 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

No. 14 of 2017 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

MONDAY 19 JUNE 2017 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

 

MOTION 

 

BILL (Public) 

 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

(Formed by Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth) 

 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Home  Affairs,  External 
Communications  and  National  Development  Unit,  
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities  
Minister  Mentor,  Minister  of  Defence,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood 
KCMG, QC 
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Jugnauth,  GCSK,    

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
Minister of  Technology, Communication and Innovation 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary   

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 
Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 
Sinatambou 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah 
 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Jean Christophe Stephan Toussaint 
Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Tourism 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity,  and 
Environment and Sustainable Development  

Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer 

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister  of 
Protection 
Attorney General 
Minister of Youth and Sports 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister 
Empowerment  
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
 

and  Economic 

of  Social 

Integration 

 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 
 
Hon. Purmanund Jhugroo 
Hon. Marie Cyril Eddy Boissézon 
Hon. Dharmendar Sesungkur 

 

 

 

4 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries 
and Shipping  
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 
Minister of Local Government and Outer Islands 
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms 
 
 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Teeluckdharry, Hon. Kalidass 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Jahangeer, Hon. Ahmad Bashir 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Seetul, Ms Darshinee 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 14 of 2017 

 

Sitting of 19 June 2017 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

7 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PROCEEDINGS – 04 APRIL 2017 – POINT OF 

ORDER 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  at  the  Sitting  of  Tuesday  last,  the  hon.  Second 
Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East, hon. Ameer Meea, raised a point of 
order in regard to an alleged case of tampering with the official report of 04 April 2017. A 
perusal of the extracts tabled, in fact, reveals a discrepancy between the two versions of the 
same extract of the proceedings of the House, which appear to have been downloaded from 
the website of the National Assembly on two different dates. Hon. Members, Standing Order 
16 provides as follows, I quote – 

“An Official Report containing a report which shall be as nearly as possible verbatim, 
of all speeches made at each sitting, shall be prepared under the supervision of the 
Speaker and published under the Authority of the Assembly.” 

As  you  are  aware,  the  responsibility  of  preparing  the  official  reports  lies  on  the 
Hansard Unit. The established workflow process consists of the reporting, various levels of 
sub-editing  and  final  editing  of  the  proceedings  of  the  House,  prior  to  the  finalisation  and 
publication  thereof,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Speaker  and  under  the  Authority  of  the 
Assembly. This is a protracted process. 

Formerly,  the  publication  of  official  reports  took  years  to  be  finalised  and  become 
accessible.  It  is  only  since  2009  that  the  proceedings  of  the  House  are  uploaded  on  the 
website  of  the  National  Assembly  within  24  hours  of  a  Sitting,  with  the  express  mention 
‘Unrevised’. That process made it possible for the proceedings of the House to be accessible 
to one and all within such a short delay.  

At that point in time, it was a laudable initiative since it was the only way Parliament 

could be brought to the people.  

However, as you are surely aware, the mention ‘Unrevised’ which accompanies the 
proceedings, qualifies the said version as being non-authoritative, that is, there is a disclaimer 
from the National Assembly in case of error or omission. In other words, the responsibility of 
the National Assembly is engaged only when the Revised version is uploaded, which occurs 

 

8 

after the correctness of the reporting is ascertained. In the case under hand, true it is that the 
two  different  versions  of  the  same  extract  of  the  proceedings  of  04  April  2017  have  been 
uploaded on the website of the National Assembly, but both bare the mention ‘Unrevised’, 
that is, both are non-authoritative. Therefore, to all intents and purposes, no Contempt of the 
Assembly can be said to have been established, and I rule accordingly. 

However, I must add that I have looked into the matter and it has been ascertained 
that the discrepancy referred to had altered the substance of the proceedings of that part of the 
proceedings in question. I can assure the House that the omitted part has now been restored. I 
thank, however, the hon. Member for having drawn my attention to such a serious matter.  

I also wish to reassure the House that an internal enquiry is being carried out to look 
thereinto. Inasmuch as the general principle regarding the records is that corrections, if any, 
are confined to clerical mistakes and cannot improve or alter the substance or form of the 
Reporters’ copy. In the light of the enquiry, if required, the whole reporting and editing of the 
proceedings of the House will be reviewed to prevent any such recurrence in the future. 

I thank you.  

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

BETAMAX LTD - ARBITRAL AWARD 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  X.  L.  Duval)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Attorney General whether, in regard to the recent arbitral award in favour of Betamax Ltd., 
he will – 

(a)  the terms of the award, indicating if a claim of some Rs4.5 billion has been 

received from Betamax Ltd.; 

(b) whether  the  Solicitor  General  had  approved  the  procedure  adopted  for  the 

termination of the contract with Betamax Ltd. in 2015; 

(c)  full  details  of  any  alleged  cost  saving  made  since  the  termination  of  the 

contract with Betamax Ltd., and 

(d) if appeal will now be lodged against the award. 

 

9 

The  Attorney  General  (Mr  R.  Yerrigadoo):  Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  of  the 
Contract  of  Affreightment  (COA)  regarding  the  transportation  of  petroleum  products  for 
Mauritius signed between the State Trading Corporation (STC) and Betamax Ltd has been 
raised and addressed in this House on many occasions. The information I would be providing 
in this PNQ has been obtained from the hon. Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer 
Protection under whose portfolio the STC falls. 

Let me remind the House of some facts about this contract and in the way in which it 
was allocated in 2009 when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was a Senior Member of the 
then Government. 

Madam Speaker, the Betamax Contract was awarded by the then Minister of Public 
Infrastructure, Mr Bachoo, when the Labour-PMSD alliance was in Government. It should be 
pointed  out  that  the  Attorney  General’s  Office,  which  was  consulted,  did  not  give  its 
clearance to the contract as proposed by Mr Bhunjun, one of the proponents of Betamax Ltd. 
One of the grounds was that the Public Procurement Act had not been followed. Despite that, 
the issue was pursued by the then Government disregarding the legal advice and it is not a 
mere coincidence that it was on the very day on which the STC Board was considering the 
Contract of Affreightment, that Betamax Ltd. was incorporated. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  experts  consulted  by  the  State  Trading  Corporation  are 
unanimous in saying that they have never seen such a Contract of Affreightment, the terms of 
which  are  not  to  the  benefit  of  the  State  Trading  Corporation.    For  instance,  the  COA  is 
drafted very much in favour of Betamax Ltd and the terms provide for STC to pay far above 
the market rate for the services provided and for items which we would not expect the STC to 
pay according to usual market practice. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  central  element  is  that  the  price  structure  was  changed  by 
Betamax  Ltd  and  approved  by  the  then  Government  whereby,  instead  of  applying  market 
rates  for  the  freight,  for  transport,  a  fixed  rate,  much  higher  than  the  prevailing  ones  was 
retained. The Contract of Affreightment also included an escalation clause with an increase 
every five years. 

The House is aware that as soon as this Government came into power in December 
2014, an  Inter-Ministerial Committee was set up by Cabinet to re-negotiate the COA with 
Betamax Ltd., namely on the following – 

 

10 

(i)  Demurrage  charges because it was unusual in the context of a single vessel 

full time charter; 

(ii) Freight charges exorbitant as well as above market rates; 

(iii)Escalation rates for freight and demurrage unheard of in the freight market; 

(iv) Port dues and bunker consumption on STC’s account payable over and above 

freight rates contrary to market practice, and 

(v) Additional  cargo;  Betamax  Ltd  had  exclusive  rights  to  provide  for  freight 
services, beyond the capacity of 64,000 MT of Red Eagle, therefore, the cost 
of any additional cargo on another vessel would still be paid to Betamax Ltd 
based on the existing contract rates. 

Unfortunately, even though three meetings were held with Betamax Ltd to review the 
COA, Betamax Ltd did not demonstrate any genuine willingness to renegotiate the COA and 
did not substantiate any of their averments with documentary evidence.  Thus, on 30 January 
2015, as a  responsible  Government, we took a  decision in the public interest for the State 
Trading Corporation to terminate forthwith the Contract of Affreightment with Betamax Ltd 
in the light of, inter alia, the unlawful procedure and processes regarding the allocation of the 
contract. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, the terms of the award cannot be 
disclosed as per rule 35 of the 2013 Rules of the Singapore International Arbitration Centre 
which provides that and I quote from Rule 35.1–  

“The  parties  and  the  Tribunal  shall  at  all  times  treat  all  matters  relating  to  the 
proceedings and the award as confidential.” 

However, to enlighten the House and from information which is already available in 
the  public  domain,  I  can  confirm  that  the  Arbitrator  has  awarded  that  STC  should  pay 
between Rs4.3 billion to Rs4.5 billion (depending on rate of exchange to Betamax Ltd). 

On 12 June 2017, Betamax Ltd submitted a claim to the STC to that effect.  The STC 
has already replied on the 13 June 2017, indicating that the STC will apply to the Supreme 
Court to set aside the Award. 

 

11 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition who has been in Cabinet for so many years, should know that advice tendered by 
Law Officers is privileged and are covered by the Official Secrets Act. Given the privileged 
nature of the legal advice… 

(Interruptions) 

I  heard  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  saying  that  he  has  any  sort  of  advice.  As  Attorney 
General and the power vested upon me by the Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius, let 
me sound a note of caution about the Official Secrets Act. 

(Interruptions) 

 It is my duty. The Leader of the Opposition will take his responsibility under oath he took 
when he became Deputy Prime Minister of this former Government. 

(Interruptions) 

It is my duty, Madam Speaker. I will not stay away from my duty.  It is my duty under the 
Constitution of this land. 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and,  in  particular,  section  3(4)(e)  and  I  continue, 

Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please proceed! 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Given the privileged nature, I have sounded a caution ... 

(Interruptions) 

The Leader of the Opposition takes his responsibility because our Courts ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Silence, please!  

(Interruptions) 

If we lose time, then I will not be able to give additional time even if that is warranted! 

 

12 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Given the privileged nature, I was saying, Madam Speaker, of legal 
advice and the provisions of the Official Secrets Act, I do not propose to provide any details 
as to the legal advice tendered by any law officer of the Attorney General’s Office. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  has  not 
been the legal adviser of the State Trading Corporation on this whole termination of contract 
and  arbitration  issue.  The  STC  has  received  independent  legal  advice  both  locally  and 
internationally.  

The  STC  has  received  independent  legal  advice  to  the  effect  that  the  Betamax  Ltd 
contract  was  against  the  “public  interest”.  Advice  was  tendered  along  those  lines  by  local 
respected  Senior  Counsel  and  Senior  Attorney.  Advice  was  also  given  by  Stephenson 
Harwood, a reputable international firm, which is multi-disciplinary not just law, but shipping 
and other matters. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) of the question, I would like to stress on the 
fact  that  the  decision  to  terminate  the  contract  between  Betamax  Ltd.  and  STC  was  taken 
after  an  independent  study  was  carried  out  by  Stephenson  Harwood,  as  I  said,  a  firm 
specialised in this matter.  

According to the Stephenson Harwood Report, had the STC gone on the open market 
for the transportation of petroleum products, the costs would have been for time charter USD 
55,765,247  and  for  a  Normal  Contract  of   Affreightment  USD  64,462,321.  This  analysis 
showed that STC had overpaid an amount in the range of USD 45 m. to USD 53 m., that is, 
between Rs1.6 billion and Rs1.9 billion, since May 2011. 

Madam Speaker, the total amount paid to Betamax Ltd for the period May 2011 to 
January  2015  was  USD  125,244,128  for  the  importation  of  4,046,703  metric  tons  of 
petroleum products, that is, an average freight rate of USD 30.79 per metric ton. 

After the termination of the contract with Betamax Ltd., the average freight rate paid 
by STC for the period February 2015 to May 2017 is USD 24.25 per metric ton, that is, a 
savings of USD 6.54 per metric ton.  

Madam Speaker, from February 2015 as at May 2017, the total savings amounted to 
USD 16,328,099, that is, some Rs580 m. It is estimated to be USD 17,581,599, that is, Rs622 
m. by the end of July 2017.  

 

13 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed by the hon. 
Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  that  the  STC has  informed  him 
that the STC intends to apply to the Supreme Court under the International Arbitration Act to 
set aside the said arbitral award. The STC has issued a communiqué to that effect on 07 June 
2017. I am tabling a copy of that communiqué. The hon. Leader of the Opposition should 
understand  that  I  cannot  give  any  more  details  on  that  forthcoming  application  to  the 
Supreme Court as same would prejudice the case of the STC. 

Mr X. L. Duval: Because of the Attorney  General’s incompetence, it is confirmed 
now that the taxpayers will be paying billions of rupees in fines.  The first thing I would like 
to  ask  whether  he  is  aware  that  all  the  matters  that  he  raised  concerning  the  previous 
allocations have been fully enquired into by the Police and that the DPP has given a no case 
to answer to all the protagonists of which I was not one of them.  Madam Speaker, this is my 
first question. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Can I reply to that first question, Madam Speaker? 

Mr X. L. Duval: I have not finished. 

Madam  Speaker:  One  by  one!  If  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  got  two 

questions, so it is one by one. 

One by one! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, don’t make provocations, please! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: The House would be aware that the Commissioner of Police has ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t get excited! 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  ...  on  that  matter  raised  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  - 
entered  a  judicial  review  proceedings  against  that  decision  of  the  DPP  and  the  matter  is 
currently sub judice pending before the Supreme Court of Mauritius. 

 

14 

Mr  X.  L.  Duval:  Madam  Speaker,  the  previous  Prime  Minister  once  describes  the 
Attorney General as the worst Attorney General in Mauritius since history and this is being 
confirmed. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, ask your question! 

Mr X. L. Duval: I would like to ask the Attorney General – he knows it very well – 
whether it is not a fact that the Solicitor General, on being consulted about the termination 
and the termination procedures, gave a report which advised Government not to proceed in 
the  way  it  is  proceeding  and  that  he,  himself,  personally  overruled  that  decision.    Is  the 
Attorney General going to tell the truth, now? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  casting  all 
sorts of imputation.  The Attorney General is a law officer. The Solicitor General is a law 
officer. Any law officer of the Attorney General’s Office on any advice he gives, he advises 
his privilege, be it for internal matters or to our client Ministries and cannot by virtue of the 
Official  Secrets  Act  and  under  the  claim  of  legal  privilege  neither  affirm,  confirm  or  say 
anything with regard to such advice.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Again, I sounded another word of caution because, Madam Speaker 

... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some silence in the House? Hon. Attorney General, 

have you finished your reply. 

(Interruptions) 

He has not finished his reply. 

Mr  X.  L.  Duval:    He  is  going  to  repeat  what  he  has  said  already.  No,  Madam 

Speaker! 

 

He cannot repeat! 

15 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Let me see whether he is repeating.  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  There  is  a  point  which  is  within  the  precinct  of  you,  Madam 
Speaker. I am just saying what happens if a former member of Government discloses under 
the  cloak  of  Parliamentary  Immunity  and  Privilege,  information  which  came  to  his 
knowledge when he formed part of Cabinet and Government?  This is a very important issue 
which should not likely be dealt with, in my honest opinion, under the cloak of Parliamentary 
Immunity. 

Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General has been very silly.  I just 

confirmed the truth in whatever I was saying.  Thank you. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I did not confirm anything, Madam Speaker. 

Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I will continue now.  On the negotiations, we had 
the Dufry negotiations, but now we have the negotiations with Betamax. Can the Attorney 
General  confirm  whether  four  or  five  Ministers  sat  with  the  owners  of  Betamax  and 
negotiated new terms for the contract? 

(Interruptions) 

And I have the Minutes. Can he confirm that this is how it happened?  The Attorney General 
sat with them and negotiated. Is that it? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  Cabinet  set  up  an  Interministerial  Committee 
which  composed  of  former  Minister  of  Finance,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  myself,  Attorney 
General, former Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance, hon. Bhadain, and the 
current Minister of … 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

16 

Mr X. L. Duval: I am asking a question. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Silence, please! 

Silence, I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Can we restore order, please? Order in the House, please! 

Order in the House, please! 

Order, in the House!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition when you ask your question, allow the Minister to give his 
reply. He should be allowed to give his reply. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  So,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  common  practice  in  our  Westminster 
model,  just  like  under  the  previous  Government,  hon.  Duval  chaired  an  Interministerial 
Committee with so many Ministers to decide on whether the contract should be allocated to 
Betamax. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Silence, please! Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr X. L. Duval: I never negotiated with anybody.  He should bow his head in shame 
for misinforming the public, Madam Speaker. Can the Attorney General inform us whether in 
breaking  this  billion-rupee  contract,  any  mise  en  demeure,  any  letters  were  written  to 
Betamax to give them a final warning - first warning, second warning, third warning - and to 

 

17 

tell them that they were breaking the contract and if so, will he table because no such letters 
were sent to them? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  what  is  amazing  is  that  the  now  Leader  of  the 
Opposition formed part of that Cabinet. Madam Speaker, three meetings - I am not going to 
go  into  the  nitty-gritty  because  I  cannot;  those  will  most  probably  be  live  issues  in  the 
application  to  set  aside  the  award.  But  I  can  say  Cabinet  set  up  the  Interministerial 
Committee.  There was a first meeting on 09 January 2015; there was a second meeting on 14 
January 2015 and on 25 January 2015. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Please… 

Can I ask… 

We will waste time.   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am asking both sides of the House not to be nervous and not to get excited. I know that you 
are  passionate  about  this  debate,  but  I  will  ask  both  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  the 
Opposition side and Government side not to get nervous about this, otherwise we will not be 
able to proceed with the work of the House.   

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  so  I  was  saying  that  Interministerial  Committee 
met the representative of Betamax Ltd, Mr Bhunjun, with his lawyers and legal advisers; they 
came to three meetings.  One on 09 January 2015, the second one on 14 January 2015 and the 
third one on 22 January 2015.   Madam Speaker, matters discussed in that meeting are to the 
knowledge of parties in that meeting and Betamax Ltd is fully aware, Mr Bhunjun is fully 
aware, of matters which have been discussed on the three meetings and hon. Bhadain maybe 
can confirm to the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr X. L. Duval: Again, the Minister is confirming not one thing in writing was put, 
or mise en demeure sent to Betamax before breaking this contract which is costing us billions 

 

18 

of  rupees.  I  would  like  to  ask  and  I  am  going  to  mention  Cabinet.  I  am  going  to  say 
something  very  serious,  Madam  Speaker.    Will  the  Attorney  General  confirm  that  he 
misinformed Cabinet by saying that it is Betamax who did not wish to continue negotiating 
whereas  it  is  the  Ministerial  Committee  itself  which  took  the  decision  to  break  off  the 
contract and there will be an enquiry on this one day and he will have to answer? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  already  replied  to  the  question  and  the 
threats of the hon. Leader of the Opposition do not scare me, Madam Speaker. Let me just 
say, on so many - I don’t want to put … 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! Hon. Bhagwan! Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  I haven’t finished my answer. 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Allow me to finish my answer, hon. Duval! And I said, I don’t want 
to  put  credibility  and  probity.    The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  cited  the  former  Prime 
Minister, perhaps Mr Navin Ramgoolam, saying whatever, but, let me say, he knows, on so 
many  occasions,  he  congratulated  me  on  so  many  issues  and  he  said  I  was  an  excellent 
Attorney General - from himself! 

Démenti ça, si to vrai, démenti ça! To pas capav démenti et to koné ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

19 

Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, please continue!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr X. L. Duval: It is not Mr Ramgoolam, I am talking about Sir Anerood Jugnauth 

who said that about him. And you know very well! 

No, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

As  far  as  the  alleged  savings  are  concerned,  firstly,  I  challenge  the  Minister  to 
produce the Stephenson Harwood Report so that it can be examined independently because I 
have  a  lot  of  questions  to  ask  about  the  Stephenson  Harwood  Report,  Madam  Speaker. 
Secondly,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  the  hon.  Minister  to,  again,  submit  his  workings 
concerning any alleged saving that has been made.  Because from my calculation - I am not a 
lawyer, I am a Chartered Accountant and I have some of the invoices - not only there has not 
been any saving hundred or million, not even 10 sous and we know this is a Government 10 
sous, not even 10 sous, but instead, Madam Speaker, the country may well have paid tens of 
millions of rupees additional because of the termination of the Betamax contract. So, not only 
do we have the fine… 

Madam Speaker:  This is your question? 

Mr X. L. Duval: Let me just explain, he may not understand! 

(Interruptions) 

I will have to explain, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr X. L. Duval: Not only we do not make any saving, we are going to pay a fine, but 

now we are going to have no saving at all, a fine of billions of rupees! 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  I am informed, Madam Speaker, that the accounts of the STC are 
duly audited and any payments made by the STC can be checked empirically. Secondly, we 

 

20 

have no problem.  My learned friend, the Minister of Commerce and Industry and Consumer 
Protection  has  tabled  in  the  past,  in  answers  to  PQs  and  even  PNQs,  details.  We  have  no 
problem tabling later during the day, the workings backing up the figures I have mentioned in 
the answer to this PNQ, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, one should know… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr X. L. Duval: … that the billing from Betamax is variable and not fixed and with 
the huge fall in the price of bunker with the new deck at the port and the full capacity of the 
use of the ship, Betamax, in my view, Madam Speaker, would have been cheaper today than 
Government and I will challenge the Government on this issue to produce all the figures. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Madam Speaker, in reply to this, I am advised, and I verily believe, 
that in the contract of affreightment, apart from the freight charges, over and above, freight 
charges can be variable depending on market rates, yes so be it. 

There, again, there are fixed costs which independently of freight charges would have 

to be paid - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Demurrage charges; 

Escalation rates for freight and demurrage; 

Port dues and bunker consumption on STC’s account, and 

Additional cargo. 

All this, Madam Speaker, in the context of a single vessel full-time charter, that is, the 
Red Eagle had only one purpose and was supposed just to carry petroleum products only and 
only for the STC. 

Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker,  il nous prend pour des idiots !  Le ministre me 

prend pour un idiot, oui ! 

 

21 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No!  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! I would remind the House that this House is not a 
forum for personal attacks.  So, I would ask hon. Members to refrain from using words which 
can be construed as being unparliamentary. Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  X.  L.  Duval:  Madam  Speaker,  have  some  respect  for  the  public,  have  some 
respect.  Who cares the bake up of the different issues on the cost of the billing of Betamax! 
The only thing that matters is whether now per metric ton, the price is more or less calculated 
from using whatever Betamax would have charged. That is the only issue and it is that issue 
which  must  be  challenged  and  submitted  to  the  public  so  that  all  the  Mauritians  can 
understand what exactly the situation is. 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  I have just answered to that and one can refer to the Hansard edition 
albeit unrevised of what  hon. Minister Gungah said in his speech a couple of days ago on the 
matter where he explained everything. 

Mr  X.  L.  Duval:    Again,  I  will  challenge  that  and  I  will  ask  the  hon.  Attorney 
General to kindly provide to this nation, who is going to pay billions in fine, to provide, not 
just a little bit of paper, the full information that he has in his files. 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Yes, STC will provide to the hon. Minister and will table later, but I 
am informed, as I said in my answer, the freight is actually now less.  The STC is paying less 
now. The STC is now paying USD 24.25 per metric tonne and under the Betamax contract it 
is USD 30.79 cents and… 

…and we are saving… 

And the STC, Madam Speaker, is…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  And the STC, Madam Speaker, is saving USD 6.54 cents per metric 

tonne… 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr X. L. Duval:  Madam Speaker, those figures are incorrect and my  calculation, 
STC with Betamax would have paid around 21 dollars to 23 dollars per metric tonne.  I say 
this  and  I  challenge  STC  which  is  providing  the  hon.  Minister  with  shameful  wrong 
information, not to do so in the future. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Soodhun, please! 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Was that a question, Madam Speaker? 

Mr X. L. Duval:  I want to ask the hon. Attorney General whether he is aware that, in 
trying to obtain the supposedly cheaper price - which is not a cheaper price, which is,  in fact, 
a more expensive price – and they will also have to answer for the wrong information that 
they are giving him.  I am looking at them, Madam Speaker, and STC… 

(Interruptions) 

…whether they have used ships which are 20 years old and more, putting in danger, Madam 
Speaker, our island’s environment and our tourism industry? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  There is no such question about putting in danger whatever. We 
have acted in public interest and I have demonstrated in the answer I have given to that PNQ 
that Republic of Mauritius, STC has saved. As undertaken  earlier,  we  will provide figures 
which STC shall be giving to its substantive Minister and I will happily table same by the end 
of today’s session, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  X.  L.  Duval:    Madam  Speaker,  I  will  also  table  just  now  two  Press  articles 
confirming that there were, in fact, big discussions at the time in Government as to whether 
we should go ahead or not with this contract termination. I would like, in fact, to ask the hon. 
Attorney General whether he, himself, feels capable of continuing to advise Government in 

 

23 

the rest of these appeals that are coming up for hundreds or billions of rupees from Patel and 
everwhere?  Does  he  feel  comfortable,  capable  of  advising  the  Government  and  even 
overruling the Solicitor General in these cases? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:    Madam  Speaker,  let  it  be  clear.  Just  like  any  Minister,  in  his 
respective  Ministry,  does  not  work  on  technical  aspects  of  his  Ministry,  but  is  given  a 
portfolio.  Let  me  say  and  I  will  be  happy  if  there  is  a  substantive  question  on  arbitration 
cases. Those arbitrations are highly specialist arbitration questions.  I am only giving answers 
in the public domain.  In this arbitration - commercial and international arbitration - the STC, 
apart  from  having  retained  services  of  reputable  Senior  Counsels  and  Senior  Attorneys  in 
Mauritius,  was  advised  by  a  reputable  law  firm  in  Singapore  Rajah  and  Tann.    On  all the 
other arbitrations which  we are defending or in which the State of Mauritius is appearing, 
clearly in areas that we do not have expertise, we have hired services of reputable law firms 
and their respective partners to advise Mauritius and to appear for Mauritius on those matters.  
So, one must be exact and careful and I will be very pleased to reply to any specific question 
so  that  we  enlighten  the  House  on  any  such  arbitration  matter  and  not  making  sweeping 
remarks.  

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  time  is  already  over,  but  I  will 
allow you two additional minutes because the hon. Minister, in one instance, asked that the 
question be repeated.  So, I give you two additional minutes for your last question. 

Mr X. L. Duval:  I have two questions.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No, one final question!  Your final question! 

Mr X. L. Duval:  One final only!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Yes. 

Mr X. L. Duval:  I will ask this, Madam Speaker. In view of the maladministration, it 
is  clearly  shown  the  tampering  with  negotiations,  the  incompetence  that  has  been  shown; 
deliberately misinforming the public as to who broke up the negotiation. Madam Speaker, I 
am challenging this Government to bring forward legislation to make Ministers who do such 

 

24 

acts  against  the  public  interest,  be  personally  responsible  for  their  cases  so  that  they  pay 
personally  for  any  of  the  damages  and  claims  that  are  made  against  the  Government  as  a 
result of their own misdoings.   

Mr Yerrigadoo:  It is amazing, Madam Speaker, but the final question of the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition is the echo of Navin Ramgoolam asking in a Press Conference. 

(Interruptions) 

What an amazing fact, Madam Speaker! I do not agree at all with whatever the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition has said.  I am very sorry, what inescapable… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:    ….conclusion  one  can  reach  is  that  he  being  the  mouthpiece  of 

Navin Ramgoolam in this Parliament. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!    However,  I  wish  to  remind  hon.  Members  that 
Private Notice Question is the privilege of the Leader of the Opposition and as far as I am 
concerned, there is only one Leader of the Opposition.  So, I can’t allow any supplementary 
questions … 

(Interruptions) 

unless the hon. Leader of the Opposition has exhausted his questions.   

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, you are provocating! I have drawn your attention several times not to make 
provocations so as to allow the House to work in serenity.   

Hon. Bhagwan, last time! 

 (Interruptions) 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

 

25 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2017-2018) BILL 2017 

(NO. VII OF 2017) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Husnoo!  

(12.13 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Dr. A. Husnoo):  Madam Speaker, I 
am deeply honoured to address this august Assembly on the occasion of the Budget debates 
2017-2018.  At  the  very  outset,  let  me  extend  my  heartfelt  congratulations  to  hon.  Pravind 
Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister, Minister of Home Affairs, External Communications and 
National Development Unit, Minister of Finance and Economic Development for presenting 
the third Budget of this Government. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Can  we  have  some  silence  in  the  House  please  because  I  can’t 

even hear the speech of the hon. Minister. 

Dr. Husnoo:  Madam Speaker, let me reply to some of the questions raised by hon. 
Salim  Abbas  Mamode  last  week  during  his  speech.    Firstly,  concerning  the  stray  dogs  as 
indicated by him, I have to inform the House that there is an on-going agreement with the 
Mauritius  Society  for  Animal  Welfare  for  control  of  dogs  and  cats  in  the  premises  of  our 
health institutions against a monthly payment of Rs100,000. 

As regards the lack of facilities for SAMU, I have the pleasure to inform the House 
that we are procuring five ambulances for SAMU to deal with the ever increasing requests for 
ambulances.  

 

26 

Regarding  water  leakage  in  our  health  institutions,  we  have  already  started 
waterproofing the building since last year on a priority basis. A contract for waterproofing for 
SSRNH which has already been awarded and the site was handed over to the contractor. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  the  H1N1  vaccines  are  concerned,  since  delivery  of  the 
vaccines was slightly delayed, we closed the centre for one day. However, the vaccination 
process  restarted  the  next  day  and  is  proceeding  as  programmed.  Just  for  the  record,  at 
present, we have 69,000 doses of vaccines. 

Just for the record, at present, we have 69,000 doses of vaccines and we are receiving 
50,000 in about a week’s time. Normally, we are using about 5,000 to 6,000 vaccines every 
day and we have a good stock for the time being.  

Let me add as well, because now the hospitals are providing vaccine on Saturdays and 

Sundays till 06:00 p.m. as well.  

Now, as far as a point raised by hon. Osman Mahomed, when he was talking about 
marchands ambulants, he said that he agreed that we had to put order. I am glad to hear that. 
But he said that there was no plan B.  

I am surprised he said that. He seems to have not been in the House because so many 
times I have answered, because the project at La Gare Victoria is on. And he is the only one, I 
think, who is not aware of it.    

Madame Speaker, if you allow me to continue formally with my intervention now.  

Budget 2017-2018 which is presented under the theme of ‘Rising to the Challenge of 
Our Ambitions’ represents an important milestone in driving our country into the league of 
high-income nations. It arranges for sustained strategies to further pave the way for Mauritius 
to achieve the second economic miracle with the objectives and targets as spelt out in Vision 
2030.  

Budget  2017-2018  meets  peoples’  aspirations  and  expectations  for  an  enhanced 
quality  of  life.  The  five  overarching  strategic  directions  of  the  Budget  2017/2018  target 
critical areas such as - 

• 
• 
• 

fostering higher growth for more and better jobs, 
massive investment in the infrastructure of tomorrow,  
further improving the quality of life of the population, 

 

27 

• 
• 

ushering a New Social Paradigm, and 
consolidating macro-economic fundamentals. 

These pragmatic measures will, no doubt, contribute to attain the desired economic 
growth rate of 4.1% in 2018. They  will be the major drivers to elevate our country to the 
league of high-income countries. And it is expected that our per capita income will increase 
from the current level of USD 9740 to USD 13600 by the year 2023. 

Madam Speaker, if you would allow me now to express myself on my sector. Health 
constitutes an essential sector of our national economy. It makes a significant contribution to 
the GDP. Productivity in all other sectors hinges on the good health of the people. For 2017-
18, the financial envelope of my Ministry will be Rs11.67 billion, representing an increase of 
Rs845 m. as compared to the allocation of Rs10.9 billion made for the current financial year 
2016/2017. 

Government expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP has increased from 2.42% 
in  financial  year  2016-17  to  2.54%  in  financial  year  2017-18.  Per  capita  expenditure  on 
health in respect to the budget of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life is estimated at 
Rs9,558 in financial year 2017-18 compared to Rs8866 for financial year 2016-17. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  goes  without  saying  that  good  health  contributes  to  sustain 
economic  growth.  Mauritius  has  no  other  resources  than  its  human  capital.    As  the 
Government is pursuing its efforts to make Mauritius a high income country and to improve 
the  living  standards  of  the  whole  population,  it  is  more  than  essential  to  ensure  that  our 
human capital enjoys a good health. This places a duty upon my Ministry to provide quality 
health services to all Mauritians in a sustainable manner. 

The  Mauritian  health  system  is  among  the  best  in  Africa  and  its  improvement  is 
ongoing under the current political leadership. In line with the Government Vision 2030, the 
health systems are being further strengthened in view to improving the quality of life of all 
the citizens of Mauritius. Emphasis is more on performance towards quality.  

In 2015, the United Nations adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 
17 goals to be met by 2030. Goal 3 is on health, namely to ensure healthy lives and promote 
well-being for all at all ages. Health is positioned as a major contributor to the other SDGs: 
without health, many of the other SDG cannot be achieved. It is worth noting that Mauritius 
has already achieved some of the health related SDG targets. For example, in 2016, Under 5 

 

28 

Mortality Rate was 14 per 1,000 live births in Mauritius compared to the global target of 25 
to be attained by 2030. 

Madam  Speaker,  budget  2017-2018  builds  on  the  succession  of  the  two  previous 
budgets  of  this  Government.  However  Budget  2017-2018,  is  not  only  about  the  proposed 
allocation of funds and budgetary policies to achieve economic and social outcomes, but it is 
also an economic and social plan. It incorporates a Three-Year Strategic Plan from financial 
year 2017-18 to financial year 2019-20. 

The  main  objective  of  the  Three-Year  Strategic  Plan  in  the  health  sector  aims  at 
promoting the health of the nation and improving the quality of life through the development 
of an affordable and sustainable health care system. To achieve these objectives, Government 
will invest significantly in health. An estimated total amount of Rs5.5 billion will be invested 
during  the  forthcoming  three  Financial  Years  to  enhance  the  provision  of  healthcare 
infrastructures in the public sector.  

Now  as  far  as  the  ageing  population  and  the  NCD  is  concerned,  that  is  the  non-
communicable diseases, my Ministry will leave no stone unturned to deal with the growing 
challenges  of  the  ageing  population  and  the  rising  prevalence  on  Non  communicable 
Diseases. NCDs, such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancers and  chronic respiratory 
diseases, which mostly relate to affluence, unhealthy lifestyles and poor dietary practice, are 
major health concerns in Mauritius. In 2015, the prevalence of diabetes was 23% among the 
adults population of 25-74 years. Pre diabetic is 19.4 % making a total of nearly 42% of the 
population at risk of complications of diabetes. The prevalence of hypertension is 25%. I will 
continue with some more statistics, Madam Speaker.  

Besides what I have said about nearly 42% of the population at risk of diabetes and 
hypertension  25%,  56%  of  the  population  is  either  overweight  or  obese.  Only  23%  of  the 
Mauritian  adult  population  does  regular  exercise  which  means  that  nearly  77  %  of  the 
population does not do regular exercise. And we all know the importance of doing exercise. 
19  %  of  the  population  currently  smoke  and  the  prevalence  of  alcohol  consumption  in 
Mauritius is 52%. What a situation Madam Speaker! 

Cancer, as well is increasing.  In 2015, there were nearly 2,500 new cases of cancer 
and  this  is  increasing  compared  to  the  2014  figures.    As  far  as  Diabetes  is  concerned, 
Mauritius  is  the  first  in  Africa  and  third  in  the  world  ranking.      As  you  are  aware,  this 
problem leads to other complications like cataract, cardiovascular problems, amputation and 

 

29 

kidney  failures.    An  estimate  of  nearly  80  %  of  the  hospital  budget  is  spent  on  patient 
suffering from Non-Communicable Diseases and their complications. 

With such dire statistics, the control of NCD is being reengineered, Madam.  We need 

a multi-prong approach.   

The whole NCD service needs to be modernised with new modalities of treatment and 
proper follow-up of patients. If we want to make a real improvement in NCD, we have to pay 
more  attention  to  our  diet  and  make  sure  that  the  Mauritian  public  does  regular  exercise. 
These are two most important things, diet and exercise because a major problem in Mauritius 
is Non-Communicable Disease and if we want to prove the NCD, we have to concentrate on 
these two, to look at the diet, what we are actually eating and encouraging the people to do 
regular exercise. 

In this regard, we are going to recruit additional nutritionists in the Ministry of Health 
and Quality of Life. We have to review the health education regarding diet in primary schools 
as well. We are putting up a computerised diabetic management system for better follow-up. 
Overall,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  to  review  the  whole  management  of  the  Non-
Communicable Disease because Mauritius is in dire straits, to tell you frankly. 

As mentioned at item 225 of the Budget Speech, we have to get more people, young 
and old, men and women to practice sports, to engage in physical activities. A new national 
sport policy is going to be set up to encourage greater participation of young adolescent girls 
in sports activities. Promoting exercise at the workplace and encouraging sport for school-
aged children after school hours. 

As far as smoking is concerned, we have to control this as well. In fact, this morning I 
was at a workshop where we stressed on the importance of control of tobacco in Mauritius. 
As I mentioned earlier, the prevalence of smoking was 19% in the adult age group and the 
population, as I mentioned, who consume alcohol is 52%. We welcome the 5% increase in 
tax for beer and alcoholic products and the 10% for tobacco products. It has been shown that 
increasing the duty on tobacco decreases the prevalence of smoking, especially among young 
people. 

To provide better NCD service, we are going to decentralise the NCD clinics to the 
Medi  Clinics,  community  health  centres  and  area  health  centres.  This  will  give  a  better 
service to the population and less time will be wasted in queues at the hospitals. 

 

30 

As far as cancer is concerned, we are going to encourage young girls to do the HPV 
vaccination  to  prevent  cervical  cancer.  Screening  of  breast  and  cervical  cancer  would  be 
expanded  and  a  palliative  cancer  care  will  be  set  up.  Terminally  ill  cancer  patients  have 
multidimensional needs including physical, social, emotional and practical needs. Palliative 
care will be decentralised to support these patients in the different hospitals of the island. 

Madam  Speaker,  all  these  investments  and  the  re-engineering  of  our  ongoing 
programme will no doubt contribute to the overall enhancement of the health status of our 
people. Our key goal is to raise the average life expectancy at birth to the same level as high 
income countries by 2030, that is, from 74.6 years in 2015 to, at least, 75.4 years by 2020 and 
76.2 years by 2030. 

Our present fertility rate is 1.3 well below the replacement value of 2.1. What does 
that  mean,  Madam  Speaker?  I  am  going  to  explain  it.  Suppose  in  one  generation  of  the 
population  you  have  hundred  people,  if  you  want  to  have  hundred  people  in  the  next 
generation, you must have a fertility rate of 2.1, that is, for hundred in the first generation to 
have hundred in the second generation. But, now in Mauritius our fertility rate is 1.3. We are 
having  less  and  less  number  of  children  who  are  being  born.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have 
more and more people in the older age group. If we continue with this fertility rate in about 
five years’ time, the population of Mauritius will start decreasing and we can guess the effect, 
the consequence of the decreasing population in the socio-economic system of our country. 

We have to improve the care provided to our ageing population and in this context we 
are  going to set up an early  dementia diagnosis  service. Suffering from  dementia is a real 
tragedy for the patient and the family alike. This service will be provided in the five regional 
hospitals  as  outpatient  to  enhance  the  quality  of  life  of  individuals  with  dementia,  their 
caregivers and their family members. 

It  is  estimated  that  there  are  about  10,000  persons  suffering  from  dementia  in 
Mauritius and with an increasingly ageing population this number is expected to double by 
2030. My Ministry has already prepared a National Strategy for Dementia in line with the 
WHO Global Plan on Public Health Response to Dementia 2017-2025. 

The  decentralisation  of  the  psychiatric  service  is  also  very  important.  At  Pandit 
Sahadeo Area Health Centre Vacoas, psychiatric nurses are operating one psychiatric clinic 
for  Modecate  injection  since  the  year  2011.  Psychiatric  nurses  working  at  Brown  Sequard 

 

31 

Mental Hospital Centre have received training in community psychiatric service. The region 
of Flacq has been identified for implementation of community psychiatric service on a pilot 
basis.  Once  the  work  plan  is  finalised  the  project  will  start  soon.  It  is  very  important  to 
develop  community  psychiatric  services.  I  don’t  think  all  the  patients  suffering  from 
psychiatric problems should be locked away at BSH. 

In the same vein, we are going to help the NGOs which are doing a wonderful job of 
looking after psychiatric patients in the community. The service of a treating psychiatrist will 
be made available to Friends in Hope, for example, half a day on a weekly basis to assist in 
reviewing beneficiary cases, holding talks, staff coaching and training is the latest update of 
psychiatry.  

Similarly, as you are aware, we have a number of children and adults suffering from 
autism. The Autism Mauritius is giving a service which is not being given by the Government 
service. So, a grant will be made available to Autism Mauritius so that they can continue to 
provide support to these children and some adults for this debilitating disease.  

On a different idea, Madam Speaker, my Ministry also intends to implement blindness 
prevention programme. Recent data suggests that a large number of people are blind due to 
high incidence of cataract and vitreous retinal bleed mostly as a complication of diabetes and 
high blood pressure. Vision screening programme will be implemented on a large scale to 
detect  individuals  suffering  from  these  pathologies.  Moreover,  the  ophthalmologist  service 
will be expanded to SSRNH and Souillac Hospital so that treatment can be given to these 
patients early to prevent them from going blind. 

Madam Speaker, I would wish now to mention some measures and some new service 
that are being planned. Key capital projects to be implemented in the next three years include 
–  

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

the construction of a new ENT hospital with a grant provided by the 
Government of India; 
a new cancer centre at Solferino; 
a new modern warehouse for pharmaceutical products and other medical 
consumable with proper facilities. As you are aware, the Ministry of Health 
and Quality of Life is criticised for the improper storage of drugs year in year 

 

32 

out in the Audit Report. So, we have to act now to provide a place where 
medicines can be kept in good condition; 

(iv)  We are working also on the new hospital at Flacq; 
(v) 
(vi) 

the implementation of the E-health system; 
setting up of new Dialysis Unit at Long Mountain Community Hospital and 
Dr. Jeetoo Hospital; 
(vii) 
setting up of a national health laboratory centre; 
(viii)  a new Neurosurgery Unit at  Dt. Jeetoo Hospital; 
(ix)  Yves Cantin Hospital will be upgraded and provided with inpatient facilities; 
construction of Medi Clinic at Quartier Militaire, Stanley and Bel Air; 
(x) 
(xi)  Area Health Centres will  be built at Bambous and Rivière du Rempart; 
(xii)  Community health centres at Saint François Xavier, Plaine Verte, l’Esperance 

Quartier Militaire, Cap Malheureux, Trou d’Eau Douce, Camp de Masque, 
Grand’Baie and Baie du Cap; 

(xiii)  acquisition of high-tech medical equipment including two linear accelerators 

and brachytherapy amongst others for the new cancer centre; 

Can  you  imagine,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Linear  Accelerator  at  Victoria  Hospital  was 
bought  about  20  years  ago.  The  lifespan  of  this  Linear  Accelerator  is  10  years,  but 
unfortunately,  it  was  bought  20  years  ago,  its  lifespan  is  10  years,  but  unfortunately  no 
replacement has been made over the last 10 years. Hence, the catastrophic situation we are in 
now, with the breakdown of this crucial lifesaving equipment.  

Now we have to send the patients regularly to India for the treatment. And you can 
imagine the difficulty for these  cancer patients who are weak and sometimes in very  poor 
physical condition to travel to India for treatment. But we are working on it. We are working 
to replace, to put a new linear accelerator urgently at Victoria Hospital. This is going to cost 
Rs150 m., but I think our patients deserve it. As I mentioned, cancer is a major public health 
concern internationally and in Mauritius. The number of new cancer cases registered in 2014 
was 2,387 as compared to 2,107 cases in 2013. At present cancer services are clearly outdated 
and the country is in dire need of a modern, responsive and comprehensive service. 

Palliative  care  for  cancer  patients  is  almost  non-existent.    A  new  state-of-the-art 
Cancer Centre is being set up to address the gap in our cancer services. This project will be 
implemented in two phases: will need highly technical input for this hospital, and  I  am in 
discussion with HSCC from India for this project.  

 

33 

The most important phase will be the phase 2. This will comprise the construction of 
New  Radiotherapy  Block  including  two  Bunkers  with  two  Multi-leaf  Collimator  Linear 
Accelerators, CT Simulator, 3D Treatment Planning System and Accessories amongst other 
equipment. 

As I mentioned, Madam Speaker, this setting up of the new Cancer Centre is a must 
because we are facing a major problem with the increasing prevalence of cancer in Mauritius. 

Construction in the pipeline is a new ENT Hospital. This Hospital, as you know, is 
presently  accommodated  in  an  old  colonial  wooden  building,  which  is  subject  to  termites 
attack, water leakages and seepages during the rainy season.  

With a view to alleviating the problems, my Ministry under the G 2 G agreement with 
India, will construct a new state-of-the-art ENT hospital, with a total surface area of 12,498 
m2 and comprising among  others, three operation theatres, six bedded  Intensive Care Unit 
with all the required facilities, there will be three wards of 30 beds each. The preliminary 
budget estimate is Rs571 m. including VAT. Construction of the ENT hospital is expected to 
start in September 2017 and will last for 18 Months.  

The next project is a new Eye Hospital. Presently, as you know, it is accommodated in 
a  concrete  building  which  is  not  amenable  to  any  upgrading  or  renovation  and  expansion 
work for further development. The Ministry has decided to construct a new Eye Hospital on a 
portion of the land of approximately 10 arpents situated along the Dual Carriageway opposite 
the  Apollo Bramwell Hospital at Réduit. The acquisition procedures are underway. 

The  new  eye  hospital  will  provide  technologically  advanced  health  services  to  the 

population. At present the hospital is overcrowded. The specific project objective is to - 

(i)  Ensure universal coverage of specialised eye care services in the country; 
(ii) 
Increase capacity of clinical treatment and non-clinical services which will 
automatically result in economies of scale; 

(iii)  Cater for increasing demand of services due to the ageing population and 

rising burden of non-communicable diseases; 

(iv)  Reduce waiting list for surgeries and other medical treatment. 
The New Eye Hospital will operate as a Centre of Excellence. The new hospital will 

help to adapt to changing public health needs of the country. 

 

34 

Madam Speaker, now I am going to say a few words about the E-health. My Ministry 
is planning to introduce the e- health project on a pilot basis at Dr A. G Jeetoo hospital. The 
overall objective of such a project is to facilitate the processing of patients’ file, minimise 
duplication  of  entries  and  enable  easy  access  and  timely  retrieval  of  patients’  data.  At  the 
same time, the Project provides for better management of human resources, stock taking of 
pharmaceutical  products  and  eventual  monitoring  of  patients’  file  in  hospitals.  Upon 
successful implementation at the Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, the project would thereafter be 
rolled out to include the five medi clinics and the Community and Area Health Centres in 
Port- Louis.   Eventually, it is going to expand to the four other  regional hospitals and the 
associated Health centres to cover the whole island. 

Now, in Black River, as far as the Yves Cantin Hospital is concerned,  Rs15 m. have 
been  provided  for  the  upgrading  of  Yves  Cantin  Community  Hospital  at  Rivière  Noire  to 
provide for additional facilities and inpatient services. At present we do not have an in-patient 
service  there.  So,  we  are  going  to  introduce  inpatient  services.  I  am  sure  this  will  make  a 
difference to the lives of the inhabitants of Black River. 

As  everybody  is  aware,  physical  inactivity  is  one  of  the  risks  of  NCDs  and,  as  I 
mentioned  before,  about  77%  of  the  population  is  not  doing  sufficient  physical  activities. 
First  of  all,  about  50%  of  the  cause  of  death  is  due  to  cardiovascular  disease.  To  provide 
additional  facilities,  my  Ministry  will  continue  its  policy  of  constructing  Health  Tracks  in 
several  part  of  the  country.  This  will  complement  to  some  degree  the  infrastructural 
development being undertaken by my colleague, the Minister of Youth and Sports to help in 
this  direction.  If  we  want  to  prevent  NCDs,  there  is  no  better  way  than  to  encourage  the 
population to do regular exercise. This is a sine qua non.  

Now I am going to talk about two other projects which are a bit closer to my heart. 
Firstly  the  Neonatal  Intensive  Care  Units  (NICU).  Neonatal  Intensive  Care  Units  (NICU) 
presently exist in three regional hospitals, namely, Victoria Hospital, SSRN Hospital and J. 
Nehru Hospital. The NICU bed capacity in all the three hospitals is only 13 beds. 

 Such number is highly insufficient for the neonatal population.  Very frequently, the 
paediatrician has to wait long before he can travel a sick baby to a Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit.   In view of the increasing number of premature births due to several increasing risk 
factors such as teenage pregnancies and late pregnancies, my Ministry intends to increase the 

 

35 

number  of  beds  to  34.  Provision  will  be  made  so  that  there  is  no  shortage  of  place  at  the 
Intensive Care Unit for newborns for the next 15 years.  

In  addition,  my  Ministry  is  also  going  ahead  with  the  provision  of  a  Paediatric 
Intensive Care Unit.  Previously, I talked about the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, now it is 
the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit. You know, when we start medical school, the first thing 
we  are  told,  a  child  is  not  a  small  adult.  He  is  different  physiologically.  He  has  different 
psychological and emotional makeup. 

Presently,  children  above  the  age  of  one,  whenever  they  need  Intensive  Care  Unit, 
they are admitted to the adult ICU and, believe me, this is not the best place for a very sick 
child to be, in an adult ICU. Thus a PICU will be set up to cater for these sick children.  It is 
the first one we are setting up and eventually, we are setting it at Dr. Jeetoo Hospital and, if 
need be, we are going to increase it to different hospitals as well.  

Appropriate training is also being given to the medical and nursing staff to look after 

our children population.  

Another  main  theme  that  was  discussed  in  the  budget  was  the  National  Healthcare 
Waste  Facilities.  The  National  Healthcare  Waste  Facilities  Project  will  be  implemented 
during  the  2017/2018.  Presently,  contaminated  healthcare  wastes  generated  from  public 
health institutions are being disposed in incinerators located mainly in the regional hospital 
most  of  which  are  located  in  residential  areas.  Frequent  complaints  have  been  received 
regarding air pollution associated mainly with smoke emissions.  

In  this  context,  my  Ministry  has  embarked  on  the  implementation  of  a  National 
Healthcare Waste Disposable Facility at La Chaumière on a plot of land to the extent of two 
Arpents 50. This facility will basically aim at improving the healthcare waste management. 
The terms of reference for the consultancy service in respect of this project have already been 
finalised.  Bidding  documents  for  the  procurement  of  the  consultancy  service  are  being 
prepared. It is expected that the bid will be launched by the end of June 2017.  

In the meantime and as a backup facility, new incinerators will be installed at SSRN 

and Victoria Hospitals to replace the existing non-functioning ones. 

Tobacco use is the second leading cause of death worldwide causing about 7 million 
deaths every year. Moreover, some 600,000 people died due to tobacco exposure every year. 

 

36 

In Mauritius, it is estimated that around 1,000 people die every year due to tobacco smoke. 
Tobacco  consumption  and  exposure  to  second-hand  tobacco  smoke  is  responsible  for  a 
number  of  chronic  diseases  including  cancer,  lung  disease  and  cardiovascular  diseases. 
Studies have shown that a 10% increase in the price of tobacco products will result in a 5% 
decrease in consumption.  

Moreover, it is submitted that young people are two or three times more responsive to 
tax and price changes than older people. Tobacco tax increases will have a significant effect 
on reducing tobacco consumption among young people as well as on reducing the chance of 
young people moving from experimentation to addiction. 

Most of our acute admissions at Brown Seqaurd Hospital and in the adult male ward 
in the regional hospital are due to alcoholism. So, we hope that the 5% tax increase in alcohol 
will make some difference to the problem of alcoholism in Mauritius and we welcome the tax 
increase both on tobacco and on alcohol. 

Madam Speaker, please allow me to say a few words on Rodrigues now. Following 
my last visit to Rodrigues and discussions held with the different stakeholders there, it has 
been agreed to extend the Queen Elizabeth Hospital to provide for additional health facilities 
in view of the increase in demand. Accordingly, a sum of Rs36 m. is being allocated to the 
healthcare sector in Rodrigues as follows – 

•  Rs30 m. have been provided for the renovation of the hospital as well as Rs9.7 

• 

m. to the convention one ward into a paediatric unit, and 
in addition Rs8.5 m. have been provided for La Ferme Area Health Centre and 
Rs5 m. for the haemodialysis service in Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, over the next three years, there would be a lot of development in the 
health sector in Mauritius which we are sure is going to improve the quality of care provided 
to our population.  

I wish to thank the hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance for providing me with 
the  opportunity  to  modernise  the  healthcare  infrastructure  bringing  in  in-depth  reform  to 
healthcare  delivery  and  supporting  me  in  fighting  more  effectively  the  non-communicable 
disease, which, as we know, is in epidemic proportion now. This will help to bring down the 
burden of disease in our society.  

 

37 

The objective is to adopt a patient centred healthcare and strengthen our health system 
so that instead of sending patients abroad, it will be possible for us to treat them locally. I am 
sure, Madam Speaker, that the development in the health centre over the next three years will 
change the physical infrastructure of a number of our health facilities and, more importantly, 
provide a much better quality of care that our population rightly deserve. 

I thank you again, Madam Speaker. 

Thank you, very much. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 12.51 the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 1.59 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port-Louis  East): 
Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker;  I  have,  as  all  of  us,  listened  with  a  lot  of  interest  to  the 
interventions  of  all  the  previous  Members  in  this  Assembly.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  hon. 
Husnoo has taken the front bench of the Government side, but it is unfortunate for him that it 
is not a promotion but only a simple matter of musical chair. 

It has not been in my habit to have him faced any music whatsoever but allow me to 
say that I will have to comment on what he has stated in his intervention or what he has failed 
to address in his intervention. Madam Speaker, each and every time the Minister of Finance 
of any Government comes to this Assembly and presents his work, his plan, his vision for the 
coming year or years to the population. Now we have it. We have live broadcast. People are 
willing to sit down and listen to everything that is being stated more so when it comes to a 
Budget Speech. 

It is my contention Madam Speaker that nothing will be able to change with the way 
that people view the presentation of a Budget if we do not go to the very fundamentals that 
need  to  be  changed.  What  I  mean  by  that  is  the  following.  It  is  clear  that  whatever  this 
Government is going to propose, it has to obtain l’adhésion populaire. It has to obtain the 
approval of the people. It has to obtain the assent not of us, we will just do what has to be 
done but the people out there, they have certain expectations. 

 

38 

It  is  not  the  opinion  of  Government  that  counts.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  it  is  not 
necessarily even the opinion of the Opposition that counts because what does matter is what 
do the people outside watching us believe this Budget brings to their daily life. I have asked 
people not of only my Constituency but nationally; I have asked people from various walks 
of life: what does this Budget mean to you? I have asked people going to the sugarcane fields, 
what does this Budget mean to you? 

It  obviously  means  something  different  to  someone  working  in  the  Cyber  City, 
someone  working  in  the  call  centre,  someone  who  is  a  pilot,  someone  who  is  a  medical 
doctor, someone who is a simple plumber but so important because we need people like that. 
A  simple  electrician  but  not  simple  because  we  need  people  like  that.  People  working  in 
industries,  people  working  in  the  export  sector,  I  have  asked  all  of  them  what  does  this 
Budget mean to you. There is one common denominator that I always hear, that they expect 
that  any  Budget  would  bring  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of  living.  They  expect  that.  Has  this 
Budget  met  with  the  expectations  of  the  people  Madam  Speaker,  and  what  are  those 
expectations?  As  I  have  said,  the  mother  and  the  father  of  a  family,  they  expect  that  this 
Budget will reduce the cost of living, the expenses they have to incur with regard to family 
expenses. They expect that it will bring something positive for the children who are going to 
school - their children. They expect that somehow the burden that they have to carry every 
day, the sacrifice will be looked into, will be addressed by the Budget. To simplify matters, 
Madam Speaker, they expect as simple as that - when they go to the shop or the hypermarket 
next door or a little afar; when they look at what they have spent there is a reduction in it. 
They do not expect more than that when you think about it. Has this Budget really addressed 
what people are expecting outside and the answer is no. Why it will never be able to address 
it, it is because it is clear.  

When I listen to Members of Government who come as Ministers to read pre prepared 
documents to defend the budget of their ministries; when I look at the Government defending 
the very in essence even the back benches coming to say that everything that Government is 
doing is perfect, there is nothing wrong with it. There can be no room for improvement. No 
one has had the courage, Madam Speaker, to come and try to be different; to try to have a 
critical analysis of that Budget. Every single one of the Members of Government has come 
and said everything is perfect and there can be no wrong, there will be no wrong as long as it 
is hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth who is Prime Minister just like before him it was his father. 
There can be no wrong, there will be no wrong, he makes no mistake he is the perfect being. 

 

39 

This, in itself, destroys the very essence of a debate and whenever the Members of the 
Opposition  decide  that  they  will  have  to  be  critical  in  their  approach  even  though 
constructive, just because we do not agree with Government and what they propose, we have 
the fireman de service, hon. Sinatambou who will go for a press conference and go as far as 
to say that Opposition Members who have a different opinion are not patriots. 

So,  either  you  bow  to  the  ways  of  thinking,  the  methodology  and  the  vision  of 
Government,  and  if  you  do  not  bow  to  them,  you  are,  therefore,  not  a  patriot.  Where, 
therefore, is the very concept of agree to disagree? Where is, therefore, the very nature about 
democracy? In this august Assembly we are supposed to have a debate, not a pre-prepared 
script. This is what our Standing Orders say, Madam Speaker. In this august Assembly I am 
supposed  to  hear  people  talk  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  and  come  and  tell  us  why  they 
agree? What they may think could be done to be different? But what we see, Madam Speaker, 
is not that. It is just a conflict between Opposition and Government and nothing else. It is just 
politics  that  is  in  essence  being  given  la  priorité  and  not  economics.  It  is  politics  and  in 
essence  the  very  advantage  that  each  political  party  is  going  to  try  to  vie  for,  position; 
political supremacy.  This is what becomes more important than vision, national interest. This 
is taken in the back seat.  

I was here listening very carefully to hon. Husnoo, and hon. Husnoo, I am sad to note 
is  a  Member  of  my  own  Constituency,  an  elected  Member.  I  am  not  sad  because  he  is  a 
Member of that Constituency. Far from it! He will note, Madam Speaker, that I have never 
stood up in this Assembly, criticised him or even said anything against him with regard to his 
previous or this Ministry. I only put questions, but have never gone below the belt. But there 
is something which I view with sadness today, is that I would have expected him today to 
address issues pertaining to Constituency No. 3.  True it is, he is an hon. Minister who has to 
come and defend his portfolio, but he is also a Member of Parliament of Constituency No. 3.  

In Constituency No. 3, today I have met people who are listening, who are listening to 
him  and  were  expecting  to  hear  from  him  as  to  what  exactly  he  proposes  as  an  elected 
Member in the Government of that Constituency. What does he propose to do to address the 
issue  of  a  drug  substitution  therapy  of  methadone?  How  it  has  gone  in  such  a  disastrous 
direction? How it is being delivered next or in vicinity with the school? This was never, I am 
sure, his own idea, but the fact is today he is the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life, 
Member of Parliament of the Constituency, Madam Speaker, and therefore he owes it to the 

 

40 

constituents whom he represents to give them a solution and not to allow such a situation to 
rot because this is precisely what is happening, a rotting situation where methadone is being 
delivered next to schools. People from the school there go into the garden, next to where the 
users are receiving their methadone, and there is an intermingling which is not to the liking of 
the parents of that locality. He knows it better than I do. I expected him to address this.  

I expected him to address the very important issue which is the rise of prostitution in 
our Constituency. I expected him to be truthful in his approach by coming to admit that the 
Government may have started a Commission of Enquiry on drugs, but the very fact is, that 
this  has  not  reduced  the  consumption  of  synthetic  drugs  in  our  Constituency  and  in  many 
towns and villages out there, Madam Speaker. The use of synthetic drugs is rampant today. If 
they are to make us believe that because of a simple Commission of Enquiry that is making 
headlines once in a while; they have tackled a very important fléau that is killing our youths, 
they  are  wrong.  How  has  this  Commission  of  Enquiry  reduced  in  any  way  the  use  of 
synthetic  drugs?  How  has  this  Commission  of  Enquiry  in  any  way  reduce  the  number  of 
people who are dying because of synthetic drugs? How has this Commission of Enquiry in 
any way address the sadness in the hearts of parents and family members and citizens of this 
country who have to see deaths leaving their homes because precisely Government has been 
incapable of addressing the issue of drugs? Simply to come and say: “well, we have set up a 
Commission  of  Enquiry.  The  former  Judge,  Mr  Paul  Lam  Shang  Leen,  is  there,  tackling 
issues.  This means we are having a control on it.”  

We have seen in the Press, heroin in a majority of cases, being stopped at the airport 
or in the port or in the gas cylinders, but what of synthetic drugs? This is the poison of the 
modern world; the world we are living in, not only in Mauritius, in other countries as well. 
But when a Government sits down, when the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life who 
is responsible for this dossier of the delivery of methadone or Suboxone from his previous 
colleague, previous Minister of Health and Quality of Life who had the goals – let us only 
remind the people watching us today, Madam Speaker, what hon. Gayan said: “this was not 
the  cause  of  any  death  or  whatsoever  and  it  was  not  an  emergency.  It  was  not  an  urgent 
problem. It was not a problem in actual fact”. But, unfortunately, hon. Husnoo is now sitting 
in that hot seat. People are still dropping out there. He is in Government, but each time that I 
will  come  and  say  something  like  that,  then  you  will  have  le  pompier  de  service,  hon. 
Sinatambou, who will come and with his mop de service, try to clean up the mess by saying: 
“What!  Or well, you were in Government, what did you do?”.   

 

41 

Well, let me just simplify matters for them, maybe they have not understood.  In the 
beginning  of  a  mandate  you  can  turn  around  and  say:  “you  were  in  Government.”  In  the 
beginning of a mandate you can turn around and say: “you messed up, that is why we won.”  
You have already passed the stage of mi-mandat.   

Now that each and every time that you turn around and say: “You, what did you do?” 
It shows that you are coward, a coward who cannot even face the fact that there are problems 
out there that the Government cannot in any way solve because of sheer incompetence and 
negligence. But if it is not incompetence, if it is not negligence; what can it be? Ignorance! 
Ignorance of the obvious! Let us turn one’s eye to the obvious and let us open our heads, the 
sword of Damocles hangs by a slender thread until it will drop and destroy the very strength 
of this nation.  Each and every time they turn around and look in the rear view mirror:  “What 
did you do?  What did you do?” They are in Government, Madam Speaker. I am not.  And if 
I were in Government and all such things had happened, I would have be ashamed. We have 
a Government who is today in power, and let me say that for all to hear and even le pompier 
de service. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Mohamed,  please!    Don’t  continue  to  refer  to  the  hon. 
Member as ‘le pompier de service’! I stated last time that hon. Members are entitled to use 
severe language, but so long as it is within the bounds of order. 

Mr Mohamed:  I will not address the hon. Member as ‘pompier de service’. Anyone 
who wants to act as ‘pompier de service’ maybe they will recognise themselves. Anyone who 
wants to act like that; what do they have to do?  Why don’t they go out there and explain 
issues of that nature.  Now, only one who wants to clean up the fire that is brewing.  

Just now, I heard the hon. Attorney General’s speech.  The hon. Attorney General says 
that he will not divulge matters with regard to Betamax.  He will not divulge the legal opinion 
that has been delivered.  Why?  Because it is privileged.  But it is trite law.  It is simple law 
for anyone who is a first year student in the field of law to understand that, and he can easily 
be consulted even by those who are not lawyers that privilege does not belong to the lawyer 
but privilege belongs to the client, and in this particular case the client was Government and 
it is for Government to decide whether it wants to be transparent and whether it wants to give 
the document or not. If he holds on to that privilege, it is his choice, not the choice of the 
lawyer or the legal team delivering the advice.  

 

42 

So, Government in spite of the fact that they have the right to waive that privilege and 
give that legal opinion, they decide not to. Why? What are they trying to hide? When I heard 
the hon. Attorney General standing in this Assembly and saying that, at that time when this 
contract was signed, the Betamax and the STC contract, it was against the advice of the State 
Law Office. 

(Interruptions) 

But  it  is  amazing!  Thank  God  for  Hansard!  I  here  will  refer  to  a  document.  This  is  a 
document where my good friend, hon. Uteem - PQ No. B/73 - STC – Betamax Shipping Ltd - 
Petroleum  Products  -  when  he  put  a  question  to  the  hon.  Minister  Gungah,  and  in  that 
particular document, hon. Uteem  says - I quote - 

“Following up on my learned friend’s question, can the hon. Minister tell the House 
who was the legal adviser who gave that advice? Because answering to a PQ on 24 
May 2011, the hon. Minister Soodhun, in an answer to a question put by me, stated 
that – “ 

That is what hon. Soodhun stated - 

“In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the advice of the SLO  was that the agreement is 
legally in order.” 

So,  I  said  to  myself  when  I  heard  the  hon.  Attorney  General  this  morning  saying  that  the 
advice  was  that  they  should  not  proceed  with  it  because  allegedly  it  was  against  public 
procurement legislation.  

But  here,  I  read  that  hon.  Soodun,  himself,  when  he  was  Minister  stood  up  in  the 
Assembly,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  where  hon.  Adrien  Duval  is  siting  today,  this  was  the 
position that he sat in..  And I said: “Let me go and see 24 May 2011, what exactly was said.” 
I saw that question, in fact, was indeed a question of No. B/391 in 2011. A question put on 
Betamax Petroleum Products and Transportation.  

And in this particular question, hon. Uteem wanted to know precisely what was the 
advice obtained prior to entering into that contract. Maybe Members of the august Assembly, 
on  the  other  side,  have  to  know,  maybe  they  are  not  given  all  the  information,  maybe 
backbenchers there, Madam Speaker, have to know. They are not given all the information. 
Ministers choose to give some information and are economical with some other information. 
It is important, therefore, to be transparent because people outside are listening to us, Madam 

 

43 

Speaker,  also  have  to  know.  Today,  this  Government  says  that  supposedly  the  State  Law 
Office  decided  that  they  should  not  proceed  with  this  contract  with  Betamax,  parce  que 
supposément il y une avait quelconque illégalité dans le processus. Comment se fait-il alors, 
Madame la présidente, qu’en 2011, maintenant le Vice-Premier ministre, alors ministre du 
Commerce, debout dans cette Assemblée, a dit : 

« M. le président, in regard to part (b) of the question, I have been informed by the 
STC that the reply is in the affirmative.” 

Therefore  if  you  want  the  smoking  gun,  if  you  want  the  evidence,  if  you  want  the 
unshakeable evidence, that, in fact, a Member of this Government, opposing to us, was, in 
fact, standing in this Assembly in the position of Minister of Commerce, in charge of that 
particular file of Betamax, saying that the State Law Office advice was, indeed, taken and it 
was in order, legally in order. Therefore, Madam Speaker, whose version are we to believe? 

The population is watching us today. You have heard, they have heard the Attorney 
General say one thing, they have now the evidence that hon. Soodhun said something else 
that is diametrically opposed. Either one is true and the other is false, it cannot be that both of 
those facts are true. 

Who, therefore, will take the hat and put it on their head and will pass for the clown? 
Because the population out there does not want to be made a fool of. The population out there 
does not like them being taken for a ride, the population out there does not like it that they are 
being taken for fools.  Because, today, the population has two versions, one of hon. Soodhun 
and  one  of  rhw  hon.  Attorney  General.  Many  versions!  We  will  have  a  third  one  most 
probably from hon. Sinatambou later on.  Which is which? It is very simple. Either A or B, 
which is which? It cannot be that hon. Soodhun was lying, or could it be? It cannot be that the 
Attorney General was lying this morning, that he was hiding the truth from us. Could it be? 
Or can’t it be? Which is possible? 

We are, therefore, in the realm of a lottery. We are not in the realm of a Parliamentary 
democracy, where we expect people to speak the truth. We are just in the realm of a lottery. 
In Creole, they called it pik poul. Who is the poul and who will be doing the piké? En tout 
cas, it should not be the population because the population at the end of the day, is le dindon 
de la farce, because here it is a farcical situation. I challenge both of them, hon. Soodhun and 
hon.  Attorney  General  to  meet  up  and  come  to  the  population  and  tell  us  by  the  close  of 
business today who is the one speaking the truth and who is not.  

 

44 

When hon. Soodhun was in Parliament, I was Minister with him and I was siting just 
behind.  I  remember  he  defended  the  case  of  Betamax  with  all  his  might,  with  all  his 
conviction. He defended the case of Betamax and that file and said that it was totally in order 
and it was in the interest of the people and the SLO had said it was in order, and that’s that.  

Today, he is Vice-Prime Minister on the front bench there and today, because of the 
incompetence of Government, we are today sitting down on a time bomb, because the fact is 
that the bomb will blow up. And what is that bomb, Madam Speaker?  To mistake the people 
out there, la population de l‘ile Maurice, les jeunes, les enfants, même ceux qui ne travaillent 
pas  ont  aujourd’hui  une  dette,  shoved  on  their  heads,  a  noose  tied  around  their  necks 
suffocating the population because of the sheer incompetence of the Government that decided 
to bring an end to a contract against an advice of the Solicitor General. That is a fact! That is 
why I say, why is it this Budget will never obtenir l’adhésion populaire? Never! Because, 
today, we have a Government that is a gouvernement de contradiction. In the midst of that 
Government,  you have several versions of the truth. And there are not two truths, there is 
only one truth. 

But the fact is, we have a Government that does not believe in transparency. We have 
a Government that says it is going for the Freedom of Information Act, but does nothing for 
the Freedom of Information Act. What has it done? 

Today, we have an Attorney General qui cache la vérité et aujourd’hui il se cache 
dernière une opération  de la loi, quand il dit que soi-disant  ce Conseil des avocats a  été 
donné et c’est un des conseils confidentiels. 

Let me add to this what today we did not have time to bring up, sheer incompetence 
of Government. Do we know how much Government has paid to their lawyers in Singapore 
for  this  particular  matter  of  arbitration?  Do  we  know  that,  in  fact,  la  population  aussi 
commence à savoir et doit savoir, à cause de l’incompétence de ce gouvernement - each and 
every time I see the interested feature of my good friend hon. Jhugroo, I cannot blame him, 
he was not part of that Government. So, don’t worry, he is not to blame. Because he was not 
part of that Government, he was here as Chief Whip when this blunder was committed. 

And  what  is  interesting  is  that  the  award  goes  as  far  to  say  that  the  legal  costs  of 
Betamax have to be paid by the State Trading Corporation. Not only its own legal costs, but 
the legals cost of the State Trading Corporation! And to go further, each and every day that 
goes by interest is going up. I am informed that the legal cost goes as far into several millions 

 

45 

of US dollars.  Therefore, almost  R 150 à R 200 m. ! et encore une fois l’incompétence de ce 
gouvernement  a  créé  une  situation  révoltante.  La  population  de  l’Ile  Maurice,  Madame  la 
présidente,  se  voit  maintenant  avec  une  ardoise  salée,  almost  poisonous!  But  then  every 
Minister who is responsible for that will tell you ‘I am immune from any prosecution’. They 
will show the Public Officers Protection Act up there ‘I cannot be taken to task because I was 
acting in my public official capacity.’ 

But  we  need  a  law  and  this  is  when  we  will  start  building  trust  again  with  the 
population.  There  is  the  need  for  a  law.  Il  y  a  besoin  d’avoir  une  nouvelle  loi  qui  met  la 
responsabilité,  qui  met  les  ministres  devant  leurs  responsabilités  quand  ils  prennent  une 
décision qui va à l’encontre d’un avis légal, qui va à l’encontre d’un rapport qui a été soumis 
par le Solicitor General, quand ils décident d’agir comme courtiers de par eux-mêmes. On 
n’a jamais entendu quelque chose comme cela. Des ministres qui se voient attribuer le rôle de 
courtiers commerciaux pour négocier avec les préposés de Betamax. Where are we going? 
That you set up a Ministerial Committee in order to look at an independently produced report, 
yes, an independent assessment, yes, but not to go and negotiate in lieu and instead of people, 
officers of the State Trading Corporation. This is treason against the people! 

When did Ministers of Government have the right to negotiate contracts to be entered 
into by the State Trading Corporation? When? Who gave them that power? This has never 
been done in the past! Anyone else may say that this was done in the past, but this was never 
done  in  the  past.  There  was  an  inter-Ministerial  Committee  which  analysed  independent 
reports with regard to Betamax - whether it was a good contract or not. Let us not forget that 
for the Betamax contract, BDO, the very firm that this Government swears by because they 
believe in the credibility of that firm, BDO was retained and BDO approved the very nature 
of this contract and said it was a good one. 

So, this Government does things and then what? They are going to come and try to 
give another angle to it and say that they were right in the name of what? In the name of good 
governance! Can this Government give us lessons about good governance? Let us talk about 
good governance. I am sad, in fact, just to get back to hon. Dr. Husnoo. Hon. Dr. Husnoo was 
talking  about  Saint  Francois  Xavier  Community  Service.  I  was  looking  here  and  the  only 
thing I saw is the upgrading of Community Health Centres.  

The  only  thing  I  saw  here  at  page  207  of  the  Estimates  for  2017-2018  item  419, 
upgrading of Community Health Centres, for last year Rs9 m. and for this year Rs10 m. But 

 

46 

there  is  no  mention  here  of  how  much  is  going  to  be  spent  on  the  construction  of  a  new 
Community  Health  Centre,  he  never  said  upgrading  just  now  in  his  speech.  He  said 
construction. But if there is going to be construction, la moindre des choses est qu’on doit 
pouvoir consulter les documents qui donnent les détails des dépenses de ce dit ministère et 
vérifier. Where is it?  It is not here! It is not even mentioned and he goes as far as to talk 
about the Eye Hospital, let alone in our constituency it is not even made provision here, but 
for  Eye  Hospital  the  only  thing  that  is  provided  for  in  terms  of  the  Eye  Hospital  is  for 
preliminary preparation and design which was Rs5 m. last year and Rs10 m. this year. So, it 
was preliminary preparation and design. We do not even know what the hospital is going to 
cost. We do not even know. There is no provision for that. There is no estimate for the cost 
and he talks about the new Eye Hospital, where it is going to be built. The land itself has not 
been acquired as yet and he is already announcing it en fanfare as though it is going to be 
such a great measure.  

The very fact and the truth is I started a project in the constituency which was for the 
construction of a school Abdul Rahman Abdul. Today that project had already started when I 
was Minister and today it has halted, it cannot even go ahead, God knows why because there 
is no follow-up, there are not people who can ensure that projects are implemented. 

Secondly,  he  goes  on  talking  about  projects  in  the  constituency.  Dr Idrice 
Goomany Government School: I implemented that project. If he wishes I can even show him 
all the documents and the meetings that I chaired with regard to all those designs and he says 
it is him. If he wants to take la paternité, fair enough! I have no issues. But then what else has 
been  done  in  that  constituency  ever  since  2015?  Nothing!  We  cannot  give  a  medal  to 
Government simply because they say ‘we have tarred so many roads’. That is your duty, for 
God’s sake! What! We are going to give you a medal because you made drains!  Obviously 
that is your duty. You are paid for it. But what else have  you done? What sports facilities 
have  you built? What schools have  you constructed? What new ideas have  you had? How 
many homes have been built for the poor in that constituency? Should I say the word: zero?  

Today,  when  you  look  at  that  constituency,  it  is  falling  in  disrepair.  The  Police 
officers who have to be at important junctions are not present there and there are traffic jams 
everywhere.  This  is  une  circonscription  délaissée.  And,  today  when  I  read  the  Press, 
l’Express of today, and when I look at the figures of the hon. Minister of Labour with regard 
to unemployment in Port Louis, the highest place where there is unemployment on record is 

 

47 

Port  Louis.  The  highest  on  record  is  Port  Louis  and  I  am  convinced  about  that,  Madam 
Speaker.    Il  y  a  beaucoup  plus  de  chômeurs  enregistrés  au  ministère  du  Travail  et  de 
l’Emploi, les  habitants de Port Louis sont en grande majorité.  La raison pour laquelle c’est 
le  cas  est  précisément  parce  que  le  gouvernement  ne  s’occupe  pas  des  habitants  de  Port 
Louis. Is it because they were not elected as much as they wanted to be as opposed to other 
areas? Are they being forgotten? Les laissés pour compte simplement par revanche politique? 
Pourquoi alors se fait-il que la majorité se trouve à Port Louis ? Why? And we talk about 
arbitration! 

I have to talk about what hon. Gayan also did and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for 
having had the courage - I don’t very often do that towards you, but I have to say it today: 
whenever you are doing something which I admire, I will say so. This has to be fair. Because 
hon. Gayan when he spoke on this Budget and he is still a Member of this Government, I am 
not Prime Minister, I never will be! But, had I been Prime Minister I would have fired him! I 
would have fired him without any explanation because  I do not accept that anyone who is 
Member of this Assembly can stand up and make remarks of a communal nature! It is not 
once that he has done it, il récidive. A chaque fois qu’il essaye d’être intéressant, il récidive 
et comment se fait-il que quand il a parlé à l’Assemblée nationale, Madame la présidente n’a 
pas laissé passer. Madam Speaker stood up and intervened –  

« Hon. Gayan I will ask you to refrain from making communal remarks (…)” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker had the courage to call him to order and if Madam Speaker has done that, it 
must be because it must have offended the rules of the Parliament, it must have offended, in 
other  words,  your  own  appreciation  of  having  to  be  a  place  where  we  should  make  no 
difference between communities and this I bow to you for having done that, Madam Speaker.  

But what did he say? He brings us back to 1968. What has 1968 and the PMSD got to 
do with the Budget of 2017? Because it suits hon. Gayan to talk about 1968 and what did he 
say? He talks about how 50 years of independence the country has moved and the PMSD has 
not moved and he accuses the PMSD to be stuck in time ‘you are frozen in time’. But, he is 
the one who is frozen in time! He is still talking a despicable language of a racist. 

(Interruptions) 

 

48 

He talks about that and what does he say? He goes on to say, hon. Adrien Duval was talking 
about Curepipe, –  

“Who does not remember what happened ‘malabar nou pas ouler, enveloper nou pas 
ouler.’ 

The words of hon. Gayan and he is still Minister in this Cabinet.  

(Interruptions) 

And he is still a Member of this Government. And this Government expects us to believe in 
the Leadership of a Prime Minister, who is weak! A weak Prime Minister who does not even 
have the courage to dismiss a Minister who has made such a communal remark! This is not 
unparliamentary? 

Madam  Speaker:  Do  not  attack!  Do  not  attack  the  integrity!  No!    Hon.  Shakeel 
Mohamed, I have said that everybody who intervenes, he intervenes within the parametres of 
what should be said. You can have whatever language you want, but please do not attack the 
integrity of people. You cannot attack the conduct of people. You cannot attack the characters 
of people. I will not accept that. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, it takes a Leader with resolve, it takes a Leader with 
strength  or  purpose,  it  takes  a  Leader  who  is  not  scared  of  his  alliance  falling  to  bits  and 
pieces and going into smithereens, it takes a Leader who believes in a cause, it takes a Leader 
who believes in national unity, and not only the words that compose this phrase. It takes a 
Leader who acts and not just does words, and plays to the gallery; it takes a Leader who is a 
real Leader, with strength of resolve and conviction, to be at the head of this country today. 
And such a Leader would have not accepted that the Minister, with such remarks, continues 
to form part of his Cabinet. 

(Interruptions) 

And  what  is  worse,  Madam  Speaker,  you  called  him  to  order,  but  has  the  Prime  Minister 
called him to order? The least that could have been done by the Whip of the Government is to 
ask him to apologise. Did he withdraw the words? No! Therefore for all intents and purposes, 
those  sickening,  racist  words  still  are  on  Hansard,  and  they  emanate  from  the  ranks  of 
Government, and not a  single Member of Government can come and tell me the contrary. 
Look at this! Look at this!  

 

49 

I was coming across why should we believe a Government of this nature? Let me talk 
about that. How many promises have been made with regard to jobs? How many promises 
have been made with regard to jobs to be created by Government? Let’s go back! Today, we 
have Government coming forward with a  Budget, and, once again, fooling the population, 
making them believe that they are better than the rest. That they will create employment and 
they go as far as to tell us that the people out there believe them. They themselves among 
their  own  ranks  do  not  believe  themselves.  They  will  create  employment?  And  you  judge 
them on what they have done in the past.  Let’s look of what they have done in the past! 
What  about  the  projections  and  promises  that  have  been  made  by  Government?  Let’s  not 
forget the 2015-2019 Government Programme. What did they say then in the programme? 
Some 15,000 jobs will be created annually. In 2015-2016 Budget, the Magician, the one who 
was  supposed  to  bring  us  this  new  miracle,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  who  is  no  longer 
Minister of Finance. He said, he was talking about ‘to steer the economy towards the path of 
high investment and high employment.’ He said that there would the creation of thousands of 
jobs  at  a  rapid  pace.  And  then  in  the  speech  of  the  hon.  Minister  Mentor,  the  second 
economic miracle, Sir Anerood Jugnauth avait dit en août 2015, Madame la présidente, qu’il 
y aura la création de 100,000 emplois directes et indirectes, crées en 5 ans. Ce qui veux dire 
un minimum de 20,000 par an. Ça se sont les paroles de ce grand monsieur qui est l’ancien 
Premier ministre, de ce grand monsieur qui est le ministre mentor, et celui-là qui dit qu’il va 
créer 20,000 emplois par an, minimum. And, en 2015-2016, n’oublions pas que seulement 
16,000 emplois ont été créés. Et il dit que 16,000 emplois vont être crées. Ce sont ses paroles. 
Il  dit  que  more  than  7,000  vacancies  will  be  filled  in  2015-2016.  And  he  talks  about  the 
Youth  Employment  Programme  for  2,500  jobs,  placements  under  the  Youth  Employment 
Programme. En 2016-2017, the actual Minister of Finance, now Prime Minister, talks about 
the new era of development to create more job opportunities for all. 

 And he goes on to talk about 21,400 youths, men and women who will be taken out 
of unemployment. But let us look at the figures, Statistics Mauritius.  They can twist and turn 
as  much  as  they  wish,  but  the  statistics  are  very  straightforward,  other  Members  of  this 
National Assembly have said it before me that only 300 jobs net were created en 2016. Que 
ce  gouvernement  a  créé  que  300  jobs  net,  en  2016 !  Ce  sont  les  chiffres  de  Statistics 
Mauritius. There are tables in the Statistics of Mauritius Report that show exactly that, they 
cannot now come and say otherwise. Children outside who are going to school, students of 
University, fathers and mothers, citizens of this country have access to Internet, they can all 

 

50 

go to the Internet and download the 2016 Report for labour creation. And they will see what 
it was, only 300 net. 

And there is something que l’actuel ministre du travail ne le dit pas. Et ‘zot compran’ 
pourquoi l’actuel ministre du travail ne dit pas cela dans son discours. Parce que surement il 
n’est  pas  supposé  venir  donner  toute  l’histoire.  Parce  que  l’histoire  aussi  ce  n’est  pas 
seulement que l’année dernière, il y a eu que la création de 300 emplois net, et pas plus. Pas 
les chiffres de 20,000 ou de 21,400 ! Mais au fait, ce que l’actuel ministre du travail ne vient 
pas dire, que les statistiques pour Workfare Progamme 2017 que j’ai dans ma main. Ça ce 
n’est pas sur son site Internet ! Ça ce n’est pas sur le site du ministère ! Ce n’est même pas 
sur  le  site  du  Statistics  Mauritius.  Le  nombre  de  workers  qui  ont  été  admis  au  Workfare 
Programme  pour  juillet  2016  à  mai  2017 sont  5,080.  Ça  veut  dire  que,  que  ceux  qui  sont 
éligibles pour le Workfare Programme ont été admis à ce programme. 5080, de juillet 2016 à 
mai 2017 !  

Mais il y a beaucoup plus encore, qui, en d’autres mots, ont perdu leur travail, sont 
maintenant  chômeurs,  il  y  a  eu  destruction  d’emplois.  C’est  la  raison pour  laquelle  ils  ne 
sont  pas,  pourquoi  -  auparavant,  quand  moi  j’étais  ministre  du  travail,  sur  notre  site,  on 
avait  le  nombre  d’usines  qui  avaient  fermé,  le  nombre  d’emplois  qui  avaient  été  perdus. 
Comment se fait-il maintenant qu’auparavant il y avait des chiffres, transparence totale sur 
le  site  Internet  du  ministère,  et  comment  se  fait-il  que  cette  année-ci    ces  chiffres  qui 
démontrent le nombre d’entreprises qui ont fermé ne sont plus là. Les chiffres qui démontrent 
le nombre d’emplois qui sont perdus, c’est plus là, pourquoi ? Mais moi, Dieu merci, j’ai les 
chiffres ; plus que 10,000 personnes en moins d’un an ont perdu leur emploi. Plus que 10,000 
personnes en un an ont perdu leur emploi, et aujourd’hui le gouvernement vient nous dire 
qu’ils ont créé de d’emplois, 300 emplois net.  

Et ce qu’ils viennent dire, ce qu’ils doivent aussi admettre, c’est qu’en 2015, quand 
on  compare  2015  à  2016,  le  labour  force  en  2015 :  584,600 ;  en  2016 :581,000  le  labour 
force. Ça veut dire qu’il y a moins de jeunes, moins de personnes, moins de mauriciens et 
mauriciennes qui forment partie de ce labour force ; qu’il y a eu, en d’autres mots, un drastic 
drop in the labour force. Comment ils vont expliquer cela ? Mo, j’aimerai que quelqu’un des 
rangs  du  gouvernement  puissent  venir  expliquer  précisément  cela,  qu’il  y  a  eu  moins  de 
personnes dans le labour force entre 584,600 et 581,000 ; un total drop. Why?  

 

51 

So, where, therefore, Madam Speaker, are those great figures that have been referred 
to by the former Prime Minister? Where are those great figures of job creation referred to by 
the actual Minister of Finance?  This never used to be done when I was Minister of Labour 
because we have to be transparent.  As I have said, we always gave the real figures.  Those 
are the number of people who lost their employment.  Those are the number of enterprises 
that have closed.  Those are the number of people who went on the Welfare Programme, but 
this Government clearly does not believe in the concept  of transparency. J’ai l’impression 
que  c’est  le  mot  d’ordre  qu’on  ne  doit  pas  donner  la  vérité.    Un  gouvernement  de 
contradiction. Ils viennent dire qu’ils ont créé de l’emploi, qu’ils croient soi-disant dans le 
Freedom of Information, but do not share those figures on the website. Why? I am also very 
surprised. We are talking about various sectors of the economy where people have to see that 
things are progressing.   

Hon. Minister Mentor, I recall here, in his speech that he pronounced on 22 August 
2015 and even now the actual Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech goes on to talk about 
the  port  being  a  driver  of  the  economy.  Why  does  he  does  not  tell  us  the  truth  about  the 
figures pertaining to the port? Let us talk about the figures about the port. Productivity figures 
Cargo  Handling  Corporation  Ltd.  -  there  are  other  figures  that  are  not  published,  but  I 
manage to get my hand on them. Why is it that those figures are hidden? Why is it that those 
are  hidden  from  the  population?  Why  is  it,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  population  is  not 
allowed to look at the reality of things; that this Government when they are at the helm of the 
country, productivity goes down and productivity is destroyed.  

January  2017,  let  us  look  at  those  figures.  There  is  a  total  drop  with  regard  to  the 
ships’  productivity.  We  are  talking  about  the  ships’  productivity  in  forties,  January  to 
December  2016,  but  there  is  a  second  drop,  volume  went  down  by  more  than  9%  in 
productivity in the port in January 2017, February, March, April and May - a sudden drop of 
productivity in the port by more than 9%! Why is it the Government does not talk about those 
figures?  

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  takes  the  money  belonging  to  taxpayers  to  publish 
beautiful little books as addendums to his Budget. Why the statistic is not there? Why is it 
that it is not there? En couleur! En Caractère gras! Dessiner in terms of a graph to show that 
we  are  even  plummeting.  Plummeting  meaning  we  are  going  down  and  we  are  not  being 
productive in the port area. Still they talk so much about them going to be able to use the port 

 

52 

as a driver of productivity, and economy, and to create jobs. Let us not forget that hon. Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, in 2015, for his vision 2030 or 2020, God knows what, because finally it 
turned  not  to  a  vision,  but  more  to  a  nightmare.  Nothing  of  what  he  said  has  been  done! 
Nothing of what he has said has been achieved! So, this is a Government non seulement de 
contradiction, but this is a Government of non-achievers. They cannot achieve what they say 
and they set out to do. Beautiful words, but nothing in actual facts. 

Hon. Minister Koonjoo is not here; mostly probably he is slowing turning the corner 

somewhere. 

(Interruptions) 

Let us not forget, I have got one hour to speak. I have got it! 

They have spoken for 50 minutes.  Please do not start! 

(Interruptions) 

The Maritime Labour Convention, that was once under the responsibility - I am still 
within time - at some point of the hon. Minister of Labour. Now it is the Maritime Labour 
Convention  which  I  signed.  We  ratified  as  a  country  to  the  advantage  of  people;  for  the 
benefit of people working in that particular field. We have two years de délai. Elle aurait dû 
entrer  en  vigueur  à  Maurice  en  2015,  the  Maritime  Labour  Convention.  Legislation 
pertaining to it should have been ready according to our engagements and promises with the 
International Labour Organisation since 2015 for higher salary, better conditions of work for 
people working on vessels. What has this Government done? Is it Government of achievers? 
Had this been a Government of achievers, can hon. Minister Koonjoo come and give us an 
explanation  as  to  where  the  Maritime  Labour  Convention  is?  Why  hasn’t  it  been 
implemented ever since May 2015? Why are we late? Or maybe we should then refresh his 
memory as to what exactly is the Maritime Labour Convention. Maybe he does not know. Is 
this Government the one that we can really think is credible? 

Madam Speaker, I believe that this Government should not be believed. It cannot be 
believed, it has no credibility. We cannot trust them. They are not worthy of the trust of the 
people because you know respect is something that goes two ways. As long as the system of 
Government that we have does not change, no Government will be able to create a revolution 
in this country that will bring us the double digit growth figures that we dire really want. As 

 

53 

long as this Government does not really face reality and accept that there are things that are 
fundamentally wrong with the system of Government, we will never be able to achieve what 
we need to achieve.  

Let us look at hon. Koonjoo again. They want us to believe them that they are not 
going to create jobs for the boys that they  will not give jobs to family  members of theirs. 
Explain  to  me!  How  is  it  that  one,  Mr  Sanjeev  Kumar  Babooa,  lands  up  at  the  Mauritius 
Maritime Training Academy? This very Academy that they say will train Mauritians in order 
to give them jobs in that particular sector. How come someone called Mr Babooa, who has a 
case… 

Madam Speaker: Do not mention names! 

Mr Mohamed:  Okay! Mr S. K. B.  

Madam Speaker: Because the person is not here to defend himself! 

Mr Mohamed: Fair enough! Hon. Gayan when he spoke, he mentioned four names 

of people who were never in this Assembly, who could not even defend themselves.  

Madam Speaker: …my ruling.  

Mr Mohamed: He mentioned four names. 

Madam Speaker: You can tell the initials, the result will be the same 

Mr  Mohamed:  So,  let  us  not  forget  about  this  person,  I  have  just  mentioned  his 
name,  so  S.  K.  B.  who  has  a  case  before  the  court,  being  prosecuted  for  what  under  the 
Prevention of Corruption Act.  

But then again may be c’est dans la manière de faire de ce gouvernement de nommer 
les  gens  même  s’ils  ont  une  affaire  intentée  contre  eux  au  criminel  par  le  Directeur  des 
Poursuites Publiques pour affaire de corruption. Ce n’est pas vraiment quelque chose qui est 
important parce que c’est le gouvernement qui décide. C’est eux au pouvoir.  C’est eux qui 
décident de ce qui est bon et de ce qui n’est pas bon. 

Let us not forget that this very hon.  Koonjoo, he, himself, has gone as far as to give 
an aquaculture permit to a company, a company called Mascareignas Oysters (Mauritius) Ltd.  

(Interruptions) 

 

No, that is us! 

54 

(Interruptions) 

Let us not confuse issues. That is a brand name that we will stick to. Do not take it from us. It 
is only those who know how to go for that. 

Let  us  not  forget  Mascareignas  Oysters  (Mauritius)  Ltd.  now,  is  the  owner  of 
Mascareignas Oysters Ltd.? Who? Is it not someone related to hon. Koonjoo? How come it is 
a nephew of hon. Koonjoo?  

(Interruptions) 

I will not say his name. I will not give his name. What is the point? It is a nephew of hon. 
Koonjoo,  but  then  again  we  are  to  believe  them  that  they  are  credible,  that  they  want  the 
success  of  the  country,  that  they  want  the  rise  of  our  economy,  that  they  want  to  create 
employment. At the same time who are they creating employment and opportunities for if it 
is not for members of their own family. What about Barbara if we are to give it an English 
intonation? 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Gayan is even better.  I am trying not to mention names, but V. S.!  But now what about 
hon. Collendavelloo? K. S.! K.S. being the best person who is so qualified to be nominated as 
an ambassador.  This is an insult to all the career diplomats at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
as though she who is close to hon. Collendavelloo is better because of what. Her closeness! 
And  then  they  were  on  their  moralising  horses  standing  up  saying:  ‘The  Labour  Party  did 
this’. The hon. Prime Minister went as far as saying that they could use the private residence 
of the Prime Minister to hold a dinner for more than 100 people and it was in order. 

This is not in my concept. He went as far as to say - because it is a private residence - 
that the former Prime Minister, he even talked about orgies that were committed there in the 
past regime, but did he see the orgies? Does he have any evidence of orgies or does he come 
to throw in attacks simply like that just to satisfy himself, Members around him and his small 
dwindling  electorate?  Does  he  have  any  evidence  of  orgies?  How  could  he,  therefore,  be 
allowed,  Madam  Speaker,  to  throw  accusations  against  people  who  are  not  even  in  this 
Assembly by talking about orgy making? 

 

55 

What  is  in  fact  an  orgy?  And  what  is  in  fact  incestuous  is  the  number  of  people 
belonging to this Government who allow Members of their own family  to obtain jobs and 
positions and nominations within Government and the parastatal bodies of this Government. 
That is incestuous, that is an orgy and I do not need evidence of that because I have it. You 
have people, Madame Speaker, people who are named as what? 

(Interruptions) 

Oh, I have it here and that, we have to remember, Choomka! She starts out as a Chairperson 
and she ends up as being the Director. 

(Interruptions) 

Chooma nahi bhai! Choomka! And then, she ends up not only doing that but being a courtier, 
asking  for  God  knows  using  her  position  as  a  courtier  to  obtain  contracts  in  the  field  of 
electricity.  Then  you  have  the  actual  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  let  him  come  and  tell  this 
Assembly to explain how come Alvaro Sobrihno - I mean him we can mention his name, he 
so well-known to everyone now. He is known.   

(Interruptions) 

Zenfant lakaz! How come he has bought property in Royal Park, Balaclava and that Royal 
Park, Balaclava tell him to come and tell this House that he did not accompany him on that 
land, to show the Land! Tell him to come and tell us that Monsieur Maigrot for Royal Park 
was  not  his  client!  Tell  him  to  come  and  tell  us  that  there  is  no  established,  in  fact, 
relationship between him, Maigrot and Alvaro Sobrihno! Tell us that it is not true! Tell the 
people out there that this is not true, that this triumvirat d’enfer to facilitate the process of 
someone who has a very bad reputation outside of Angola but the Government of Mauritius 
does not know. Tell us about all!  

I skipped Barbara just now, I just mentioned the name.  But Barbara managed to get - 
once  again  colistier  de  l’honorable  Koonjoo  qui  obtient  un  contrat  gratuity.  Zero,  rien  à 
payer! Is it because she is, in fact, this person who obtained it! 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Adrien  Duval,  I  will  not  allow  this!  Even  from  a  sitting 

position I will not allow you to do this. 

 

56 

Mr  Mohamed:  And  then,  something  else,  Madam  Speaker.  I  remember  I  went  to 
Qatar in order to sign one agreement with Qatar which was for circular migration. The hon. 
Minister  talks  about  circular  migration,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  finance  talks 
about circular migration in his annexes. Let us know one thing how many people have gone 
outside of Mauritius for circular migration ever since 2015?  In fact the figures are very sad 
to admit, not very proud to write home about. And you know why that is the case? Because 
my good friend, the hon. Minister of labour is not being given the respect that he deserves. 
He is not being given the tools that he requires. He is being demeaned by his Ministry for not 
tackling  the  file  totally  for  himself  for  circular  migration.  Had  he  had  total  control  on  the 
budget, he would have shown figures and mention it in his speech.  

Today, I see that hon. Soodhun has gone as far as to issue a communiqué saying that 
the Republic of Mauritius is stopping all diplomatic ties with Qatar, a country where we have 
hundreds of Mauritians working, whom I have had the honour of meeting when I was there. 
And they write home, called home, worried that the diplomatic ties no longer exists because 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has written there and said it does not exist, in order to satisfy 
another friendly State of ours, of Mauritius, the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Why has he not 
been called to task? The Government expects us, Madam Speaker, a Government that knows 
that  with  Brexit!  When  I  look  at  this  Budget,  what  is  in  this  Budget  to  tell  me  that 
geopolitically, strategically we have given time to reflect.  Reflect upon what? 

What  to  do  with  regards  to  bilateral  trade  agreements  between  Mauritius  and  the 
European Union and the United Kingdom following Brexit? Rien! Rien n’est planifié! But 
what  this  Government,  Madam  Speaker,  is  good  at?  Of  promises,  promises  and  promises! 
They  talk,  talk  and  talk,  but  they  can’t  even  walk  the  talk.  The  people  outside,  Madam 
Speaker,  are  people  whom  I  admire.  The  people  of  Mauritius,  I  admire  their  strength,  I 
admire the resilience of those people. Many times we have come across difficult moments in 
our history where economically we have had to rely on the people of Mauritius to get us out 
of the doldrums, to get us out of the difficulty. We have, therefore, to call upon the resolve, 
the ethics of the people of Mauritius. We have to trust, the trust has to be rebuilt. But this 
Government is not trusted.  This Government is not trusted because, as I have said, people 
who are close to the family members of Government are given jobs, jobs for the boys, jobs 
for the girls, jobs for the cousins, jobs for the daughters, jobs for the sons, jobs for those who 
are close to MSM and they had the toupé to talk about la meritocracy.  

 

57 

I am for a revolution of the system. I am for a new set of laws whereby  you bring 
morals and legality in the approach of Ministers in Cabinet.  They  cannot go on acting in 
Cabinet and taking decisions as though they are the demigods of the day and that nothing will 
happen to them and the taxpayers out there will have to come and pay for the mess that they 
have created. We need a law to make Government Ministers responsible and they have to be 
prosecuted,  pay  and  disqualified  because  of  their  incompetence.  We  need  a  law  to  stop 
Government Ministers from nominating any single member of the family in any position of 
Government or parastatal bodies.  

I have been a Minister. Sir Anerood Jugnauth had named my father Yusuf Mohamed 
as Lawyer when I was not in Government. But I go as far as to say even that should never 
happen in the future. Even me, I should not see any member of my family who are named in 
any position in Government be it as a Lawyer or otherwise because a line has to be drawn, we 
have to be responsible and we have to take the first step, a step towards change and this is 
what the population wants. 

But this Government does not understand what I mean because they will be fast to 
say:  “Oh,  what  did  you  do?  What  did  you  do?  But  they  will  not  do  what  has  to  be  done 
because they have not got the courage to do what has to be done neither have they got the 
resolve  to  do  what  has  to  be  done.  I  believe  in  a  new  system  where  the  position  of  vice 
President is just simply annulled, deleted from our books, because I believe we have to start 
being responsible as a nation. I believe in a system where Members of Government will not 
have the right to choose, handpick whom they will put in positions of power and decision. 

But it should be a bipartisan Parliamentary Committee that sits down and decides who 
will  be  in  State-owned  enterprises,  in  positions  of  boards  and  CEOs  decision-making 
positions. This should not be a Government who talks of meritocracy but meritocracy only 
for their people. It is only when you change drastically, Madam Speaker, that you will be able 
then to ensure that this bond of trust with the people that no longer exists is rebuilt because 
the people are more important than any of us. I am not important. I am not important at all. It 
is the people that are important and the people do not appreciate what is going on. The people 
condemn Government.  

I have heard the Métro Léger, and I will finish on that. The Métro Léger! Hon. Bodha 
goes on to give us figures around Rs17 billion.  Tell him to come and tell us whether or not 
les deux soumissionnaires qui ont déjà donné leur prix ont quotté beaucoup plus que R 20 

58 

 
milliards.  Tell him to come and tell us it is not true! Tell him to come and tell us that it is not 
true! And when you look at the provisions in the Budget, it is for 13 kms only. And let us not 
forget the wise words of Sir Anerood Jugnauth  because now I must say he was wise before 
the elections and he lost it afterwards.  The wise words of Sir Anerood Jugnauth before the 
elections being interviewed by Nawaz Noorbux, and I can still see this video where he says: 
“Projet metro out!  Li na pas viable sa!” Those are not my words, those are his words: “Li na 
pas pou viable ! Li pou out sa!  Ceki nou bizin, c’est faire flyovers partout!” 

So, it was not viable before the elections and he gave the solemn guarantee to Nawaz 
Noorbux on a video that still can be shown to everyone, that I will post on my Facebook page 
a few minutes later on, that this is not viable, it will be out. How come, therefore, he is going 
on with the project to more than Rs20 billion for 13 kms when, in fact, what did Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth say in this recording:  “R 50 milliard pou couté sa!” He said  in his own style.  I 
cannot imitate. Hon. Rutnah can do that, I can’t. He said it will cost Rs50 billion that is why 
it has to be out. Those are the words of the Minister Mentor, but if the Minister Mentor said it 
will not be viable, que le projet ne sera pas viable, qu’il faut mettre à la porte le projet, que 
cela va coûter R  50 milliards.  Aujourd’hui, les chiffres prouvent qu’on avait raison.  Les 
chiffres  prouvent  that  the  people  have  been  taken  for  a  trail  ride.  How  come?    Parce 
qu’aujourd’hui 13 kms va coûter quoi?  R 20 et quelques milliards!  Plus de R 20 milliards!  
Et 26 kms qui est au fait le trajet initial, va coûter presque R 40 milliards.  And today, this 
Government comes and tell us that they are better than us. 

Madam Speaker, this is a Government of contradiction. This is a Government that I 
do  not  trust  and  the  people  out  there  do  not  trust.  But  then,  again,  la  même  rengaine  va 
continuer.  On va avoir ceux qui se prennent pour des pompiers de service, qui vont venir 
dire qu’on a tort et ils ont raison.  Mais quand, eux, ils viennent dire qu’on a tort, ce qu’ils 
disent au fait c’est que la population dans la grande majorité, eux, ont tort.  Mais s’ils ont le 
courage, aussitôt que l’honorable Bhadain démissionne give the election and put a candidate 
and we will show you exactly who is right and who is wrong because it will be a referendum 
election, and you will be beaten down. Met Christelle, met Samputh candidat!  And you will 
know exactly what will happen to you! 

Thank you, very much. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sinatambou! 

59 

(3.09 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity,  and  Environment  and 
Sustainable Development (Mr E. Sinatambou): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker.  I 
would like, first of all, to quote the famous American Author, Mark Twain, who actually said 
quite rightly – 

 “A half-truth is the most cowardly of lies.” 

I am saying that, Madam Speaker, because I have heard so many half-truths, on the other side 
of  the  House,  not  only  in  the  course  of  the  previous  intervention,  but in  the  course  of  the 
debates which have been ongoing before this august Assembly on the Budget Speech.  

May I first start by saying to the previous intervener through you that I have not come 
with a pre-prepared document which I will be reading out to this House. I think this is what is 
the first half-truth because if the hon. Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East 
actually  stated,  he  should  not  forget  that  so  many  other  hon.  Members,  on  his  side  of  the 
House, come with a pre-prepared document and read them out. So, as a matter of politeness 
and  elegance,  I  don’t  think  that  we  should  just state  what  the  others  do  when  on  our  side 
itself, we are doing it. As we say, il ne faut pas voir la paille dans l’œil de son voisin et ne 
faut pas voir la poutre qui est dans le sien.  

Now, I am certainly not one of those who would say that everything Government does 
is great and that there is nothing to improve. Contrary to what I have heard earlier. I am not 
among those who would say that everything which Government does is perfect, as has been 
said over there. I will not say that there is no wrong or that there can be no wrong on this side 
of Government. Never! In fact, every time I have had an opportunity to address any public 
gallery, I have made it a point to say that Government accepts constructive criticisms. But 
what Government cannot accept are those criticisms which are made in bad faith, which are 
made up of lies, which are made up of half-truths, which are actually dishonest. This is what 
we cannot accept. In view of the virulent attacks, I have heard in the course of the last hour, I 
will have to highlight some those half-truths, and in fact, I will even quote a famous Baptist 
Pastor who lived in the 19th Century and who said something which is very true also. He said 
– 

“A lie can travel halfway around the world while the truth is putting on its shoes.” 

 

60 

“A lie can travel halfway around the world while the truth is still putting on its shoes.” This is 
why it takes so long to undo many of the lies which we hear time and again from the other 
side of the House. Let me start with what I consider to be the first one.  

Someone who said:  “C’est un budget nul”.  From my perspective, it is either a lie or 
at least a half-truth. One may not agree with the content of the Budget. One may not agree 
with the principles underlying this Budget, but if there is one thing one cannot say is that ‘this 
budget est nul’. Because if that were to be said, it would be an insult to the more than 100,000 
Mauritians  earning  less  than  Rs10,000  a  month  who  are  going  to  benefit  from  negative 
taxation. Now, this is so wrong that the lie comes out. It has the time to go halfway around 
the world before we can actually dispel that lie to show that, in fact, even if we do not agree 
with  the  content  of  the Budget,  at  least,  this  one  measure  covering  more  than  10%  of  our 
population, cannot make of this Budget un buget qui soit nul. I must say, Madam Speaker, I 
heard  so  many  things  just  now.      Maybe  I  should  start  with  the  Betamax  issue,  because  I 
could  hear,  for  days  now,  so  many  virulent  attacks.  And  I  must  say  that  I  am  not  here  to 
discuss the rights or wrongs of the decisions taken. I am just here now, on the Betamax issue, 
to try and enlighten each and every one about a number of facts and figures. 

The first fact is when I heard my good friend, hon. Uteem, stating very strongly and 
rightly  so  that  the  MMM  was  against  the  award  of  the  Betamax  contract.  He  said  it  very 
strongly, I took note and I tried to find out in his speech, when he mentioned the reasons of 
this Betamax issue is that the MMM criticised the Betamax contract not because they had 
anything  against  the  people  behind  Betamax,  just  like  us.  Government  is  not  against  the 
Betamax  contract  because  we  had  anything  against  the  people  behind  the  Betamax.  Not 
because  you had anything against Betronix, nor do we. But as he stated in his speech, we 
were not agreeable with the way that we were going to bind this population for the next 15 
years.  A  contract  that  was  signed  in  total  opacity  without  any  tender  procedures  being 
followed.  

Now, I for one, was not part and party to the contract, but I can say that today when I 
came  to  know  about  what  had  gone  on,  I  must  also  say  that  Government  is  certainly  not 
agreeable  with  the  way  that  the  population  of  Mauritius  was  bound  for  the  next  15  years. 
Similarly, this side of the House is not agreeable to this contract which was signed in total 
opacity. So, we are speaking the same language. But what I do not understand is why then 
after receiving advice from both experts and lawyers in the field – not only technical advice, 
but legal advice - why then should Government not terminate a contract which is binding the 

 

61 

population in a monstrous manner which has actually been signed in total opacity, when now 
technical and legal experts come and tell Government that this contract has breached rules of 
law and rules of technicality. Why am I saying that Madam, it is because when we look at the 
facts and figures, the clauses in the Betamax contract, what do we learn? We learn, Madam, 
that the clauses of the contracts according to technical and legal experts were either unusual, 
exorbitant  and  well  above  market  rates,  unheard  of  in  the  freight  market  and  contrary  to 
market practice. 

Mr Mohamed: I have a point of order, Madam Speaker. If there is a quote made from 
any report, then it must be tabled. The Minister cannot quote from a report if he is not going 
to table it. That is Standing orders. So, maybe he should withdraw the quote because if he is 
quoting on it which is already done, then he has engaged himself in line with the Standing 
Order to table the report.  

Mr Sinatambou: This is not a report, it is my writing. 

Mr Mohamed: It is not the report, so what is making us believe it is a report? 

Madam Speaker: If it is a report, he would have given the source of the report. I do 
not think I heard him giving the source of the report. So, it is his personal opinion which he is 
expressing, I believe. 

 Mr Sinatambou: It is my document.  Now, I repeat it for those who have not heard.  
If it is actually the case, as we were advised that the clauses are either unusual, exorbitant, 
well  above  market  rates,  unheard  of  in  the  freight  market  and  finally  contrary  to  market 
practice, should such a contract not be terminated? I am not saying about who was in power. I 
am explaining the principle why this contract has been terminated. And I would like to invite 
the  Members  of  the  other  side  to  please,  not  interrupt  me.  I  listened  so  carefully  without 
interrupting anyone in the last hour. 

(Interruptions) 

I do not need you to give me an answer. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sinatambou please sit down. I would advise all Members, be 
it on this side or on the other side, not to engage in a conversation with someone who has the 
floor. Please! 

 

62 

Mr Sinatambou: Now, subsequently, as the hon. Attorney General stated earlier in 
his reply to the Private Notice Question, it was found out by the Ministerial Committee, upon 
advice, that the law, the procedures had been flouted. And as a consequence of this, isn’t it 
therefore proper…  

(Interruptions) 

I hear someone saying ‘fausse’. I think this has to stop. 

Madam Speaker: Do not interrupt, please. Please resume. 

Mr Sinatambou: So, I can vouch for the veracity of it.  In fact, in an earlier speech 
from one of the debaters, reference was made to a 32-minute video of  the Minister of the 
Financial Services and Good Governance explaining the ins and outs of all the illegalities and 
breaches of procedure and one even gave the website address. You just have to actually type 
‘Bhadain-Betamax’  and  you  can  have  access  to  the  32-minute  video,  explaining  all  those 
illegalities and flouting of procedures. 

Now, why am  I dwelling on this issue, Madam Speaker, is because the way  I hear 
some of the Members of the Opposition, it is as if they are praying that we end up having to 
pay  this  award  of  Rs4.5  billion.  And  one  wonders  whether  they  are  ‘Praying’  or  they  are 
again like virtures ‘Preying’. Looking at some of them. it is the second version. It is as if they 
are begging that Government, that this country might have to pay Rs4.5 billion in terms of 
damages in an award. 

Again if it were not good enough to show that on the basis of illegalities and flouting 
of procedures that we had to terminate this contract, the figures speak also for themselves. I 
went to find out what actually were the amounts payable. Yes, and I think it would be a sad 
day if this country had to pay Betamax Rs4.5 billion. I believe it will be a very sad day, but I 
am very  hopeful that this day will never happen and  I will tell  you why Madam Speaker.  
Because on the calculations that I worked out in the course of the three odd years that this 
contract had actually been ongoing, that is, from May 2011 to January 2015, in this award for 
the  whole  affair  we  would  stand  to  lose  Rs4.5 billion.  But,  in the  course  of  the  three  odd 
years  during  which  we  have  been  paying  Betamax,  this  country  has  paid  Rs4.4  billion  to 
Betamax and we had a 15-year contract! 

So, here we are for three plus years out of a 15-year contract, this country had already 
paid Rs4.4 billion to Betamax and we would have had to pay even more for another 15 years. 

 

63 

So, to me, if the price to stop this contract is Rs4.5 billion, even if it would be sad, we should 
accept to pay it. We are challenging it. We are going to apply to the Supreme Court in order 
to  set  this  award  aside  but  I  am  showing  that  on  the  trend  of  the  payments  one  could  not 
accept to keep paying looters of our economy that type of money.  

And, I must say that I was quite surprised in the course of the Private Notice Question 
when I heard that the Leader of the Opposition is challenging the figures of the STC to the 
effect that in the course of the now two odd years since we stopped the contract that we have 
saved nearly Rs600 m. Now, there is a saying which says that: ‘he who asserts must prove’. I 
just heard someone else again on the other side of the House saying ‘fausse’. Well, I would 
invite them to come up with their figures if they allege that they know more. I stand to be 
corrected but I have no reason to doubt the veracity of the figures given by the STC that we 
will have saved since we stopped this contract Rs600 m. approximately. These are indeed, as 
stated by one of my colleagues, audited figures. I mean the accounts of the STC are audited. 
So, I have again no further reason to doubt this.  But if you could have heard a few minutes 
ago that ‘because of the incompetence of the Government, we are sitting on a time bomb’, 
they created the bomb! 

They put everything nasty and dirty into that bomb! 

(Interruptions) 

No, we are trying to deactivate it, Sir! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Sinatambou: You see, Madam Speaker, those half-truths! The bomb had already 
been activated. I thank hon. Ameer Meea for actually coming with this half-truth even if it is 
meant to be then the most cowardly of lies. 

(Interruptions) 

You see, Madam Speaker, the bomb was not only created by them. The bomb was activated 
by them, but, at least, hon. Ameer Meea allows me to dispel that half-truth. And,  I would 
have hoped that the MMM would have helped us to deactivate the bomb because, as they 

 

64 

said, they were the first to criticise it. ‘Ils ont dénoncé cet accord’ disait l’honorable Uteem. 
So, I was expecting them to actually do the right thing; help to deactivate the Betamax bomb 
in view of its illegalities and the flouting of the procedures, especially if, as I understand that 
they are still against the Betamax contract. I believe that having heard Members on the other 
side belonging to the MMM party, they are still against the Betamax scandal. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: Forget the cuisine! 

Madam Speaker: No! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Minister is talking about the MMM, he has the right to 

talk! He is not addressing anybody personally. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, it is not a question… 

(Interruptions) 

It is not a question of which kitchen you are in! This is where perhaps I join the previous 
orator. It is not about scoring political points here. I am not trying to have any political gain 
out of the Betamax scandal. I am urging this country to help deactivate the Betamax scandal 
and bomb because  as they  rightly uncovered the scandal, they say, now  that we have also 
received  advice  both  technical  and  legal  expertise  stating  that:  ‘yes,  they  were  right’  why 
don’t  we  together  fight  to  ensure  that  this  country  does  not  end  up  paying  looters,  paying 
people who have been acting in such a nasty manner. 

 

65 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order!  He has just used a very, very dangerous word 
against parties who are not here. To pay ‘parties’, therefore, he is saying Betamax are looters. 
Therefore, he cannot do that. No one has been found guilty of anything. There is no case. The 
DPP has said there is no case. So, he cannot now s’arroger le pouvoir de venir dire que they 
are looters. I insist that on the simple principle of the Standing Orders, he should withdraw 
that! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Again, I would refer maybe to Standing Order 40 subsection (2) 

which says that –  

“It shall be out of order to use unbecoming words or expressions or to use offensive 
language (…).” 

Please,  I  would  request  you  not  to  use  offensive  language  and  if  the  hon.  Member 
considers the word ‘looter’ which you used to be offensive to somebody who is not in the 
House, then simply withdraw it! 

Mr Sinatambou: May I… 

(Interruptions) 

If that word is offensive, I indeed withdraw it. But I would like to say that I have pinpointed 
to  no  individual  but  I  consider  that  if  a  country  has  to  pay  Rs4.5  billion  as  regards  to  a 
contract qui a été dénoncé par un parti avant and now with hindsight after obtaining expert 
advice both technical and legal telling us that the law has been flouted and that the procedures 
have been flouted then I would call that plundering. And, whether it pleases someone or not, 
there is nothing offensive, I have pointed to no one, but I believe that it would be the duty of 
any  patriot,  of  any  person  who  believes  in  the  proper  running  of  this  country,  to  help  to 
terminate this contract because quite clearly there are a number of people who know more 
about it and who have not spoken. And I would appeal to those people to come forward and 
there is no scoring of political points here, I am acknowledging what the MMM did and I… 

Sorry? 

(Interruptions) 

 

66 

Madam Speaker: Non! Hon. Member, you continue to interrupt the hon. Minister! 

Please! 

(Interruptions) 

I am appealing to you not to interrupt the hon. Minister. I can understand that when on this 
side of the House you were talking then the hon. Minister had stayed silent. Please! 

Please! I have given my ruling and I don’t think we should argue on this, please! 

(Interruptions) 

No, I have already given my ruling. Hon. Bhagwan,… 

(Interruptions) 

…is it a point of clarification? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Yes, clarification because several times my good friend, hon. Etienne 
Sinatambou  has  made  mention  of  the  MMM  because  I  represent  the  MMM  so  when  the 
whole issue of Betamax case was discussed, initiated, the MSM and the Labour Party were 
together. Now,the case has gone to the arbitration and now the case is before the Supreme 
Court… 

(Interruptions) 

… it is in the process or something like that, it is their own cuisine and their own doing, why 
confront us with that! 

Madam Speaker: No, no, no! Hon. Bhagwan! Hon. Bhagwan, no!  Hon. Bhagwan, 
 
please! Hon. Bhagwan, please! I allowed you, you said it is a point of clarification; a point of 
clarification  should  not  be  controversial.  It  should  not  be  controversial,    it  should  be  only 
factual, and you should not introduce any other element in it, please. 

Mr Sinatambou: I was expecting hon. Bhagwan to actually say yes, we were against 
 
this contract, and we are still against this contract just like we are now. So I think that, in fact, 
they are being given a golden opportunity to correct what they, themselves, found to be nasty 

 

67 

and wrong. So, I do not think it is a question of who was with whom, and when. The question 
is: should those who actually unfolded the scandal, should those who actually unveiled the 
illegalities, not now, be together to stop what otherwise is going to be a plundering exercise 
of our country. That is what I believe should be the case regardless of whether it pleases the 
Labour Party or not. 

Now this being said Madam Speaker, I would like to add something because I note 
that  the  previous  orator  actually  felt  that  there  was  nothing.  He  had  asked  around  him, 
everywhere and there was nothing in this Budget which actually was worth noting. He had 
checked  with  people  who  work  in  the  sugarcane  fields.  He  had  spoken  to  plumbers, 
electricians. He had spoken to people in industries. He had spoken to people in the export 
sector and there was apparently nothing good enough to be the subject of any mention here. 
Well, I am sure that anyone in the small and medium enterprises sector, who is especially 
involved in the export segment, would applaud a decision which reduces the tax rate from 
15% to 3% annually. Nowhere in the world today do you get a 80% reduction in your tax bill. 
Nowhere! As someone rightly said on the other side of the House, SMEs are the backbone of 
an  economy.  So  it  is  here,  it  employs  about  60%  of  the  manpower  and  surely  we  should 
applaud a measure which actually involves a substantial reduction of 80% in the tax regime 
of that sector.   

Actually this reminds me, many people, on the  other side of the  House, have been 
saying that there was nothing for the SME sector. Then I would like to draw the attention to 
the  first  cluster  which  is  addressed  in  the  Budget  because  it  contains  no  less  than  eleven 
measures for the SME sector. In fact, apart from the reduction in the tax regime, I saw with 
much interest because a lot has been said about the non-provision of funds to the SME sector. 
Someone even went on to say that only Rs71 m. had been disbursed to the SME sector when, 
in fact, the first Ministry of Finance and Economic Development had stated that there will be 
Rs2 billion per year.  

(Interruptions) 

Well,  for  those  who  do  not  read,  I  think  they  should  have  a  better  read  of  the  Budget’s 
speech.  It  is  clearly  stated  in  the  Budget  Speech,  that  Government  has  kept  guaranteeing 
loans schemes to the SME sector from commercial banks, and that from 2015 to this day no 
less  than  Rs3.2  billion  have  been  borrowed  by  the  SME  sector,  so  much  therefore  for  the 
71m. which they have erroneously given to this House. We must appreciate Government does 

 

68 

not claim to be right every time, but what we believe is that we should not let lies go on. I 
like very much this saying from this Baptist pastor called Charles Spurgeon, because really, 
the lie can travel halfway around the world while the truth is still putting on its shoes.  

This is exactly what seems to be happening in this country, and for those who call me 
the  fireman,  this  is  what  we  are  doing  every  week.  We  are  telling  the  truth  to  this  nation 
because somehow, they just come up with insinuations; no fact, no figure, just accusations. 
But when you actually look at the fact and figures, you will see that so many things that they 
say are wrong, if not wrong, are false. For those who say that this Budget unfolds nothing for 
this  country,  at  least,  let  them  be  informed  that  the  whole  country  has  acknowledged  the 
social  measures  which  have  been  decided  upon  by  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development.  

Regardless of the social measures, Madam Speaker, I would like to refer to those who 
actually generate the wealth in this country. Who generates wealth in this country? All those 
who  generate  wealth  in  this  country,  apart  from  the  SME  side  for  whom  we  have  already 
catered, are to be found in two organisations mainly; one is Business Mauritius, one is the 
Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry. 

Business Mauritius now regroups all the members of the Joint Economic Council or 
the defunct, JEC, and all the members of the Mauritius Employees Federation together. What 
did they have to say? I was surprised, the hon. Leader of the Opposition stated – 

« Le Budget ne contient aucune mesures pour permettre à Maurice d’atteindre le 
niveau de pays à revenus élevés. » 

Yet, Business Mauritius stated – 

« Le Budget va dans la mouvance d’une économie qui souhaite devenir un pays à 
revenus élevés.» 

So, the Leader of the Opposition tells you there is no measure whatsoever dans la mouvance 
d’un pays à revenus élevés. The body which generates wealth in this country tells you – 

« Que  le  Budget  va  dans  la  mouvance  d’une  économie  qui  souhaite  devenir  un 
pays à revenues élevés. »  

 

69 

That it contains measures to go in that direction. In the meantime, the lie is travelling around 
half the world. Fortunately, truth now has put on its shoes and truth, when it strikes, will be 
lethal. Now if this were not enough, because I said there are two institutions; the first one is 
Business Mauritius and the second one is the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
which have stated quite openly that this Budget is going to favour the generation of wealth 
for  this  country.  What  more  do  we  need?  These  are  the  apex  bodies  in  the  generation  of 
wealth for this country. 

Now, if that were not enough, I made it a point to find a third body which contributes 
substantially to the development of our economy, and that is the Chambre d’Agriculture. The 
Secretary General of the Chamber of Agriculture, stated that the Budget contained, I’ll quote 
her – 

“Des mesures intéressantes et positives” 

So much for the prophets of doom on the other side of the House, who see no measure, no 
good measure, nothing!  

The Rt. hon. Minister Mentor used the right expression that narien pas bon syndrome.  I do 
not know where we will get the vaccine, but we will need to find it because we will have to 
stop this.  What is this doing, Madam Speaker? This is rotting the morale of this country. This 
is  rotting  the  well-being.  People  when  they  wake  up  in  the  morning,  when  they  say:  ‘Oh, 
Betamax scandale’. Not that we have to stop this scandal. What is very odd and from my 
perspective  unacceptable  is  that  the  victims  should  become  the  accused.  This  is  the  nasty 
game  which  some  people,  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  are  playing.  The  victims  are 
becoming the accused parties. We are doing what is right in the Betamax issue. They find 
fault, and fault, and fault.  

In that respect, I will have also to say a few words on the BAI scandal because indeed 
I  was  quite  surprised  to  see  both  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  the  first  orator  for  the 
Opposition  on  the  MMM  side  to  say  that  there  had  not  been  a  single  word  in  the  budget 
regarding  the  victims  of  the  BAI  scandal.  I  just  explained  how  I  do  not  agree  with  the 
Opposition when victims become accused. When this Government is trying rightly to stop a 
plundering exercise, that we should be the ones with whom they find fault.  

This time what I find unacceptable is when the Opposition convert the accused into 
victims. This is an exercise which is so wrong for the morale of this country. Let us go back 

 

70 

to this BAI scandal. What is the crux of the matter as far, at least, as I am concerned? The 
crux of the matter is that the independent investigator from Singapore found something out of 
the ordinary that from the whole amount of money which should have been in the BAI group, 
that is, Super Cash Back Gold, Bramer Asset Management, BAI Insurance etc., etc., Rs17 
billion  are  untraceable.  Now, 
the 
owners/managers/custodians of the BAI group, Rs17 billion become untraceable, are they the 
victims? Or should they be the accused? That is what this is about. 

the  money  under 

the  custody  of 

if 

from 

Lately, I have seen a tendency on the part of the other side of the House to try and 
make of the accused, of those who should have been found guilty to be the victims. Out of the 
Rs17 billion already, Rs10.5 billion had been repaid more than three months ago. Now, those 
Rs10.5 billion have been paid to nearly 70% of the Super Cash Back Gold investors and more 
than  91%  of  the  Bramer  Asset  Management  investors.    As  I  said,  once  when  we  saw  the 
political  vultures  going  around,  we  were  wondering,  but  why  is  that?  If  Government  has 
already repaid more than 91% of the Bramer Asset management investors, the totality of their 
money  and  for  nearly  70%    of  the  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  investors,  the  totality  of  their 
money again. Why all this?  

I  must  say  I  use  this  pejorative  terminology  because  when  do  vultures  go  around 
people in the desert? Comme on dit en creole, kan zotte a terre. Then vultures come to see 
what  they  can  take.  This  is  where  we  speak  of  cheap  politics.  People  coming  for  cheap 
political gains! Anyone who did not know the SCBG and the Bramer Asset Management saga 
would  have  thought  that  Government  is  heartless,  that  Government  is  refusing,  has  done 
nothing to pay those poor souls? Yet, Government had paid the totality of all the monies to 
nearly 70% of those people and more than 91% to the Bramer Asset Management people. 

(Interruptions) 

No, Government decision! It was a Government decision that this was paid.  

Now, what is the case, Madam Speaker? Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister of this 
country  who  is  also  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  found  again 
further ways and means to pay more of those people so that today, as I am speaking to you, 
an offer is on the table whereby those investors are going to get back between 50% and 100% 
of their money. I cannot understand how people could have tried in the last few months to 
depict Government as wrongdoers, as if we were drinking the blood of those people. 

 

71 

On  the  contrary,  Government  has  expressed  its  sympathy  to  all  the  victims  of  the 
mega fraud of the BAI, all the victims of the Super Cash Back Gold and the Bramer Asset 
Management  scandal.  The  Prime  Minister  not  only  listened,  but  he  said  that  this  was  a 
priority of Government and that he would actually help to find a solution and a solution he 
has found. A solution has already been proposed and I believe this is the best that this country 
could do. Rs17 billion! Another time bomb of that other side! Rs17 billion, Madam Speaker! 
Those Rs17 billion, Madam Speaker, is.... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Sinatambou: ... actually more than the budget of 17 Ministries to be found in the 
Appropriation  Bill  2017/2018.  They  have  actually  allowed  the  wrongdoers  in  the  BAI 
scandal  to  plunder  Rs17  billion.  Untraceable!  But  we  know  that  there  are  properties  in 
Washington, in New York, Castles in Italy, big apartments in London and in Paris. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Sinatambou:  Leave him alone! He has got nothing to do with it! 

He allowed the loot. He was part of it.  So, keep peace and quiet! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, this is why, we, on this side of the House, will not shirk from our 
responsibilities.  They  may say whatever they want on that side.  They are guilty of those 
wrongdoings.  But I will be first to acknowledge.  They are not guilty of everything wrong 
which went on in this country.  But they are guilty of some of the biggest crimes committed 
against this country. That to me is unforgivable.  If they think that the people do not trust us, 
they should see what the people do to them. Because I have already taken, I understand, 50 
minutes from the one hour which is imparted to me. 

Yes, those people who talked ... 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

72 

Exactly!  I heard something very good. They are speaking of popularity. They have not been 
able to hold one 01 May meeting in the last three years and they come and give lessons now. 
I would like to end on a few notes. Madam Speaker. First of all, especially when they say that 
the people… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No crosstalking, hon Jhugroo! 

Mr Sinatambou:… especially when they claim falsely that nothing is done for the 
people. I happen to be vested with the portfolio of Social Security and National Solidarity and 
the Budget allotted to my Ministry has increased by 10.08% to reach the phenomenal sum of 
Rs20.75 billion for social assistance for our countrymen and countrywomen. 

Nearly Rs21 billion just for social assistance. 217, 000 people aged above 60 will be 
eligible for basic retirement pension amounting to Rs15.6 billion. 19½ thousand widows will 
be  eligible  to  Rs1.3  billion.  30,000  beneficiaries  of  basic  invalidity  pension  will  receive 
around  Rs2.2  billion.  405  orphans  will  receive  Rs23  m.  15,000.  Beneficiaries  of  child 
allowance  will  be  entitled  to  Rs325  m.  And  around  23,000  beneficiaries  of  severely 
handicapped persons, guardians of orphans and beneficiaries of inmate allowance will receive 
other basic pensions to the tune of Rs1.1 billion. 

It’s nearly 20% of this country’s Budget which will go to the people of this country, 
to the vulnerable people of this country. And this without taking into accounts, the billions of 
rupees  which  are  actually  dispensed  as  subsistence  allowance  to  those  8,000  plus  families 
who fall under the Ministry of Social Integration. Now this is, indeed, what the Opposition 
does not like to hear, they will always be mumbling and bustling with other works. Before 
ending I would like to say one thing about the protection of coastal zones because I heard the 
Leader of the Opposition alleging that nothing is being done for the protection of coastal zone 
that there is hardly any money. 

Let  me  inform  the  House  that  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Sustainable 
Development,  which  falls  again  under  my  portfolio,  is  implementing  several  coastal 
adaptation  measures  to  cope  with  sea  level  rise  and  to  increase  the  climate  resilience  of 
coastal communities. Among the measures - 

 

1. 

2. 

73 

is  the  coast  and  adaptation  work  at  three  vulnerable  sides  namely  –  Quatre 
Soeurs, Rivière des Gallets, and Mont Choisy; 

is the construction of a state-of-the-art refuge centre, it is the fourth of its kind 
in the world, two are in the United States, one in Japan and we are the first 
refuge centre of the kind in the whole of the Southern Hemisphere; 

We have an ecosystem-based adaptation with the plantation of 20,000 mangroves in 
the  coastal  belt  of  Grand  Sable  and  Quatre  Soeurs.  This  project  has  gained  international 
recognition by the United Nations Development Programme as an instance of best practice 
for  Small  Island  Developing  States.  There  are  another  eight  measures,  but  time  not 
permitting,  I  will  not  go  further  onto  that.  I  would  like  to  say  something  which  is  of 
importance  because  I  have  been  six  months  now  at  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Sustainable Development and the Ministry of Social Security and National Solidarity, but I 
have also been six months as Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation. 

My good friend, hon. Sawmynaden, is going to address a few issues, but there is one 
issue which I would like to come before this House. It is that this year when you take the 
seven most important ICT indicators in the world and there are, at least, six or seven of them, 
in each and every one of them Mauritius ranks first in Africa. Now, this will not see the first 
page  of  any  newspaper  or  of  any  radio  information  programme,  but  I  thought  that  people 
might say: “Well, this is Africa!” So, what we did at that time was to compare with two IT 
giants, which are India and China. 

What  came  out  from  the  comparison  is  that  out  of  the  seven  parameters  in  four  of 
them, Mauritius does better than India and China. In two of them, Mauritius did better than 
one and less well than the other. In only one out of the seven parameters, the China and India 
do better than us. Now, this is why I feel so sorry for my country when I find this type of 
attempt to demolish the country with a gloom and doom being portrayed by some people on 
the other side. 

Sometimes  nonsense,  sometimes  fallacies,  sometimes  half-truths,  sometimes 
absurdities,  sometimes  the  attitude  of  pense  petit  and  I  really  believe  that  this  ought  to 
change. Because if you look at this, out of those indicators we are challenging IT giants like 
China and India. If that were not good enough, Madam Speaker, the icing on the cake came 

 

74 

last week when it was found that in the Global UN Cybersecurity Index, we are now number 
six in the world. 

At the last count, we were ninth. When we were ninth, we were ex aequo with France 

and Denmark. India was in front of us, it was sixth, we were ninth… 

…what has happened, not me, it is Government, it is the team. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, why are  you interrupting him? Allow him to conclude his 

speech. 

(Interruptions) 

It is not your problem. Whatever Ministry he can address, it is not your problem. 

Mr Sinatambou: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, what I am trying to say is that a 
giant like India was sixth, we were ninth. This year we become sixth in the world and we are 
doing better than, I think, every country in Asia-Pacific. The only European country which 
does  better  than  others  is  Estonia.  No  country  in  Europe  is  before  us  in  that  indicator  of 
Global Cybersecurity. 

But  I  am  sure  my  good  friend  and  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Communication, 
Technology and Innovation, is going to have more to say about that. Now, why am I saying 
this Madam Speaker? I am saying this because I believe whatever, let us say, shortcoming in 
the  Budget,  because  I  am  sure  the  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  would  never  claim  that  everything  is  perfect  in  the  Budget,  and  I  would 
subscribe to this type of view from the hon. Prime Minister. 

But one thing we must acknowledge is that he must be congratulated for presenting a 
Budget which from my point of view skilfully addresses major challenges in our endeavour 
to  attain  our  ambitions  and  which  carefully  addresses  major  social,  economic  and 
environmental concerns of the country. I am convinced, Madam Speaker, that the 2017/2018 
Budget will accelerate our social and economic development, that it will improve the quality 
of life of the population and bring more social justice in our country. 

I am also convinced that it will allow our countrymen to generate more wealth. I am 
sorry for the prophets of doom and gloom who keep doing a very negative job in our country 

 

75 

because  what  they  are  doing  is  simply  demoralising  our  population.  As  the  then  Rt.  hon. 
Prime  Minister  once  said:  “Faisons  la  différence  entre  les  bâtisseurs  et  les  démolisseurs.  
Nous, nous sommes de la partie des bâtisseurs.” 

 (Interruptions) 

We want this country to leave aside les démolisseurs, and with these few words, I would like 
to congratulate the hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
once again, and I thank you for your attention, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  I will now ask the Deputy Speaker to take the Chair. 

At this stage the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

 (4.06 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritim  &  Port  Louis 
East):  M. le président, un budget est une occasion pour fixer un nouveau cap. L’honorable 
ministre des finances pouvait donner l’élan nécessaire pour relancer l’économie mauricienne 
mais il a raté l’occasion. Tout le monde est sorti de l’exercice du jeudi 08 juin avec une drôle 
d’impression, celle d’avoir raté quelque chose. 

En  campagne  électorale  de  2014  et  en  début  mandat  de  l’actuel  gouvernement,  les 
Premier ministres successifs que nous avons eus: deux Premier ministres, trois ministres des 
finances, nous avaient promis un deuxième miracle économique ! Un terme qui semble avoir 
disparu du vocabulaire gouvernemental. Et là, M. le président avant que je ne rentre dans le 
vif du sujet, le budget lui-même, laissez-moi répondre à deux ou trois points par rapport à 
l’intervention du précédent orateur, notamment sur l’affaire BAI. 

M. le président, à mon humble avis, la plus grosse bêtise de ce gouvernement, une 
fois accédé au pouvoir, était de s’en prendre à la BAI et en ne respectant pas les procédures 
d’usage,  propres  à  un  état  de  droit.  La  BAI,  pour  moi,  M.  le  président,  était  malade. 
D’ailleurs, c’était nous-mêmes, au MMM, qui avions tiré la sonnette d’alarme en premier. 
Mais, M. le président, je vais m’expliquer en termes figuratifs: quand quelqu’un est malade et 
vous êtes le docteur.  Ici le docteur est le  gouvernement, les  autorités  -  qu’est-ce que vous 
faites? Quel est votre devoir? C’est de le soigner.  Mais ce gouvernement,  au lieu de soigner 

 

76 

la  BAI,  il  l’a  tué  carrément.  Et  aujourd’hui  qu’est-ce  qu’on  a?  On  a  des  réclamations  par 
milliards de toutes parts.  On a des réclamations de R 35 milliard de l’ex patron de la BAI. 
Là-dessus, M. le président, je vais être honnête dans mon propos parce que nous n’oublions 
pas ce qui s’est passé en 2015 avec l’arrogance de certains. Nous n’oublions pas ce qui a été 
dit lors des débats télévisés à la MBC ! Nous n’oublions pas ce qui a été dit dans des débats à 
la radio avec l’arrogance de certains. Et comment aussi oublier les propos de l’ancien Premier 
ministre à l’effet quand il est un capitaine d’un bateau, quand il sait que le navire va faire 
naufrage, alors il retire son argent en premier. 

(Interruptions) 

M. le président, dans quel pays sommes-nous en train de vivre? C’est un délit! Un 
délit  initié  inside  a  dealing !  Et  pas  seulement  l’ancien  Premier  ministre,  y  compris  son 
ministre des finances et le ministre de la bonne gouvernance. Ce sont ces gens-là qui viennent 
dire qu’ils sont des bâtisseurs de la nation.  Des bâtisseurs qui nous coûtent l’abus des procès 
qui vont nous coûter des milliards, M. le président. 

Donc,  je  disais,  qu’aveuglé  par  le  plein  pouvoir  ou  par  excès  de  confiance,  ils  ont 
foncé,  tête  baissée.    Autant  que  je  sache,  aucune  plainte  n’avait  été  logée  de  la  part  des 
milliers  de  clients  de  la  BAI  et  le  gouvernement,  fort  de  sa  majorité,  a  procédé 
unilatéralement  au  démantèlement  de  cet 
les 
conséquences. On a agi comme dans une république bananière. Il y a eu ni plan B, ni plan C. 
Cela a été une décision hâtive, irréfléchie, irresponsable et dangereuse. Et maintenant on est 
en train de payer le prix de cette décision irréfléchie et irresponsable. 

important  conglomérat  sans  mesurer 

Comme  je  l’ai  dit  avant,  nous  attendons  des  procès,  des  dommages  en  série, 
hypothéquant  les  générations  à  venir.  Pour  notre  cher  pays,  personne  ne  souhaite  un 
dénouement désastreux. Le gouvernement s’est rué à la télé pour faire le procès de la BAI et 
ils ont eux-mêmes tranché et passé à l’acte. Il y avait même des débats télévisés à la radio et à 
la télé comme je l’ai dit. Le gouvernement s’était substitué au tribunal devant une population 
ahurie.  Si  nous  perdons  ces  procès,  plusieurs  milliards  de  roupies  et  d’autres  réclamations 
s’ensuivront, jour après jour, et ce gouvernement n’aura plus le droit moral de diriger ce pays 
et devra démissionner par pure et simple décence envers la nation. 

Donc, M. le président, c’est dommage que l’honorable ministre est en train de partir 

parce que j’allais aussi parler sur la sécurité sociale… 

 

77 

(Interruptions) 

… sur les châteaux… 

The Deputy Speaker: Order ! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Durant son intervention il a mentionné qu’il y avait des châteaux 
en  Italie,  au  Malte,  en  Espagne,  des  appartements  à  Washington.    Mais  la  question 
parlementaire que j’avais moi-même posée à l’honorable ministre de la bonne gouvernance, 
dans sa réponse officielle, écrite - et j’espère que ça n’a pas été modifié – mais lui-même il 
n’a ni castle, ni château, ni appartement, ni à Washington, ni au Malte, ni en Espagne, ni en 
Italie.  Rien! Il n’y a rien dans les documents officiels sur la liste sur les Assets and Liabilities 
of the BAI.  Donc comment venir lâcher ça, et puis il part maintenant! Il aurait dû être là pour 
pouvoir écouter  ce que j’avais à dire. 

Donc,  laissez-moi  venir  directement  sur  l’analyse  économique  du  budget,  M.  le 
président. S’il est vrai qu’on n’attend plus rien du budget 2017-2018, cela intervient dans un 
contexte économique incertain et tourmenté et c’est tout sauf rassurant pour l’avenir. Qu’il y 
a-t-il  à  l’horizon?  Pas  grand-chose  qui  embrigade  la  nation.  Il  ne  convaint  guerre  tant  il 
manque d’inspiration, brille par son absence d’ambition est présente des incohérences. Ce qui 
est grave surtout c’est qu’il ne se concentre pas sur les priorités économiques actuelles. 

The Deputy Speaker: Order ! 

Mr Ameer Meea : Reléguer ainsi l’économie au second plan dans le contexte actuel 
de morosité économique, frise l’irresponsabilité. Un budget, c’est surtout une occasion pour 
insuffler un nouveau dynamisme à l’économie car il y a la gravité de la situation par rapport à 
la  chute  aiguë  de  l’exportation  mauricienne.  En  2016,  les  exportations  des  produits 
mauriciens  ont  baissé  si  nettement  au  point  qu’elles  finançaient  seulement  la  moitié  des 
importations de nos marchandises. On s’attend à un nouveau recul cette année alors que le 
Brexit aura des conséquences sérieuses sur notre déficit commercial.  

Un  autre  problème  économique  qui  n’a  pas  été  abordé  dans  le  budget  est 
l’investissement privé. A peine si ce terme a été utilisé durant le Budget Speech et combien 
c’est important l’investissement privé. Le Premier ministre se félicite de le voir enregistrer 
une croissance positive de 5% en 2016. Mais ce n’est pas un indicateur déterminant car le 
montant  d’investissement  privé,  R  55  milliards,  environ  était  bien  inférieur  à  des  années 

 

78 

précédentes.  Donc, nous avons atteint des chiffres dépassant les R 60 milliards. Et celui de 
2017  ne  va  pas  dépasser  encore  une  fois  les  R  60  milliards.  Donc,  le  budget  de  l’année 
dernière n’a pas atteint son objectif d’un taux d’investissement de 18.9% du produit intérieur 
brut  pour  l’année  2016/17  et  en  réaliser  17.6%  c’est  l’investissement  privé  qui  amène  la 
création de l’emploi. Il répond à une logique interne, s’il n’y a pas d’investissement privé, il 
n’y a pas lieu de parler de création d’emploi. Il n’y a pas de l’emploi dans le secteur public, et 
il n’y a que de l’emploi plutôt dans le secteur public, et d’ailleurs on recrutera quelques 2,000 
fonctionnaires et le budget elle-même ne dit rien sur l’investissement privé, M. le président.  

La  gravité de la situation économique surtout par rapport aux difficultés du secteur 
offshore. Ici aussi le discours budgétaire entretient le flou et l’incertitude en indiquant que, I 
quote - 

“We will also reform our tax regime for global business companies so that it 

evolves and meets the new international requirements.”  

Après avoir sacrifié les bénéfices du Traité de non-double imposition entre Maurice et 
l’Inde, le gouvernement envisagerai de revoir le taux de 3% appliqué aux revenus de sociétés 
offshore. 

M. le président, l’impact de la révision du Traité que Maurice avait avec l’Inde sur 
l’offshore,  nous  n’avons  pas  encore  ressenti  cet  impact.  Parce  que  l’offshore  emploie  des 
milliers de personnes, des milliers de jeunes, directement ou indirectement dans les sociétés 
l’offshore, dans les firmes comptables, dans les assurances, dans les banques, les chauffeurs 
de taxi qui vont aller chercher ces employés qui travaillent fort tard pendant la nuit, les petits 
commerces qui vendent de la nourriture, donc c’est un multiplying effect. Et tous ces jeunes 
qui font leurs études dans la comptabilité c’est surtout le secteur d’offshore qui génère tous 
ces  emplois-là.  Et  je  parle  en  connaissance  de  cause.  Moi,  je  suis  extrêmement  tracassé  à 
l’avenir de ce secteur, surtout comme j’ai dit  l’effet n’a pas encore été ressenti.  

Donc,  en  essayant  de  revoir  le  taux  d’imposition  sur  les  sociétés  d’offshore,  le 
gouvernement est en train de céder aux pressions des organisations des pays développés, sans 
égard  à notre souveraineté fiscale.  Il  est vrai que la juridiction mauricienne ne devrait pas 
continuer à fonder sa compétitivité sur un avantage purement fiscal, il est vrai. Mais il lui faut 
des mesures d’accompagnement. Comme l’industrie sucrière pour diversifier ses produits et 
ses marchés. Ce secteur est en pleine transition avec le fin du Traité indien, et ce budget n’a 
fait  aucune  mention,  on  fait  comme-ci  de  rien  n’était,  alors  que  c’est  déterminant.  Les 

 

79 

sociétés offshore aujourd’hui payent 3% au lieu de 15% de corporate tax. Est-ce qu’on va 
revoir tout cela ?  Ce sont des mesures surtout qu’exigent l’OCDE.  Donc, je disais où sont 
les mesures d’accompagnement ?  

établit 

annonce  des  gros  projets  d’infrastructure, 

Ce qui saute aux  yeux aussi, M. le président, c’est que d’une année à une autre, le 
les  dépenses 
gouvernement 
d’investissement, mais à la fin de la journée, l’enveloppe pour le  développement est sous 
utilisée.  Pour  preuve  pour  l’année  fiscale  se  terminant  30  juin  2017,  le  gouvernement  n’a 
dépensé  que  R  9.8  milliards  sur  un  budget  totalisant  R    14.4  milliards.  Quant  à  la  dette 
publique, M. le président, en excluant l’aide de l’Inde avec une enveloppe de R 35.2 milliards 
pour le financement d’une série de projets, la dette publique franchira pour la première fois la 
barre  de  R  300  milliards,  soit  presque  67%  de  notre  PIB.  Ainsi  les  Budgetary  Estimates 
accompagnant le discours du budget prévoit un endettement de R 301.6 milliards soit 63% du 
PIB, pour passer à R 347.1 milliards au 30 juin 2020. Il faut se rappeler que selon le Public 
Debt  Management  Act  2008,  le  taux  de  la  dette  publique  doit  être  ramené  à  50%  du  PIB 
l’année prochaine. Et comme je disais, en excluant l’assistance financière de l’Inde de R 35.2 
milliards,  la  dette  plutôt  par  tête  d’habitant  se  montre  à  R  238  600  soit  l’équivalant  d’un 
salaire moyen annuel.  

D’ici à juin 2020, soit la fin du présent mandat de l’Alliance MSM-ML et transfuge, 
la nouvelle détérioration de l’endettement de R 51.4 milliards pour atteindre R 347 milliards 
ou une dette par personne, per capita, de R 275,000. Et là, je dois mentionner, le fait selon 
moi, on aura dû amender le présent budget par le montant qu’on doit payer aux victimes de la 
BAI.  Comment  peut-on    présenter  un  budget  huit  jours  de  cela  et  aujourd’hui  le 
gouvernement accepte de payer R 6.5 milliards, et ce montant-là ne se  trouve pas dans ce 
même budget ! C’est l’irresponsabilité financière, M. le président, et on nous dit que le déficit 
budgétaire va être de 3.2% mais si on ajoute les R 6.5 milliards qu’on doit payer à la BAI 
quand on sait… 

(Interruptions) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Armance, allow me to listen to the hon. Member. 

Mr Ameer Meea: …que notre GDP a atteint R 44.7 milliards, donc on prend notre 
GDP,  on  divise  par  R  6.5  milliards  de  dette  additionnelle,  notre  déficit  budgétaire  va 
augmenter  par  1.45%,  M.  le  président.  Qu’est-ce  qu’on  va  faire ?  On  va  amener  un 
budgétaire  supplémentaire  dans  quelques  mois?  Tout  ça  s’est  joué  maintenant,  et  moi  je 

 

80 

propose qu’on amende le budget, et je vais faire une proposition au Committee Stage quand 
ça viendra, M. le président.  

Maintenant,  M.  le  président  et  sans  oublier  les  R  3.5  milliards  que  la  Banque  de 
Maurice a déjà avancé à la MauBank, etc. Donc, déjà en termes de taxpayers’ money, public 
funds, on est arrivé à R 10 milliards seulement par la décision irréfléchie de ce gouvernement. 
Et  l’ancien  orateur  qu’est-ce  qu’il  disait  nous  sommes  des  bâtisseurs,  des  bâtisseurs 
d’emprunt, des bâtisseurs de loans, des bâtisseurs qui sont en train d’engager les générations 
futures. C’est ça que représente ce présent gouvernement.  

M. le président, au lendemain de la présentation du budget 2017-2018, les chiffres sur 
le Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) pour le premier trimestre de cette année constituent une 
véritable honte de choc. Ces données confirment une baisse de 32% du montant du FDI avec 
un  montant  de  R2  milliards  soit  environ  USD  60  millions  seulement  injectées  dans 
l’économie mauricienne. Le secteur porteur tel que RES, et autre IRS, a, semble-t-il, pris un 
véritable ralentissement en ce début d’année et qui s’annonce de très mauvais augure pour 
l’économie mauricienne. 

Dans  son  rapport  de  perspectives  pour  l’économie  mondiale  la  Banque  mondiale  a 
revu à la baisse l’estimation qu’elle avait faite en janvier dernier concernant la croissance de 
l’économie  mauricienne.  La  Banque  mondiale  fait  alors  un  état  d’un  taux  de  3.4%  contre 
3.5% annoncé en 2017 et prend même à contre-pied les estimations de la FMI et les autres 
autorités  locales  dont  la  Banque  de  Maurice  et  Statistics  Mauritius.  La  Banque  mondiale 
revoit également à la baisse la croissance pour 2018-2019 initialement projetée à un taux de 
croissance de 3.8% pour les deux prochaines années. Les nouvelles provisions sont de 3.5% 
en 2018 et 3.3% en 2019. 

Il faut souligner que la FMI avait estimé dans un rapport publié en avril dernier que la 
perspective économique mondiale, que la croissance pour 2017 serait à 3.9% et celle de 2018 
à 4%. La banque de Maurice, elle, prévoyait une croissance de 3.9, %. Tout a été revu à la 
baisse, M. le président. 

Donc, M. le président, qu’est-ce que la population attend de ce gouvernement ? C’est 
tout simplement une amélioration de leurs conditions de vie, plus de sérénité. Elle s’attend à 
des  perspectives  d’emploi  pour  nos  jeunes  avec  une    révision  du  système  éducatif  pour 
répondre  aux  exigences  d’une  société  moderne.  Mais  au  lieu  de  tout  ça,  on  a  opté  à  des 

 

81 

mégaprojets  au  coût  de  milliards  de  roupies,  des  projets  annoncés  bruyamment  mais  sans 
résultat. Là je fais référence au projet Heritage City, M. le président.  

J’avais raison quand je m’étais opposé à ce projet qui allait endetter l’île Maurice, nos 
futures générations jusqu’au cou et tout cela au détriment de Port Louis qui allait devenir une 
ville  morte.  L’Heritage  City  a  été  validé  par  le  Conseil  des  ministres,  un  Conseil  des 
ministres spécial mais c’est le même Conseil des ministres qui vient désapprouver le projet 
Heritage City. Quelle incohérence, quelle inconsistance, quel manque de compétence de la 
part d’un gouvernement d’une décision aussi grave faite à la va-vite ; des milliards de roupies 
dans un projet pour finalement aller tuer ce même projet, M. le président.  

Qu’est-ce  qu’on  avait  dit  pour  Port  Louis?  On  avait  dit  qu’il  y  aurait  des 
investissements de l’ordre de 52 milliards de roupies. On avait brandi l’investissement et par 
qui? Par le secteur privé. Le secteur privé allait investir dans une ville morte 52 milliards de 
roupies!  Je  me  rappelle  de  cette  conférence  de  presse  par  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances, 
l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo avec à ses côtés l’honorable Nando Bodha et l’honorable Dr. 
Husnoo.  On  allait  transformer  le  bâtiment  de  l’Emmanuel  Anquetil  en  appartements !  On 
allait transformer tous les bureaux gouvernementaux par des bâtiments résidentiels. Il y aurait 
eu 300000 m² de bâtiments résidentiels pour une ville morte, pour une ville dont on retire le 
Parlement, dont on retire tous les ministères d’envergure, et tous ces gens-là allaient venir à 
Port Louis. Voilà ces bâtisseurs, M. le président. Voilà ces bâtisseurs de Rome, de Port Louis 
plutôt M. le président.  

En passant, in the process qu’est-ce qu’on a perdu ? On a perdu R47  million qu’on a 
payé  à  Stree  Consulting.  M,  le  président.  Pour  Stree  Consulting,    là  aussi  on  a  débattu  la 
question ici à l’Assemblée et qu’est-ce qu’on a eu? Aucun rapport ! Aucun rapport, niet sur 
Stree Consulting et qu’est-ce qu’on disait de Stree Consulting ? C’était un G-to-G agreement, 
une firme de Dubai de grande envergure et alors quand on vérifie tout cela sur l’Internet il 
n’y a rien, M. le président. R47 m.de taxpayers’ money qui s’est volatilisé, M. le président.  

Maintenant  par  rapport  au  développement  économique,  laissez-moi  dire  quelques 
mots sur le métro express. Nous voilà pris dans une spirale d’endettement extraordinaire. Je 
ne compte pas m’attarder sur ce projet tellement il y a eu de points de vue contradictoires 
exprimés de part et d’autre. Peut-on s’étonner de constater que la population se laisse gagner 
par le pessimisme et le découragement après avoir était bercée par des chansons? Le métro 
express  est  un  projet  grandiose  sur  lequel  le  gouvernement  compte  s’appuyer  pour 

 

82 

s’orgueiller  mais  cela  n’a  pas  suscité  une  enthousiasme  populaire.  Sans  cette  adhésion 
populaire, ce projet d’envergure pourrait être un échec, M. le président. 

Maintenant laissez-moi passer aux PMEs. Le secteur des PMEs, M. le président, c’est 
l’insatisfaction généralisée. Il y a que R100 m. qui a été alloué et, tenez-vous bien, pour les 
trois prochaines années, pour l’implémentation d’un Ten Year Master Plan pour le secteur 
des PMEs. Dans cette optique, la SME Mauritius remplacera la SMEDA comme principale 
institution du soutien des PMEs. Les R100 millions allouées pour l’implémentation du Ten 
Year Master Plan pour les trois prochaines années sont nettement insuffisantes d’autant plus 
que ce secteur contribue à lui seul 40% du PIB et qui est le plus grand employeur du pays. Le 
précédent orateur avait parlé du PME, il y a eu un reduction in the tax regime. Mais il devrait 
préciser la réduction par rapport à l’exportation, ce qu’il n’a pas fait. 

(Interruptions) 

Okay peut-être que je n’ai pas entendu. Mais, M. le président, le problème c’est que dès le 
départ les PMEs n’ont pas les moyens d’exporter. Combien de PMEs exportent ? Donc, ce 
baisse du taux fiscal combien des PMEs vont en bénéficier, M. le président ? Très peu de 
PMEs  exportent.  Qui  ne  se  souvient  pas  des  R10  milliards  promis  par  l’ancien  magicien, 
excusez-moi,  par  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances  l’honorable  Lutchmeenaraidoo!  R10 
milliards promis aux PME, R2 milliards par année. Et là-dessus j’aurais aimé revenir sur les 
propos du précédent orateur à l’effet que R3.2 milliards a déjà été injecté. 

Mais  ces  R  3.2  milliards,  il  oublie  de  dire  que  ces  loans  sont  avec  des  banques 
commerciales, avec des taux commerciales; pas avec la SMEDA ou bien avec le MauBank.  
Si j’avais pris ces loans, ça auraient été sans garantie, avec un taux préférentiel. Maintenant 
ils prennent ces emprunts avec des banques commerciales, auto-commerciales et beaucoup 
dedans, ils prennent ça pour re-finance des existing loans. Donc voilà par apport aux PMEs. 
M. le président. 

Maintenant, 

laissez-moi  dire  quelques  mots  sur 

le  Negative  Income  Tax. 
L’introduction d’un système de Negative Income Tax pour les personnes en emplois et dont 
les  salaires  ne  dépassent  les  Rs10,000.  Le  gouvernement  Lepep  -  soi-disant  lepep  -  avait 
annoncé qu’il viendrait avec des propositions pour un salaire minimal.  

(Interruptions) 

 

83 

Ça viendra ! Est-ce que tu vois quelque chose apparaitre ?  

The Deputy Speaker :  Order ! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Tout à l’heure, je donnerais des exemples, pendant deux ans et 
demie, qu’est-ce que vous avez fait. Anne, ma sœur Anne. Donc, beaucoup a été dit, mais 
rien  n’a  été  fait,  M.  le  président.  Dans  ce  budget,  le  Premier  ministre  n’a  même  pas 
mentionné  le  salaire  minimal.  Avec  le  soutien  financier  accordé  aux  employés  au  bas  de 
l’échelle, le Premier ministre admet le fait que ces personnes sont mal rémunérées. Il refuse 
simplement de traiter le problème à la source et procéder à une répartition plus égalitaire de la 
richesse. C’est une volteface de l’Alliance Lepep et une légitimation des inégalités à Maurice.  

 (Interruptions) 

Attends avant que tu partes, il y a un truc pour toi là ! Maintenant, M. le président, laissez-
moi  venir  à  la  réforme  de  la  pension.  Et  c’est  bien  que  l’honorable  ministre  Etienne 
Sinatambou est là. D’ailleurs, je croyais qu’il allait parler sur la réforme de la pension. Au 
lieu de parler des châteaux en Espagne, au lieu de parler des châteaux en Italie, il aurait dû 
parler sur la réforme de la pension qui un item extrêmement important. Au lieu de jouer au 
teletubbies, M. le président. Donc, il n’y a rien sur la pension des personnes âgées. Et en dépit 
du fait que le gouvernement avait mis sur pied un comité pour se pencher sur la question de 
l’universalité de la pension, il n’y a rien sur ce sujet alors qu’on sait qu’il va devenir un poids 
de plus en plus important sur notre économie. Il n’y a rien sur la politique démographique du 
pays. Il n’y a rien dans le budget. L’honorable Gayan nous dit qu’il a lu ça, peut-être qu’il a 
lu ça en bas là-haut, mais moi, je n’ai rien trouvé. 

Dans  les  années  qui  viennent,  la  population  du  pays  aura  diminué.  La  fameuse 
pyramide avec les jeunes en bas et les vieux en haut, va s’inverser pour devenir une toupie. 
Et, est-ce qu’on va attendre que cela arrive pour se pencher sur la question ? M. le président, 
gouverner, c’est prévoir. Et moi, je croyais que le ministre responsable, il nous a dit qu’il était 
ministre  responsable  de  la  sécurité  sociale,  de  l’environnement  -  de  six  mois  -  et  aussi  de 
l’ICT, il a acheté des appareils tout ça, donc, M. le président, je croyais qu’il allait nous dire 
qu’est-ce qu’il pense par apport au vieillissement de la population qui est un fait indéniable. 

M.  le  président,  maintenant,  laissez-moi  passer  sur  nos  terres  agricoles.  Il  y  a 
plusieurs dimensions concernant nos terres agricoles. Je ne comprends toujours pas - et ça je 
vais être honnête là-dessus, différents gouvernements successifs - comment est-ce qu’on peut 

 

84 

prendre nos meilleurs terres, comment est-ce qu’on peut prendre nos terres les plus fertiles 
qui sont dans le milieu du pays, quand je dis nos meilleurs terres, c’est Highlands, Côte d’Or, 
Bagatelle,  toutes  ces  régions  là ;  on  est  en  train  de  transformer  ça,  bâtir  des  structures  en 
béton. Et le paradoxe dedans, on est en train d’investir des millions, sinon des milliards dans 
le nord pour le de-rocking. Je n’arrive toujours pas à comprendre cette incohérence. On prend 
nos meilleures terres pour mettre du béton et pour les terres qui ne sont pas fertiles, on doit 
investir des milliards pour faire du ‘de-rocking’ Mr le président. Quand je dis ça, je dis ça en 
relation du Food Security.  

(Interruptions) 

Non, je l’ai dit, j’ai dit des gouvernements successifs ! Donc, on est en train de mettre en péril 
le food security de notre pays parce qu’on doit garder ces terres pour les générations futures, 
M. le président.  

Maintenant, un autre item du budget par apport au land conversion des golf courses. 
Mention est faite dans le budget, et également comme j’ai dit, il y a beaucoup de paradoxes, 
d’une part il y a une volonté de préserver nos terres agricoles, mais d’autre part il y a une 
incentive  pour  convertir  les  terres  agricoles,  et  parmi  il  y  en  a  quatre  mesures  phares. 
Rapidement  je  vais  vous  en  dire.    Government  is  exempting  Land  Tax  Conversion  for  the 
following purposes : Golf course, etc. 

M.  le  président,  soit  on  garde  nos  terres  agricoles  a  des  soins  productifs,  mais 
comment dans un premier temps on dit que cela, pour garder nos terres, mais d’autre part on 
encourage à en faire des golf courses ? On sait qu’a Maurice il y a environ, si je me trompe 
pas, 11 golf courses et tout le monde sait que le golf course est un gouffre financier. Déjà 
dans le pays à travers les hôtels, à travers des groupes, il y en a plusieurs golf courses, mais 
pourquoi  avoir  permis  dans  ce  dernier  budget  d’encourager  des  gens  qui  ont  des  terres 
productives, des planteurs qui font une activité économique, à vendre ces terres à des gens 
qui en veulent pour faire des golf courses, quand on sait que les golf course, je vous ai dit, 
n’est pas une activité économique, M. le président ? 

M. le président, laissez-moi parler maintenant de la télévision privée. M. le président, 
imaginons que les radios libres n’existaient pas ! Imaginons qu’il y avait que la MBC, M. le 
président !  Imaginons  que  chaque  matin,  l’unique  information  radiophonique  fut  la  MBC 

 

85 

Radio ! Imaginons la couverture médiatique par cette chaine en période électorale ou lors des 
grands sujets, d’autres scandales qui ont secoués le pays. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Duval, please!  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Imaginons  le  pays  s’il  y  avait  que  la  MBC  quand  il  y  avait  le 
scandale de bal kouler ; quand il y avait tout récemment, le scandale de Betamax, mais aussi 
le scandale de l’affaire biscuits, biscuits achetés à R 10 vendus à 40 euros, M. le président. 
Imaginons la couverture médiatique par la MBC ! L’absence de la télévision privée envoie 
une mauvaise image de notre pays, une image arriérée alors que beaucoup pays d’Afrique, et 
surtout dans la région, ont pris une sacrée avance sur nous. Là encore, c’était une promesse 
de  la  campagne  électorale.  Peut-être  qu’on  va  me  dire  qu’on  est  en  train  de  travailler  là-
dessus.  

Le  fait  que  le  gouvernement  refuse  de  laisser  opérer  une  télé  privée  ne  révèle  pas 
d’une  démocratie  éclairée  pour  équilibrer,  mais  une  énième  tentative  de  museler  cette 
démocratie. M. le président, c’est une honte à l’ile Maurice, c’est une insulte à l’intelligence 
des mauriciens. Dans cette affaire, M. le président, il s’agit plutôt de liberté d’expression, de 
démocratie,  d’un  pays  qui  respecte  ses  citoyens  et  qui  croit  dans  sa  maturité  et  son 
intelligence.  Que le Premier ministre arrête de trouver des prétextes et qu’il arrête d’insulter 
l’intelligence des mauriciens parce que la MBC le fait suffisamment tous les soirs à 19h30, 
M. le président ! 

Maintenant, laissez-moi dire quelques mots par rapport à l’alcoolisme et le tabagisme, 
le  volet  social  que  j’aurais  aimé  parler.  Pour  combattre  les  méfaits  de  l’alcool  et  du 
tabagisme, on va augmenter les prix. On va augmenter les prix des boissons alcoolisées et les 
cigarettes, trop simpliste comme solution, M. le président. Trop simpliste parce que de tels 
fléaux requièrent un travail en profondeur, une campagne de sensibilisation et d’optimisation 
des services, des ONG, des organisations citoyennes et des ressources humaines disponibles. 
Si des telles mesures budgétaires sont censées diminuer la consommation, comment explique-
t-on que l’Etat s’attend à une augmentation de R 2 milliards comme taxe indirecte ? Donc, M. 
le président, je crois que l’honorable Barbier aussi en avait parlé là-dessus et comme il avait 
expliqué  la  demande  est  inélastique,  même  si  on  augmente  les  prix,  la  demande  va  rester 
pareille. Un vice est un vice ! Or, on ne se débarrasse pas du jour au lendemain. Pour se payer 
les boissons alcoolisées et des cigarettes, on va inévitablement puiser ailleurs, on va puiser au 
détriment des enfants … 

 

86 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order ! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  …  on  va  puiser  dans  le  budget  de  la  famille  que  ce  soit  la 
nourriture ou l’éducation. Donc, il y a pour moi toute une étude qui doit être faite par rapport 
aux méfaits de l’alcool et du tabagisme.  

Dans le même d’ordre d’idée, laissez-moi venir sur la drogue, M. le président. M. le 
président, laissez-moi dire que la toxicomanie persiste et là-dessus j’aurais bien aimé dire que 
pour moi je place ce combat above party politics. Ce fléau, la drogue, ne doit pas être une 
politique  partisane.  Et  là,  je  vais  profiter  de  cette  occasion  pour  quand  même  féliciter  le 
gouvernement par rapport à l’institution d’une Commission d’Enquête sur la Drogue. Bravo! 
Pourquoi?  Parce  que  moi-même  en  tant  que  député  dans  le  précédent  mandat,  j’ai  insisté 
plusieurs  fois  sur  la  nécessité  d’avoir  une  Commission  d’Enquête  sur  la  drogue.  J’ai  mis 
plusieurs  questions  au  Parlement  sur  la  nécessité  d’avoir  cette  Commission  d’Enquête. 
Pourquoi ? Parce que la dernière Commission d’Enquête date de plus de 25 ans ou 30 ans.  
La Commission Rault!  

Pour moi, c’est une bonne chose qu’on ait mis cette Commission d’Enquête, mais je 
dois  dire  que  jusqu’à  l’heure,  visiblement  la  Commission  est  en  train  de  faire  son  travail 
convenablement, mais j’espère qu’ils y aillent jusqu’au bout. S’il faut appeler des gens qui 
sont  proches  du  pouvoir,  s’ils  faut  appeler  des  gens  qui  sont  des  avocats  des  parties  au 
pouvoir,  il  faut  les  appeler.  Je  dis  bravo  à  l’institution,  mais  il  faut  que  le  travail  se  fasse 
convenablement et en toute indépendance. Et là, on va attendre, même s’ils sont des nominés 
politiques. Je ne vais pas citer des noms et croyez-moi il y a beaucoup comme cela, mais je 
ne  vais  pas  entrer  dans  les  détails.  D’ailleurs,  je  profite  de  cette  occasion,  même  l’ancien 
Leader  de  l’Opposition,  l’honorable  Paul  Bérenger,  est  allé  déposer  à  la  Commission 
d’Enquête sur la Drogue.  

Donc, pour moi, M. le président, le mouvement antidrogue y mène une croisade, mais 
il ne bénéficie d’aucun soutien digne de ce nom, de l’Etat. Au lieu d’utiliser la MBC à des 
fins de propagande, on aurait dû la mettre au service de ceux qui militent au péril de leur vie 
contre tous ces fléaux qui gangrènent notre société tels que la drogue et le sida. On aurait dû 
utiliser la MBC à bon escient, M. le président. 

 

87 

le  président, 

Maintenant,  M. 

laissez-moi  dire  des  choses  concernant  ma 
Circonscription. En premier, M. le président, je vais maintenant parler du problématique des 
marchands ambulants. L’année dernière dans le budget speech, mention a été faite pour caser 
1,000 marchands ambulants, mais, M. le président, nous savons tous qu’ils ont été déplacés 
temporairement. Mais là, on est en train de leur dire qu’on va leur déplacer encore une fois. 
Tous ces projets annoncés en fanfare, les milles places, le projet va être financé par le secteur 
privé. Donc, ils n’ont aucune idée sur le coût du loyer. Combien le loyer va être? Ou l’espace 
va être? Qui va allouer tous ces espaces? Qui va déterminer le loyer ?  Et qui plus est, M. le 
président,  le  projet  lui-même  qui  n’a  pas  encore  démarré,  est  supposé  de  terminer  en 
novembre 2020 - de toute façon vous n’aurez pas été là.  

Donc,  M.  le  président,  pour  moi  un  gouvernement  responsable,  quand  on  prive 
quelqu’un d’un travail, il faut lui donner un alternatif. Quand on les a privés des jobs dans le 
secteur public dans les années 80, ils sont devenus des marchands ambulants. Aujourd’hui on 
les empêche de travailler, il faut leur donner un alternatif pour qu’ils puissent gagner leur vie 
correctement et convenablement. Et là, je vais revenir sur les deux sites qui ont été alloués, le 
site de Decaen et le site à la gare du Nord. M. le président, c’est dans un état déplorable. Il 
n’y a aucune infrastructure. Ce n’est pas couvert. Il n’y a rien. Ils ont couvert avec des abris 
de fortune. Il y a une insalubrité totale. Il y a un manque d’hygiène. Les gens n’osent même 
pas entrer. Quand on descend sur l’autoroute et quand on rentre dans Port Louis, on regarde à 
gauche, c’est comme si dirait les slums qu’on voit dans les autres pays. C’est comme si dirait 
un genre de petite bidonville.  

Tout  cela  on  a  mis  les  marchands  ambulants  là-bas,  M.  le  président.  On  ne  leur  a 
proposé aucune alternative crédible et beaucoup d’entre eux ont dû abandonner cette activité 
et aujourd’hui ils sont dans le noir. Je vous le dis ça en ne connaissance de cause parce que le 
nombre  de  personnes  qui  viennent  me  voir  pour  une  aide  financière  et  pour  une  aide 
quelconque a considérablement augmenté. Ces gens-là, avant, jamais ils ne venaient me voir. 
Pourquoi? Parce qu’ils travaillaient. Ils gagnaient leur vie convenablement. D’accord, qu’il 
fallait mettre de l’ordre, mais en tant que gouvernement responsable, on aurait dû prévoir un 
alternatif et un alternatif crédible, M. le président. 

Autre sujet que j’aimerais aborder par rapport à ma Circonscription - c’est dommage 
que le ministre, l’honorable Dr. Husnoo, ne soit pas là - c’est le projet Concorde. Le projet 
Concorde, c’est un projet où on aurait érigé un Multi-Purpose Sports Complex dans le jardin 

 

88 

de la Plaine Verte. Je ne sais pas qui est cet abruti qui a eu cette idée de venir construire un 
bâtiment dans un jardin de la Plaine Verte. C’est le dernier espace vert qui reste à la Plaine 
Verte et on est en train de venir maintenant mettre un complexe sportif, M. le président. 

M. le président, c’est un cri du cœur que je relaie au Parlement aujourd’hui de la part 

des habitants des régions avoisinantes. Il faut à tout prix préserver cet espace… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Abbas Mamode! 

Mr Ameer Meea:… sinon les générations futures vont nous blâmer. Comme je vous 
ai dit ‘gouverner c’est prévoir’, et une fois cet espace vert disparaît, c’est pour l’éternité et 
cela ne va jamais revenir. Ce projet va à l’encontre de l’écologie ; quand même il y a une 
solution assez simple par rapport à ce projet. Comme nous savons tous, il y a le centre Idrice 
Goomany qui est là plus de 40 ans et ce centre, aujourd’hui, est en état de décrépitude totale. 
Année après année, on est en train d’investir des millions en termes de rénovation alors que la 
solution  la  plus  simple  aurait  été  de  démolir  ce  centre.  Il  y  a  suffisamment  d’espace  pour 
rebâtir un bâtiment futur, moderne où on aurait pu faire le Sports Complex mais aussi bien 
d’autres projets, M. le président. 

 D’ailleurs,  concernant  les  projets  d’infrastructures,  je  l’ai  dit,  il  n’y  a  aucun  projet 

d’envergure dans la circonscription No. 3, que ce soit à Plaine Verte ou Roche Bois. 

Et  je  dois  dire  aussi  ma  déception  par  rapport  à  la  force  policière  dans  la 
circonscription  No.  3.  Aujourd’hui,  si  vous  prenez  une  route  telle  que  route  des 
Pamplemousses  ou  la  rue  Desforges,  vous  n’avez  qu’à  voir  par  vous-même.  Prenez  la  rue 
Desforges, au commencement jusqu’à la fin, il n’y a pas un seul policier, M. le président. 
C’est aussi le cas de la route des Pamplemousses où des milliers de gens transitent jour et 
nuit !  J’ai  déjà  expliqué  cela  à  l’ajournement  des  travaux ;  il  y  a  un  nombre  croissant 
d’habitants  de  Port  Louis  qui  seront  installés  à  Vallée  des  Prêtres,  à  Cité  la  Cure,  à 
Abercrombie, à Ste Croix et tout le monde transite par la route des Pamplemousses et jamais 
il y a un policier. Il y a aussi et surtout de l’incivisme ; je suis d’accord qu’il y a des gens qui 
garent leur voiture n’importe où, mais c’est le travail des autorités pour mettre de l’ordre.  

Aujourd’hui,  pour  rouler  en  voiture  dans  la  circonscription  No.  3,  c’est  devenu 
comme  la  loi  de  la  jungle,  M.  le  président.  Et  le  ministre  Husnoo  est  responsable  du 

 

89 

gouvernement  mais  il  est  aussi  député  de  la  circonscription.  C’est  à  lui  de  régler  tous  ces 
problèmes en s’adressant au Premier ministre et au Commissaire de police. Il n’est jamais là.  
Il n’est jamais dans la circonscription, rarement on le voit! 

M.  le  président,  une  dernière  chose  par  rapport  au  stade  St  François-Xavier  qui  se 
trouve  à  un  jet  de  pierre  de  ma  demeure.    C’est  un  stade,  où  on  a  apporté  de  grandes 
innovations au coût de millions de roupies avec l’accord de la FIFA. Mais on y joue très peu - 
quelques rencontres de première division et la raison c’est parce qu’il n’y a pas de fog light, il 
n’y a pas de lumière prévue pour les matchs de la soirée. C’est un stade vraiment moderne, 
construit au coût de plusieurs millions de roupies. J’avais adressé cette question, plus d’une 
année de cela, à l’honorable ministre Sawmynaden qui a répondu qu’il faut attendre les jeux 
des îles pour y installer ces lumières.  Donc, tous ces jeunes qui habitent la région ne peuvent 
pas bénéficier de ce stade parce qu’il n’y a pas de lumière. Combien est-ce que ça coûte pour 
qu’il y ait de la lumière dans un stade, M. le président?  Le ministre des Sports, l’honorable 
Toussaint est là, peut-être qu’il va essayer de faire amende honorable parce que le stade va 
être utilisé par tous les gens qui habitent Plaine Verte, Camp Yoloff, Roche Bois et on pourra 
faire beaucoup si le problème est réglé. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  CSR  (Corporate  Social 
Responsibility) which was a system that was introduced in 2009, whereby companies were 
required  to  devote  2%  of  their  profits  for  carrying  out  CSR  activities  under  approved 
programmes  as  per  published  guidelines.  The  then  hon.  Minister  of  Finance,  hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo, stated to the House in answer to a PQ that the CSR system has been too 
rigid and cumbersome with its complicated set of guidelines. It was difficult for companies to 
allocate  funds  to  eligible  NGOs.  Accordingly,  he  removed  all  CSR  guidelines,  but  the 
obligation remains that under the Income Tax Act for companies to allocate 2% of their profit 
after tax towards CSR. Thus, in July 2015, all CSR guidelines were removed and companies 
were  allowed  to  use  CSR  funds  according  to  their  will.    The  moment  the  CSR  guidelines 
were removed, this is then when all the problems started, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir.  

Two and a half years have elapsed since this Government came into power.  We have 
lost  so  much  time  and  money  in  the  fight  against  poverty  due  to  the  incompetency  and 
amateurism of this Government. And what we see now is a set of new regulations. Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, we do not deny the fact that there are new targeted areas which are important, 
but  what  we  cannot  understand,  what  we  dispute,  is  the  fact  that  these  priority  areas  of 

 

90 

intervention  such  as  the  environment  and  sustainable  development  -  field  of  advocacy  -  I 
don’t know what  it means - peace and nation building.  

What the CSR has to do with peace and nation building, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir? And 

the biggest joke… 

(Interruptions) 

No, it is not drug! It is road safety and security. Corporate Social Responsibility: the primary 
objective of CSR was eradication of absolute poverty and vulnerable groups. Now, we have 
amended the regulation so that CSR can be used for road and safety. We are already pumping 
billion in terms of tax on fuel and diesel for the RDA. Now, we want to use the CSR for the 
RDA; il ne nous reste que le métro léger, on aurait pu construire le métro léger avec le CSR 
si on prend cette même logique, M. le président. And answering to a Parliamentary Question 
(No.  B/766)  on  free  Wi-Fi  spot  project  implementation  by  Mauritius  Telecom,  it  went 
unnoticed,  but  it  was  in  the  electoral  manifesto  that  Mauritius  Telecom  used  their  CSR 
money to finance the Wi-Fi hotspot.  But by doing so, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no money 
will be left for the NGOs, for the true NGOs doing the job. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  Public  Accounts 
Committee (PAC).  I have been a member of the said Committee since 2010 and I am of the 
opinion  that  the  Finance  Minister  should  have  a  fresh  look  at  the  mandate  of  the  Public 
Accounts  Committee.  I  am  saying  this  because  the  mandate  of  the  Public  Accounts 
Committee  has  not  been  changed  since  30  years  and  it  no  longer  suits  the  current  public 
finance management framework. As we are aware, the PAC derives its powers from Standing 
Orders and presently the only role of the Public Accounts Committee is that we debate the 
Report of the Director of Audit. 

It is like an ex-ante event, that is, it has already happened and reported.  We debated.  
We called the public servants and then we questioned them and then we write a report.  And 
an ex post facto!  And the report is not even debated in the House. The PAC does not have 
the power to choose subjects for examination outside the audited report. If the PAC can act to 
detect  issues,  its  enquiries  might  have  been  a  deterring  effect.  Relevant  important  subjects 
would look beyond the issues identified in the audited report for the largest system weakness 
that makes individual problems such as contract issues inevitable. 

 

91 

The PAC does not currently have the power to convene Ministers nor can the PAC 
accept the testimony of outside experts or the general public. The committee does not have 
technical staff at its Secretariat necessary to support it to achieve its mandate. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Inadequate  follow-up  of  mechanism:  there  is  no  mechanism  for 
Government  to  report  on  whether  the  PAC’s  recommendations  have  been  approved  and 
implemented.  Besides  the  local  practice  is  to  seal  the  evidence  of  previous  committee 
proceedings once a new Parliament has been elected. This practice limits the mandate of the 
PAC  to  investigate  or  to  review  past  expenditures  of  Government  and  also  limits  the 
continuity, scope and timeliness of the PAC review process. The PAC so far, does not report 
and recommend disciplinary actions to relevant authorities in case of fraudulent practices.  

Now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to say a few words again on the PAC, but 
in relation to international practices. Many countries have reformed their budget procedures 
in order to focus more on the results of public expenditure. It has become clear that there is a 
common ground in these reforms, but also there is wide divergence in approaches followed 
by individual countries, of course. But, I must say, that different Chairmen of previous Public 
Accounts Committees, be it hon. Alan Ganoo, be it hon. Xavier  Luc  Duval, when he  was 
Chairman of Public Accounts Committee, be it hon. Baloomoody, they have all stressed up 
on the necessity to reinvent our PAC so as to be more effective and in line with international 
practice.  

Many countries in the Commonwealth and the Francophony have already done, and I 
must say, that I am ashamed to say that we lag behind on this issue and we would urge the 
hon. Minister to look into this matter seriously. And I must say that when hon. Baloomoody 
was Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, we had a meeting with the then hon. Prime 
Minister. Hon. Jhugroo also was present.  I think hon. Henry also was present and he was 
very agreeable to the necessity of a reform in the Public Accounts Committee.  Il était très 
réceptif.  Il était d’accord qu’il fallait changer la donne par rapport au PAC, but then I don’t 
know what happened to his willingness to change the PAC. Until now, and I must say that ce 
n’est pas avec la gaieté de cœur qu’à chaque semaine je me rends aux réunions du Public 
Accounts Committee. Je le fais par devoir. Je le fais parce que j’ai décidé de former partie 

 

92 

de ce comité, mais croyez-moi le travail qu’on fait dans le  Public Accounts Committee n’est 
pas valorisant du tout et surtout en comparaison aux pays étrangers, M. le président. 

Donc, M. le président, laissez-moi avant de conclure dire quelque chose par rapport à 
Agaléga.    Agaléga,  comme  vous  savez,  est  dans  la  circonscription  No.  3  et  ça  fait  partie 
intégrante  de  la  nation  mauricienne.  Récemment,  nous  avons  débattu  la  question,  ici,  à 
l’Assemblée Nationale et dans le budget, mention est faite que c’est une décision historique 
de refaire la piste d’atterrissage. Mais c’est totalement faux!  This has been with us for the 
last  10/12  years.    Look  at  all  the  Budget  Speeches!  Mention  is  being  made  for  Agalega 
airstrip, for a jetty to be constructed in Agalega.  Now, talking about a historical decision; 
this Government has been in power for two and a half years.  What have you done for two 
and a half years?  Nothing!  It is now that we hear that this will be done, that will be done.  
But still two and a half years, half of the mandate is over and even the previous Minister of 
Outer Islands, hon. Koonjoo, I don’t know whether he has been to Agalega or not… 

He has been, but nothing has been done!   

(Interruptions) 

Everything…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

As he said:  «He did not get the flowers there ».  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order !   

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Donc,  M.  le  président,  maintenant    laissez-moi  conclure.  Il  faut 
venir avec des mesures concrètes au plus vite pour assurer tous ces gens sinon leurs craintes 
pourraient devenir contagieuses et se répandent dans la société créant une psychose générale, 
très  mauvaise  pour  la  relance  de  l’économie.  Peut-on  être  si  naïf  pour  croire  que  les 
investissements étrangers vont se bousculer à notre porte et les valises pleines des capitaux 
pour se disputer les secteurs où ils vont investir.  

 

93 

Déjà nous avons une image à refaire, tout un climat de confiance à établir. Pour qu’on 
nous  prenne  au  sérieux,  il  faut  envoyer  des  signaux  forts  et  surtout  nommer  des  gens 
hautement crédibles dans des secteurs vitaux de l’économie. Pas de membre de la famille, pas 
de petits copains, pas de petites copines ! 

On a menti  à l’électorat. On avait parlé d’un deuxième miracle économique et une 
nation d’entrepreneurs. Mais après deux ans et demi on est loin de cela. Les deux ténors des 
années 80, l’ancien Premier ministre et l’ancien ministre des finances ne sont plus au poste où 
ils étaient en 2015. Ils ne sont que le pâle reflet de ce qu’ils étaient avant. Ils se sont tout 
simplement trompés d’époque. Le premier qui a fondé tous nos espoirs est devenu ministre 
mentor en jouant au retrait. L’autre est allé au ministère des affaires étrangères pour jouer au 
profil bas parce qu’il disait que sa santé ne permettait pas d’être ministre des finances mais sa 
santé le permet d’être ministre des affaires étrangères. Ce sont les seconds couteaux qu’ils ont 
monté  au  créneau  pour  prendre  des  décisions  importantes.  Des  échecs  en  échecs,  des 
voltefaces  en  voltefaces,  des  contradictions  en  contradictions,  le  pays  s’enfonce  davantage 
dans le désespoir.  

Ce gouvernement aurait dû prendre le taureau par les cornes et tenter de redresser la 
situation  en  donnant  le  bon  exemple  dans  le  sens  du  sacrifice  d’abnégation  et  du  sérieux. 
Mais on a eu droit à des nominations des proches avec des salaires mirobolantes faisant des 
grands  titres  de  la  presse.  Est-ce  que  le  signe  avant-coureurs  d’une  fin  de  règne,  M.  le 
président. Pour se défendre le gouvernement fait usage éhonté et abusif de la télé. Comme si 
c’est  sa  propriété  personnelle.  Le  bulletin  d’information  est  grossièrement  trafiqué  et 
manipulé pour que la majorité des téléspectateurs se tournent vers d’autres chaînes. Or notre 
station  nationale  aurait  dû  être  notre  fierté  nationale,  un  outil  de  prédilection  pour  unir  la 
population autour des idéaux nationaux, un outil efficace pour notre nation building.  

A en juger, M. le président, ce qui se passe à l’étranger par rapport aux élections. On 
se demande si on ne s’achemine pas vers un raz-de-marée balayant tout sur son passage pour 
instaurer une nouvelle horde politique dans un décor nouveau et dans un paysage nouvel, M. 
le président. Il y a un manque de leadership, 

The Deputy Speaker :  Order !  Hon. Aliphon, please ! 

Mr Ameer Meea :  … il y a un manque de leadership… 

(Interruptions) 

 

94 

 The Deputy Speaker :  Hon. Bhagwan, please ! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea :    …  éclairé  et  une  mauvaise  répartition  de  richesses  dans  notre 
pays. Les innombrables scandales et l’arrogance du pouvoir fait que l’usure commence à se 
faire sentir… 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Henry, allow the hon. Member to… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea : M. le président, pour terminer la politique est une roue qui tourne 
en permanence et cette roue est en marche pour botter ce gouvernement hors du pouvoir et ce 
sera que justice naturelle. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 5.16 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.53 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sawmynaden. 

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation 

(Mr  Y. 
Sawmynaden):    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  before  congratulating  the  Prime  Minister  and  the 
Minister of Finance for this Budget of 2017/18, let me, first of all, reply the hon. Member 
Aadil Ameer Meea who spoke just before me. 

I  have  been  listening  carefully  to  the  hon.  Member.  He  is  making  the  public 
understand  or  make  the  public  realise  that  the  BAI  group  has  been  a  victim  of  this 
Government as if the BAI group was running so well that, all of a sudden, the Government 
just got in and decided to crash the whole thing.  

Je pense que l’honorable membre devrait demander à ces employés de la BAI quel 
trauma ils ont traversé pendant l’année 2014. Les propriétaires de bâtiments qui louaient leur 
emplacement au group BAI, que ce soit pour Courts ou pour l’assurance, avaient des loans à 
rembourser mais ils ne pouvaient pas honorer leur engagement parce que le loyer n’était pas 
payé. Allez demander à ces petites et moyennes entreprises qui fabriquaient des meubles pour 
Courts à l’époque ; ils n’étaient pas payés mais avaient des traites bancaires à honorer. Allez 
demander à ces propriétaires des voitures, qui ont payé pour leur voiture qui n’a jamais été 
livrée. Hon. Sewocksingh n’est pas là, elle allait être une victime. Elle a eu sa voiture à temps 

 

95 

sinon elle aurait été sans voiture alors que la voiture était déjà payée. Mais moi, j’ai été une 
victime. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order!  

Mr Sawmynaden: M. le président, heureusement que ce gouvernement a pu prend le 
taureau par les cornes, et ces petites et moyennes entreprises ont été sauvées de justesse. On a 
su prendre les décisions qu’il fallait à l’époque. Maintenant en écoutant l’honorable Ameer 
Meea qui parlait des terres agricoles, je sais que l’honorable Ameer Meea n’était pas candidat 
ni membre du MMM en 2005 alors que nous, nous étions en alliance avec le MMM-MSM.  
Quand  j’entends  l’honorable  Ameer  Meea  parler,  comme  si  son  nouveau  guru  politique 
maintenant c’est Navin Ramgoolam ! 

(Interruptions) 

Quand il disait à l’époque les terres d’Ebène, sur des terres mauriciennes, on va construire un 
éléphant  blanc, quand  il  disait  qu’il  fallait  la  laisser  comme  tel  pour  pouvoir  promouvoir 
l’agriculture, mais nous avons payé le prix pour cela. Quand le parti Travailliste menait une 
campagne  contre  nous  pour  dire  qu’on  était  en  train  de  construire  un  éléphant  blanc, 
l’honorable Rajesh Bhagwan est au courant de cela. Parler de l’Illovo deal mais je pense que 
l’honorable Ameer Meea doit revoir sa copie et en parler avec son leader parce qu’on a tous 
été victime de cette campagne mensongère en 2005 et nous avons payé le prix fort pour cela. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will first of all congratulate the hon. Prime Minister and the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  for  his  Budget 
2017-2018.  As  he  rightly  branded  it,  this  Budget  is  meant  to  help  Mauritius  rise  to  the 
challenge of its ambition. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Sawmynaden: Under his guidance this country is setting off to greener pastures. 
M. le président, la population Mauricienne aujourd’hui doit savoir who is the Prime Minister 
of  this  country,  qui  est  le  premier  ministre  de  ce  pays.  C’est  un  homme  de  principe,  un 

 

96 

homme d’honneur, un modèle pour les jeunes et surtout un bon père de famille. Un homme 
qui  a  gardé  les  pieds  sur  terre.  Ici,  au  sein  de  l’Assemblée  Nationale,  tous  les  honorables 
Membres savent très bien qu'à chaque lunch break et tea break, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth 
est avec ses députés pour prendre le déjeuner ou même le tea break. C’est la même chose 
pour l’honorable Bérenger. Je sais que mes amis du PMSD se sentent un peu orphelins parce 
qu’eux, ils sont tout seuls sans leur leader. 

Voilà, il mange dans son bureau ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Voilà! Better not to talk of the former Prime Minister, amateur de cigars who was hiding 
millions  if  not  billions  in  his  coffers,  who  was  busy  tousse  sali  instead  of  sitting  in 
Parliament.  

I will give one clear example, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when hon. Pravind Jugnauth 
became Prime Minister, what was his first trip abroad? When others rushed to the UK for a 
white Christmas and Christmas pudding and the roast turkey, he went to Rodrigues to meet 
our brothers and sisters of the Republic of Mauritius! 

(Interruptions) 

He did not go for roast turkey or for Christmas pudding, he went for salade ourites and a jus 
de limon. 

(Interruptions) 

Mais,  M.  le  président,  cela  fait  beaucoup  de  jaloux  tout  comme  quand  mes  deux 
collègues, l’honorable Seeruttun et l’honorable Jhugroo sont partis pour Agaléga cela a fait 
beaucoup de jaloux de par l’accueil qu’ils ont reçu. M. le président, laissez-moi vous dire que 
nos frères et sœurs Rodriguais et Agaléens ont exprimé leur sentiment et surtout le respect. 
Ce sont là les valeurs sûres de cette République. Malheureusement, c’est triste de le dire, le 
PMSD  ne  connaît  pas  ces  valeurs  en  maltraitant  le  Chef  Commissaire  de  Rodrigues  en 
personne pour ne pas répéter les mots de l’honorable Henry. Et les pauvres enfants d’Agaléga 
qui n’ont fait qu’exprimer leur contentement à leur propre manière ! 

 

97 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, some  Members of the  Opposition brag about  him being a 
part-time Finance Minister. Well, that Budget clearly proves that hon. Pravind Jugnauth is, 
in fact, a dedicated Minister with the prosperity of our country as major priority. Un homme 
de  terrain  qui  a  mené  des  consultations  pré  budgétaires  élargies  avec  même  des  back 
benchers, une première dans les annales.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, l’Opposition réclame des élections générales sous prétexte 
que Pravind Jugnauth n’a pas la légitimité. Je rappellerai à ces détracteurs que le leader du 
MSM a été choisi par sa majorité comme Premier ministre et de toute façon notre constitution 
est  claire  là-dessus.  Il  a  été  élu  dans  sa  circonscription  et  commande  une  majorité  au 
Parlement. L’affaire est très claire. Crystal clear !  

A tous ceux qui parlent de deal papa piti, ils ont un selective memory, M. le président. 
Il  est  bon  de  leur  rappeler  qu’en  1992,  l’honorable  Sir  Gaëtan  Duval  a  démissionné  du 
Parlement  pour  que  son  fils  aujourd’hui  le  leader  de  l’Opposition,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc 
Duval, puisse faire son entrée. Il a même été acting  Prime Minister ! Là il n’y avait pas de 
problème ! Il n’était même pas élu. 

(Interruptions) 

Pour ne pas dire après quelle déclaration il a fait, je préfère ne pas tomber dans cette bassesse. 

(Interruptions) 

On a more serious note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with hon. Pravind Jugnauth the motto is 
clearly ‘work for a better Mauritius’. And, to reach that goal let us not forget that he has a 
solid and trustworthy team around him.  

Depuis  qu’il  a  pris  les  rênes  aux  finances  les  indicateurs  sont  revenues  au  vert.  Le 
secteur de la construction, véritable baromètre de la santé économique du pays, est à nouveau 
en croissance pour preuve, quand vous passez par le triangle de Réduit au niveau de la Cyber 
Cité  vous  verrez  bien  pas  moins  d’une  dizaine  de  gratte-ciels  en  construction.  Ailleurs,  à 
travers l’île, on construit des village halls, des terrains de football et tout ceci alors que la 
NDU, une coopération en faillite sous l’ère Travailliste, recommence à se remettre à flot. 

Je  suis  passé  ce  week-end  par  Rose  Hill  pour  aller  vers  Flic-en-Flac,  que  ce  soit  à 
réduit, que ce soit à Rose Hill, la Rue Labourdonnais, que ce soit à Quatre Bornes, que ce soit 
sur la route Mont Roches/Saint Martin, que ce soit à Bambous, que ce soit à Flic-en-Flac, 

 

98 

vous voyez des drains en construction, vous voyez des routes réasphaltées, même l’autoroute 
est en pleins travaux. 

Même à Rodrigues ! 

(Interruptions) 

A  ceux  qui  disent  jalousement  qu’il  y  a  que  le  Numéro  8  qui  connaît  des 
développements, je les inviterai à aller voir un peu partout dans le pays les chantiers qui sont 
menés. Nous vivons là une période qui ressemble beaucoup aux années 85 - 87 avec une île 
en pleine mutation où divers chantiers sont en cours. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me now come to the gist of this Budget. In this age of 
increasing  uncertainty  on  the  global  front  with defenders  of  globalization  having  to  face  a 
strong and resurgent protectionist movement there is an urgent need to ease the environment 
for doing business in the country so as to raise the level for the country to graduate to a high 
economy status.  

Since  this  Government  has  taken  office  we  have  not  spared  any  efforts  to  bring 
measures to boost up private investment in this country. Several initiatives are being taken to 
allow enterprises or other organizations to operate in a more business friendly environment. 
For an economy to sustain this dynamic and competitive world there should be no hurdles to 
the  processing  of  applications  for  licences  and  permits  so  as  to  operate  a  business,  hence, 
innovation is the keyword.  

As a matter of fact, we are engaged in a new paradigm whereby we need to reinvent 
ourselves so as to cater for the next generation. We are working to create jobs that do not 
exist now. We have to anticipate on the trends that we shall come in 10 or 15 years. This is 
why we are setting the ideal environment, with a battery of measures meant to harness these 
future  needs.  It  is  in  this  context,  the  Government,  under  the  visionary  leadership  of  hon. 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  presented  a  recipe  for  a  modern  Mauritius  driven  by  the  Vision  2030, 
which was put on track by the Minister Mentor, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we shall not only boost ourselves of our rank on African or 
world rankings, we all know that our dream of a higher income economy or society is directly 
linked to our capacity to come up with new areas, sectors of development. Since 30 years, all 
Government  have  come  up  with  incentives  to  boost  employment,  but  concretely,  these 

 

99 

approaches  have  not  met  expectations.  This  is  because  the  world  has  changed  and  that 
acquisition of technology has rapidly overtaken basic human resource needs. Doing business 
today is very much dependant on technology. Digital transformation which is in the essence 
of the profound and accelerating transformation of business organisation and society to fully 
leverage  digital  technologies  to  drive  new  value  for  customers,  employees  and  citizens,  is 
ruling the planet today. 

Digital transformation opens a new world for us. The world has by now already taken 
cognizance that data is the new oil. A man made resource that has infinite potential when 
mixed with technology. The young start-ups of today look at what value they can derive from 
data, so to create new business, products and services around it. We should know that since 
our  Government  took  power,  the  average  number  of  jobs  created  in  the  ICT  sector  has 
increased  by  10.4%  per  year  compared  to  the  equivalent  statistics  for  the  previous 
Government. It is clearly the sector where employment is buoyant and its growth is steady. 
The Government has taken the pledge to enhance the tendency, but we are no more talking of 
mere call centre operations, we are now concentrating on e-services, mobile apps and other 
innovative services and it is this Government which will give impetus to that movement. 

Being  a  responsible  Government,  we  embark  under  Open  Data  Odyssey  in  a  well-
planned and structured manner. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as we all know, Open Data is the 
data that Government, businesses, organisations, individuals put out in the public domain for 
youths, reused and redistributed freely. Open Data is necessary for the emergence of a mobile 
eco-system  in  Mauritius.  By  using  data  developers,  we  will  be  able  to  create  mobile 
applications  which  will  enhance  the  lives  of  Mauritians  as  well  as  tourists  visiting  our 
country. In view of identifying the public data sets that can be released with maximum impact 
for  business  and  society,  the  Government  with  the  assistance  of  the  World  Bank  has 
formulated  an  Open  Data  Readiness  Assessment  Report.  29  quick-win  datasets  have  been 
identified, ranging from budget data, metrological forecasts to help statistics.  

My  Ministry  is  at  the  forefront  of  easing  the  life  of  our  citizens  by  introducing  e-
services in different sectors and has also developed a National Data Policy 2015-2016 which 
formulates  the  guidelines  and  process  for  Ministries  and  Departments  in  the  release  and 
management of Government Datasets as Open Data to make this vision of ours a reality. The 
National Computer Board, which operates under the aegis of my Ministry, is working on the 
setting up of an Open Data Portal, which will host the Open Datasets. This portal holds the 

 

100 

promise of developing innovative products and services on the basis of Business Insights that 
may generate form the Open Datasets. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me now share with this August Assembly the work of my 
Ministry on the Info Highway, the next big thing in terms of innovation in the public sector. 
Info  Highway  provides  one  of  the  most  robust  service  delivery  platforms,  conceived  for 
business facilitation and other e-government initiatives. It is a unique infrastructure providing 
the  most  innovative  mechanism  for  sharing  of  data  across  public  sector  agencies.  It  is 
important to note that my Ministry has already implemented 38 data sharing requests and 80 
e-services using the Info Highway. For example, the time taken for the development of the 
Tourism Authority e-licensing solution has been reduced thanks to the Info Highway. Now, 
customers using this e-licensing solution benefits from a shortened application process which 
is online. Citizens of businesses are not required to submit the same information every time 
they  interact  with  a  Government  agency,  and  this  is  transforming  the  way  we  are  doing 
business. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, now let me turn to the open source software. Adoption of 
open  source  software  has  become  a  global  phenomenon.  Recognizing  the  transformative 
power of open source software, my Ministry elaborated a National Open Source Action Plan 
in  2016  which  puts  into  action  the  recommendation  of  the  National  Open  Source  Policy, 
Strategy and Action Plan for Mauritius.  

One of the fundamental measures under the Action Plan is the setting up of the free 
and  open  source  Society  of  Mauritius  to  provide  guidelines,  policies,  standards  and  inter-
operability  frameworks  and  advice  on  the  implementation  of  the  National  Open  Source 
Action  Plan.  The  plan  aims  at  the  development  of  an  Open  Source  Software  Programme 
consisting  of  repository  of  knowledge  in  open  source  software,  awareness  events  on  open 
source software, support to the primary, secondary schools open source software initiatives, 
supports  of  academic  research  on  open  source  software,  an  open  source  software  lab  to 
support  research,  technology  and  education  initiatives  in  open  source  software,  promotion 
and  coordination  of  research  in  open  source  software  and  the  support  of  public-private 
partnership for the development and adoption of the open source software. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my Ministry has carried out an assessment of data sharing 
needs  among  Government  agencies  and  private  organisation  under  adequacy  of  existing 
structures. This has allowed us to formulate a data sharing policy. We strongly believe that 

 

101 

the  implementation  of  the  data  sharing  policy  will  reduce  the  number  of  time  citizens  are 
required to provide the same data to different agencies, reduce the duplication of data within 
Government, reduce the reliance on hard copies and allow retrieval of information directly 
from the owners of data. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  cannot  talk  of  business  facilitation  without  talking  of 
innovation.  My  Ministry  is  currently  finalising  the  National  Innovation  Framework  which 
defines the strategies to be adopted by the country for the next 5  years to become a high-
income and innovation driven nation. The Framework, the first of its kind, aims at inculcating 
and sustaining an innovation culture with an important human dimension engaging people. 
The proposed strategies cut across all spheres and disciplines. 

As  announced  in  the  Budget  2017/2018,  the  Mauritius  Research  Council  will  be 
transformed  into  the  Mauritius  Research  and  Innovation  Council,  a  one-stop  shop  for 
innovation.  A  financial  envelope  of  Rs150  m.  has  been  earmarked  for  the  research  and 
development  to  support  matching  and  non-matching  grant  schemes  in  areas  like  high 
performance, computing, including proof of concept schemes. 

With this measure, Government wants address the research and development needs of 
academics and that of the private sector. The Industrial Property Office will also be integrated 
in the Mauritius Research Innovation Council, so that we can better safeguard the patent’s 
right and our researchers and innovators. 

We are introducing an eight-year income tax holiday for new companies engaged in 
the manufacturing of pharmaceutical products, medical devices and hi-tech products.  New 
companies involved in the development of intellectual property assets in the country will also 
benefit from a tax holiday of eight years on the income derived from the totality of the IP 
assets  produced.  This  innovation  box  regime  will  foster  the  emergence  of  new  kinds  of 
service providers in the country. The National Computer Board will set up a Digital Youth 
Engagement Programme to provide introductory courses on computer programming, that is, 
coding  to  young  Mauritians.  In  doing  so,  we  will  allow  the  young  Mauritians  to  become 
problem solvers. This can only be a good thing as we need a critical mass of problem solvers 
in order to move towards Vision 2030. 

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that with this Budget, research and development 
will get its rightful place in the innovation ecosystem. We are coming up with an accelerated 

 

102 

depreciation  of  50%  per  annum  in  respect  of  capital  expenditure  incurred  on  research  and 
development.  

Innovation will be the driving force of Mauritius for the next decade. This is why we 
are coming up with so many measures in innovation. Moreover, companies shall be allowed 
to  claim  a  double  deduction  in  respect  of  qualifying  expenditure  on  research  and 
development.  This  measure  will  be  effective  until  the  income  year  2021/2022.  To  further 
push  the  frontiers  of  innovation,  an  innovator  Occupation  Permit  will  be  introduced  for 
innovative  start-ups  for  which  20%  of  their  operational  expenditure  has  been  devoted  to 
research and development. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will now talk about the importance of investing in skills 
and development. Skilling our  youth for tomorrow’s challenge and an  ever-changing work 
environment is our responsibility. With the increasing opportunities that exist in the digital 
economy,  it  is  imperative  that  our  youth  are  equipped  with  High  End  Skills  in  emerging 
technologies and they are to operate in highly competitive ICT industry. A budget of about 
Rs130 m. has been allocated for the Polytechnique so that our youngsters can be trained in 
the emerging skills in many fields, including ICT.  

Emerging technologies will have a pride of place in the ICT field with robotics, big 
data  and  internet  of  things  being  offered  at  Le  Reduit  Polytechnique.  3D  printing  services 
will be set up and operated by the National Computer Board to support manufacturing firms, 
university  students  and  start-ups  who  need  to  develop  prototypes  using  3D  printing 
technologies. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, our Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  got  it  right  when  he  said  last  year  that  digital  economy  shall  be  the  driving 
force behind a new era of development. We want to make Internet become more affordable 
after having revolutionised access to Internet by installing 300 free Wi-Fi spots around the 
island and with 300 Always On spots for Harel Mallac proved that this Government inspires 
the private sector. In this Budget, we are going miles further. For the companies operating in 
the sector, the price of connectivity is a major issue. This is why the prices of International 
Private  Leased  Circuits  (IPLC)  and  the  Global  Multiprotocol  Label  Switching  (MPLS) 
services have been lowered by 15% as from 01 July 2017. These measures come after the 
SME booster package introduced by Mauritius Telecom this year itself. 

 

103 

Furthermore, with the expansion of business in areas as of high and business process, 
outsourcing  like  knowledge  process  outsourcing,  medical  process  outsourcing  and  legal 
process outsourcing, we have a large number of customers in Europe and as such we need to 
comply with the EU Data Regulations which will take effect as from May 2018. Our Data 
Protection Act will thus be amended to comply with the new EU Data Protection Regulation. 
This Government gives much importance to innovation. As I have elaborated earlier, start-up 
digital  nomads  need  an  oasis  to  survive.  We,  in  Government,  will  provide  the  necessary 
infrastructure, software and ingredient for that oasis to emerge.  

We are coming up with the Mauritius ICT plug and play platform which in essence 
will be a  cloud service  platform for digital nomads lauded  with innovative business ideas. 
This cloud set up will no doubt be a crowd-puller for start-ups inside Mauritius and for other 
shores alike. In addition to that, a Mauri-cloud platform will be set up by Government for the 
uploading and insurance of documents be carried by agencies in the course of doing business 
with  their  customers.  The  citizens  won’t  be  required  to  carry  paper  documents,  reducing 
administrative expenses as all documents will be available for verification online. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there has been a significant increase in cybercrimes recently. 
The  Cyberspace  cannot  be  a  no-law  field  where  everything  is  permitted.  Action  is  being 
taken to address this evil and it is good to note that Mauritius has just been ranked sixth on 
the Global Cyber Security Index of ITU. The top 10 global ranking is as follows – you should 
listen carefully, the companies just before and after us – 

Singapore; 
USA; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Malaysia; 
(iv)  Oman; 
(v) 
Estonia; 
(vi)  Mauritius; 
(vii)  Australia; 
(viii)  France; 
(ix)  Canada, and 
(x) 

Russia. 

Small and tiny Mauritius is sixth in the world and needless to say that we are No. 1 in 
Africa. Moreover, we need ... 

 

104 

(Interruptions) 

Anyway,  this  is  the  result  of  this  Government!  It  is  not  my  Ministry  or  the  other 
Ministries; it is the result of this Government. We work as a team and whatever results we 
get, we all take the gold medal. 

Moreover, we need to strengthen the capabilities of the Police Department and the 
Judiciary to investigate and prosecute the various types of cybercrimes respectively. My 
Ministry  will  implement  the  National  Cybercrime  Strategy  to  be  rolled  out  during  the 
course of the year. A National Disaster Cyber Security and Cybercrime Committee will 
be  set  up  with  representatives  of  the  PMO’s,  the  Police  IT  Department,  the  Data 
Protection Office, the IT Industry Association, the civil society and my Ministry to chart 
the way forward on the protocol to be observed when cyber-attacks occur. 

A  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  Policy  will  be  formulated  to 
ensure that appropriate security contents are put in place to minimise any disruption in 
case of any security breaches. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as you can judge for yourself, we 
are  being  audacious  and  most  daring  throughout  the  measures  announced.  It  is  this 
forward-looking  gaze  that  will  make  it  possible  for  a  better  life  for  our  citizens  and  a 
growing economy. On the other hand, I would like to take some time to highlight other 
measures that I think are game changes for Mauritius.  

M.  le  président,  l’ajustement  de  notre  politique  de  santé  en  fonction  d’un 
vieillissement de la population était une priorité qui devait être abordée d’autant plus nous 
avons maintenant le taux d’espérance de vie le plus élevé dans la région africaine. En ce qui 
concerne les mesures visant à atténuer la pauvreté, j’aimerais dire que ce gouvernement a, 
depuis  qu’il  est  arrivé  au  pouvoir,  contribué  à  soutenir  les  familles  à  faible  revenu.  De 
l’augmentation  de  la  pension  nationale  à  l’introduction  des  tarifs  sociaux  pour  l’eau,  en 
passant par l’extension de l’allocation mineure handicapée, nous avons beaucoup fait. Cela 
devrait être  reconnu. 

M. le président, permettez-moi d’ajouter  que parfois les mauriciens doivent vraiment 
savoir  qu’ils  obtiennent  gratuitement  le  service  de  santé,  l’éducation,  le  transport,  les 
subventions sur les produits de base parmi tant d’autres. Dans quel autre pays est-ce que nous 
voyons cela? D’autres mesures sociales sont à l’étude, par exemple, le salaire minimal, mais 
nos citoyens doivent se rendre compte du prix à payer pour tout cela. 

 

105 

M. le président, je faillirai à ma tâche de ne pas parler sur le sport en tant qu’ancien 
ministre  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports.  Je  suis  très  content  que  mon  collègue,  l’honorable 
Toussaint,  continue  le  travail  déjà  enclenché  et  je  suis  sûr  que  nous  allons  récolter  les 
résultats escomptés aux prochains Jeux des Iles de 2019. 

Je suis fier de constater que les allocations mensuelles aux athlètes de haut niveau ont 
été  augmentées.  Le  National  Young  Volunteer  Scheme  prend  aussi  plus  d’ampleur  sans 
oublier le Hall of Fame pour ceux et celles qui ont fait flotter très haut le drapeau national. Et 
M. le président, je pense qu’à travers toutes les mesures enclenchées pour le bien des athlètes, 
nous aurons des athlètes de très haut niveau dans un futur pas trop lointain. 

S’agissant du secteur éducatif, comme vous le savez très bien, moi et ma collègue, 
l’honorable Madame Dookun-Luchoomun, travaillons main dans la main depuis que je suis 
devenu ministre. Depuis le début de l’année, nos ministères élaborent le meilleur plan pour 
procurer les outils et les plateformes d’éducation numérique qui accompagne la vaste réforme 
enclenchée  dans 
l’éducation.  Cette  nouvelle  façon  d’éduquer  avec,  par  exemple, 
l’introduction  du  jeu  d’échecs  dans  les  écoles  primaires  et  notre  réponse  à  la  pédagogie 
moderne. 

Maurice  a  toujours  investi  beaucoup  dans  l’éducation  et  continuera  à  le  faire  parce 
que nous jetons les bases pour un futur meilleur. Le projet School Net est sur la bonne voie.  
Il  devra  être  une  alternative  plus  humaine  à  l’industrie  des  leçons  particulières  qui  est  la 
principale cause de l’inégalité dans ce secteur.  

M.  le  président,  pour  conclure,  j’aimerais  souligner  certains  épisodes  récents  qui 
viennent  justifier  le  raz-de-marée  de  décembre  2014,  et  qui  prouve  que  l’ancien  régime 
devrait être chassé du pouvoir. 

Il y a eu une décision sur le dossier Betamax et même aujourd’hui certaines personnes 
ne  veulent  pas  comprendre  que  ce  deal  scandaleux  a  été  fait  pour  garantir  un  matelas 
confortable à Navin Ramgoolam et ses chamchas et ses goondas. Le Leader de l’Opposition 
dit qu’il a supplié les membres du Cabinet pour ne pas remettre en question le mega deal 
Betamax.  M.  le  président,  j’aimerais  savoir  pourquoi  il  n’a  pas  fait  de  même  lorsque  les 
membres de l’ancien régime ont validé cet accord honteux, fait au détriment de la population. 

Il n’a pas supplié  à cette époque, il avait applaudi. J’invite l’honorable Xavier  Luc 
Duval d’être juste dans son jugement. Je sais qu’il a ravivé son amour pour le chef du parti 

 

106 

travailliste, qui l’a pourtant humilié à plusieurs reprises. N’oublions pas  l’épisode Michael 
Sik Yuen, jeté du PMSD, accueilli à bras ouverts par le parti travailliste et l’actuel Leader de 
l’Opposition devrait s’asseoir dans le même Cabinet ministériel de Michael Sik Yuen. Quelle 
humiliation! 

Mais il en valait. Lorsqu’on regarde la composition des gouvernements précédents de 
Navin Ramgoolam, le dénominateur commun est l’honorable Xavier Luc Duval, le complice 
de toutes ses actions en d’autres mots. Il n’a jamais claqué la porte du parti travailliste. Là 
qu’est-ce qu’on entend tous les jours, les députés du PMSD, un budget menti menti.  Si ça 
c’est un budget menti menti, je pense qu’on doit décortiquer le pompeux rezilta lor rezilta. 

Je vais vous lister la liste maintenant, le rezilta lor rezilta du PMSD. Le mega deal 
Betamax, le Ponzi de la BAI, le Ring Road, les fissures de Terre Rouge/Verdun, le Bagatelle 
Dam, il y aura trop à compter, il faudra une calculatrice. Voilà, M. le président, le rezilta lor 
rezilta alors je préfère avoir un menti menti qu’un rezilta lor rezilta.  

M. le président, l’honorable Pravin Jugnauth est un Premier ministre qui symbolise le 
respect quand on voit comment il symbolise le respect, quand on voit comment il lutte contre 
les barons de la drogue depuis qu’il est à la tête de ce pays. 

En deux ou trois mois, on a saisi plus de drogue qu’en dix ans sous l’ère travailliste. Il 
mène ce combat avec conviction pour le bien de la population mauricienne, pour les jeunes 
de ce pays.  

En  tant  que  ministre  responsable  des  Finances,  il  a  anticipé  les  prochains  défis 
auxquels nous sommes confrontés. D’où ce point stratégique, allant au-delà de cet exercice 
financier. Il est également derrière les conditions généreuses accordées par notre partenaire 
historique et culturel, l’Inde. Sa relation particulière avec le Premier ministre, Shri Narendra 
Modi, un homme mondialement reconnu et respecté, suscite beaucoup de jalousie. Mais elle 
apporte  déjà  des  résultats  en  termes  d’investissements  massifs  dans  ses  projets  qui 
stimuleront notre économie dans les mois à venir. 

L’île Maurice est au carrefour de son destin. Il y a ceux qui affichent un scepticisme 
pervers parce qu’ils ne veulent pas que nous progressions et ceux qui en tant que patriotes ont 
compris ce que ce gouvernement veut faire. Nous voulons d’une société à revenus élevés, un 
modèle de développement qui satisfait tous nos citoyens. C’est la feuille de route définie de 
ce Budget 2017/2018.  

 

107 

Le Metro Express est un gigantesque projet qui va révolutionner notre mode de vie, 
notre quotidien un stimulant pour l’économie. Ce gouvernement est ambitieux et à bien des 
égards nous construisons des maisons pour les pauvres.  

Mon ami et collègue, le Vice-Premier ministre, l’honorable Showkutally Soodhun ne 
s’épargne aucun effort pour allouer un toit décent aux familles qui avaient été oubliées par le 
régime  précédent.  Le  logement  n’est  pas  seulement  une  question  de  confort  mais  aussi  de 
dignité. C’est en fournissant de telles commodités qu’on met en œuvre des mesures comme 
celles  incluses  dans  ce  budget,  que  nous  construisons  une  meilleure  île  Maurice  dont  les 
générations futures seront fières comme l’a fait Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

 En  conclusion,  je  citerai  ce  que  George  Pataki,  un  républicain  américain  53e 

gouverneur de New York, disait d’un budget – 

“A  budget  reflects  a  choice  -  not  an  easy  choice,  but  the  right  choice.  And 
when you think about it, the only choice. The choice to take the responsible, 
prudent path to fiscal stability, economic growth and opportunity” 

M. le président, à ceux qui disent contrairement un copy/paste de vous, ce discours a 
été écrit par moi. Ceux qui pensent que les élections sont pour demain, je leur dirai quand 
j’étais petit, il y avait la pub à la télé qui s’appelait « aret rever kamarad » de J. Kalachand. 
Alors,  je  dirai  aux  membres  de  l’Opposition  « ena  boucou  pou  atane ,  ena  boucou  pou 
atane » une course, on regarde la fin, la fin c’est en 2019, là on est à mi-course. À la fin, on 
verra !  Et laissez-moi vous dire en 2020 on sera toujours là et je ne sais pas si eux ils seront 
toujours là-bas.  

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, like most Mauritians, on learning that  Mauritius has secured such a huge sum of 
money from a friendly country, I was elated at the thought that at long last, we have sufficient 
capital funds to inject in the economy and take us on the path of high growth, clear the way to 
emerge out of the middle-income trap. My hopes, alas, were shattered when I heard the Prime 
Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  saying  that  Mauritius  will  attain  a  high  income  country 
status in 2023.  

 

108 

Once again, we keep postponing the year when we shall join the prestigious club of 
High Income Countries status. We start to lag behind while countries of our size or smaller 
keep outperforming us, the last being Seychelles, Malta, Trinidad and Tobago, even Ireland, 
Iceland,  and  Singapore.  They  have  all  similar  problems  like  Mauritius  and  share  similar 
attributes. What has happened that we are falling behind and losing ranks on every index? 
Yet, the Government’s spokespersons continue to believe they are doing a great job.  

Let’s  talk  about  the  economic  growth,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  great 
reservations that Mauritius would achieve 3.9% growth. The records of 2004, 2005, 2011 of 
two different Governments and again in 2016 show the extent Government underachieved all 
the parameters. All the main international agencies consider the expected growth rate to be in 
the range of 3.4 to 3.6. Yet, in his Budget, the Prime Minister announces a figure of 3.9%. 
For  this  to  occur,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  several  conditions  have  to  be  satisfied.  First, 
investment  has  to  be  high  and,  according  to  most  publications,  Mauritius  would  need  an 
investment closer to 24%.  In 2015, investment fell by 2.7%. As a share of GDP investment 
dropped from 22.1% to 17.2% in 2016 and is expected to rise only to 17.9%, a rate below the 
potential of what is desirable.  

With  this  rate,  how  can  we  expect  growth  higher  than  4%?  We  should  not  be 
surprised  that  we  are  struggling  in  the  middle  income  trap  and  there  doesn’t  appear  a 
coordinated effort to uplift Mauritius and play in higher category. With this Government in 
place,  ambition  has  gone  down  and  is  likely  to  play  in  second  division  rather  than  in  the 
Premier  league.  This  is not  happening  by  coincidence.  It  is  happening  because  there  is  no 
coordinated  comprehensive  policy  that  takes  all  the  opportunities  and  constraints  into 
account. Most of those who have entrusted responsibilities and sectors have developed the 
complex that they know best and they ignore all comments and criticisms by people who are 
not happy with their performance. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  shall  return  to  this  issue  as  this  syndrome  starts  to 
undermine  the  performance  of  the  country.  After  I  have  broached  on  certain  economic 
variables, I must admit I am greatly perturbed by this development. Let’s talk about the first 
variable being the labour market. 

Let’s  now  revisit  the  data  from  Mauritius  stats  and  show  to  the  House  that  this 
Government has not reduced unemployment as it pretends. Has the Government misinformed 

 

109 

the  public?  I  have  a  feeling  that  the  reading  is  so  superficial  that  Government  end  up 
believing that they tend to repeat the nth time. 

The Government boasts of having brought the unemployment rate from 7.9% in 2015 
to 7.3% in 2016. This looks like an achievement. It is not. Many Ministers went on the air 
and claimed Government has dented unemployment. They have misled the population, aware 
that very few people scrutinise technical reports. Actually, it is an underachievement. Many 
factors underpin what gives the impression we are harnessing unemployment, when we are 
not. Actually, 10,800 potential workers migrated from the economically active group, that is, 
labour force and joined the economically inactive, causing a jump from 383,700 in 2015 to 
394,500 in 2016. At the same time, the labour force shrinks  from 584,600 to 581,000. As 
recorded in the Statistics Office, the unemployment falls from 46,300 to 42,400, that is, by 
3,900. In paragraph 37 of the Social Indicator published by Statistics Mauritius, it is seen that 
some 7,100 are classified as inactive although they were not working and were available for 
work. 

Since  they  were  not  looking  for  work,  they  do  not  meet  the  three  conditions  to  be 
recorded officially as unemployed. Now, why are they not looking for work? The main cause, 
and this is not confined only to Mauritius, is that after some time jobseekers, frustrated by not 
securing  a  job,  stop  reporting  to  the  relevant  authorities  and,  therefore,  move  out  of  the 
unemployment register. In the absence of unemployment benefits, many simply get fed up. 
This is technically called ‘depressed unemployment’ and fails to be recorded. In Mauritius, 
matters have worsened since this Government came to power because you need protection to 
obtain a job. We have some specific cases to prove this.  

True,  a  job  gets  advertised  for  cosmetic  arrangement.  Interviews  are  carried  out 
sometimes  using  so-called  private  consultants  who  get  paid.  Your  experience,  the 
unemployment period and your academic qualifications or any sports or social/environmental 
activities are unfortunately not sufficient to ensure you a job. You need to have been poster 
stickers or to be a relative of some parliamentarians in power. This is where our country has 
fallen so obviously, many jobseekers simply give up.  

On  the  other  hand,  many  Cabinet  Ministers  in  this  Government  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  is  not  any  competent  person  in  the  market;  other  Ministers  find  that 
competent persons are available only in their close  family circles. All these combine to roll a 

 

110 

very  grim  picture  to  the  average  youth  who  in  his  depressed  job  seeking  situation  simply 
stops reporting to an employment exchange. 

If we now add this pool of depressed labour, we get a different picture. The actual 
unemployment  figure  jumps  to  49,500  instead  of  42,300,  the  economically  labour  force  is 
adjusted and, therefore, rises to 588,100 which gives an unemployment rate of 8.5% rather 
than 7.3%. This is 2% higher than when this Government came to office. The Stats Office 
wrote it clearly in the report and explained why these people were not included. 

A second variable, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is inflation. This is one of the variables 
on which we can have a good consensus that we have achieved some progress. Actually, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  low  inflation  confirms  the  trade-off  between  unemployment  and 
price  stability.  It  confirms  the  trade-off  between  high  unemployment  and  low  inflation  as 
expounded  in  the  famous  Phillips  curve,  the  engineer-economist  who  first  observed  the 
relation. Yet the Government firmly, if not obsessively, believes it is making serious inroad 
in denting unemployment. This country does suffer from a major unemployment problem; it 
is  not  creating  jobs.  Yet  most  Government  Ministers  think  they  are  doing  a  great  job,  but 
economic  analysis,  theory  and  figures  do  not  lie.  Inflation  is  low  partly  because  of 
circumstances. Many products on the world market underwent falling prices like oil. Much of 
our inflation is imported. When we see our imports, we know how it impacts on inflation. 

Let’s  talk,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  of  the  fiscal  deficit.  The  budget  notes  little 
progress from last year. The Budget deficit will be 3.5%, higher than the original estimates. 
The country faces a huge challenge. There is something serious abnormal. Are the departures 
from objectives signs that there are troubles ahead? My worry, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is 
that we have closed two funds and transfer all. Without these funds, the deficit would have 
exceeded 5%.  Next year, there will be no funds to close and rescue the Minister. So, how 
much will be the deficit? Are we heading for a 5% to 6% deficit? The norms for running a 
deficit  are  that  it  should  not  exceed  3%.  We  need  to  be  wary  of  sustainability.  The  hon. 
Minister should be very careful about this. 

The  Deficit  also  stems  from  structural  problems.  When  the  income  does  not  grow 
adequately or when we are underperforming, our revenue falls. Tax is an increasing function 
of GDP. These variables clearly show that the Government is not able to deliver and most of 
its variables are in orange. We should not, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, look superficially at the 
data. We have to look underneath to find out what symptoms the variables are conveying to 

 

111 

us. It is such problem that eventually ignites the wrath of the IMF and slowly opens the way 
to the Greek syndrome. It is time the Government sits down and realises that it is important 
for us to have a deep look at the economic situation of the country. 

Regarding the debt issue, Mr Deputy Speaker, it is very rare in recent years that we 
have reached such grim figures on debt. Debt has to be at a reasonable level and has to be 
sustainable. Managing debt has become a daunting challenge, and there are strong fears that it 
might awaken the dragon of inflation, erode our competitiveness in the international market 
and stifle development because it will have to allocate a higher share to finance interest and 
capital, which then leaves much less to meet the priority needs of the country. The debt of the 
country is a staggering Rs288 billion, reflecting a per capita debt of over Rs221,000.  

As  a  ratio  to  GDP,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  has  exceeded  the  limit  set  by 
international norms. At 63% of GDP, we are in the red. We need to restrain demand and set 
order in our kitchen to this, we need to add the USD 500 m. The Government is aware that 
poor management of public finance will sound the alarm bell to the IMF. With this line of 
credit, the Government is sending the wrong signal. At 66%, as a result of the Rs18 m. under 
the  ILOC,  the  debt  issue  will  jeopardise  our  rating  and  make  investors  think  twice  before 
thinking of investing. We are approaching the periphery and we should make sure the firms 
carrying  credit  rating  and  risks  like  Fitch  or  Moody’s  could  easily  downgrade  us.  The 
Government is increasingly a poor achiever because it does not have sufficient time to look at 
public finance. 

Our Exports, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, manufacturing is doing increasingly less well. 
Once the locomotive driving force, it is now a laggard. Currently, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
our exports are declining and are falling rapidly behind imports. We are importing more. We 
have  not  a  single  job  created  last  year  in  the  export  manufacturing  industries  and  the 
prospects are bleak. Our firms employ low technology and are costly. Mauritius needs high-
value added product. It has moved from labour-intensive products but it has to become more 
productive and shift to higher technology with higher value product. 

We note that many variables are approaching the red. 

The Forgotten, Mr Deputy Speaker, I am under the impression that Government has 
avoided controversial or measures that have brought down the popularity of the present Prime 
Minister  as  was  the  case  in  2005  when  he  had  targeted  pension.  That  has  brought  the 
downfall of the then Government. 

 

112 

The  country  faces  two  enormous  problems:  the  ageing  population  and  the  pension. 
We have discussed this issue in various platforms. I had expected the hon. Minister to address 
this issue as a matter of priority because of its urgency. The population is ageing and which 
has  wide-ranging  socio-economic  implications:  Pattern  of  consumptions  and  imports  will 
alter; available labour in the market will undergo drastic changes, causing wages to increase 
and resulting in acute shortage, more particularly manual labour, which in turn may trigger 
the need to shift to more capital and technology based skills, including robotisation in some 
cases  or  contracting  jobs  to  other  countries  and  envisaging  more  supple  conditions  for 
imports of labour. 

Health  and  education  budget  may  require  much  more  funds  to  cater  for  non-
communicable  diseases,  geriatrics,  new  types  of  specialised  medicines  and  para-medical 
support while education will require a revamping of the standard and funding of education as 
well as part time/or attachment jobs for university students.  

Immigration policy, which may require new agreements with friendly countries, and 
new legislations to replenish the dwindling population and above all, fiscal implications in 
terms of progressive taxes and reforms of the system. 

The  ageing  phenomenon  budget  will  adversely  impact  public  expenditure  and  may 
have to be increased. This will fall on a smaller proportion of the population to support those 
in the labour force. 

The share of people over 60 years in total population will increase from 13% in 2013 
to 30% in 2050.  This in turn will impact on pension spending adding pressure on budget 
allocation. This mainly reflects non-contributory benefits on basic retirement pension, and the 
relatively generous civil service pensions according to IMF. 

Its pattern of consumption will change. New products will be in demand to serve a 
higher proportion for the older population. The fiscal burden will need to be renewed. New 
types of jobs will emerge. Demand for some jobs will shrink.  

Only some 12000 babies were born compared to 35,000 babies 30 years ago. This is 
an  area  which  needs  to  be  addressed  urgently.  Yet,  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  several 
technical reports and the deteriorating climate in public finance, with unpredictable budget 
deficit  in  the  short  run,  the  Prime  Minister  avoids  this  issue.  This  is  abdicating  from 
responsibility on the part of Government. 

 

113 

This Government did not feel it was important and the budget woefully  kept quiet. 
Yet we know what this meant to the labour market, the nature of jobs and entertainments. The 
Government seems to be running from its responsibility. After reaching a peak around 2030, 
the  population  will  start  to  decline  after  2050.  Apart  from  an  obscure  measure,  the 
Government did not find it useful to come with a package to stimulate couples to marry and 
reproduce. The budget did not find it useful to think about child benefits nor does it find it 
worthwhile to explore immigration. 

In turn this has serious implications for the Basic Retirement pension, the NPF and 
other related issues. The pension is not sustainable unless reforms are introduced.  Anomalies 
persist but the Government does not have the courage to reform the system and make it more 
cost-effective. Should we extend the retirement  age? Should workers participate in worker 
participation? 

This year’s Budget jumps to 5%, and it is expected to attain 11% when the share of all 
people attains 40%. We cannot leave the burden to the generation who will be in command in 
2050 or roughly in three decades. Just as we benefit from the fruits of our predecessors, we 
need to plan and leave a legacy for the future generation. The work starts now. 

The  Budget  rightly  looks  at  the  financial  services  sector  with  high  expectation.  In 
2019, the arrangement currently with India will expire and some of the incentives that make 
Mauritius  so  successful  will  terminate.  It  is  true  Mauritius  has  always  risen  above 
circumstances. However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there was a tradition to Plan Consult and 
come out with different options when changes or crisis seem imminent.  

Today, we take so many things for granted without examining the challenges ahead. It 
is  vital  that  we  stay  alert  and  rise  to  the  circumstances.  New  opportunities  are  prominent. 
However, we are taking too much time to react. For a substantial CEO is a firm anchor and 
gives direction and a sense of purpose to an organisation. Keeping a CEO at actingship level 
leads to play safe attitude and delays needed decisions. I understand that the current acting 
CEO has been running the organisation for almost two years. This is at odds with modern 
management  and is an  abdication of the ministerial responsibility. No serious Government 
can allow top jobs to remain vacant for so long. Can such a vital sector grow, expand and 
inspire in a disorganised state? 

 

114 

Information  upstream  and  downstream  communication,  close  monitoring,  data 
analysis, and regular publication are part and parcel of any modern management. Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, we need to equip the sector with the right tools and staff them with dedicated, 
competent persons. We cannot take chances. A little delay can cause considerable damage to 
the sector. Since January, this sector seems to be hitting the headlines for the wrong reason. A 
sector of this nature has to be extremely careful in avoiding conflict of interest in keeping a 
clean image and in constituting a strong bond with people of high integrity who can, through 
exchange of information and deliberation, forge a distinct role for an organisation free from 
adverse influence. Inability to observe ethical conduct has adverse implications in terms of 
economic  impact,  international  image  and  governance  issues.  It  lost  seven  places  in  Wall 
Street  Heritage  Index  and  ranked  16  in  Africa  when  only  a  few  years  it  held  the  place  of 
pride. 

As  regards  the  infrastructure  projects  this  betrays  a  total  lack  of  seriousness  and 
irresponsibility. The total dependence on India shows the failure of the Government. Without 
India  there  is  no  capital  budget.  This  is  a  grave  situation.  35  major  projects  have  been 
presented.  I  have  strong  reservations  that  the  country  has  the  capacity  to  implement  the 
projects.  I  recall  the  first  Budget  of  the  Government  had  announced  the  flyover  bridge  at 
Jumbo Phoenix junction. Government informs us two years later that work will start soon, 
very  soon.  Can  we  believe  him?  How  much  time  the  35  projects,  if  ever  they  are 
implemented, will take? Do we need acquisition of land, preparation of site, mobilisation of 
equipment, bidding exercise, award of contract for design, not implementation? The injection 
in the economy will be a small amount of the project value, less than 10% of total project 
value  in  practice.  Very  few  manual  jobs  will  be  created.  At  this  stage,  no  wealth  will  be 
added to the stock of national wealth. The Government is bringing pipe dreams to the people. 
Government claims it obtained Rs12.7 billion and after two years not a single cent has been 
spent. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, another subject of interest is the social Budget or dismantling 
of the Welfare State. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, looking at the figures I am greatly perturbed. 
Since Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam gradually over time endowed this country with a sound 
Welfare State which became a good model, not only for Mauritius but also for the world, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth worked hard, stood firm with the IMF, and not only preserved the Welfare 
State but, more importantly, improved the efficiency while widening the base. Joseph Stiglitz, 
Nobel recipient for Economics, and in visit to Mauritius he wrote a number of articles in ‘The 

 

115 

Washington Post’ and ‘The Guardian’, praising the Mauritian system and inviting the US to 
draw lessons from the Mauritian experience. 

What do we see today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? Examining the figures, we find the 
Budget for health and education has been reduced as a share of GDP. In this Budget, it falls 
to 3.7% from a range that varied between 4% and 4.5% and even exceeded 5% on occasions. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we need skilled people to run this country, new skills to exploit new 
sectors  like  the  ocean  economy,  the  pharmaceutical  industry  and  the  graduation  to  light 
engineering  and  avionics  and  in  certain  cases  even  robotics  because  we  will  be  short  of 
labour.  The  current  excess  of  labour  stems  from  poor  policies,  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
Government  and  the  prevention  of  the  market  forces  to  work  because  of  Government 
intervention, which stifles development. 

We need to raise the standard of our universities and refrain from filling vacancies by 
political appointees who cannot maintain their neutrality. Universities around the world make 
headlines  because  their  staff  write  books  and  pioneering  articles,  because  they  make  new 
inventions or carry out revealing researches or because their students have secured jobs very 
quickly.  Our  universities  make  headlines  for  the  wrong  reasons  and  are  laggards  in 
international  ranking.  It  is  a  shame  for  the  country.  The  Manraj  Report  has  been  a  mere 
concessional report that did not look at the fundamentals. The Minister of Education would 
be wise to sort out the issues, find solutions so that we have a good image and we produce the 
needed labour pool to stimulate the new growth pillars. 

In the health sector for the level of development we have reached infant mortality and 
women who lose their lives while giving birth should have been significantly lower. All small 
countries  and  island  economies  like  Mauritius  have  much  lower  death  casualties,  in  some 
cases as low as 10% the Mauritian figure. Ethnicity is not an explanatory variable since both 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  Fiji  do  much  better  than  Mauritius.  While  doctors  remain  idle 
because they have not secured a job and run the risk of becoming increasingly out of touch 
with medical knowledge and practice we see more people dying.  

The  H1N1  and  H1N3  viruses  have  caused  an  alarming  number  of  casualties. 
However, some doctors feel otherwise. Probably, some 10 persons have died from these two 
diseases. I find this alarming. Our ratio of doctors to the population should have given better 
results. Let us take the example of Switzerland which has a ratio of 1.5 while that for Israel is 

 

116 

2.5 compared to 0.2 per 1,000 for Mauritius. Hong Kong with a ratio of 0.3 has one of the 
highest life expectancy. Something does not turn round in this Ministry. 

The  health  system  needs  to  be  revamped  to  be  more  performing  and  more  cost-
effective perhaps with a dose of market forces, but without sacrificing poor people. We read 
regularly how doctors abuse of the system. So, the health Budget too has been stressed down 
and represents only 2.6% of GDP. This cut stands for the fact that Government is refusing to 
eliminate the anomalies  in the universal pension.  It is illogical and inequitable that people 
who are still working till 65 start drawing their pension at 60. Government’s approach is to 
give  to  those  who  have,  and  to  leave  unattended  those  who  do  not  have.  This  approach 
permeates elsewhere too. I note a good measure in the pharmaceutical industry.  

However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, while not denying its importance, this measure on 
its own will not trigger interest. We need a whole package that overlaps with other sectors 
like  sugar,  the  ocean  economy,  education  and  the  health  sector.  Piecemeal  approach  may 
have an adverse effect because when people hear ad nauseam of such project, good as it is, 
but failing at implementation level, they become disappointed. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when 
we look at the proposal for pharmaceutical industry, the story may resemble the 3 pigs; for 
the industry to take off, we need to build-in on solid rock. If we build on our hut with patch or 
wood,  as  if  the  eldest  pig  brothers,  the  wolf  would  come  and  devour.  And  in  the 
pharmaceutical industry, there are many wolves, we need to do it like the little pig and build 
the industry on solid concrete with a whole comprehensive package. 

The Tourism Sector, Mr Deputy Speaker! Tourism is doing moderately well, and it is 
a  good  sign.  However,  we  should  be  on  our  guard.  Many  of  our  competitors  have 
outperformed us and we remain an expensive destination. The Maldives and Sri Lanka are 
doing better.  We need to ensure that we do not outprice ourselves, and we do not go for low-
end tourism. Many such tourists travel by bus, eat McDonald’s which do not have significant 
impact on earnings. The multiplier effect, as my friend, hon. Rutnah     like to say, may be 
turning  negative.  The  tourist  sector  may  actually  causing  harm  by  inducing  a  significantly 
higher import, straining the current account deficits, and exasperating our imports. We can 
see that between 2014 and 2017 the impact is 10% on imports, causing what economists call 
a ‘leakage’, so I suggest the Ministry commissions a comprehensive report that studies the 
sector  and  submits  its  recommendations.  Such  report  is  good  to  maintain  our  competitive 
edge.  

 

117 

M.  le  président,  permettez-moi  de  faire  quelques  remarques  quant  aux  mesures 
annoncées  dans  le  secteur  de  l’immobilier,  comme  je  l’ai  fait  pour  les  derniers  exercices 
budgétaires. Il va sans dire que j’accueille favorablement l’exemption du Registration Duty et 
du Land Transfer Tax sur le transfert des bâtiments et des terrains qui seront servis pour des 
Hi-Tech  Manufacturing  Activities.  Cela  va  dans  le  droit  fil  de  la  politique  annoncée  en 
matière de haute technologie et en matière de recherche et développement.  

Autre  mesure  annoncée,  l’exemption  du  Registration  Duty  lors  de  l’enregistrement 
des contrats de bail des terrains agricoles. Il est dommage de constater ici, encore une fois, 
qu’on n’a pas corrigé l’injustice qui a été causée en 2006. Je l’ai souligné la dernière fois, 
mais  malheureusement  cela  est  restée  lettre  morte.  Je  souhaite  que  le  ministre  de 
l’Agriculture,  qui  est  ici  présent,  porte  une  attention  particulière  à  ma  proposition.  Avant 
2006, lorsqu’on est venu amender le Sugar Industry Efficiency Act et le Registration Duty Act 
pour taxer le transfert de terrain agricole au même titre que le terrain non-agricole, c’est-à-
dire, taxer 5% côté vendeur et 5% côté acheteur, afin d’encourager l’achat et le transfert de 
terrain agricole sous culture de cannes, le vendeur était exempté de la taxe et l’acheteur ne 
payait  que  2%  de  Registration  Duty.  Cela  a  porté  un  boost  dans  le  transfert  de  terrain  et 
l’acquisition de terrain agricole. Le gouvernement consacre aujourd’hui R 50 millions pour 
amener  500  hectares  sous  culture  de  cannes  pour  l’année  fiscale  2017-2018.  Cette  mesure 
sera  sans  effet,  sans  démesure  quant  aux  exemptions  ou  de  réductions  de  taxe  lors  des 
transferts de terrain agricole.  

Le  budget  vient  aujourd’hui  corriger  une  anomalie  pour  permettre  l’exemption  du 
Registration Duty et du Land Transfer Tax des droits au  bail de terrain de l’Etat quand il n’y 
a  pas  d’effective  change  of  ownership,  par  exemple,  des  actions  dans  une  société  ou 
compagnie.  M.  le  président,  je  souhaite  ici  faire  une  remarque  pour  dire  au  ministre  des 
Finances  qu’il  existe  aujourd’hui  une  surtaxation  ou  même  une  double  taxation  lors  de 
transfert des droits de State land, ce qu’on appelle Transfer of Right of Lease in State land. Je 
m’explique.  Lors de l’acquisition d’un bien se trouvant sur un terrain de l’Etat, l’acheteur 
paye aujourd’hui 10%  sur le droit au bail et 5% de taxe de vente, le Land Transfer Tax, sur la 
valeur totale du  bien, qui inclut, encore une fois, le droit au bail et la valeur de l’immeuble se 
trouvant sur le terrain de l’Etat. 

Cette double taxation est une anomalie,  une injustice pour le consommateur. Il aurait 
été plus plausible et juste de taxer 10% sur le droit au bail, et seulement 5% de Land Transfer 

 

118 

Tax sur la valeur de l’immeuble existant sur le terrain de l’Etat et non pas 5% sur la valeur 
totale du droit au bail et sur la valeur de  
l’immeuble  existant  sur  le  terrain  de  l’Etat. 
L’accès à la terre et à un logement a toujours été une préoccupation des gouvernements. Le 
principe des First Time Buyers’ exemptions permet l’exemption de la taxe jusqu’à un certain 
seuil pour les acquéreurs des terrains vagues et des immeubles bâtis. Le budget vient rétablir 
une injustice flagrante où l’acquéreur était privé du droit de First Time Buyer exemption lors 
de  l’acquisition  des  appartements  NHDC  ou  maisons  CHA, lorsque  ces  immeubles  se 
trouvaient sur le State land, ou encore ne faisaient pas partie des règlements de copropriété. 

M. le président, nous savons tous la maxime, la taxe tue la taxe. Cela est d’autant plus 
vrai  dans  le  secteur  de  l’immobilier  où  une  taxation  forte  décourage  le  transfert  de 
l’immobilier et, par la même, apporte une baisse des revenus de l’Etat du fait qu’il y a moins 
de transfert de terrain. Il est temps que le ministère des Finances vienne de l’avant avec une 
politique globale et approfondie en matière fiscale dans le secteur de l’immobilier. Il est un 
fait aujourd’hui que l’inflation, la hausse des prix est aujourd’hui causée en majeure partie 
par une fiscalité forte. Dans bon nombre de pays en Europe, on a aboli la taxe de vente, le 
Land  Transfer  Tax,  et  on  applique  uniquement  le  stamp  duty,  le  droit  d’enregistrement 
seulement du côté de l’acheteur. Cela est d’autant plus logique lorsqu’on sait que le vendeur, 
lors de l’achat de son bien, a déjà payé la taxe. 

Cela est inconcevable que lors de la vente, on lui fasse payer la taxe sur un bien où il 
s’est  déjà  acquitté  de  la  taxe  vis-à-vis  de  l’Etat  lors  de  l’achat  de  ce  même  bien.  M.  le 
président,  l’acquisition  des  biens  par  les  étrangers  a  un  apport  de  58%  de  FDI.  Le  Non-
citizens  (Restriction  Property)  Act  a  pour  vocation  de  gérer  l’accès  à  l’immobilier  aux 
fonciers par des étrangers. Cela est dû au fait que la superficie du terrain accessible au privée 
dans le pays est limitée, et qu’il appartient à l’Etat de protéger les mauriciens dont le pouvoir 
d’achat  est  loin  d’être  égal  aux  étrangers ;  qu’il  appartient  aussi  à  l’Etat  de  s’assurer  que 
l’économie,  la  terre  est  le  moins  dépendant  possible  de  l’étranger ;  qu’il  n’y  ait  pas  de 
spéculation à outrance au niveau de l’immobilier. 

J’ai  eu  l’occasion  d’intervenir  lors  des  débats  sur  le  Non-citizens  (Restriction 
Property)  Bill. Je souhaite, ici, réitérer mes préoccupations quant à une non-règlementation 
de l’accès à la terre par les étrangers. M. le président, nous sommes passés de l’IRS au ERS, 
et maintenant au PDS scheme. Bien que je ne sois pas contre l’idée de la possibilité d’achat 
par  des  étrangers  dans  des  cas  spécifiques,  il  nous  appartient  en  tant  que  législateur  de 

 

119 

déterminer  dans  une  politique  d’aménagement  du  territoire  dans  le  long  terme  des  régions 
spécifiques du pays où le PDS Scheme ou même les smart cities peuvent être aménagés. Il est 
inconcevable que de tels projets puissent se faire n’importe où dans le pays. Il nous appartient 
de protéger la famille mauricienne et la culture mauricienne. 

Nous  avons  un  devoir  vis-à-vis  de  la  population  locale,  de  protéger  la  spécificité 
culturelle de nos quartiers, de nos villes, de nos villages et de protéger la possibilité d’accès à 
la terre à un logement. Nous savons tous que l’accès à une portion de terre ou un logement 
décent représente pour bon nombre de mauriciens l’accomplissement d’une vie. Cette charge 
émotionnelle symbolise aussi le devoir de ce père ou de cette mère de famille de protéger ses 
valeurs familiales. Il nous appartient, nous en tant que législateurs, d’être très prudents à ce 
propos, M. le président. 

Les récents amendements au Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act permettent aux 
étrangers  détenteurs  ou  pas  d’un  occupational  permit,  détenteurs  ou  pas  d’un  professional 
licence,  détenteurs  ou  pas  d’un  investor’s  licence  d’acquérir  un  bien  immobilier.  
Aujourd’hui,  M.  le  président,  n’importe  quel  étranger  sans  le  contrôle  à  priori  du  Prime 
Minister’s Office, peut faire une application au BOI pour acquérir un appartement dans un 
complexe qui fait plus que ground plus 2 avec un prix minimum de R 6 million.  

Autres  amendements  apportés,  M.  le  président,  concernent  les  business  and 
commercial premises. Il convient de le rappeler que cela est grave pour le pays. Aujourd’hui, 
la porte est grande ouverte pour l’acquisition des commercial premises et ce, tenez-vous bien, 
sans  aucune  restriction  de  prix  et  sans  aucune  définition  de  c’est  quoi    les  commercial 
premises. C’est quoi les commercial premises, M. le président ? Ce sont tout simplement ces 
locaux commerciaux qui ont eu une licence du District Council ou des municipalités. Cela 
peut tout aussi bien être des salons de coiffure, des vidéos clubs, des tabagies, des bars, des 
boutiques de quartier,  des filling stations, des snacks, des boutiques des cordonniers ou des 
jardiniers.  Aller  voir  ce  qui  se  passe  dans  les  régions  côtières  de  Flic  en  Flac,  de  Rivière 
Noire, de Grand’ Baie et de Pereybere où tous ces petits business qui faisaient la fierté des 
familles  mauriciennes  sont  aujourd’hui  accaparés  par  des  étrangers.  Parce  qu’il  n’existe 
aucune restriction en ce  qui concerne l’acquisition des commercial premises. C’est une loi 
dangereuse,  votée  à  la  va-vite,  qui  met  aujourd’hui  en  danger  la  famille  mauricienne  et  le 
tissu social à Maurice. 

 

120 

Pour terminer sur ce volet, je souhaite faire une remarque quant aux exemptions de 
First time Buyers. Le ministre des Finances a corrigé une anomalie l’année dernière en ce qui 
concerne  l’acquisition  des  terrains  vagues.  Aujourd’hui,  on  permet  l’exemption  de  la  taxe 
jusqu’à une somme de R 2 million pour l’acquisition des terrains vagues et la différence est 
taxable à 5%. L’anomalie persiste toujours et là je souhaite que le ministre porte une attention 
particulière à cela parce que cela constitue une anomalie. L’anomalie persiste toujours en ce 
qui concerne l’acquisition des maisons et des appartements. Si le prix de vente dépasse R 4 
millions pour l’acquisition des maisons ou des appartements, l’acquéreur doit payer la taxe à 
5% sur le prix total de la vente et non pas jusqu’à R 4 million. Je considère que cela constitue 
une anomalie de la loi et je demande au ministre de porter une attention particulière parce 
qu’il va  venir  de  l’avant  avec  le  Finance  Act  éventuellement.    Alors  qu’il  aurait  été  plus 
logique  comme c’est le  cas pour les terrains vagues d’exempter les  First Time Buyers des 
maisons jusqu’à une somme de R 4 millions et de les faire payer la différence à 5% et je fais 
un appel au ministre.  

Autre  point  à  ce  niveau,  c’est  de  considérer  que  bon  nombre  d’acquisitions  des 
appartements  se  font  aujourd’hui  à  travers,  de  ce  qu’on  appelle,  les  sociétés  civiles 
immobilières  d’attribution  ou  sous  la  vente  à  l’état  futur  d’achèvement.  Bien  que  le  First 
Time Buyer est permis pour la vente à état futur d’achèvement, tel n’est pas le cas en ce qui 
concerne  les  acquisitions  à  travers  des  sociétés  civiles  immobilières  d’attribution  et  là  je 
demanderai au ministre de porter une attention particulière à cela. 

M.  le  président,  je  souhaite  aborder  un  autre  sujet  qui  me  tient  à  cœur  qu’est  la 
situation dans ma ville de naissance, la ville où j’habite, la ville où j’ai fait ma scolarité a 
Belle  Rose,  la  Circonscription  de  Belle  Rose/Quatre  Bornes  qui  m’a  élu  pour  être  leur 
représentant  à  l’Assemblée  Nationale.  La  Circonscription  No.  18  est  aujourd’hui  un  grand 
sujet d’actualité. Il faut le dire c’est aussi le lieu où le ministre Mentor a connu les grands 
jours de son enfance à Palma, où le Leader du MMM a fait son baptême de feu politique, la 
ville  où  bon  nombre  de  députés  habitent  ou  encore  la  Circonscription  du  Leader  de 
l’Opposition. Cette ville me tient à cœur. Cette ville, M. le président, c’est ma vie. 

M.  le  président,  c’est  aussi  la  circonscription  de  la  présidente  de  l’Assemblée 
Nationale,  l’honorable  Madame  Maya  Hanoomanjee.    C’est  parce  que  la  circonscription 
numéro 14 chevauche la ville à travers les régions de Palma, Bassin et Résidence Kennedy. 

 

121 

Cette  ville,  tout  comme  bon  nombre  d’agglomérations,  connaît  une  pression  sans 
précédent  en  matière  de  politique  d’urbanisme.  La  municipalité  est  redevable  vis-à-vis  du 
gouvernement central. La politique d’urbanisme fait partie des terms of reference du Ministry 
of Housing and Lands, mais aussi de la Mairie. Il faut le reconnaître aujourd’hui qu’il existe 
une cacophonie inacceptable en matière de politique d’urbanisme. Ce qui se passe dans la 
ville de Quatre Bornes est tout aussi valable dans la région de Grand’ Baie, Pereybere et tout 
aussi  valable  dans  les  grandes  villes,  dans  les  grosses  agglomérations.  L’ABCD  d’une 
politique  d’urbanisme  c’est  de  pouvoir  délimiter  les  zones  résidentielles,  des  zones 
commerciales, les zones industrielles ou encore des zones agricoles. Les habitants de Quatre 
Bornes sont aujourd’hui dans le flou total.  

Il  n’est  aujourd’hui  pas  une  surprise  de  se  retrouver  du  jour  au  lendemain  avec 
l’ouverture  d’un  bureau  ou  d’une  quincaillerie  à  côté  de  sa  maison.  On  nous  dira  tout 
simplement  que  l’applicant  a  respecté  tous  les  critères  nécessaires  en  termes  de  Building 
Regulations et donc il est éligible à obtenir sa licence. Il est temps une fois pour toutes que le 
Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands,  qui  est  aussi  responsable  de  l’aménagement  du  territoire, 
vienne  de  l’avant  avec  une  véritable  politique  d’urbanisme  et  des  Building  Regulations 
adaptés avec les développements en cours dans tous les recoins du pays.  

Il est un fait aujourd’hui que 10 à 15 ans de cela dans une superficie de 300 m², y 
habitait  une  famille  de  cinq  membres.  Et  dans  cette  même  spécifie  aujourd’hui,  M.  le 
président,  y  habite  au  moins  une  vingtaine  de  familles  en  copropriété  dans  les  complexes 
d’appartements, avec de telles pressions en matière de politique d’urbanisme; est-il normal 
aujourd’hui  avec  cette  tendance  d’habitation  en  vertical  et  en  copropriété  que  les 
infrastructures  routières  soient  restées  les  mêmes,  que  la  distribution  des  utilités  publiques 
que  ce  soit  l’eau,  l’électricité,  le  sewerage  ou  la  communication  soient  restés  figés.  Le 
ramassage  d’ordures  se  fait  au  même  rythme  bien  qu’il  y  ait  un  boom  sans  précédent  en 
matière de peuplement et là je parle plus particulièrement de la Ville de Quatre Bornes. 

Je peux comprendre que les day-to-day business du Ministry of Housing and Lands 
soit  la  question  des  squatters,  la  construction  des  complexes  de  la  NHDC,  l’allocation  des 
terres  à  quelques  privilégiés  ou  encore  l’organisation  du  Hajj  ou  encore,  s’il  vous  plaît, 
caresser l’Arabie Saoudite dans le sens du poil ou encore la résiliation des relations avec le 
Qatar. M. le président, il est temps que le Ministry of Housing and Lands applique à la lettre 

 

122 

le terms of reference de son ministère quand il y va de la suivie même des agglomérations 
urbaines. 

M. le président, je suis fatigué, fatigué d’avoir attiré l’attention des autorités que ma 
ville  croule  sous  l’immoralité.  M.  le  président,  lorsqu’au  entre  dans  Quatre  Bornes,  on  a 
tendance à dire que Quatre Bornes, c’est mari nissa.  Lorsque vous entrez dans la ville, il 
existe des charmantes hôtesses qui vous accueillent tout le long de la route St Jean, devant le 
Central Supermarket,  devant la Hong Kong Bank, on nous dit que cela fait partie du décor de 
Quatre Bornes. 

Le law and order fout le camp. Ces proxénètes et ces prostituées travaillent au su et à 
la vue des autorités policières. Savez-vous, M. le président, que la station de police de Quatre 
Bornes est seulement à une centaine de mètres des base d’opération de ces proxénètes. Les 
proxénètes et les prostituées travaillent pendant les mêmes horaires que les policiers qui font 
leur  sentry  tout  le  long  de  la  Route  Royale  de  Quatre  Bornes.  Mais  c’est  l’omerta,  M.  le 
président! 

M.  le  président,  ne  voyez  pas  dans  ma  démarche  une  stigmatisation  envers  les 
prostituées.  On  ne  se  prostitue  pas  par  plaisir,  mais  surtout  par  obligation  de  survie,    par 
obligation de nourrir ses enfants, par obligation de se procurer de sa dose d’héroïne pour le 
jour suivant. 

Dans  mon 

travail  social  dans 

je 

le  quartier  de  Quatre-Bornes, 

travaille 
quotidiennement avec ces mêmes prostitués. Je connais leur quotidien, leur environnement, 
leur soif de vivre. C’est aujourd’hui un cri de cœur que je lance, je n’accepte pas qu’en 2017, 
un enfant grandisse dans un taudis avec une mère prostituée. Je pose une question toute bête 
M. le président. Savons-nous le nombre de femmes et d’hommes prostitués dans la ville de 
Quatre  Bornes  et  ailleurs?  Savons-nous  le  nombre  d’enfants  nés  de  père  ou  de  mère 
prostitué(e). Cette question peut vous pousser à  l’indifférence honorable  membres de  cette 
auguste Assemblée mais ces mêmes enfants habitent à quelques dizaines de mètres de vos 
chics demeures de vieux Quatre Bornes et demain seront vos concitoyens.  

M. le président, j’ai soulevé à maintes reprises le problème de la congestion routière 
dans la ville de Quatre Bornes. Il nous prend aujourd’hui - je l’ai maintes fois souligné - plus 
de temps de rallier l’hôpital Victoria au rond-point de St Jean que de partir du rond-point de 
St Jean à Port Louis. 

 

123 

Bien que la bretelle reliant Solferino à Pierre Fonds ait été d’un certain soulagement, 
il est un fait que la congestion routière a pris une proportion alarmante du rond-point de la 
Louise vers Candos ou sur la route St Jean. Rien n’a été fait en matière de plan d’ensemble 
pour la ville de Quatre Bornes malgré les nombreuses interpellations parlementaires que j’ai 
moi-même faites ici dans cette auguste Assemblée ou même les interpellations du public. Là, 
c’est un peu le joke de la ville M. le président. À chaque doléance des membres du public, on 
ajoute un traffic light. C’est le record on se retrouve avec pas moins de 14 traffic lights rien 
que sur la route royale de Quatre-Bornes. Il n’y a pas mieux pour aggraver le problème de la 
congestion routière. On élimine les espaces de parking sans se rendre à l’évidence que cette 
politique  d’amateur  pousse  aujourd’hui  les  Quatre-Bornais  à  la  révolte  avec  des  risques 
d’accidents et une pollution étouffante. M. le président... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Aliphon please! 

Mr Ramano: M. le président Je suis de ceux qui pensent…  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! Please, Order! 

Mr Ramano: M. le président, je suis de ceux qui pensent que, dans ce corridor de 
Curepipe à Port Louis, il est temps de venir de l’avant avec un mass transit system. Le projet 
Metro Express suscite aujourd’hui malheureusement plus d’interrogations que d’espoirs dans 
la population. Ces interrogations sont tout à fait justifiées tant sur le plan financier quant au 
coût réel du projet. Sur le plan du running costs, aucun chiffre n’est avancé jusqu’à présent; 
aucun chiffre en ce qui concerne la rentabilité du projet, aucun chiffre en ce qui concerne le 
nombre de passagers effectifs prévus. 

On nous annonce maintenant un Environment Impact Assessment alors que le projet 
est déjà annoncé et mis en exécution. De nombreuses interrogations ont été soulevées dans la 
Chambre.  Les  réponses  précises  se  font  attendre.  Dans  la  ville  de  Quatre  Bornes  à  l’état 
actuel du tracé, les habitants redoutent une mort certaine de la ville avec un tel projet M. le 
président. Depuis que le projet est annoncé rien n’est dit dans le concret. Comment manier le 
tracé du Metro Express avec les routes adjacentes maintenant qu’il est dit que le projet Metro 
Express passera au niveau du sol et non pas sur pilotis. 

 

124 

Je me pose la question M. le président. Même si le tracé - je répète M. le président 
même si le tracé - devait se faire sur pilotis sur la route royale de Quatre Bornes de quelle 
largeur devrait être le soubassement des pilotis? Il est évident que vu la largeur de la route St 
Jean, la route Royale de Quatre Bornes ces constructions sont impraticables. 

Autre interrogation, M. le président, est-ce que le ministre est en mesure de nous dire 
quelle est la distance requise en terme de buffer zone entre le tracé et les commerces, entre le 
tracé  et  les  habitations  immédiates.  Cette  question  que  je  me  pose  pour  la  ville  de  Quatre 
Bornes est tout aussi valable pour la ville de Port Louis, pour la ville de Beau Bassin/Rose 
Hill.  Pour  la  région  de  Belle  Rose,  quel  est  le  buffer  zone  requis ?  Quelle  est  la  norme 
internationale requise  en ce qui  concerne le  buffer zone  entre le tracé du métro léger et le 
commerce avoisinant et les habitations avoisinantes. 

Les commerces sur la route royale de Quatre Bornes seraient, tenez-vous bien, à trois 
metres  seulement  du  passage  du  Metro  Express.  Tout  le  long  de  la  Promenade  Gerard 
Bruneau, il existe des habitations. Quelques maisons seulement ont fait l’objet de compulsory 
acquisitions. Pour les autres habitations, M. le président, qui longent cette Promenade Gerard 
Bruneau, elles seront seulement à moins de trois mètres du tracé du métro express. Est-ce que 
cela est viable? Est-ce que c’est vivable dans la ville de Quatre Bornes avec l’entrée d’un tel 
projet dans la ville de Quatre Bornes? 

Il n’y a pas lieu d’être un consultant, il n’y a pas lieu d’être un expert pour savoir ce 
que  cela  représente  comme  violation  à  l’environnement,  comme  danger  en  matière  de 
sécurité ou encore un appauvrissement de la qualité de vie avec une pollution sonore qui frise 
la révolte M. le président. À l’état actuel du projet, le Metro Express est non seulement non 
viable mais inacceptable pour les habitants de la ville de Quatre Bornes. 

Je  ne  suis  pas  contre  le  développement,  il  faut  qu’un  développement  de  cette 
envergure  avec  un  investissement  aussi  massif  que  ça  puisse  se  faire  d’une  façon  plus 
scientifique,  plus  planifiée  pour  le  bien-être  de  tout  un  chacun.  Il  y  va  de  l’argent  des 
contribuables. Il y va aussi du bien-être des habitants de la ville.  

M. le président, le Ministre des collectivités locales a annoncé en grande pompe suite 
à une interpellation de ma part de la délocalisation du marché de Belle Rose suivant le projet 
de Metro Express. 

 

125 

Il faut se rendre à la cruelle vérité, M. le président. Aujourd’hui aucune somme, je dis 
bien,  aucune  somme  n’est  prévue  à  cet  effet  dans  le  présent  budget.  On  parle  de 
délocalisation du marché de Belle Rose mais aucune somme n’est prévue en ce qui concerne 
la construction d’un nouveau marché pour la région de Belle Rose. On parle de l’élimination, 
pure et simple du marché de Belle Rose sans aucune mesure alternative.  

M. le président je souhaite terminer sur une note qui m’est chère que sont les valeurs 
qui  me  guident  dans  mon  action  politique.  Il  nous  appartient,  il  est  de  notre  devoir  de 
défendre et de pratiquer ces valeurs mais qu’on le veuille ou pas il y a des dizaines de milliers 
de personnes en dehors de ce Parlement qui nous considèrent comme des rôles modèles. À 
tort ou à raison c’est une autre question. Ils s’attendent à ce qu’on défende leurs intérêts et ce 
quelque  soit  leur  appartenance  sociale  ou  leur  appartenance  religieuse.  Il  nous  appartient 
d’identifier ces valeurs qui rassemblent les Mauriciens et qui donne une identité, une raison 
de fierté, la force de s’affirmer comme une nation au niveau international. 

Si nous sommes dans cette auguste assemblée M. le président, il nous appartient avant 
tout  d’assumer  nos  responsabilités  en  tant  que  Mauriciens.  Cessons  avec  ses  réflexes 
primaires  de  toujours  trouver  un  prétexte  à  relent  communal  pour  sortir  des  sujets 
controversables. Il était un temps lorsqu’il y avait des allégations de malversations contre un 
ancien commissaire de police on nous disait pas tousse nous commissaire. Il existe des faits 
indéniables  que  la  présidente  de  la  république  a  outrepassé  ses  pouvoirs,  on  nous  dit  pas 
tousse madame là. 

J’ai demandé à ce que le MOU signé avec l’Inde en 2015 à propos d’Agalega soit 
rendu  public  au  nom  de  la  transparence  et  au  nom  de  la  souveraineté  de  la  nation 
mauricienne, des pense petits m’accuseront sûrement d’être anti-Inde. M. le président j’ai la 
conviction  de  mes  idées  et  je  l’affirme  et  cela  parce  que  j’ai  été  élu  par  les  habitants  de 
Quatre Bornes et j’en suis fier et honoré.  

Je vous remercie M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

 (7.35p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  &  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker Sir, usually I address a number of political issues but this time I think there 

 

126 

are a number of questions which have been asked in this Assembly, the most about the Metro 
Express.  But this time, I think there are a number of questions which have been asked in this 
in this Assembly, the more so about the Metro Express. So, I will take a lot of time to answer 
these queries which I consider as being legitimate.  

First of all, let me say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this country is 50 years old, next 
year. Is it the end of a cycle? Is it the beginning of a new cycle? Is it the beginning of a new 
chapter in the making of modern Mauritius? It could be so. But the most important thing and 
I appreciate what hon. Ramano has said about the way he does about politics. 

I  believe  that  we  should  have  conviction.  Second,  you  should  have  sincerity  of 
purpose.  Third,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  you  should  be  loyal  to  the  nation.  We  have  had 
extraordinary debates here in the last 50 years.  We are sitting at the seats of stalwarts who 
made amazing speeches, brilliant speeches; some full of sound and fury; some which were 
pertinent. But today, I think the time has come to make fundamental choices and the Metro 
Express is one of those choices. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Bodha:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  New  York,  in  a  few  days,  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth  is  going  to  stand  up  to  present  his  motion  which  has  been  requested  to  the 
Secretary-General for an advisory opinion at the International Court of Justice as regards the 
separation of the Chagos from Mauritius in 1965 before Independence was granted. In 1967 
and  1968,  this  country  was  divided  on  the  issue  of  Independence  and  when  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth will stand up in New York, he will ask for an advisory opinion with regard to one of 
the last remnants of decolonisation on the continent of Africa; the Chagos. And today, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth is standing.  Olivier Bancoult representing the Chagossian community will 
be standing by his side. The people of Chagos and the Republic of Mauritius and in spite of 
the formidable propaganda machine of the United States and the United Kingdom, in spite of 
the threats, in spite of the arm twisting, we hope that we will have this advisory opinion and 
we are working for a majority to be able to win this advisory opinion and you know who is 
co-sponsoring this proposal of Mauritius? It is the Republic of India. 

(Interruptions) 

 

One of the co-sponsors!  

127 

(Interruptions) 

And Sir Anerood Jugnauth is going to have bilateral meetings, I have been told, with so many 
of the countries, with the non-aligned movement, with the Africa Union to be able to put up a 
strong case, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

This is where Mauritius has reached. This is where we have reached after 50 years 
and there were formidable choices to make in this country. One was independence. Half of 
the people of Mauritius voted almost against Independence, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Those 
who  fought  for  Independence  today  can  rest  in  peace.  But  even  those  who  fought 
Independence can rest in peace because this nation today, 50 years later, is reconciled to the 
idea of freedom and Independence. So, may they rest in peace! They were fighting here. We 
are fighting today. 

I understand the passion of hon. Ramano when it comes to Quatre Bornes.  I am a 
town planner.  I can understand him. I can understand the apprehensions of the people, but I 
hope that today after the explanation that I am going to give; we have to make a choice, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

India  has  supported  us,  will  support  us  and  I  was  very  interested  when  I  went  to 
China. Do you know what is happening in the world today? Because this budget has to be put 
in perspective. What is happening in the world today? The United States is recoiling upon 
itself. The European Union is looking for its own cohesion.  There are only two continents 
rising up; the two superpowers of India and China in Asia and the new continent with all the 
opportunities, in Africa. Where are we? We are in the middle. And who are standing by our 
side? Countries like India. Countries like China. This is the geopolitics of this modern world 
today. And this is where we have to think what to do; what are the opportunities; what are the 
challenges to raise to be able to provide a better future for our new generation. This is the 
challenge,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  China  has  come  with  an  extraordinary  infrastructure 
project called the one belt and one road linking China to Europe and to the Middle East and 
to Africa.  

Japan and India have come with the Japan-India initiative. We have massive billions 
with the China-Africa Fund. We have massive billions with the Japan-Africa Fund, with the 
India-Africa Fund. And last week, there was a representative of the Ministry of Infrastructure 

 

128 

and Tourism who came from Japan with 12 of the biggest companies in the world because 
they want to set a regional office in Mauritius to provide for the market in Africa. This is 
where we are. And tiny Mauritius has to play its role.  

We have to become the star and key of the Indian Ocean again. History has changed 
50 years later, but geography has not changed. We have 2.4 million kilometres of ocean.  And 
this is the ambition that we have, to be able to provide, to be the stepping stone to Africa 
because Africa infrastructure, investment, job creation is going in Africa to be massive and 
there are the two superpowers standing up, India and China, to be able to see how to explore 
the possibilities in that market. And we can be the regional hub. We can be the platform. We 
can be the stepping stone just like we are with the office of the World Bank, the office of the 
International Monetary Fund. We can have big companies from China coming to Mauritius, 
twining  with  Mauritius  to  go  into  Africa.    And  this  Budget  has  to  be  placed  in  its  right 
perspective,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  development  of  Agalega  has  to  be  seen  in  that 
perspective. It has to be seen in that perspective because it places Mauritius with all the latest 
technology in the middle of the Indian Ocean with an airport, with a jetty.  

My friend, the hon. Minister of Local Government explained. I have been to Agalega. 
We  all  know  how  dangerous  it  is  to  be  able  to  get  onshore.  We  know  how  beautiful  this 
island  is.    Why  can’t  it  become  a  cruise  terminal?  Why  cannot  Agalega  become  a  cruise 
terminal with the cruise ships from the Indian Ocean berthing at Agalega. So, this is how we 
have to see it; not see it as a tiny dot, but to see it in the whole ocean or between the emerging 
giants of Asia and the continent of tomorrow, Africa. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  future  of  the  ocean  economic  has  to  be  seen  in  that 
perspective as well. And we are doing everything to be able to explore all the possibilities 
that we have; an island of 60 kms by 40 kms. But where is our future? This is what we have 
to decide now. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  was  a  question  saying  that:  why  does  India  help 
countries like Mauritius when India needs the rupees for its own people in India? But this is 
the foreign policy of a giant which helped in the decolonisation of Africa and the colonised 
world. This is the legacy of the Nehrus, of the Gandhis to help, to stand up like a big brother 
when  you  have  small  countries,  small  little  Mauritius.  And  I  was  very  happy  to  hear  the 
Speaker of the National Lok Sabha on a dinner and she summed it up in one sentence, and 
she said: “we have a relation of blood and history, and each time Mauritius will fight for its 

 

129 

development, India will stand by its side. She says: ‘We have a relation of blood and history 
and each time Mauritius will fight for its development, India will stand by its side’. This is in 
this perspective that you have to place the grant of Rs12.7 billion, the loan of 500 m. dollars. 
We have to see where we are. Mauritius is not small. We are not a small country. We have to 
place ourselves dans le concert des nations. We have a role to play because we have a special 
relationship with India, because the Prime Minister has a special relationship with the Prime 
Minister Modi, because, in the past, we had a special relationship with South Africa. We have 
to rise up, we have to stand up like a little great country, Mr Deputy Speaker.  

Let me now continue because, in the 70s, India gave us the MGI. True, those millions 
could have helped to make some housing units in India, but you see the symbolism of it. It 
hosted the ACP Summit here at the MGI. It gave to Mauritius, something, a shop window, in 
the  same  manner  India  gave  us  the  possibility  of  having  the  CyberCity  where  we  had 
sugarcane fields on the Illovo deal. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  same  manner,  the  Swami  Vivekananda  Convention 
Centre today is a venue for international conferences. How did we get it, why did we get it? I 
remember a PNQ in 2005 because there was a problem. That Centre was to be provided for 
by December for the Summit, and myself and hon. Bhagwan, we went to New York to say - 
he was with me -  that we could not provide the Centre… 

(Interruptions) 

He  is  a  Master  in  politics,  I  said.  He  was  with  me  and  we  met  the  Secretary  General  to 
explain to him that this Convention Centre is not going to be ready and that it is  going to be 
ready only in March for the SIDS Conference. There was a PNQ of the Labour Party about 
duty-free cars. I remember this. That is what I am saying, we are a great little country, and we 
should think of things which are big. This is our destiny to be a shop window for Africa, to be 
a destiny for the world because our vivre ensemble is a model in the world today. That is why 
we are here. I listened to the debates. It’s a very good thing. Debates have to be done, but 
decisions have to be taken.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is so much that we will achieve with India in the years 
to  come.  We  have  a  Prime  Minister  who  has  a  long  career,  we  have  Mr  Modi.  All  Prime 
Ministers from India have come to this country. They have graced this land. All Presidents of 
India have graced this land. This is a unique and special relationship.  

 

130 

Let me now come to December 2014. In December 2014 - I am answering to those 
who  said  that  we  are  leading  the  country  to  bankrupt,  we  are  going  to  be  indebted  -    the 
Government then had already almost allocated a contract of Rs24.5 billion to Ascon for the 
light rail. It was on this programme that the MMM/Labour Party had gone to the elections. 
Over  and  above  this,  the  Government  had  committed  with  ………..  for  a  decongestion 
programme of Rs25 billion, with a Dream Bridge of Rs10 billion with toll, and a tunnel of 
Rs5 billion with toll.  

Over  and  above  that,  the  country  had  committed  itself  with  Air  Mauritius  to  buy 
aircrafts for Rs75 billion. So, what would have happened, if the MMM and the Labour Party 
had been in the Government? What would have happened? What would have hon. Ramano 
said  then?  Now,  if  Air  Mauritius  with  Rs75  billion  goes  bust.  The  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition  said:  what  happens  if  this  goes  bust,  and  if  the  Metro  goes  bust  in  two  years? 
What would have happened if Air Mauritius goes bust with Rs75 billion. Who would have 
paid it? So, again it’s a question of responsibility. What we have done? We have reduced this 
decongestion to Rs10 billion, we have reduced this Metro express to around half - we  are 
getting it from India – of about Rs10 billion. This sum of Rs75 billion of aircrafts has been 
re-engineered and the two aircrafts coming for A350 in November and December are going 
to be leased.  

Isn’t  this  responsibility?  They  are  saying  that  we  are  leading  this  country  to 
bankruptcy. We are taking important decisions which have to be taken,  Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir. So, let us come to growth. 

I am convinced that we are going to break the glass ceiling of 4% this year. We are 
going to get out of the middle income traps slowly. I think everybody wishes so. Why am I 
saying this? Let me now tell you what happens in the infrastructure and construction industry. 

In 2014, we had a negative 7% recession. In 2015, we had a negative 3% recession. In 
2016, we have now a growth and this year we are getting at least 5% to 7%. I am going to 
explain to you what are the projects which are coming, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

So, with all the resilience of some sectors, with  tourism, for example,  doing well; 
financial services doing well. I am convinced that we will break the ceiling of 4% next year 
and we will continue with a cycle of sustained growth.  

 

131 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me now say a few things which have happened in my 
sector. I am going to a few other issues later. The Omnicane project of Rs600 m. in the south 
will  be  delivered  next  month.  The  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  repairs  will  be  completed  in  nine 
months. I would like to explain here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, because there was a criticism 
from the MMM saying that we are taking so much time to repair the Terre Rouge-Verdun. 
We have to understand, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this is a very complex area. You had 
five landslides, the tests were not done, and we could not do some quick fix. We could not do 
that. So, we have to understand what is happening. To understand this, we had a report from 
the Japan International Corporation Agency. We had a second report from the ARQ Co. in 
South Africa. We had a third report from the Korea Express Corporation from Korea. The 
reports showed that it was a massive failure which could have been prevented if the proper 
test had been done. Do you know, what is happening there -  those who have gone past? We 
are removing 140,000 metre squares of aggregates and soil. This is in total no less than 3,000 
lorry  loads.    We  were  told  that  we  could  do  two  solutions,  what  were  the  stone  columns, 
vertical, or the horizontal solution, that is, we remove scrap everything. We go to the rock 
structure and then we do the filling to be able to have the road repaired, and this is going to 
take eight months. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are not responsible for the failure. There was a question 
put by hon. Bhagwan. I explained that. Let me tell you one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In 
Cabinet, the Prime Minster then, Sir Anerood Jugnauth asked me: ‘what is the guarantee that 
the road will not fail somewhere else.’ In fact, there was a landslide with 3000 tons of mud 
which covered the six lanes which we have repaired.   So, we have to do what has to be done, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. So, the repairs are going to be done.  

Now,  we  are  extending  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  to  Arsenal.  This  is  going  to  be 
completed in a month. The repairs to the Ring Road which collapsed, which was also of a 
very complex nature, this has been done, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

We  have  been  mentioning  the  decongestion,  that  is,  the  Jumbo  Phoenix  and  the 
A1M1. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have to do what has to be done, the soil test and all that 
has to be done and then we have to go by the procurement laws.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, just 
to prequalify 6 out of 14 of the biggest companies in the world, for the first time the biggest 
companies in the world have been requested to give a bid for the construction of the Jumbo 
Phoenix flyover and the A1M1 bridge which is 140 metres. You have –  

 

132 

•  Deawoo; 
•  Larsen & Toubro ; 
•  Bolloré; 
•  The Chinese companies. 

At the Public Procurement Office, it took me three months and there was a challenge. Now 
that all the documents have been sent to the six bidders, they will come with an offer in two 
months and that is why we have said that the works are going to start in three months, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Let me now continue with the south-west connection which will start in La Vigie; it 
will  go  La  Marie,  to  Henrietta,  to  Beaux  Songes  and  to  Flic-en-Flac.  This  road  is  costing 
Rs1.3 billion and it will help the traffic from the south to reach the west. A tourist coming 
from the airport will go directly to Flic-en-Flac without hitting Curepipe, Vacoas, La Louise, 
Quatre Bornes. It will go directly there and this is going to be one of the solutions for Quatre 
Bornes. I am going to mention others. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Port to Jinfei third lane will start this year. Tenders have 
been floated and works are starting in 3 months. This is costing us Rs 300 m. Re-engineering 
of  the  roundabouts  and  flyovers  of  St  Jean  –  what  is  happening  in  St  Jean,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir? Everybody leaving Quatre Bornes goes to St Jean. They go to St Jean to Rose 
Hill. They go to St Jean to Port Louis and they go to St Jean to Curepipe. So, everybody sees 
St Jean as a tunnel.  

What are we going to do now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? We are going to re-engineer 
that roundabout going to Jumbo, coming to St Jean and what we are doing is we are doing a 
link road from Terre Rouge/Verdun connecting to Sodnac directly over the M1 highway. It 
will pass just in front of these huge three buildings which are the towers… 

(Interruptions) 

Émérite! So, we are connecting Terre Rouge/Verdun directly to Sodnac, which would mean 
that when you come from Terre Rouge/Verdun you don’t have to go to St Jean and you go 
directly to Sodnac. From Sodnac now you can come in and join the Motorway towards Rose 
Hill because we have just finished the roundabout. 

 

133 

Coming from Port Louis now, when you reach Ebene you turn left and you have a 
roundabout  and  then  you  go  inside  Ebene;  we  are  correcting  that  as  well.  And  when  you 
come from Port Louis, you won’t have to go to St Jean to enter Quatre Bornes. You will take 
that roundabout and cross the M1 and go to Sodnac. So, the idea, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is 
to reduce the fluidity and the number of traffic on the main road from St Jean to La Louise. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  Quatre  Bornes  they  can  go  to  the  south  via  Beaux 
Songes,  La  Marie,  La  Vigie  and  to  the  south.    We  are  going  to  re-engineer  the  whole  of 
Quatre Bornes.  This is how we are going to consider. I will come back to the Metro Express 
a bit later, M. Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bodha: Thank you.  We are constructing a third lane from Bois Cheri to Grand 
Bassin. This is going to be finished in a few months. We are also doing the stabilisation work 
from  Deux  Frères  to  Bel  Air  and  this  is  ongoing.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  year  we 
resurfaced 49 km in two months… 

The Deputy Speaker: Order!  

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha:  Rose Hill is in there.  The hon. Member knows this as I told him so! 

Rose Hill… 

No, Rose Hill is in there; 14 km in two months, finishing in July. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr Deputy Speaker, we built –  

•  13 km of footpath; 
•  15 km of handrail; 
•  11 km of guardrail 
•  108 km of road marking; 
•  800 metre square of traffic signs, and  

 

•  30 km of hard shoulder. 

134 

And we have all the other projects. I am not going to mention those projects because we are 
going to have the Committee Stage and most probably my colleagues will ask a number of 
questions and we will be there to answer. 

Now, let me come to the Metro. Why the metro? Why have we been talking of the 
Metro since 1995 or even before? Why?  The MSM has been consistent on one thing about 
the metro throughout. Since I have been here since 1995; before I was here the metro has 
been a top priority, a consistent project of the MSM. What do you have today? You have Rs 6 
billion of congestion that cost us Rs 4 billion of accidents and Rs 2 billion of subsidy which 
is not accountable because we don’t know how we spent those Rs 2 billion. But, how do we 
correct this? We take the two options: bus lane and metro. Let us take the bus lane now. If we 
ought  to  have  a  bus  lane  from  Curepipe  to  Port  Louis,  we  will  have  to  build  a  lane  from 
Curepipe to St Jean and to Port Louis. We have to build another lane from Vacoas to St Jean 
and to Port Louis. We have to build another lane from Quatre Bornes to St Jean and to Port 
Louis and we have to connect Rose Hill to Réduit on the bus lane.  

First,  how  can  we  heap  on  that  bus  lane  all  these  buses?  Secondly,  what  is  the 
reliability of such a system? And thirdly, what is the reliability that we are going to be on 
time? So, the bus lane is not an option for another reason. I see very few people leaving their 
cars to take a bus to come to Port Louis for a number of other reasons. I am going to give you 
another reason now.  We have two thousand buses in Mauritius. Out of 550,000 vehicles, that 
is, 0.6% of the fleet, do you know what is the percentage of accidents involving buses? It is 
6%! 

So, you have ten times more accidents with the buses in Mauritius than with a car or 
any other vehicle. Now, with the bus lane heaping on where are we going to have the other 
lanes for the other traffic?  

Let me now come to the metro that we are building. A lot of people think that it is just 
a  railway  line  connecting  the  different  cities  in  Mauritius.  That  is  not  at  all  the  case,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. I would like to say that the metro line, the alignment that we have today 
is exactly the same that we had in the past with the railway system, except for two segments.  

 

135 

In Jumbo, we had to cross Sodnac and come to reach the Centre of Quatre Bornes, 
which is today impossible.  Because of the density of population, we cannot do that. That is 
why it has been chosen to go through the St. Jean.  

Now, the other segment where there is  a difference in  alignment is from Pailles to 
Victoria.  In  the  past,  it  went  along  the  motorway,  now  it  is  going  to  the  foot  of  Signal 
Mountain, and then it crosses Moka Street and reaches Caudan. Apart from these two small 
segments, nothing has been changed from the alignment that we had in the past. Now, when 
it  comes  to  Quatre  Bornes  -  the  question  was  asked  –  could  we  build  it  on  structures?  It 
would  have  been  awful!  Terrible!  So,  we  have  asked  the  Singaporeans  to  do  a  thorough 
exercise to consider all the aspects of the Metro entering into Quatre Bornes. And the four 
measures I have mentioned - 

re-engineering of the roundabout of St. Jean; 
connecting the M1 to Sodnac; 
connecting Terre-Rouge/Verdun to Sodnac; 
re-engineering the traffic within Quatre Bornes, and  
the access of Quatre Bornes to the south via Beaux Songes.   

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
These are the measures we have decided and we want to implement those measures 
within two years to be able to free the main corridor because that is the corridor, as I said, in 
the minds of all people living in Quatre Bornes. You have to go to St. Jean, to Rose Hill, to 
Port Louis and to Vacoas.  

When  it  comes  now  as  regards  to  the  number  of  lanes,  the  Metro,  as  has  been 
proposed by the technical team, is going to be in the middle and you will have two lanes of 
traffic: one going to La Louise and one going to St. Jean, and shoulders on the sides. 

Once the contract will be signed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we will come to the House, 
we will come everywhere to explain to people why those technical choices have been made. 
There is one thing I could not come in the House because I am going to explain the figures. 
Give a figure today and tomorrow come back to the House to say: ‘Listen, we were not so 
sure about it.’ I cannot come with a solution today and say that listen, we contemplated that 
solution and we are not able today to implement that solution. I have given the reasons why 
Quatre Bornes, that’s the way it is. And the reasons, what are the mitigating measures that we 
have provided in the next two years, and what we are going to implement in the months to 
come.  

 

136 

Let me come now to the figures! The figure is 17.7.  That figure was mentioned by 
myself in the House here, and this is the figure which the Singapore Corporation Enterprise 
gave  us  with  a  number  of  adjustments  from  the  project  of  Rs24.5  billion  which  was 
advocated by the former Government. And I would like to say that in the Rs24.5 billion, there 
was one item called ‘Preliminaries’ and that was Rs4 billion. And we asked the Singaporeans 
what it is all about, and they said it is a percentage of the project. The figure Rs17.7 billion 
was given to us, and I came here in the House to give this figure.  

Now, there is a project value of Rs20.9 which has been mentioned in the Budget. So, 
there were a lot of questions saying that: “you mentioned 17.7, now you are coming to 20.9. 
How come?” 

This difference, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, relates to site works, consultancy costs, for 
example, Rights from India is going to supervise it, project planning, compensation and some 
other miscellaneous costs. As regards to the project itself, the two bidders have already made 
their offers, the Singapore Corporation Enterprise has considered the two offers, they have 
made a number of queries to the two companies, Larsen & Toubro and Afcons. They went to 
Singapore  and  they  have  arrived  this  morning  to  have  working  sessions  with  the  Metro 
Express Ltd. And they are going to query, have a face-to-face negotiation and discussion with 
Afcons and with Larsen & Toubro tomorrow and the day after. And they are going back to 
Singapore  and  they  are  going  to  come  back.  In  three  weeks,  we  will  be  able  to  be  in  a 
position where we can award the contract mid-July. 

What I can say as regards the 17.7 is that this is a reference figure and we are working 
very hard to be able to have the contract around that sum. We are working very hard to have a 
contract around that sum, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

There was also the issue of the 13km and the 30km. The 13km is linked to one thing; 
is that we have two options. Either we start in Port Louis and in Curepipe at the same time 
and four years later, we meet up in Rose-Hill or we do Port Louis/Rose Hill and it becomes 
operational, and we have a second segment from Rose Hill to Curepipe. 

The 13km, in fact, is from Port Louis to Rose Hill if this option is adopted and the 
Budget provides for this. It was told that 30km in 2030, what does that mean? 30km because 
we were considering the possibility of having an extension between Réduit, and Ébène and 
Rose Hill. Because, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there was another question saying that we are 

 

137 

asking the people from the rural areas to pay for the urban population. But the Metro is a 
national network! The London underground was not built in a day. It has to have a backbone. 
And the backbone is from Curepipe to Port Louis. We want to have a north, south, east, west 
network, and, hopefully, we will have it. 

Yes, this is the backbone.  So, 17.7%, we are working on it to be able to be around 
that figure. 20.7, I have explained, it is linked with a number of other costs which has nothing 
to  do  with  the  project  cost.  And  third,  I  explained  that  why  we  have  put  30km,  it  is  an 
extension. And in the end, we want to have a Metro from Mahebourg to Grand’ Baie and 
from east to west. That is why  I said, we have to make a choice.  Do we want to be with 
2,000 buses, half of them are 12/10 years old, with all our stations remaining the same for the 
last 40 years, with old buses and the parking for buses? This is the Mauritius that we want to 
give to our next generation? No, Deputy Speaker, Sir! We are doing something else. That is 
why I said: “It is not a railway line; it is a re-modelling of urban Mauritius.” 

Let  me  explain  to  you  now!  Curepipe,  Vacoas,  Quatre  Bornes,  Rose  Hill  and  Port 
Louis, Victoria and Immigration, are going to be urban terminals. And urban terminals are 
like airports where the bus will come, where the train will come. You are going to have food 
courts, you are going to have a stall for the hawkers, you are going to have offices, you are 
going to have services, you are going to have shops, you are going to have malls et une place 
de vie. This is what we are doing.  And, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, one of these projects in 
Victoria,  we  launched  a  request  for  proposal  for  Victoria  and  a  consortium  of  six  local 
companies have made an offer of Rs1.5 billion of investment. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is with the Government of Mauritius just leasing the land for 60 
years. 

This project is going to be presented to Cabinet on the 30th  of this month. We are 
working on Immigration Square. We are working on Place Margeot with my colleague, the 
Deputy Prime Minister. We are working on Curepipe. We are working on Vacoas. We are 
working on  Quatre  Bornes. This is going to be  a golden opportunity  for Quatre  Bornes to 
have  an  Urban  Terminal  which  would  be  like  an  airport.  Let  me  tell  you  one  thing,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, from that terminal in 10 minutes, you are in Rose Hill. In 10 minutes, 
you are in Vacoas. In 20 minutes, you are in Port Louis. In 20 minutes, you are in Curepipe.  
You are going on time on the minute.  

 

138 

Now, my friend is saying - I can understand him, but we need to have change. This is 
the  decision!  This  is  the  decision  that  we  have  to  take.  Just  imagine  Mauritius  with  a 
regeneration  of  all  our  Cities.  All  our  bus  parkings  today,  what  are  they?    Ce  sont  des 
cimetières de bus. Est-ce qu’on veut léguer a l’île Maurice de demain et à nos générations.  
Mais non, M. le président.  

We want a remodelling, a regeneration. So, these six terminals will generate private 
investment  to  the  tune  of  about  Rs6  to  Rs7  billion  with  jobs,  with  facilities,    with 
modernisation.  You  know  what  is  going  to  happen  at  Victoria?  We  are  going  to  have  an 
esplanade - 80 metres, crossing the motorway to link the old City and Caudan where people 
don’t want to go because of the underpasses. This is the urban regeneration with the Metro 
Express, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I would like to say today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  you 
have a Metro line in 200 Cities. It is considered to be the safest of modes of transport.  A light 
rail  travels  20  to  25  kilometres  in  the  City  and  can  drive  up  to  80  kilometres  between 
segments where  you do not have residential houses, for example, between Riche  Lieu and 
Pailles. So, it can go up to 80 kilometres, but in the City, it goes to 20 to 25 kilometres, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Let  me  continue.  The  two  producers  now  Bombardier  and  Caffe  have  produced 
25,000 light rail trains. This is what we are bringing to Mauritius, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
As I have said, the light rail is built for Cities. It has an interface with the City with all the 
traffics. It has a system of sensors and an electronic system to be able to drive safely for the 
Metro, for the people and for the other users of the road. LRTs are seen to be extremely safe. 
We believe that we will reduce the number of accidents because we believe that we are going 
to have about 10% to 15% of people driving cars, who will park their cars, and will take the 
Metro. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  I  said,  the  consultants  have  worked  thoroughly  all  the 

options regarding Quatre Bornes. I would like also to say, ... 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Callichurn, please! 

Mr  Bodha:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  all  the  scenarios,  before  2014,  now  and 
before, the Metro was always agreed between St Jean and Quatre Bornes. This is a fallacy to 
say  that  it  was  alleviated  and  we  have  brought  it.  No!  On  the  contrary,  the  solution,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker Sir, is to reduce traffic on this Quatre  Bornes, St Jean Road and to do all that 

 

139 

I have proposed to do within two years. We are budgeting this. This has to be done within 
two years to show to the people of Quatre Bornes that this can be done. Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, as I said, in 20 minutes from Quatre Bornes, you are in Port Louis and on the minute 
because the train arrives on the minute and reaches Port Louis on the minute.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  the  capital  expenditure,  the  former 
Government was supposed to spend Rs24.5 billion. You know why we said we shelved this 
project  because  the  Prime  Minister  was  Minister  of  Finance,  he  was  sitting  here  in  the 
Labour/MSM/PMSD Government, we had thought for the Metro to be in the programme of 
the 2011/2015 mandate. When he did a first meeting, the Metro was about Rs11 billion and 
then it reached Rs12 billion, and then we heard in 2014 that it has jumped to Rs24.5 billion. 
That is why we said we cannot afford this, there is something wrong. Every project of the 
Labour  Government  spirals  with  overrun.  We  all  know  what  happened  to  Terre 
Rouge/Verdun, what happened to the airport. So, when we said Rs24.5 billion, I think, we 
could say Rs30 billion. So, we said we cannot have this project that is why we shelved the 
project. 

Now,  this  project  was  supposed  to  cost  Rs24.5  billion  and  what  did  the  Prime 
Minister then achieved. He got Rs200 m. line of credit from India. What was going to happen 
to  the  rest?  It  was  going  to  be  another  line  of  credit,  another  loan.  So,  that  Metro  was 
supposed to cost Rs24.5 billion funded by loans and that was considered then to be feasible. 
It was considered then to be sustainable. Our friend, hon. Ramano, went to campaign on this 
in Quatre Bornes… 

That was in your manifesto. 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha: He went to campaign on a Metro of Rs24.5 billion on loans, now he is 

asking whether it is feasible. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

 

140 

Mr Bodha: Now, the hon. Member is asking, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, whether this is 
feasible? What is feasible? A Metro which is costing less with half of the money given by 
grant. So, a Metro which was costing Rs24.5 billion on loan by the former Government, on 
the manifesto of the MMM and the Labour Party was feasible, but a Metro costing the people 
of Mauritius around Rs8,9 billion, paid by half the grant of Mauritius, this is not feasible. 
This is not commercially viable. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  should  know  what  we  are  talking  about.  We  have  to 
compare what is to be compared. Now, this Metro, the one that we are doing, is going to cost 
half of the money being a grant from India. Half of it is going to be a line credit of 1.8% with 
four years moratorium on interest and seven years moratorium on capital. But, let me tell you, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are working as soon as we have the figure of the contract. We 
have requested the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise (SCE) to make a business plan for 15 
years to show and I am going to bring this to the House. We have to show it to people that we 
are not bankrupting this country, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. There have been a lot of criticisms 
that we are opaque. There is no transparency. We do not know anything about it. Let me tell 
you one thing, the Leader of the Opposition wrote one line about a Dream Bridge of Rs10 
billion in his Budget of 2011. I am asking him now - he is not here - was it transparent then? 
Was there any feasibility study? They wrote about a tunnel for Rs5.2 billion with tolls. Was it 
seen whether it was feasible, whether the Mauritian people would have paid a toll to take that 
bridge or to take the tunnel. 

The only problem, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is that we have our hands tied. I did not 
want to come to this House with a figure and then come to say that this cannot be done. But 
as soon as we have the figure, we can factor in all the capital expenditure, all the operational 
costs, all the feasibility and we will give it to the public to show that we are building modern 
Mauritius and we are not leading the country to bankruptcy. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  some  have  said  that  the  Metro  Express  is  going  to  cost 
Rs100 billion, Rs50 billion, Rs40 billion, but we are going to come with the figures. What I 
want, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is to have the company which will be awarded the contract to 
do a Press conference to say: “this contract is mine and these are the terms of the contract, 
this is the budget allocated to me and I am going to work within that budget.” This is what we 
want to do. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding subsidy … 

 

141 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, very good! Today, we are spending Rs2 billion. What do we do with it? Whom are we 
subsidising? We have made a figure: 60% of students free travel, 40% of elderly. Who did 
this figure? Who checked this figure for the last 10 years? It was done in 2005 and the hon. 
Leader of the opposition was the Minister of Finance for so many years. 

We have done a PricewaterhouseCoopers survey to say whether it was done properly, 
how to do it next. And we have been told how to do it.  We need to have a smart card which 
will be used for parking, for bus travel and for the Metro. And I am launching the first smart 
card next week with Rose Hill Transport, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, so that you can travel with 
the smart card.  But now, let me tell  you one thing.  I have seen the Metro in a number of 
places and I must say to you, the success of the Metro is to be able to carry every potential 
person in the catchment area. 

We  need  to,  as  we  say  in  Bhojpuri,  chaan  maro,  that  is,  we  have  to  take  all,  the 

potential passengers should be able to take the Metro. How do we do this? This  

is  called  the  last  mile  from  the  station  to  home.  If  you  come  from  a  Metro  every  4  to  5 
minutes and then you wait there and you don’t know how to go home. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, please! 

Mr Bodha: You’ll be tempted; you will stay on the station. So, we are coming with a 
system of feeder buses, which are going to be shuttled in the catchment area regularly so that 
they can just take the person from their home to the train. And we will include the fare in the 
general fare, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. So, we have to work.  That is why I am saying that the 
bus companies need not to worry. 

The  workers  need  not  worry  because  we  will  be  needing  them  as  feeders  in  the 
catchment area. I take, for example, Vacoas, it will go up to Henrietta and to Hermitage. In 
Quatre Bornes, it will go to La Source, it will go to Palma and we are working on this. This is 
our priority, to be able to address the needs of all the potential commuters from their home to 
the Metro, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I ask you one thing? 

(Interruptions) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon Rutnah! 

142 

Mr  Bodha:  Sitting  here,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  listened  carefully  to 
everyone  and  I  have  never  disturbed  anybody.  They  can  bear  testimony  to  that,  so  they 
should  give  way  to  me  because  this  is  a  very  important  national  issue  and  I  want  to  put 
forward our argument. Debate is a debate, as I said, but the choice has to be made in the name 
of history. 

This is what we are doing today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I always say that this is a 
place  where  history  is  written  every  minute,  anything  can  happen.  Hon.  Collendavelloo 
knows  this  very  well.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  he  decided  to  resign  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment, in 1989.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, so, there is no need to… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr  Bodha:  …  instil  fear  in  people  that  we  are  going  to  harass  them;  that  we  are 
going  to  change  the  way  they  live.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  providing  a  sophisticated, 
attractive, reliable and affordable mass transit system to this country Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
And this is what we have to do, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I am convinced that after I have 
given all these arguments, that we have shown our conviction, our sincerity of purpose and 
our loyalty to the nation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is why I mentioned that we stand up here, we speak, we 
make debates, but we have to see what we are doing. We are committed, we sincerely believe 
that this will transform Mauritius and it is Rs5 billion of injection in the economy every year 
for  four  years,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  all  the  jobs  it  will  create,  with  all  the 
opportunities it will create.  Et on aura le chantier national qu’on a toujours voulu avoir et 
qui est en train de se mettre en place, M. le président. 

Before concluding - because I don’t want to address many other issues - I would like 
to say a few things, first of all, on challenges. The MSM Government, with other parties in 

 

143 

the 80s, in the 2000 and in the 2015 has had cycles. In the 80s, we built up the country with 
the industrial revolution and made modern Mauritius. Everybody knows this. 

In 2000, with the MMM, we laid the foundation of another modern Mauritius and we 
had a cyber city where you had sugar cane fields. The debt in 1995 was Rs37 billion, it was 
doubled by two in 2000 and it came to Rs74 billion with the Labour Party and the PMSD. 
Nothing was done.  We moved in 2000 - 2005 from Rs74 billion to Rs110/Rs115 billion and 
be built about 50 schools, we built the cyber city. Of course, the debt increases, but we used 
the money not fer jalsa, we used the money to build the country. 

You have to build your country, infrastructure equals development, developments call 
jobs and prosperity. We have to do that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. So, I will come, now, to a 
few issues - because I heard some comments - on the Betamax saga, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
We went to the people during the campaign to say that c’était un contrat abusif, en béton. So, 
when we came back to power with the hon. leader of the Opposition, it was our duty to see to 
it whether this contract be rescinded. We did, but you can’t negotiate with somebody who 
doesn’t want to negotiate and stay put.  

Now, let me tell you one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In spite of all that have been 
said, I am not going to add. I would like to add one thing. Do you know that the red eagle is 
the only ship of its kind in the world? Do  you  know this? Do  you know why? Because it 
carries all the different types of oil which is never done.  

This  is  never  done.  Why?  Like  jet  fuel  for  the  airplane  has  to  be  carried  out  at  a 
certain temperature so that it doesn’t evaporate, otherwise, it is going to be dangerous. Black 
oil, if you don’t carry it at a higher temperature, it will stiffen to become hard. So usually you 
have a ship carrying black oil and diesel or you will have a ship carrying white oil, jet Fuel 
and  it’s  never  done  in  a  same  boat.  This  is  a  boat  which  is  not  in  fact  -  it  was  made  to 
measure for 15 years, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. So, this is something I wanted to add to the 
debate.  The boat itself, the technicality of it, it is the only boat in the world which can do 
that. C’est très dangereux.  

Let me tell you, now, one word on the drug issue. We were here, my colleagues were 
here, we were in the opposition, we were shouting, on était en train de supplier - le leader de 
l’opposition  a  choisi  ce  mot  -  le  Dr.  Navin  Ramgoolam  pour  qu’il  mette  une  commission 
d’enquête. 10 ans! 

 

144 

For 10 years we did that! You can see the number of questions of all my colleagues, 
but he never did that! We always had the courage to do it. We did it in 1986. We are doing it 
now. I see the results. The seizure! I see the way it is done.  

Now, let me tell you one thing. The hon. Leader of the Opposition, in fact, mentioned 
something which is very interesting. It is about the drug issue in the world today. You know 
that synthetic drugs, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Phentamil? Phentamil is particularly attractive 
to  criminals  because  it  is  so  potent that  with  only  one/two  mg  of  the  stuff  it  is  enough  to 
cause an overdose. It is easy to hide in letters and small packages that are sent by post. The 
rewards are enormous. 1 kg of Ferantil costs $4,000 to buy from China and yields profits of 
$1.6 billion on the streets. By contrast, 1 kg of heroin costs around $6,000, but it is worth a 
few hundred thousand dollars.  

Another figure which is very important, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today, we have 800 
different types of synthetic drugs. 800! The synthetic drugs are made in massive quantities in 
China. They are made in China and flooded in the market, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. That is 
what I wanted to say how horrendous is this challenge and to be able to win this challenge, 
we need the commitment of one and all and to see to it that politics does not prevent us from 
winning  this  battle  because  with  the  Commission  of  Enquiry,  with  what  is  being  done  as 
regards to law enforcement, I am convinced, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that we will win this 
war.  But  then,  the  whole  important  thing,  again,  is  the  role  of  the  parents,  the  role  of  the 
responsible parties. Iceland has won the battle against cigarette, alcohol and drugs. It is very 
interesting to see how they have done it. Do you know how they have done it? Somebody 
who is vulnerable, the young, should never be left alone with his peers.  

It should be the parents or the teachers or the responsible party or somebody to be 
always with him to prevent him from falling prey to these drugs. They did a survey about at 
what age the first cigarette is smoked; at what age the first glass of alcohol is taken. Let’s say 
it is 13. So, they say why don’t we push it? We will work on it so that we push it to 15. It will 
be two years. And then, they have, at 10 o’clock, a curfew. Young people cannot buy alcohol. 
This is where we are! If we want to win this battle, we have to find a solution for Mauritius, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

There are many issues. I would like also to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of 
Education. This extraordinary reform of Nine-Year Schooling, c’est comme une lettre à la 
poste. But can you imagine a reform in schools? How many years it would have taken, how 

 

145 

many debates? We have achieved this. Nobody talks about it! We have reduced the price of 
flour by Rs1 and they are mentioning 10 cents for bread. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me ask  you and the House: what would have happened if  we 
have had increased it by Rs1?  If we had increased it by Rs1, there would have been a PNQ 
of the effects of this. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order 

Mr Bodha:  Then, you would have un debat de misérabiliste pour dire pourquoi this 
Rs1 is going to spiral, a lot of people are not going to have a loaf of bread, but because we 
have reduced it by Rs1; well, it is 10 cents.  I have done a PNQ on an increase of Rs1 as 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. This is politics. I can understand them. 

(Interruptions) 

I can understand them, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. If we had increased it by Rs1, it would have 
been the talk of the town.  But this is politics Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I think that before 
resuming my seat, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir… 

(Interruptions) 

Before ending on the Metro, hon. Rutnah read … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please! 

Mr Bodha: …what hon. Roshi Bhadain said about the Metro last year. So, I am going 

to read it – 

(Interruptions) 

“The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  left  no  stones 
unturned  to  introduce  measures  to  stimulate  economic  growth,  to  kick-start  major 
capital projects, to bring reforms whilst at the same time committing unprecedented 
resources to alleviate poverty.”  

 

146 

This year we have the Negative Income Tax which is a formidable measure.  

This type of Budget, Madam Speaker, is, indeed, very rare!  

(Interruptions) 

It enhances credibility; credibility in terms of our motives, credibility in terms of the 
strength of Government’s economic management policies. 

“Madam  Speaker,  the  decision  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  to  invest  the  grant  of  Rs12.7  billion,  which  I  negotiated  with  the 
Republic of India, in development priorities, shows his wisdom and foresight to bring 
the highest returns both in terms of economic and social benefits.”  

As he stated in his Budget Speech. –  

“(…) the money should be invested so that our children and their children as well can 
benefit” 

 “Revamping our towns  and villages requires  a  durable solution to traffic jams and 
better  town  and  country  planning.  The  previous  Labour  Government  would  have 
spent  Rs24.5  billion  on  what  they  called  a  “Métro  Léger”  project,  which  seemed 
more like a "Métro Lourd" project, Madam Speaker...” 

(Interruptions) 

“…..not only because of the excessive and abusive costs, but also the time wasted to 
conceptualise  their  project,  with  excessive  elevations  and  stations  which  were  not 
priorities and therefore, like the Labour Government, not required.” 

(Interruptions) 

 “Madam  Speaker,  our  "Metro  Express"  will  be  implemented  at  a  much  lower 
expenditure  level  than  what  the  Labour  regime  had  envisaged.  The  grant  obtained 
from  India  will  provide  Rs7.2  billion  to  the  "Metro  Express"  which  will  include  a 
network of modern integrated urban terminals with appropriate provisions made for 
parking facilities, food courts, commercial spaces, dedicated hawker areas and green 
spaces.” 

 

147 

Madam Speaker, my question: what does the population at large want?  The Opposition will 
say  they  want  elections  and  they  want  the  Opposition  in.  Do  you  really  think,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir… 

(Interruptions) 

Do  you  really  think,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  people  of  Mauritius  want  the 
Opposition today to be in Government? 

(Interruptions) 

I am finishing here.  Hon. Baloomoody, do we really think that the population in this country 
want  to  have  the  Opposition  of  today  in  Government  now?  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the 
answer is definitely no.  What this population wants is this Government to succeed and we 
will  succeed.  This  is  what  this  population  wants:  to  see  us  succeed  because  we  have  a 
mandate, and we want to succeed.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  are  born  to  build.    Nous  sommes  les  bâtisseurs.  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have the commitment. The Prime Minister is a man of conviction 
and achievement. We have the conviction, we have the sincerity of purpose and we love this 
country and we are loyal and consistent in the way we relate to other country. We should be 
consistent. I am saying so for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. You need to be consistent. 
We have to build carré-carré according to procedures because we have to go by procedures 
and I here pay tribute to the Deputy Prime Minister and all our partners of the alliance. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am convinced… 

(Interruptions) 

…that  the  promise  of  clean  energy  will  be  met.    I  am  convinced  that  the  promise,  the 
challenge of water on a 24/7 basis will be achieved by the time we will finish our mandate. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are blessed because as soon as the Bagatelle Dam was built, we 
had the rain to swell it and I am convinced that we will accomplish our mission. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Budget is one more step in our new endeavour. It shows 
the way to us, builders. We have always built in the 80s, in the beginning of this millennium. 
Now, we are builders together with the nation and the Prime Minister must be congratulated 

 

148 

for  this.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  convinced  that  the  population  outside  wants  this 
Government to succeed and we have to work hard to succeed and when we stand up next year 
in Parliament, we would have walked a long way towards our future. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 8.48 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 9.56 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  and  Port  Louis  West):  Thank 

you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, on Thursday 08 June 2017, the hon. Minister of Finance presented 
the  Budget  for  the  financial  year  2017-2018.  This  was,  in  fact,  the  second  Budget  of  this 
Finance Minister since the last general election in December 2014. But it is the third one of 
this Government because, in 2014, the people voted for an alliance, then known as Alliance 
Lepep, which was composed at that time of the MSM, PMSD and ML.  

Madam Speaker, I said this is the third Budget of this Government and it is surprising 
to note, and it is revealing that none of the orators on the other side made reference to the first 
Budget of this Government. It is as if hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo is ‘dead’ for them politically. 
He is a liability! Even the Mentor Minister started his speech by saying, I quote - 

“The  Budget  espouses  the  philosophy  and  targets  set  out  in  my  Economic 
Mission  Statement:  Vision  2030.  It  puts  the  people  and  the  country  first.  It  is  a 
continuation  of  the  2016-2017  Budget  which  was  meant  to  usher  a  new  cycle  of 
growth and shape a new, modern and sophisticated Mauritius (...).” 

No  mention  of  the  first  Budget  of  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo.  Two  and  a  half 
years  after,  they  have  already  forgotten,  ‘buried’,  politically  speaking,  hon.  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo. And  today  what do  we have? Hon. Bodha -  I will come to that later  - 
spoke about ‘we have to be sincere to our electorate, to be consistent with ourselves’. What 
do we have in front of us today? What Government? Is that the Alliance Lepep which people 
voted for in 2014?  As rightly pointed out by my senior friend, hon. Bhagwan, we have today 

 

149 

a  Government  made  up  of  the  MSM,  Muvman  Liberater,  and  transfuges.  And  transfuges, 
Madam Speaker! I will come to which transfuges later and about what was said of transfuges. 

And what is worse, what did the Alliance Lepep market in 2014? SAJ, five-year Prime 
Minister!  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  five-year  Minister  of  Finance!    This  was  the  product 
that  was  presented  to  the  people  and  they  were  supposed  to  bring  the  second  miracle 
économique.  

Today what do we have in this Government of MSM, ML and transfuges? A Prime 
Minister  who  has  not  been  chosen  by  the  people,  but  chosen  by  his  father!  And  the  same 
person who was not chosen by the people to be Prime Minister, who was never presented to 
be Minister of Finance, is himself the Minister of Finance! He could not trust anybody in his 
troop to give that Ministry, so he has to keep the Ministry of Finance to himself! He could not 
trust  anybody  following  the  episode  of  bal  couler,  following  the  episode  of  Vishnu 
Lutchmeeraidoo, who used a loan from a public bank to gamble in gold. A bank that he was 
the  Minister  responsible  for!  The  State  Bank!  And,  today,  we  have  a  Prime  Minister 
nominated by this father, and also Minister of Finance. Madam Speaker, this goes against the 
basic principle of a democratic Government, where the wish of the people is of paramount 
importance. This amounts to an act of principality, where the king hands over the kingdom to 
his son.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  national  budget  is  a  central  political  process.  It  is  not  only  a 
process  which  lays  down  the  expenditure  and  income  of  the  Government,  but  provides  a 
platform for a long-term vision for our country, political credibility and confidence for the 
future.  

Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  lacks  clarity  in  direction  and  depth. 
There does not seem to be a coherent link between vision and action, between strategy and 
objectives. There is confusion and inconsistency between the economic policies and some ill-
advised policies. Above all, it is a Budget which is unrealistic and unsustainable. The nation 
out there, Madam Speaker, was expecting a Budget which was going to give this country a 
vigorous impetus to turn back the negativism that we have seen in the past three years. But 
we are left with a Budget qui manque de souffle - it’s not me who is saying so - as rightly 
pointed out by a respectable economist, Mr Pierre Dinan, in the paper after the Budget was 
presented.  

 

150 

Madam Speaker, as far as people out there are concerned, we are debating this year’s 
Budget and it is good that this is broadcast on television now. But for the people out there, 
this Budget was un fait divers, an annual repetitive show of intention. People have no trust in 
the  words  of  this  Government  anymore.  This  Government  has  promised  so  much  when  in 
reality it has done nothing. And what is worse, it has done exactly the contrary of what they 
were supposed to do.  

This Government has failed the country for the last two and a half years. And can we 
blame the people out there for not having any trust in the discours, in the oral of the Minister 
of Finance?  

Let’s  see  for  the  last  two  years  what  have  been  promised!  Fabrication  locale  de 
bicyclettes  et  de  motocyclettes,  zero!  Création  d’un  village  pharmaceutique  à  Rose  Belle, 
zéro !  Installation  d’une  raffinerie  d’or  et  de  production  de  lingots !  Zéro !    Hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo was probably tempted by that, he looks after his own interest. Création de 
technopole dotée d’imprimerie 3D à Rivière du Rempart et à Rose Belle, zéro ! Création d’un 
aquarium de niveau international, zéro ! Développement du port pour faire un hub régional 
pour le bunkering, le sea food, le transbordement et les croisières, zéro ! Introduction d’un 
ferry entre Pointe-aux-Sables/Port Louis et Baie du Tombeau, zéro. Création d’une Chambre 
des  métiers  pour  les  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises,  zéro !  Création  d’une  compagnie 
maritime  régionale,  zéro !  Convertir  La  Citadelle  en  une  espace  artistique,  my  goodness, 
zéro !    A  bank  pour  les  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises,  zéro !  And  the  list  is  long. 
Unfortunately, it is late and there are many orators who will be speaking after me, otherwise I 
would have carried on.  

Madam Speaker, I stated earlier, people have no trust in this Government. They are 
angry, they are disgusted when they see what Government they have today, and what were 
promised in December 2014.  

Let us come to the transfuges.  This Government now has in its troop five transfuges; 
one  Minister  transfuge,  one  PPS  transfuge.  What  did  they  say  in  their  Programme?  At 
Paragraph  256  of  the  Government  Programme  of  2015-2019  -  their  programme  -  it  was 
written the following, I quote - 

“An ‘anti defection’ legislation will be introduced to make it more difficult for 

MPs to cross the floor.”  

 

More difficult?  

151 

Today, they are making it easier by thanking them for a post of either PPS or Minister and 
God knows what they have received behind the scene! And you want the people out there to 
trust you? 

(Interruptions) 

And hon. Bodha tells us we have to be consistent? We politicians have to give example of 
consistency? I will come, there is a lot more than that! 

Let us now come to corruption. Corruption! That was one of their main issues during 
the  campaign,  corruption.  Chapter  4  of  the  Presidential  Address  which  relates  to  good 
governance and paragraph 246 mentions, and I quote –  

“Government has a mandate for change and will relentlessly fight fraud, corruption 
and financial crime. To that effect, a Financial Crime Commission will be set up to 
act  as  an  apex  body  to  oversee  the  ICAC,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  the 
Enforcement Department of the Financial Services Commission.” 

Two and a half years have gone now! 

(Interruptions) 

Your Government  I  am  talking about! You should take collective responsibility, don’t say 
Bhadain! Think what you have done! 

(Interruptions) 

What the Prime Minister has done. He was the Prime Minister! Two and a half years after 
where is your fight for corruption? Where is the Financial Crime Commission? In fact ICAC 
today, it is unfortunate to say, it is not the ICAC that the MSM/MMM Government created in 
2002 or 2003. Hon. Collendavelloo chaired a commission, I was in that commission… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t address another hon. Member. You can’t talk to him. 

Mr Baloomoody: Hon. Gayan was there. We prepared a report. We prepared a Bill to 
create the ICAC and today what is the ICAC that we have? Both the Labour Party and this 
Government have destroyed the ICAC we set up in 2002 – 2003. 

 

152 

And, what is worse, Madam Speaker, and I will go a bit lengthily on that because I 
was thrown out on last Tuesday I think when I mentioned Boskalis. When I was thrown out 
everybody out there asked “hey ki ete sa Boskalis la”,  some thought that it is a sweet, a cake, 
an insult and you were expelled because you mentioned Boskalis.. 

Madam Speaker: Oh no! You were not expelled because you mentioned… 

Mr Baloomoody: …because I was referring to… 

Madam Speaker: You were expelled because you ignored the Chair! 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, but I don’t want to go back to that issue… 

(Interruptions) 

I was not the only one ignoring the Chair. There was a brouhaha I got that you heard only my 
voice. Never mind! I was expelled. Let me come to Boskalis in detail for people out there, for 
our nation to know who is advising, who is the Senior Adviser of the Prime Minister and we 
will know why is it that there is that perception that there is allegation of fraud and corruption 
everywhere at the top level of Government! 

(Interruptions) 

No, there is not. Boskalis is finished. I am not talking about the case against Mr Maunthrooa, 
I am talking about the case of Boskalis on which judgement has been ordered and sentence 
has passed and I know that case and hon. Collendavelloo knows that case very well. Boskalis 
is a German company which deals with the drainage of port… 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  a  Dutch  company,  sorry.  Dutch  company,  drainage  of  port  -  at  that  time  there  was  a 
tender… 

(Interruptions) 

The Directors of Boskalis were charged under 8 counts… 

(Interruptions) 

8 counts… 

 

153 

(Interruptions) 

They had pleaded guilty. What do you mean by judgement? The judgement is here! 8 counts! 
And among the 3 counts, 4 were against one gentleman and 4 counts were against – I will 
read the charge, count 7 –  

“In or about the year 2006 one Boskalis International represented by Mr Ian Cornelis 
Hack in the present case having the registered office address as (…)” 

In Germany –  

“(…) did wilfully and unlawfully agree with one Ramprakash Maunthrooa, 57 years 
old, Consultant residing at Avenue Prudent Floreal…” 

 

 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, on a point of …. 

Mr Baloomoody: “…to do an act which is unlawful…” 

“…and Boskalis pleaded guilty.” 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Baloomoody! Please give way! Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is talking about a case which is still 
pending.  I  know  that  this  is  a  different  case.  But  it  has  a  bearing  on  the  case  that  is  still 
pending. 

So, I will… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

154 

I think it is a cursus in the Parliament that we should not talk about matters which are still sub 
judice. So, I will urge the Member to refrain from talking about it. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: It is in the Court record, the judgement is on the website. 

Madam Speaker: Has a judgement been given in this case? 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, of course. 

Madam Speaker: And if this…  

Mr Baloomoody: I will come to the judgement and table the judgement! 

Madam Speaker: Hold on! Why are you getting excited? 

Please sit down!  

I am asking you a question! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Will this Boskalis case have a bearing on the case which is in Court right now and which is 
being shaped? 

(Interruptions) 

This is the question I have because if that Boskalis case has a bearing on that case which is in 
Court, then the matter is sub judice and it cannot be discussed over here! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: As a matter of procedure and evidence, a judgement in one case is 
not admissible in another case. So, I am going to file the judgement which I will lay on the 
Table.  Judgement  2013,  Intermediate  Court  288  and  the  particulars  of  the  charge  is  more 
interesting -  

“25,000 dollars were given to Mr Ramprakash Maunthrooa.” 

 

This is count 7. Now we have count 8… 

155 

(Interruptions) 

“(…) same did wilfully and unlawfully agree with one Ramprakash Maunthrooa, this 
time 60,000 US dollar and the company was represented by counsel…” 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  hon.  Baloomoody,  I  am  sorry,  please  can  you  table  your 
document and I will take few minutes, I will study this and then I will come back for a ruling! 

Table your document! 

Table your document! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Table your document! I suspend the sitting for 15 minutes! 

At 10.14 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 10.33 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair! 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  have  examined  the  judgement  in  the  case  of 
Police v Boskalis International bv and anor. In this judgement conviction has been secured 
against  Boskalis  International  bv  and  anor.  To  all  intent  and  purposes  in  this  case  Mr 
Ramprakash Maunthrooa has not been convicted.  

The case of Police v Ramprakash Maunthrooa and anor is still pending before Court. 
Any accused party is presumed to be innocent until proved guilty. So, if you are referring to 
this case then the matter is sub judice. The hon. Member cannot therefore infer from the case 
of Police v Boskalis that Mr Ramprakash Maunthrooa is guilty. 

Please continue! 

Mr Baloomoody: Thank you for the ruling. I am not inferring anything. I was just 
reading the judgement in the case of Boskalis which has already been tried and where the 

 

156 

accused  company which was accused of  giving  bribe to X, Y and Z, including our Senior 
Adviser and he has pleaded guilty. That is all I was doing! 

Now, to complete the series, I will file a ruling, this time in the case of our Senior 
Adviser,  Mr  Ramprakash  which  is  cause  number  2012  PL3  81  where  that  gentleman  is 
provisionally charged with the offence of money laundering, aiding and abating the author of 
a crime and in breach of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act. This is 
the case where our Advisor is involved. I am not inferring anything! Let him defend himself, 
he is an adult and I am sure he will be able.  

But,  of  course,  Madam  Speaker,  when  you  have  this  type  of  people  advising  our 
Prime Minister, it is a matter of concern and you can’t blame the people out there if they are 
not convinced that this Government has the credibility, has the authority be it moral to fight 
corruption.  You  cannot  blame  the  people  out  there.  In  fact,  when  it  comes  to  corruption 
Madam Speaker, the credibility of this Government is negative.  

Now  I  will  quote  from  Hansard  before  I  go  to  another  chapter  where  when  I  first 
addressed the House on the first Budget which nobody wants to talk about now, Budget of 
hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, I was allowed to make reference to the case of Boskalis. It is 
in Hansard, and today I have been denied to make reference to the case of Boskalis. 

Madam Speaker: My ruling is final hon. Member. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    Yes,  but  I  am  saying  that  I  was  allowed  to  say  that  when  I 
addressed the House on the first occasion on the Budget of hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo. I am just 
repeating  what  I  did  2  years  ago,  but  now  I  am  being  informed  that  I  cannot  speak  about 
Boskalis. Okay I obey your Ruling… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Member, no! No! I did not tell you that you cannot speak 
about Boskalis. I told you that if you take from the case of Police vs Boskalis, and you infer 
that Mr Prakash Maunthrooa is guilty, then I told you that you cannot do this. 

Mr Baloomoody: He is not guilty, but it is a fact, he is on bail for corruption offences 

and money laundering offences. Let’s leave it here. Let’s go to other issues.  

Now let me turn to the issue of wastage ad abuse in the use of public funds. Let me 
refer, Madam Speaker, to paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Government Programme. Paragraph 8 of 
the Government Program reads as follows –  

 

157 

 “Government is committed to conducting business on the principles of discipline, 
transparency, accountability and exemplary governance.” 

And paragraph 9 reads as follow-  

 

This implies: 

• 

‘Responsible and judicious use of public funds and a crusade to weed out 
wastage;’ 

And there a list, I am not going to read the whole list. Let me read this one. Listen to this one. 
This is interesting. That will interest probably hon. Gayan -  

• 

‘Freeing  our  society  from  the  shackles  of  widespread  corruption, 
favoritism, nepotism, mafias and political interference,’ 

This is the Government Programme. This is what this Government was elected to do. What 
has  happened  since  December  2014,  Madam  Speaker?  One  thing  is  certain,  2  things  are 
certain, 3 things are certain; mafia has inflated most of our public intuitions, I did not say 
that. Hon. Pravind Jugnauth says it; two and a half after this Government mafia has infiltrated 
most  of  our  institutions.  Favouritism  has  been  the  practice  of  the  day.  Fortunately,  hon. 
Fowdar was not here. I am sure he would have tape la table when I am saying so. Nepotism! 

When it comes to drugs, when you say the mafia, when you are talking about mafia, 
what a coincidence Madam Speaker! What a coincidence! When I read the papers today at 
what is happening before the Commission of inquiry on drugs, it reminds me the Commission 
Rault. I was Counsel together with my friend Collendavelloo, not for a trafiquant, but for a 
senior politician at that time, before Commission Rault. The MSM was in power at that time, 
coincidence wants it that again today, the MSM is in power. Mafia at that time had infiltrated 
the Police, the prisons, the customs, even Parliament. We should not forget about the four 
MPs from MSM who were arrested in Amsterdam with a VIP passport, a diplomatic passport, 
with drugs.  

(Interruptions) 

Sorry? They were MSM, Government of MSM, I do not know. There had some transfuges 
who had joined the MSM; you want it that way?  

(Interruptions) 

158 

 

Pelladoah was not MSM? 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Non! Hon.Baloomoody! Do not let yourself be interrupted by what they are saying!  

(Interruptions) 

But then do not let yourself be interrupted by them, please proceed with your speech but I 
would ask on the other side not to interrupt him. 

Mr Baloomoody: Anyway, they were Members of the Government?  I do not know 
what they were because this Government as well we do not know who they are; transfuges or 
what?  They  had  diplomatic  passports  issued  to  them  by  the  Prime  Minister.  They  went 
through the VIP authorised by the then Prime Minister, and they were arrested. When you 
look at the paper today it is as if history repeating itself: ‘Mafia la drogue was climbing the 
stairs  of  power  in  that  day,  and  today  we  have  Mr  D.  D,  I  won’t  mention  his  name,  ene 
zenfant lakaz Sun Trust, zenfant la cuisine, arrested for drugs. What a coincidence! 

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  come  with  regard  to  appointment  of  close  relatives, 
nepotism,  copain-copines,  urging  huge  sums  of  money.  They  decided  by  themselves  –  we 
will make an allowance of Rs100,000 for the next months. am not going to through the list, it 
is too long: the 19 million barrister-lawyer fees; the Trust Fund for the heart - scandal; ICTA; 
IBA; so many advisors etc, etc 

This  is  a  Government  which  was  elected  to  free  our  country  from  corruption, 
favouritism,  nepotism,  mafia  and  political  interference.  Let  us  not  talk  about  political 
interference when we know.  

Today, Madam Speaker, what is funny? If you make a declaration against a Member 
of the Government, you become the victim. Somebody says he has brided one Minister, the 
Minister goes and makes a declaration, they arrest the one who has made that declaration. If 
you make a declaration today against a Member of the Government, your declaration is not 
investigated upon; you are being investigated upon. Interferences politiques!  

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training is not here, 
but I shall speak with regard to industrial relations in the public sector. You know there was 

 

159 

big tamtam here when we voted the Police. Now the Police will have their union. Now the 
Police  will  fight  their  case.  Now  you  see  we  have  done  that.  I  remember  I  told  them  this 
won’t work in practice. In fact, Police will be victimised, there will be more problems. Let’s 
see in the public sector. I do not know whether it is with benediction of the Government or 
not. The Post Office Madam Speaker! I won’t talk much about the Post Office because I am 
Counsel in this case. The President of the Union is suspended and is being called before a 
disciplinary committee. A case is before the Supreme Court now. I will not talk about that. 

With regard to the prison, again, the Secretary General of the Union of the prisons is 
being  suspended  because  he  has  said  things  in  the  course  of  negotiations  at  the 
Commission for  Conciliation and Mediation and  he  is  supposed  to  appear  before  the 
disciplinary  committee  very  soon.  The  Police  officer  who  is  the  President  of  one  of  the 
biggest unions, because he made a statement for the welfare of the Police Officers, within 12 
hours, he has been transferred. Knowing that in Port Louis he will do his activities as a trade 
unionist, they transfer him to Mahebourg.  There is not even 12 hours he has been transferred. 
Knowing that in Port Louis he will have to do his activities as a trade unionist, they transfer 
him  to  Mahebourg.  Being  a  Prosecutor  of  the  Intermediate  Court,  he  was  degraded  and 
transferred to the Mahebourg District Court just because he is the President of a trade union 
and nothing from that Minister of Labour who was supposed to safeguard the interest of our 
trade  unionist.    No  mention  was  made  whatsoever  in  his  speech  with  regard  to  the  way 
certain public services are treating union leaders, intimidating them, discrimination against 
them,  taking  disciplinary  action  against  them  just  because  they  are  fighting  the  interest  of 
their members.  What is worst, Madam Speaker? 

On 27 March, the Police Officers Solidarity Union held a Press conference at Marie 
Reine de la Paix.  I do not know who took the decision, whether it was the Commissioner of 
Police or the one responsible for the Central CID, but members of the Central CID were sent 
there to intimidate people not to attend that meeting and the matter was reported.  They came 
in a Government car, 134 GN 10.  Members of the Central CID were sent there to intimidate 
them so that they could not hold their Press conference.  This is with the blessing, I do not 
know whether with or without, but I hope the Minister for Industrial Relations will intervene 
to ensure that trade unions, be it in the private sector or in the public sector, wherever they 
exist, be allowed to carry on their business as trade unionists.   

(Interruptions) 

 

160 

When the representative of the trade union of the prison speaks to the Commissioner 
of prison, do you know what he has to say? ‘You know, the Standing Orders still mention 
about Prison Council.  There is no mention in the prison of a trade union.’  This has been here 
since the Employment Rights Act for more than 10 years.  They have not even bothered to 
amend the Standing Orders and today the union of the prison is not being recognised because 
they still have in their Standing Orders, Prison Council.   

Even in the Police Force, the Employment Rights Act stipulates that – 

“Any person who appears before the Disciplinary Committee is allowed to be 
accompanied  by  a  representative  of  the  Labour  office  or  a  Counsel  of  his 
choice.”  

Although, we have a union, now, in the Police, Counsel are still barred from assisting their 
clients in case of a Disciplinary Committee. Nothing is being done to change that Standing 
Order. Nothing is being done by the Minister of Labour to ensure that those who appear in a 
Disciplinary Committee are allowed to have Counsel of their choice to assist them at the level 
of the Disciplinary Committee. Not at the level of the enquiry when a Magistrate chairs the 
Disciplinary Committee, but at the level of the enquiry, like we have an Internal Disciplinary 
Committee. But in an Internal Disciplinary Committee, they are not allowed. 

Now, let me come to the Police Force. When the hon. Minister of Finance addressed 

the issue of the Police, he said loudly, I am now - 

“Tackling law and order  

Let me now turn to law and order.  

I am providing Rs8.4 billion to the Police Department as follows:” 

And  he  gives  the  details.    Do  you  know  how  much  it  was  last  year  for  the  Police  Force? 
Rs8.7 billion last year! This year, with Rs8.5 billion, they want us to believe they are going to 
tackle  the  problem  of  law  and  order  when  the  funds  are  not  even  being  provided.  What  a 
joke! There are many other issues in the Police Force. The morale is very low. For those who 
practice at the Bar and who meet the Police officers nearly every day, we know about it. My 
friend, hon. Teeluckdharry, knows it very well.  

 

161 

Several recommendations of the PRB have not been implemented yet such as bank of 
Police officers for overtime. They were supposed to have an enquiry allowance when they do 
enquiry. This has not been paid yet. Extra duty allowance has not been paid yet. Cash in lieu 
when  working  on  public  holidays,  payment  are  made  6  to  8  months  after.  Do  you  know, 
Madam Speaker, those poor Police officers who have been working on 01 and 02 January, 
when the nation is celebrating, they are working. Up to today, they have not been paid their 
allowance for working on public holidays.  

We have the Police Academy in all the budgets for the last five or six years that I have 
been  here.  In  most  of  the  budgets,  the  Police  Academy  keeps  repeating.  Lack  of  training! 
Lack of equipment! Now, we are in winter and up to now their cardigans and their socks have 
not  been  provided.  There  is  a  shortage.  They  were  being  told  to  wear  the  last  two  years’ 
cardigans. Is this the Police Force we want? Those who were recruited in 2014 have not been 
confirmed up to now. Nearly 3 years after! Do you want these people to be motivated? This is 
in breach of the DFSC Regulation, which stipulates that - 

 “Appointment  has  to  be  confirmed  within  a  period  of  not  more  than  12 
months.”  

Hon. Boissézon, probably have to look into that matter. Two and a half years later, they are 
not confirmed and we want them to have the courage, the morale to fight law and order.  

I better not talk about the Police stations, most of them. But there is one which still 
has  to  be  mentioned.  It  has  been  mentioned  nearly  every  year,  the  one  at  Moka.    My 
Goodness! I was there a few weeks ago, when you enter, there is no books on the table, ena 
lamoc. Quatre Lamocs lor la table because it is leaking. Not even the occurrence book. 

(Interruptions) 

In fact, I met, you know who! The officers there were all complaining. We had to go in a 
small  room  behind  where  it  is  not  leaking  to  give  the  statement  of  my  client.  This  is  our 
modern Police Force. Singapore nu pu vini! The Police is celebrating the 250 years this year. 
If you go in front of these Police stations, you have to laugh. What is written on: ‘Service 
with care, pride and honour’. How can you service with care, pride and honour in such Police 
stations where lamoc is on the table when you enter that Police station. 

 

162 

Now,  the  prison,  this  is  another  disaster.  You  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  some 
people prefer to stay in the prison, especially drug addicts. Gagn zaffaire la plis facil la-bas, 
missier,  ki  dehor.    Laisse  mwa  endans  meme.  Their  parents  come  and  see  me  to  make  an 
application for bail. When you go and visit them, they say: ‘No, no, ... 

You agree with me! 

 (Interruptions) 

They say: ‘No, no korek la.  Ici mo gagn mo ration, mo gagne mo dose. » 

The union is being victimised. What about access to prison? I raised an issue once 

with regard to religious persons who are allowed to enter prisons. 

Up to now, I have not received an answer. Religious persons were allowed to enter 

prison without the consent of the Prime Minister’s Office. 

(Interruptions) 

No, not this one.  There are cameras which are not working. We have visited the prison when 
I was a Member of the PAC, lots of cameras are not working. They are here just for the sake. 
If one day they decide to have all of them functioning, only two people will have to watch 80 
cameras, 4 lizier pou get 80 cameras. Again, I put a question to the hon. Minister Mentor; I 
am still waiting for the answer. 

The Budget made provision for the installation of two scan cameras, scan machines 
when you enter. Interesting! But, what the point of having the scan machines if they do not 
use them? Are  you aware, Madam Speaker, that  there is a team there called ‘24/7’. These 
people are allowed to enter the prison any time they want and leave the prison any time they 
want without being searched. I asked a question to the hon. Minister Mentor and this is my 
information. 

They  come,  now  you  are  searched  when  you  enter,  we  were  searched  when  we 
entered as Members of Parliament. But this search stops at 4.00 p.m. L’equipe 24/7 comes 
after 4.00 p.m. 

(Interruptions) 

 

163 

Yes, in the prison there is a team called 24/7. They are supposed to be the top guys who at 
any time can enter  a police cell, search without the permission of anyone who is on duty. 
They have that authority which has been given to them by the Commissioner of Prisons, 24/7 
team. 

Again, I raised that issue but it is becoming worse, relationship between the prison 
and the Human Rights Commission, especially the National Preventive Mechanism Division 
(NPMD). Since the Chairperson of that Division has made in report with regard to the death, 
alleged to suicide of Arvind Hurrychurn in the Moka Detention Centre le 31 Octobre 2016, 
this Division is supposed to go and visit prisoners, is supposed to go and see cases of brutality 
reported against them by members of the Prison. Since that report has been outdated le 01 
Novembre 2016¸ there is no collaboration between that Unit of the Human Right Commission 
with  the  Prison  Officers.  And  my  information,  it  is  not  to  be  verified,  it  is  confirmed 
information, the number of brutality in the prison is on the increase and if things goes as it is, 
we are flirting with a révolution in the prison, wittily if action is not taken. 

Now, I wanted to raise these issues under the heading of the Minister Mentor and also 
Ministry of Labour because they concern industrial relations and the safeguards, the interest 
of Prison Officers and Police Officers. 

In the Budget itself, the Minister of Labour was very interesting, excited to say: “Yes, 
we managed to put job placement, 4,787 people.” Excellent placement! But, how many was 
placed  in  a  job  for  the  year  2016/2017?  These  are  the  official  figures.  4,787  put  on  job 
placement, only 906 managed to secure a job. Manipulating the figures, just to come and tell 
us that employment is low or is getting down. 

There is also the issue which has been raised many times in this House regarding the 
ladies, who are working at the Ministry of Education, earning only Rs1,500 per month. No 
mention!  Two months ago I think it was in April, I raised the matter at Adjournment Time. I 
was informed by the Ministry of Labour that an enquiry is being carried out at the level of the 
Ministry of Education and very soon we will know about the outcome; 2 months outcome 
now. 

I  am  happy  the  Minister  of  Education  will  speak  after  me,  and  I  am  sure  she  will 
enlighten  us  about  the  fate  of  these  ladies  who  are  still  earning  Rs1,500  cleaning  primary 
school.  Cleaning  the  toilet,  the  yard  -  R  1500!  Nothing  on  portable  severance  allowance! 

 

164 

Minister of Labour, no mention! There is some concern with regard to the question of having 
a National Investment Authority. The unions are very concerned and you don’t blame them 
because Government intends to use the money of the National Pension Fund who have their 
own  Internal  Investment  Committee  and  the  National  Saving  Funds  to  be  in  Mauritius 
National Investment Authority. 

And here, we are talking about the salaries of workers, their sweat, some even give 
their blood to have their money in that institution to secure a pension. And when we know the 
way this Government appoints ti copain, ti copine, favouritism to head authorities, when we 
know political interference, we know what happened, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, when he stood 
up that evening or the day after when there was a PNQ with regard to the BAI and Bramer 
Bank. 

Candidly, he said: “No problem State Bank will take Bramer Bank, SICOM will take 
National Insurance Company - BAI, the insurance part.” As if this belongs to Government. 
Zouer avec l’argent, la sueur travailler, and this, we are against and we are happy that the 
Trade  Unions,  and  we  will  support  the  Trade  Unions  to  make  sure  that  their  money,  their 
sweat, their contribution is not misused, abused, dilapidated by Government’s Authorities. 

to  my 

Then, there is that issue of Duty Free Car for Confédération des Syndicats. There are 
not  many  confederations.  According 
there  are,  apparently,  9 
confederations and 27 federations. They have not asked for mini bus. Now, what has been 
proposed  in  the  Budget?  They  are  nearly  asking  for  a  4x4  duty  free.  What  we  are  talking 
about 27 4x4 duty free for 24 fédérations.  They have to go on the site to see the conditions 
under which the workers are working. They don’t sit in the office like some of our colleagues 
on the other side do. They go around, alle lor terrain. 

information, 

There is also a matter of concern regarding the amendment to the National Identity 
Card Act.  When we know all the problems we have had, we had to postpone cases in courts; 
Privy  Council  cases.    My  friend  on  the  other  side,  hon.  Teeluckdharry  knows  very  much 
about it.  And we manage to get at least one thing, that this data  belongs to the owner of the 
card and will not be used for any other purpose whatsoever without his consent.  And this 
was said by the Privy Council in the judgment of Madhewoo v The State of  Mauritius. A 
Privy Council’s judgement! Because what we have in that card is a private right, it is the right 
that belongs to that person. His personal rights! This has not been followed by only the Privy 
Council. It reflects in that judgement, this is the sentiment across Europe with regard to the 

 

165 

European Convention of Human Rights. Now, we want to amend this Identity Card Act to let 
private people have access to information, to let third parties have access. Page 41 reads as 
follows - 

“C.7 National Identity Card Act 

The National Identity Card Act will be amended to allow reading card data by 
both  public  and  private  agencies  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Ministry  of 
Technology, Communication and Innovation according to set criteria.” 

So,  now  we  are  going  completely  away  in  breach  of  International  Regulation  and 
International Human Rights issues. We are giving a third party access to data which is found 
in our identity card and this will create… 

(Interruptions) 

You have already spoken; unfortunatelym you have not explained. You should have done it 
before! 

(Interruptions) 

You should read the papers, read the concerns of the people out there. Read the papers! All 
the unions and everybody are concerned. All human rights people are concerned. You should 
have come with a statement on that issue. We are talking about national identity card. 

(Interruptions) 

Now, there is also the amendment to the Banking Act.  In the annex to the Budget at 

section A.8 Tax Administration, under paragraph (b), it reads - 

“In line with the international move towards automatic information exchange – look 
what pretext! - and in order to enable the proper tracking through the movements of 
substantial funds linked with drug dealing and money laundering schemes, the Income 
Tax  Act  will  be  amended  to  empower  MRA  to  request  from  banks,  insurance 
companies and non-bank deposit taking institutions, an Annual Statement of Financial 
Transactions  in  cases  where  a  transaction  by  any  person  (individual,  company, 
société, trust or succession) exceeds Rs500,000 or if the aggregate amount of deposit 
in an income year exceeds Rs4 million.” 

 

166 

For this we have no problem if there is suspicion of drug trafficking, money laundering or 
even terrorism.  But, look at paragraph (b)(ii) Obligation to furnish information - 

“Necessary  amendments  will  be  made  to  ensure  that  the  obligation  on  a  person  to 
furnish data and information at the request of MRA for purposes of enforcement of 
tax laws ... ”. 

So, now it is for purpose of enforcement tax laws!  Paragraph (b) (ii)does not talk about drugs 
or money laundering.   

“…will  not  be  constrained  by  the  confidentiality  provisions  of  the  Data  Protection 
Act, Information and Communication Technologies Act and the Companies Act.” 

So, now for enforcement tax laws, if you do a transaction of Rs500,000 and your turnover is 
over Rs4 m., like any supermarket, the MRA just ask for all - now the MRA is allowed only 
to  ask  for  interest  paid  on  your  deposits  without  a  Judge’s  order,  but  now  they  would  be 
allowed to ask for all details of transaction. 

Pretexting  compliance  with  the  international  norms  and  particularly  in  strategy  to 
combat  drug  dealing  and  money  laundering,  Government  is  empowering  the  MRA  to 
encroach  brutally  on  two  fundamental  elements  of  individual  privacy.  First,  and  this  is 
important, on the right to the confidentiality of his bank account and, secondly, on his right to 
the protection of his personal data. So, today the MRA under the pretext that you are doing a 
transaction of Rs500,000, and your turnover is Rs4 m., it can go to that bank and say that it 
wants  all  the  accounts  of  this  company  or  gentleman,  and  the  bank  has  to  do  it  without  a 
judge’s order. So, we are creating a ‘Big Brother’. And when we know of the misuse and the 
abuse there have been by  certain institutions recently for political vendetta, we have to be 
careful. 

This is not necessary because, as I have said, the reasons spelt out in an annex to the 
Budget, namely drug dealing and money laundering are themselves enough. A robust arsenal 
of  power  is  already  vested  in  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  to  the  ICAC  under  the 
FIAMLA  and  the  PoCA  respectively.  Care  and  cautions  have  been  used  to  strike  a  right 
balance  between  the  necessity  to  protect  the  right  to  bank  confidentiality  and  the  need  of 
information  for  public  authorities  to  carry  out  their  function.  The  MRA  is  by  far  not  the 
primary  institution  having  responsibility  to  investigate  into  drug  dealing  and  money 

 

167 

laundering. MRA’s statutory purpose is to administer and collect taxes. It is only marginally 
and incidentally involved in the investigation of drug trafficking or money laundering. 

It is good to note that in the Peer Review Supplementary Report of the OECD under 
paragraph 112, banking information dealing with availability of banking information on all 
accounts holders, the phase 2 findings published on the 24 April 2014 show that Mauritius 
was fully  compliant. So, if we are fully  compliant why do we have to  give the MRA that 
power? Is it again to punish people? 

 As regard to the derogation to the Data Protection Act to allow access to personal 
data by the MRA, it is wondered how this measure can be linked up with the collection of 
taxes. The Act is itself the safeguard for the protection of the information and amendments 
sought to relax this protection is today the least dubious while the reason for this derogation 
remains  nebulous.  So,  this  is,  Madam  Speaker,  another  dangerous  amendment  the 
Government intends to come with. 

Let me say a few words on art and culture because I have been approached by certain 
artists in my constituency, Constituency No. 1. There is a request that the IBA Act be revised 
to make it a must on our radios for public broadcasters to have a minimum of local songs be 
produced because, nowadays, they are only around 8% and 82% of the Copyright money, the 
cash money goes to foreigners. Apparently, Michael Jackson is still the first one, whilst our 
local  artist  is  earning  peanuts.  So,  the  Minister of  Arts  and  Culture  will  have  to  look  into 
amending probably the IBA, impose upon them that they should at least pay … 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, why not! You can! You impose upon them whenever you want to broadcast! 

Madam Speaker: No, you can’t engage in any conversation with somebody who has 

the floor. 

Mr Baloomoody: If you don’t want to do it, tell them you don’t want to do it. Stand 

up and say you don’t want to do it. Finish!  

(Interruptions) 

There is also the question that we congratulate Government for giving our sportsmen - 
although  it’s  the  beginning,  but  I  am  sure  it  will  increase  to  come  to  the  sum  which  my 

 

168 

learned friend has exposed - for athletes, but we have to think about artists as well. When 
they get all these people, they are not invited to sing in hotels. This is what I am being told. 
They are not invited to sing in hotels or in shows at night.  So, we should at least look for a 
formula for them at their old age to earn a honest living.  

As we have given loan facilities for SMEs by the banks, some loans have also been 
written off. There is a request from the artists that when they buy their equipment, they want 
to renew the equipment that they have these facilities of low interest, non-guaranteed loan. 
And those who are indebted be given the opportunity to have all or part of their loans written 
off as we have done in other cases. So, these are issues that probably the Minister of Arts and 
Culture can have a look at.  

Hon. Gayan is listening to me. Probably, there are artists playing in hotels.  It would 
seem that most of the hotels now have their own in-house group of artists and there are our 
international artists whom  you take with  you when  you  go abroad for international forum. 
Unfortunately, now they are getting less and less access to hotels. So, probably here again, 
it’s like taxis in the hotels. They have their own organisation, so many taxis, so probably for 
the artists also an effort could be made towards the hotels so that there is a limit to a quota, 
how  much  in  five  nights.  At  least  two  nights,  we  have  national  singers  and  in-house  one, 
anyway, this is a formula which  you can work out with these gentlemen.  I am just saying 
about their request.  

Now, my last point will be on education. Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Too late my friend! 

We all agree that education is a fundamental issue. It is of paramount importance to 
us, to our children. It is only through education that we can climb the social ladder. But then 
when we come with reform, one will expect to have consensus and consultation. Education 
has  to  be  reformed,  it  can’t  remain  static.  But,  unfortunately,  this  Minister  of  Education  - 
nothing  personal  -  has  a  habit  of  making  a  practice  that  she  applies  something  first,  takes 
action, starts to implement, then there is consultation. We have had this with regard to the 
nine-year schooling. There was no debate in the House. Its consultations started in December, 
when it was supposed to be in operation in January.  

(Interruptions) 

 

169 

The Minister will reply, please keep quiet! You are not the Minister of Education. 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  concerning  Skill  development,  Rs310  m.  announced  for  training  centers, 

funding for the reimbursement of the UTM, the University des Mascareignes, etc. 

Again, what guarantee of cost effective spending now. Has there been a due diligence 
with  regard  to  these  universities.  When  we  were  informed  that  there  will  be  very  soon  a 
higher education Bill, there is no mention in the budget. But before we go, putting money 
here and there, we must do a constat. You must have a look as to what are the needs of these 
universities.    We  know  what  has  happened  with  regard  to  the  buildings  for  the 
polytechniques. How the Director of Audit was harsh for wasting money and now, when the  
Director  of  Audit  has  intervened  to  see  that  we  are  wasting  money,  Rs750  m.  in 
infrastructure, equipment and facilities in order to bypass the Director of Audit, and to get 
parliamentary control out of the polytechnic, a company is formed, Knowledge Part Ltd.  

So, when we ask questions about Knowledge Parks Ltd, no this is a private company 
governed by the Statute, etc.This is the reply we will have when we start to be operational. 
Now the Minister has answered, because there is not much to say, they are not operational. 
So, when it comes operational when we start to hear about things. 

Same for the nine-year schooling, it has been implemented, but I hear there are still 
problems  at  primary  level.  But  at  secondary  level  there  is  much  concern.  There  is  much 
concern. I had the opportunity during the weekend to speak to teachers, managers, students, 
and  specially  teachers  of  the  prevocational  schools.  They  don’t  know  exactly  what  will 
happen to the prevocational schools. And now with the five credits, are we going to close 
some of the private colleges because they won’t be able to do HSC. They don’t know what to 
do with prevocational school, what will happen to these staff.  

(Interruptions) 

I  am  happy  you  are  speaking  after  me.  So,  what  will  happen?    There  is  still  much 
confusion with regard to secondary schools.  So, it is important to know where we are going. 
But there is one fundamental issue which has not been addressed. Goal 4 - UN Sustainable 
Development Goal which reads as follows, which was adopted in 2015 – 

 

170 

“Ensure  inclusive  and  equitable  quality  education  and  promote  lifelong  learning 
opportunities for all.” 

Number  one:  ‘inclusive  and  equitable  education’,  no  provision  in  this  Budget  to 
address inequalities in education. For example, no comprehensive plan for early childhood 
education.  ZEP is still being  reformed every  year with no assessment of the effectiveness. 
Whilst I am talking of ZEP, what about the hot limb which these people were supposed to 
have. There is one ZEP in my constituency, Richelieu Government School. Do you know, 
Madam Speaker, that manze gate pe donne zot. 

Children of four years old are being given dipain avec achard, not even achard, soya 
in the early morning. Soya in their bread, which smells - I have been there personally. At one 
o’clock,  I  received  a  phone  call  and  I  went  there  to  smell  that  bread.  Impossible  to  eat, 
Madam Speaker! 

These children of four years old are probably not aware, they will eat it. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but you have to choose these contractors. Rightly pointed out by my friend.  Contracter 
fane, but they were not chosen with the consultation of the PTA. The PTA was not aware.  

Oui, kan to pas ti gagne, pas bizin done dimoune manze manzer puri mo kamarad. 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Quality education: clear downward trend in CPE pass rates and SC success rates over 

the last five years with no remedial measures. 

Okay, you carry on, when you finish… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You can carry on. You have more than half an hour. 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, I am talking. Half an hour! I have got more than that. 

Lifelong learning, again, adult education is totally absent. Communication policy of 
the Ministry, I have already spoken, it is a total failure.  But I can’t conclude before referring 
to the holistic student - that’s a really sad story - who was asked to follow courses at the YEP.  

 

171 

I think they were a hundred of them and when they were recruited, the hon. Minister went to 
SARO, she made a speech there, and I quote - 

“You encourage us to stay in the programme for YEP on induction day by saying we 
would have a priority in getting the job. However… 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  On  a  point  of  order,  the  hon.  Member  is  mentioning 

something that I have never uttered and I will not accept it. 

(Interruptions) 

No,  on  a  point  of  personal  clarification,  I  will  not  admit  that  certain  words  be  put  in  my 
mouth when they were never uttered! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: I won’t put words in your mouth… 

I will get words out of my mouth! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order in the House, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Everybody  is  tired.  It  is  getting  late  so  can  we  have  some  order!  I  have  asked  the  hon. 
Member he can go on for another one hour also! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Now,  these  people  were  given  the  impression  when  they  were 
recruited by YEP that they will be employed subsequently, and that they will be qualified to 
be employed in the service. Unfortunately, they don’t reach the criteria of the PSC. Only one, 
not some, in a reply you said ‘some’. The hon. Minister, in my Parliamentary Question No. 
B/276, said –  

 

172 

“As far as part (b) of the question (…) is carried out by the PSC as per approved. I 
have been given to understand (…)” 

They have misled the hon. Minister – 

“(…) that some of the YEP trainees (…)” 

Not some but only one. So these people have gone through training and only one has been 
recruited by the PSC. What a waste of money! 

(Interruptions) 

For two years, we have spent a lot of money but unfortunately… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order, please! 

Mr Baloomoody: So, may I ask the hon. Minister to see to it that these youngsters, 
they have spent their money and their time to study for a specific purpose. I don’t know if the 
hon. Minister has to amend the regulations or what to do but can she see to it that those who 
have followed… 

(Interruptions) 

So, let me conclude, Madam Speaker… 

We are here in this House… 

Mo pas presser mwa! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Take your time! 

Mr Baloomoody: We are here in this Parliament, Madam Speaker, for the Mauritian 
people who chose both of us to bring them to the blooming of the country in every possible 

 

173 

meaning of the term. Unfortunately, we have today a Government led by a nominated Prime 
Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

…somebody who has not been chosen by the people, who has failed the expectation of our 
nation and our youth. When we see what is happening in this Government we can’t blame the 
youth if today they are  turning their back on politics, but let me address the  youth of this 
nation telling them that not all politicians are the same. There are still good, honest politicians 
on this side of the House… 

(Interruptions) 

…  who  don’t  believe  in  transfuge,  who  don’t  believe  in  favoritism,  who  don’t  believe  in 
petits copains, who don’t believe in wastage of public funds. 

Madam  Speaker,  every  time  we  challenge  the  nomination  of  the  Prime Minister  as 
Prime Minister of this country his only reply is: ‘what, we have the Westminster system and 
he will always refer us to the British Prime Minister  Mrs Theresa May. May I ask him now if 
truly he believes in the Westminster system, if truly he believes in people of this country… 

(Interruptions) 

who they choose for their Prime Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

follow the step of Mrs Theresa May…  

Follow the step… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Order  or  I  will  suspend  the  session!  If  there  is  no  order  I  will 

suspend then for another half an hour! 

(Interruptions) 

 

174 

Mr Baloomoody: So, if he believes in the Westminster system, he always refers to 
Mrs  Theresa  May  but  have  the  guts,  follow  what  Mrs  Theresa  May  has  done  in  England, 
dissolve  Parliament,  go  for  election  and  let  the  people  of  this  country  choose  the  Prime 
Minister not the father! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

You can take two hours! 

(11.30 p.m.) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs  A.  Perraud  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne  Longue): 
Madame la présidente, je dois dire que ce n’est pas évident de parler à cette heure tardive de 
la nuit devant cette audience mais c’est un exercice sérieux et très important pour le pays. 

Madame  la  présidente,  chaque  année  le  ministre  des  Finances  présente  son  budget. 
C’est un exercice qui autrefois était très attendu et qui suscitait un grand intérêt. Si l’année 
dernière  le  grand  argentier  avait  présenté  un  budget  avec  de  grandes,  de  très  grandes 
ambitions peut-être parce que c’était son premier budget en tant que ministre des Finances de 
l’Alliance Lepep ou peut-être parce qu’il était un Premier ministre in waiting. 

Cette année nous pouvons constater un contraste dans la forme et dans le fond. Alors 
qu’il est le Premier ministre on ne va pas aujourd’hui, du moins pas pour l’instant, discuter 
comment il a accédé à ce poste suprême à la tête du pays, n’est-ce pas? L’honorable Pravind 
Jugnauth  présente  un  budget  populiste,  fade,  sans  grande  ambition,  comme  dirait 
l’économiste Pierre Dinan un budget au ras de sol. 

Le Premier ministre, ministre des Finances a raté une belle occasion afin de redorer 
son blason en tant que Premier ministre. C’est un départ raté. Madame la présidente, c’est un 
budget  décevant - peu de mesures pour créer ce feel good factor, peu de mesures pour alléger 

 

175 

le fardeau des ménages à Maurice, peu de mesures pour faire face aux problèmes sociaux, 
peu de mesures pour donner l’espoir aux mauriciens. En analysant, en décortiquant ce budget 
2017-2018 nous pouvons constater beaucoup de manquements, de répétitions aussi avec le 
budget de l’année dernière. 

Donc, Madame la présidente, ce soir le temps me fait défaut. Merci de m’avoir donné 

deux heures de temps mais le temps me fait défaut. 

(Interruptions) 

Le temps me fait défaut pour présenter mon analyse tant sur le plan économique, sociale et 
politique.  Oui,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  budget  2017-2018  est  plus  un  exercice  politique 
qu’un exercice économique mais un exercice économique raté. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  ne  peut  pas  berner  la  population,  on  ne  peut  pas  tromper  la 
population.  On  ne  crache  pas  sur  la  confiance  de  la  population.  Puisque  le  temps  me  fait 
défaut ce soir je vais axer mon discours sur l’éducation mais là aussi rien qu’une partie du 
secteur  éducatif.  Je  vais  aussi  parler  de  ma  circonscription  et  bien  sûr  je  ne  raterai  pas  de 
rétablir les faits en ce qui concerne tous les mentis-mentis qui ont été dit dans cette auguste 
Assemblée. 

Madam Speaker, let us have a look at what is happening in the education sector. To be 
able to better understand the situation in this sector, we will have to start with the first Budget 
of this Government, the Budget 2015-2016. Madam Speaker, in the Budget 2015-2016 we 
read at paragraph 162, I quote –  

“I  will  now  come  to  the  issue  of  education.    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  providing  an 
amount  of  Rs14.7  billion  to  the  Ministry  of  Education  to  improve  the  quality  of 
education  from  pre-primary  to  tertiary  level,  implement  the  nine  year  schooling, 
reform the tertiary sector as well as revamp and adapt vocational training to the new 
needs of our society.” 
However,  Madam  Speaker,  as  per  Statistics  Mauritius,  the  total  Government 
expenditure for the financial years 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 are estimated as follows:  For 
financial year 2015-2016, an amount of Rs124,000,745 of which only Rs15,000,807 which 
represents 12.7%, has been allocated to education and training. 

 

176 

And  Madam  Speaker,  for  the  following  Financial  year  2016-2017,  a  sum  of 
Rs141,000,739  was  spent,  of  which  Rs17,000,468  has  been  allocated  to  education  and 
training.  We can say, Madam Speaker, that right at the beginning, I mean right from the first 
budget of this Government, there has been an over exaggeration of figures.  

Furthermore,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  interesting  to  analyse,  in  detail,  how  the  total 
budget on education and training has been allocated. So, for financial year 2015-2016, 53% 
to secondary education, 24% to primary education, 8% to tertiary education, 3% to technical 
and  vocational  education,  a  mere  2%  to  pre-primary  education  and  the  remaining  10%  to 
other expenses.  

For  the  financial  year  2016-2017,  we  can  see  almost  the  same  trend,  50%  to 
secondary education, 27% to primary education, 7% to tertiary education, and the percentage 
remains the same for  technical and vocational education, and pre-primary education, that is, 
only  3%  to  technical  and  vocational  education,  and  2%  to  pre-primary  education,  and  the 
remaining 11% to other expenses.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  is where  I  think  things  go  wrong.  Les  chiffres  parlent  d’eux-
mêmes.  The  way  money  has  been  spent  for  different  sectors,  we  can  see  where  the 
Government sets its priorities. Madam Speaker, for 2 consecutive financial years, only 3% 
has been spent on technical and vocational education, yes a mere 3%. There is a gap, a very 
big gap between what the Budget 2015-2016 announced and what follows.   

Madam Speaker, much emphasis has been laid on the need and importance to, avec 
raison,  develop  the  technical  and  vocational  sector.  This  good  intention  has  not  been 
translated in reality. Effets d’annonce! In the Budget 2015-2016, many paragraphs dealt with 
technical and vocational education; paragraphs 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, where we can read 
at paragraph 60, I quote-  

“Third, the role and functions of the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development 
(MITD)  will  be  reviewed  to  put  a  much  greater  emphasis  on  training  plumbers, 
electricians, welders, masons, carpenters, and other technicians for which there will 
be increasing demand as the ‘vaste chantier de développement’ unfolds.”  
But, Madam Speaker, only a small, very small budget for this sector, 3%! When we 
have a look at the Budget of the following year 2016-2017, this determination, this will to 
review  the  sector  of  the  technical  and  vocational  education  faded  away,  even  though,  the 

 

177 

budgetary  measures  of  the  previous  year  were  not  implemented.  Effets  d’annonce!  In  this 
financial  year’s  Budget,  on  revient  à  la  charge,  a  sum  of  Rs310  m.  is  budgeted  for  the 
upgrading  of  educational  hardware  and  infrastructure  in  some  training  institutions,  namely 
the  MIDT  Training  Centres,  the  Ecole  Hôtelière  Sir  Gaëtan  Duval,  the  Sir  Rampersad  
Neerunjun Training Centre, and Le Chou Training Centre in Rodrigues. And also a sum of 
Rs130 m. is budgeted to finance the operating costs of polytechnics. 

Madam Speaker, let us hope that these measures will really be implemented et qu’on 
ne va pas être mené en bateau, comme ce fut le cas pour les 2 années écoulées. Mais on dit 
souvent: jamais 2 sans 3.  Attendons voir! To remain in this sector, Madam Speaker, another 
figure  which  speaks  volume,  which  reflects  the  situation  prevailing  in  this  sector  is  the 
following:  We  can  see  that  in  general  and  pre-vocational  sector,  there  is  a  decrease  in 
enrolment. In 2015, there were 124,197 students enrolled, whereas for the year 2016, there is 
a decrease. Only 120,944 students were registered in prevocational sector.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  shows  clearly  that  there  is  a  loss  of  confidence  in  our  pre-
vocational system. It is in contradiction with the measures announced in the previous Budget 
to boost this sector. It shows undoubtedly that Government fails in this sector. In Government 
Programme 2015-2019, at paragraph 72, we can read and I quote – 

“The  MITD  will  be  called  upon  to  position  itself  as  a  Regional  Training  of 
Trainers Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training in Southern 
and Eastern African, COMESA and SADC countries.” 

But  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  not  seeing  this  happening  at  all.  Madam  Speaker, 
concerning the tertiary education, the tone was set since the first Budget of this Government. 
The Minister of Finance announced that the objective of the Government for education was to 
build the knowledge hub of the future. However, an allocation of only about Rs1.3 m. and 
Rs1.2 m. in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 Budget. This sum was allocated to tertiary education 
which is a contradiction with Government’s vision.  

Furthermore,  Madam  Speaker,  in  2015-2016  Budget,  the  Minister  of  Finance,  at 

paragraph 58, announced that - 

“Government  will  use  the  three  campuses  presently  under  construction  at  Réduit, 
Montagne Blanche and Pamplemousses as follows - 

 

178 

• 

• 

• 

The Réduit campus will be used to house a Polytechnic which will offer 
courses in Middle Management, ICT and other ICT-related fields.    
The Montagne Blanche campus will be reserved for a Polytechnic offering 
courses, mainly in Tourism, and Hotel Management, including cruise tourism.  
The Pamplemousses campus will offer courses mainly in health care for 
nurses, technicians and trained personnel in the medical field.” 

Madam  Speaker,  these  measures  were  announced  in  2015,  now  we  are  in  2017.  2 

years and nothing has been done.  Effets d’annonce!  

In Budget 2017/2018, mention is made again about Réduit Polytechnic at paragraph 
134. However, I wonder who will work there as there is no mention pertaining to recruitment 
of  new  staff.  Again,  big  announcements  regarding  those  campuses,  especially  the  Réduit 
campus. On 29 March 2016, from a communiqué from Government website, it was reported 
that the Government has taken note of developments in the setting up of polytechnics, but this 
was not implemented. Effets d’annonce! 

Madam  Speaker,  figures  in  the  tertiary  sector  show  some  alarming  trend.  In  2015, 
50,608 students were enrolled in the tertiary sector including part-time, full-time and distance 
learning.  23%  of  these  numbers  are  enrolled  in  overseas  institutions.  This  number  has 
decreased  to  48,970  in  2016,  the  lowest  since  2012.  Madam  Speaker,  are  these  figures 
showing a loss in confidence in our tertiary system? 

Madam Speaker, I was very surprised to hear my colistier - unfortunately, he is not 
there - hon. Oree, during his speech saying that he went on some campuses, he met some 
foreign  students  from  Africa  and  India  studying  here  in  our  local  universities.  So,  he 
concluded that our Universities are among the best universities in the world. It is surprising 
how hon. Members in Government have a very special way to judge things and persons. We 
will all recall how another Member looked into the eyes of a VVIP and deducted detected 
that this person is of good faith and good reputation. Madam Speaker, everybody can have 
access  to  figures  from  Statistics  Mauritius.  We  did  not  look  into  the  eyes  or  talk  to  the 
students to get the ranking of our Universities.  

Moreover, Madam Speaker, the enrolment of students at Open University is on the 
increasing side. In 2011/2012, 809 students were enrolled at the Open University whereas in 
2016/2017,  the  number  increased  to  4,750  while  other  institutions  have  remained  almost 

 

179 

stagnant. When the trend is clear that people preferred distance education, so why do we need 
three new campuses that offer face-to-face education? Clearly, it is against the market needs.  

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  the  private  training  and  vocational  sector,  it  must  be 
highlighted that there exists close to 600 private training centres approved by MQA, yet the 
Government  has  not  appointed  any  Director  at  the  said  institution.  The  MQA  has  800 
registered trainers and another 2,000 people are employed to work in these private centres, 
yet the MQA has only four Programme Officers to support and monitor those 600 centres. 
Does that look close to any kind of international quality standards? Certainly not! 

Madam Speaker, in 2015/2016 Budget, it was identified that there were 3,000 gradués 
chômeurs whose training does not match market requirements. The Government promised to 
retrain  them  so  that  they  are  more  employable  and  it  is  disappointing  to  know  that  out  of 
3,000, hardly 300 have been trained after two years so far. Madam Speaker, we have noticed 
some repetition of measures in 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 Budget, for example, at paragraph 
270 in this year’s Budget, we can read and I quote – 

“Moreover, a new Strategy Paper for the Special Education Needs will be developed 
and an authority will be set up to harmonise and promote policies for that sector.” 
In  2016/2017,  the  last  year’s  Budget,  at  paragraph  330,  the  Minister  of  Finance 

announced the same measure. I quote – 

“Moreover, the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific  Research  will  come  up  with  a  strategic  paper  to  review  the  Special 
Education Needs sector in the wake of the 9-year schooling.” 

Another repetition, Madam Speaker, is at paragraph 247 in 2017/2018 regarding the Police 
Training  Academy.  This  Police  Training  Academy  was  one  of  the  measures  in  2016/2017 
Budget at paragraph 202. 

Madam Speaker, the Higher Education Bill was announced in the Budget 2015/2016 
at  paragraph  164.  The  last  time  we  heard  about  this  Bill  was  in  February  2016  where  the 
Minister, herself, said in ‘Le Defi’ that - 

“This Bill est pour bientôt. »  

We do not know when is ‘bientôt.’ I hope the Minister will tell the House in her speech when 
will the Higher Education Bill be ready. 

 

180 

Madam Speaker, at paragraph 129 in the Budget 2017/2018, the Minister of Finance 

and Prime Minister said – 

“(…)last  year  I  spoke  about  our  strategy  to  move  towards  a  fully-fledged  digital 
society.  This year we will make further strides to realise this ambition.” 

Yet, Madam Speaker, only 47% of our pre-primary schools were equipped with computers. 
Only  13%  in  pre-primary  and  38%  in  primary  has  Internet  access.  Of  course,  Madam 
Speaker, the pupils of Grade I and II are still awaiting for their digital tablets, which was one 
of the measures in 2016/2017. 

Madame  la  présidente,  un  autre  parent  pauvre  du  secteur  éducatif  à  part  la  filière 
technique et vocationnelle est le secteur préscolaire. Je tiens à rappeler à la Chambre que pour 
les deux dernières années, le budget alloué à ce secteur n’est que 2%. Rien que 2%, Madame 
la  présidente!  Ce  secteur  pourtant  un  secteur  clé  reçoit  que  des  miettes.  Madame  la 
présidente,  la  lutte  contre  les  inégalités  démarre  dès  les  premières  années  de  la  vie.  La 
Banque Mondiale abonde dans le même sens. Je cite – 

« Les  investissements  en  faveur  des  jeunes  enfants  consentis  à  travers  des 
programmes  de  développement  de  la  petite  enfance  qui  garantisse  un  éveil,  une 
éducation et une alimentation adéquate sont l’une des dépenses les plus judicieuses 
qu’un pays peut faire pour lutter contre les inégalités, rompre le cercle vicieux de la 
pauvreté  et  améliorer  les  performances  d’un  individu  tout  au  long  de  sa  vie.  Les 
données  recueillies  dans  différents  pays  développés  et  en  développement  montrent 
qu’un  dollar  supplémentaire  investi  dans  des  programmes  préscolaires  de  qualité 
procure un rendement allant de 6 à 17 dollars. » 

Madame la présidente, malheureusement, nous constatons qu’il n’y a aucune volonté 
politique pour aider le secteur préscolaire. Seulement 2% du budget de l’éducation est dédié à 
ce secteur. 

Madame la présidente, si nous voulons améliorer les résultats de l’enseignement de 

base, surtout pour les enfants pauvres, il faut investir massivement, pas que 2 %. 

Il faut investir dans des programmes de développement de la petite enfance de qualité, 
favorisant  le  développement  physique  et  global  de  l’enfant,  cognitif,  linguistique  et  socio-
affectif  dès  le  plus  jeune  âge.  Madame  la  présidente,  les  recherches  ont  démontré  que  les 

 

181 

retards  accumulés  très  tôt  sur  le  plan  de  compétences  cognitives,  linguistiques  et  socio-
affectives  compromettent  la  capacité  de  l’enfant  à  apprendre  lorsqu’il  intègre  une  école 
primaire et aussi diminue sa motivation.  Les recherches ont aussi révélé que les enfants qui 
accumulent du retard dans les premières années de leur scolarité obtiendront probablement de 
moins  bons  résultats,  redoubleront  ou  abandonneront  l’école  avant  d’avoir  achevé  le  cycle 
primaire.  

Madame la présidente, alors que le monde se mobilise, les pays s’engagent à investir 
davantage  dans  la  petite  enfance  pour  stimuler  la  croissance  à  long  terme,  à  Maurice  on 
néglige ce secteur. 

L’année  dernière,  le    06  octobre  2016,  lors  d’un  sommet  organisé  à  l’occasion  des 
assemblées annuelles du groupe de la Banque Mondiale et du Fonds Monétaire International 
(FMI), le président du groupe de la Banque Mondiale, Monsieur Jim Yong Kim a souligné 
que,  je cite – 

 

« L’engagement  de  chef  de  Gouvernement  et  de  Ministre  des  Finances  à 
combattre les retards de développement en renforçant les capacités cognitives 
des  enfants  donnera  aux  individus  comme  aux  économies  les  moyens 
d’exprimer tout le potentiel et, ce faisant, d’éviter de nouvelles crises »  

Alors que le directeur général du Fonds des Nations Unies pour l’enfance, Anthony Lake, quant à 

lui, a déclaré que, je cite –  

 

« Ce que nous sommes en train d'apprendre sur l'ensemble des éléments qui 
affectent  le  développement  du  cerveau  des  enfants  –  si  leur  corps  est  bien 
alimenté, si leur esprit est stimulé, s'ils sont protégés contre la violence – est 
déjà en train de changer la façon dont nous pensons le développement de la 
petite enfance. Aujourd'hui, nous devons changer la façon dont nous agissons. 
»  

 Madame  la  présidente,  la  question  qui  reste  posée  est  la  suivante :  pourquoi  l’île 
Maurice ne suit pas les bonnes pratiques internationales en ce qui concerne le secteur de la 
petite enfance ? Pourquoi le Ministère de l’Education traîne loin derrière ? 

 

182 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  viens  de  démontrer  à  quel  point  le  secteur  de  la  petite 
enfance est un secteur clé non seulement pour les enfants, pour les familles mais aussi pour le 
pays économiquement et socialement. 

Alors comment expliquer que depuis de longues années le Early Childhood care and 
Education Authority n’a pas de directeur. Je disais plus tôt que dans le secteur technique et 
vocationnel il n’y avait pas de directeur. C’est un Officer-in-Charge qui est à la tête de cet 
organisme si important. Pourtant, nous avons si souvent entendu parler de directeurs de corps 
para étatiques avec des salaires faramineux, exorbitants. 

Le Early Childhood Care ça veut beaucoup dire.  For the Early Childhood Care and 

Education Authority on n’a pas jugé bon de chercher the right person.  

 

Madame la présidente, comment se fait-il qu’il n’y a pas un département de Quality 
Assurance, de HR Unit or Early Childhood Care and Education Authority ? Pourquoi le Pre-
School Regulation de 1998 n’a pas été revu pour répondre aux besoins de nos enfants de la 
société d’aujourd’hui. On attend le Higher Education Bill depuis deux ans. Et pas un mot sur 
des  possibles  amendements  au  Pre-School  Regulation  de  1998 !  Pourquoi  le  National 
Curriculum  Framework  Pre-Primary  qui  date  de  2010  n’a  pas  été  réajusté  par  rapport  au  
Nine-Year Schooling ? Madame la présidente, dans ce secteur on se plaint que certains des 
superviseurs sont moins qualifiés que les puéricultrices, qu’elles ne sont pas assez formées 
pour ce travail, alors que les superviseurs sont supposés veiller à ce que les normes soient 
respectées. 

Madame la présidente, au risque de déplaire à certains qui nous accusent du contraire 
au  PMSD,  nous  préparons  nos  dossiers,  comme  l’a  si  bien  dit  mon  ami,  l’honorable  Guy 
Lepoigneur. D’ailleurs, l’honorable Oree lui-même a reconnu que le Leader de l’Opposition 
soutient ses arguments avec preuves à l’appui, et il a raison. Effectivement, Madam Speaker, 
au PMSD, nous sommes à la bonne école. Le Leader, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval nous 
donne  l’exemple  du  travail  bien  fait,  toujours  aller  à l’affût  d’information,  faire  des 
recherches, soutenir nos arguments à l’aide de statistiques, de documents et si besoin aller sur 
place. 

Madame  la  présidente,  j’y  suis  allée.  J’ai  rencontré  beaucoup  de  personnes  dans  le 
secteur  de  la  petite  enfance,  les  parents,  les  puéricultrices,  les  responsables  d’école  et  les 
psychologues. Ils sont tous unanimes à dire qu’il n’y a pas un plan stratégique pour le secteur 

 

183 

de  la  petite  enfance,  que    de  2014  à  2017  les  choses  sont  restées  les  mêmes  malgré 
l’introduction  du  Nine-Year  Schooling.  Il  n’y  a  aucune  mesure  pour  repenser  ce  secteur. 
Lorsque  j’ai  posé  la  question  aux  stakeholders :  est-ce  qu’il  y  a  eu  consultation,  dialogue, 
atelier de travail en ce qui concerne le Nine-Year Schooling. La réponse était qu’il n’y avait 
rien de sérieux, de façon très marginale, tellement marginale que je ne me rappelle pas. Je 
cite ce que les gens m’ont dit dans ce secteur. Madame la présidente, il y a d’autres  lacunes à 
déplorer,  tels  que  le  manque  de  services  de  psychologues  dans  le  secteur  pré-primaire.  Le 
département de la psychologie du ministère dessert aussi le secteur pré-primaire, mais c’est 
un  département  squelettique.  Il  y  a  trop  peu  de  psychologues  pour  travailler  dans  le  pré-
primaire et secondaire. Donc, il n’y a pas d’intervention systématique. Madame la présidente, 
les personnes qui interviennent dans les écoles pré-primaires font plus du Counselling que de 
la psychologie, alors que ce qu’il faudrait ce sont des personnes avec une approche psycho-
dynamique.  

Madame  la  présidente,  pour  résumer,  nous  dénonçons  ce  manque  d’intérêt  du 
gouvernement,  ce  manque  de  volonté  politique,  de  méconnaissance  de  l’importance  de  la 
petite  enfance  à  Maurice.  Le  secteur  est  un  secteur  négligé,  abandonné,  Madame  la 
présidente, si nous ne jetons pas les bases, nous ne construisons pas une bonne fondation, on 
ne pourra pas régler les problèmes dans le secteur de l’éducation. Donc nous faisons un appel 
au  gouvernement  pour  revoir  ses  priorités.  Le  secteur  de  la  petite  enfance  et  le  secteur 
technique  et  vocationnel  doivent  occuper  une  plus  grande  place.  Madame  la  présidente,  le 
loup ne deviendra jamais mouton, tout comme le vautour ne sera jamais colombe. Le MSM 
n’a pas changé.  Au PMSD, nous avions pensé qu’avec le temps le vin s’était bonifié, que le 
MSM s’était assagi.  

Erreur mes camarades! Chassez le naturel, il revient au galop! Le loup est resté loup 
et  le  vautour  est  resté  vautour.  Le  MSM  est  resté  ce  qu’il  a  toujours  été;  un  masque,  une 
duperie, une simulation, de belles paroles, des promesses mielleuses, l’art d’embobiner tout le 
monde. Une fois le pouvoir conquis, grâce au PMSD, bien sûr, … 

(Interruptions) 

….le masque tombe et apparaît alors la face hideuse de la vérité. Un MSM arrogant, avide, 
vengeur,  dictatorial,  impitoyable  et  cruel.  Le  PMSD  avait  accepté  de  former  partie  d’une 
alliance  dirigée  par  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  parce  qu’il  croyait,  tout  comme  le  pays  croyait, 
qu’avec  le  temps  le  MSM  avait  changé.    Une  fois  au  gouvernement,  nous  avons  été 

 

184 

désillusionnés tout comme la population. Nous avons tous été trahis par ceux qui ont fait du 
pouvoir une jouissance presque charnelle. Une des nombreuses raisons pourquoi le PMSD a 
décidé  de  quitter  le  pouvoir  parce  que  ce  gouvernement  -  disons  pour  ne  pas  utiliser  un 
langage épicé - crache, urine sur beaucoup de promesses faites à l’électorat… 

(Interruptions) 

….parce que le MSM, ML et transfuges ont dévié du code de moralité que nous avons établi 
parce  que  ce  gouvernement  provoque  chez  la  population  déception ;  parce  que  ce 
gouvernement n’a plus le droit moral de diriger le pays.  Je vous ai dit au PMSD quand on 
parle, on parle avec preuve à l’appui. Je crois que ce soir tout le monde reconnaît ce fameux 
document. C’est le manifeste électoral : «Gouverner pour le peuple, avec le peuple, l’Alliance 
Lepep’. Je sais ce que vous allez me dire. Avant que vous ne me le dites, je vous le dis : ‘Oui, 
le PMSD faisait partie de cette alliance’.  C’est important des fois de s’arrêter et de voir le 
chemin parcouru. J’espère que chacun d’entre vous de ce côté de la Chambre, vous avez pris 
la peine de lire ce que vous avez écrit dans ce document.  

(Interruptions) 

Ce que nous avons écrit. Je l’ai déjà dit avant que vous le dites l’honorable Roopun.  Donc, à 
la toute première page après le message des Leaders, nous avons comme titre «notre contrat 
de  confiance  avec  la  population  en  12  commandements. »  Des  mots  très  forts  qui  sont 
utilisés :  contrat,  confiance.  Et  la  toute  première  clause  nous  pouvons  lire :  ‘nous 
gouvernerons  pour  le  peuple,  avec  le  peuple  et  dans  l’intérêt  de  toute  la  nation.’  Pas  pour 
nous, ni pour un petit groupe d’amis, d’agents politiques, de copains ou de copines. Qu’avez-
vous fait de ce contrat ? Qu’avez-vous fait de cette clause…  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker : No cross-talking, please ! 

No cross-talking! 

Hon. Thierry Henry ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Thierry Henry ! 

I have called you twice ! 

185 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am seeing who is provocating !  Okay !  I am seeing who is provocating ! 

Mrs Perraud :  Merci, Madame la présidente. Donc je vous disais qu’avez-vous fait 
de  cette  première  clause  où  c’est  écrit  clairement  que  vous  n’allez  pas  gouverner  ni  pour 
vous, ni pour un petit groupe d’amis, d’agents politiques, de copains et de copines ? 

(Interruptions) 

C’est tout ce que vous avez à dire. J’ai envie de dire que c’est pathétique. Clause Numéro 2, 
je continue - Nous ferons la politique autrement… 

….la discipline… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Est-ce que l’honorable Gayan veut soulever un point de droit ?   

(Interruptions) 

Non.  C’est bon ! 

Madam  Speaker :    No,  it  is  not  for  you  to  ask  whether  he  has  to  raise  a  point  of 

order. 

(Interruptions) 

If he has to raise a point of order, it is up to him! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, don’t confront me ! Please, proceed ! 

 

186 

Mrs Perraud : Alors je vais répéter parce qu’il y avait beaucoup de bruit. Mes amis 
n’ont pas entendu. Je vais répéter parce qu’il y avait beaucoup de bruit. Mes amis n’ont pas 
entendu.  Redire !  Nous  ferons  la  politique  autrement.    Clause  Numéro  2 :  Nous  ferons  la 
politique  autrement,  la  discipline,  la  transparence,  la  redevabilité  et  la  gouvernance 
exemplaire constitueront la règle pour le Premier ministre, les ministres, les députés, que dis-
je,  les  conseillers  mais  aussi  à  tous  les  niveaux  dans  chaque  ministère,  organismes 
paraétatiques et départements de la fonction publique. Nous allons mettre en place un comité 
spécial pour mettre fin aux nominations inadaptées aux postes importants. Nous éliminerons 
les gaspillages. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Who is provocating now !  

(Interruptions) 

No, you are not provocating ! 

Mrs Perraud :  Je ne vais pas prendre le temps de la Chambre…. 

Madam Speaker :  I know it is late.  I know you want to go home. 

Mrs Perraud : Je sais que chacun d’entre vous, vous avez une copie de ce document. 
Je vous assure cela mérite d’être étudié. Je l’ai  déjà dit. Je crois que l’honorable Madame 
Boygah  n’était  pas  là.  Et  la  clause  10,  je  crois  que  tout  le  monde  mérite  d’écouter,  nous 
légiférerons pour combattre…. 

Nous allons donc légiférer combattre le transfugisme…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Gayan, please ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs  Perraud :  Clause  10,  nous  allons  légiférer  pour  combattre  le  transfugisme  à 
l’Assemblée Nationale et clairement établir le nombre de séances parlementaires obligatoires 
chaque  année.  Lors  des  débats  la  semaine  dernière,  à  chaque  fois  vous  avez  fait  des 

 

187 

remarques quand les membres de l’opposition – les  membres confondus de l’opposition - ont 
abordé  ce  sujet  sensible.  Qu’est-ce  que  vous  nous  avez  dit ?  Que  non,  nous  sommes  des 
transfuges parce que nous sommes venus dans l’opposition. Je me suis dit que ce serait bien 
que je donne la définition de ce que c’est qu’un transfuge. Alors, un extrait d’un papier du 
politologue, Catherine Boudet où elle cite Feu Raj Mathur pour définir le transfuge - 

“Est  transfuge  celui  qui  est  élu  sous  la  bannière  d’un  parti  politique  et  qui 
subséquemment,  change  de  parti.  On  se  réfère  normalement  à  celui  qui  quitte 
l’opposition  pour  aller  au  gouvernement,  car  l’élément  déterminant  est  l’attrait  du 
pouvoir, avec la perspective d’avantages matériels tels qu’un poste ministériel, des 
emplois pour les neveux et nièces et la famille(…).” 

Vous cherchez toujours des transfuges? Quelle honte ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Gayan, if you keep on interrupting, then they will keep on 
interrupting!  I have said it is already late. I am sure, everybody is tired.  We want to finish 
with these debates. But if you go on like this, do you think we will have time to finish this 
debate? 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Perraud: Alors donc, Madame la présidente, j’ai expliqué que ce gouvernement 
a violé le contrat de confiance, le contrat moral avec le peuple, et que c’est un gouvernement 
illégitime. Vous avez dit que vous allez combattre le transfugisme et qu’avez-vous fait? Vous 
avez accueilli en vos seins, combien?  

Wow, cinq transfuges. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

C’est pour ça que j’ai pris la peine d’expliquer honorable Roopun. Il fallait écouter. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Perraud! 

Mrs Perraud: Mais il ne peut pas... 

Madam Speaker: I have said several times I don’t think that when I say something… 

 

188 

(Interruptions) 

Now order please! Order! And allow me to intervene. When I am on my feet nobody speaks.  

I have said that when you intervene and when you are on the floor nobody can engage 

in any conversation with any hon. Member.  I have said that several times.  

Mrs  Perraud:  Madame  la  présidente,  pendant  toute  la  semaine  dernière,  lors  des 
débats budgétaires, tous les membres du gouvernement ont exécuté l’ordre de dépeindre le 
PMSD comme étant un parti communal.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: And you start again!  

Mrs  Perraud:  Mais  Madame  la  présidente,  les  mauriciens  n’ont  pas  la  mémoire 
courte, tous les mauriciens se rappellent encore comme furent traités nos sœurs et nos frères 
de  la  communauté  musulmane  revenant  du  Akhbari  Hajj  en  1983.  Ils  furent  accueillis  à 
l’aéroport par des soldats armés, ils furent fouiller et même déshabillés dans la plus grande 
humiliation. Leur bijoux furent saisis, quelle mortification.  

Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  ce  que  vos  amis  ont  fait  pendant  toute  la  semaine 

dernière et on n’a rien dit… 

Elle me parle… 

Vous voyez elle me parle? 

On se rappelle encore comment… 

Il fallait dire ça à l’honorable Seeruttun. 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mrs  Monty,  did  you  understand  what  I  said?  You  did  not 

understand? If you do understand then you don’t have to interrupt her.  

 

189 

Mrs  Perraud:  Merci,  Madame  la  présidente,  on  se  rappelle  encore  comment  avec 
véhémence  et  haine  le  MSM  insulta  le  Coran,  que  ce  livre  sacré  contient  des  versets 
sataniques. 

Madame la présidente… 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  On  a  point  of  order!  On  a  point  of  order,  Madam 

Speaker! On a point of order. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! Yes? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I think it is totally improper and unethical, and incorrect 
to impute such motives on a political party and I would ask the hon. Member to withdraw her 
points. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Thierry Henry! I think you have to go out.  

Now, go out! Go out! I order you out!  

I order you out! 

I order you out! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, please the hon. Minister had a point of order and hon. Member, let me tell you that I had 
said and I drew the attention of hon. Gayan to this. I don’t want and I will not allow in this 
House any motive which can be of any communal nature.  

Mrs Perraud: Merci beaucoup pour votre ruling Madame la présidente, mais je suis 
assez  surprise  quand  même  parce  que  j’étais  là  et  j’ai  écouté  attentivement  tout  ce  que 
l’honorable Seeruttun a dit. J’étais là et j’ai écouté quand les autres ont critiqué le PMSD en 
tenant des propos vraiment communaux à l’égard du PMSD, et on n’avait rien dit. Donc je 
suis très contente que l’ile Maurice va juger. 

 

190 

Donc  un  autre  exemple.  L’histoire,  on  n’est  peut  pas  effacer  l’histoire.  Un  autre 
exemple, cette condescendance et cette cruauté ne datent pas aujourd’hui. Il n’y a pas que 
BAI et Betamax, Rawat et Bhunjun qui ont souffert.  

Souvenez-vous  de  la  fermeture  brutale  de  la  Habib  Bank?  Après  les  élections 

générales de 1983, une communauté en particulier fut délibérément ciblée.   

Madame la  présidente,  qui  a  oublié  un  certain  décembre  1995  lorsque  Sir  Anerood 

Jugnauth osa traiter une communauté de démons… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You start over again. I will not allow this. I will not allow this. 

Hon. Mrs Perraud… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! Silence! I am on my feet! Hon. Mrs Perraud, I have just drawn your attention 
to this and you seem to once again come on this communal motive. I am really sorry - I have 
told you, I won’t allow this! 

Mrs  Perraud:  Merci  beaucoup,  Madame  la  présidente,  pour  votre  ruling.  Mais  je 
tiens  à  dire  au  contraire.  Au  contraire,  je  ne  suis  pas  en  train  de  lire  ce  que  j’ai  écrit, 
dépendant du ruling que vous avez fait la première fois. Mais si j’ai écrit ces pages comme le 
font tous les membres de cette auguste Chambre, c’est pour répondre à ce que les autres, les 
membres du gouvernement; les attaque des membres du gouvernement la semaine dernière. 
Oui, madame… 

Madam Speaker: No, I will not allow you. I have said and I repeat it again. I will not 
allow and I will say once more what I have just said, that I had drawn the attention of hon. 
Gayan to this and now I am drawing your attention for the second time. 

Mr A. Duval: Well, Madam Speaker, on a point of order, is it on record that hon. 

Mahen Seeruthun and hon. Roopun… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, please sit down! Please sit down! Please sit down! 

 

191 

(Interruptions) 

Please sit down. Hon. Member, you have been a Deputy Speaker in this House. Don’t talk at 
the same time that I am talking. I wish to draw your attention to Standing Order 41(4) which 
provides  that  the  Ruling  of  the  Speaker  is  final  and  is  not  subject  to  any  comments  and 
remarks. So you are not allowed to make any comments or remarks. 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Perraud: Donc, malheureusement, Madam Speaker, c’est très dommage qu’il y 

ait deux poids deux mesures.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, no. Hon. Mrs Perraud, if you continue, you will have to stop 
your speech. I am really sorry. You will have to withdraw what you just said because what 
you just said, you are confronting the Chair, you are challenging the authority of the Chair. I 
am here to apply the Standing Orders, and it is my responsibility to see to it that the Standing 
Orders, the Rules are maintained in this august Assembly. So you will have to withdraw what 
you just said.  

Mrs Perraud: Alors comme, j’ai un discours à prononcer… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, no. You have to withdraw!  

Either  you  are  challenging  my  authority  or  you  withdraw  what  you  just  said, 

otherwise, I will not allow you to continue your speech! 

Mrs Perraud: Donc, je redis comme j’ai un discours à prononcer je vais withdraw. 
Comme j’ai un discours à prononcer et je veux faire mon discours je vais withdraw. Madame 
la présidente, c’est très bien ce qui se passe aujourd’hui. C’est très, très bien ce qui se passe 
aujourd’hui. 

Madame la présidente, pour répondre au porte-parole, si je peux répondre au porte-
parole  du  gouvernement,  l’honorable  Etienne  Sinatambou,  qui  accuse  à  tort  le  pays  et 
l’Opposition de présenter le syndrome de ‘narien pas bon’, le peuple observe avec beaucoup 
d’inquiétude une pathologie chez les membres du gouvernement qui nécessiterait une prise en 

 

192 

charge urgente. Madame la présidente, la pathologie se présente sous la forme d’un sentiment 
que tout va pour le mieux, dans le meilleur des mondes, zéro problème. 

Semaine après semaine scandale, tout va bien madame la marquise ! Les conseillers, 
les copains et les copines qui sont favorisés, tout va bien madame la marquise ! C’est ce qui 
décrit ce gouvernement, tout va bien madame la marquise ! 

(Interruptions) 

Si vous êtes l’empereur, je peux être la marquise.  

(Interruptions) 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  souhaiterais  consacrer  cette  partie  de  mon  discours  à  ma 
circonscription, la circonscription numéro 4 Port Louis Nord/Montagne Longue. Madame la 
présidente, lorsque j’étais encore dans le gouvernement je faisais un suivi sur les dossiers des 
projets  d’infrastructures  et  de  développement  dans  ma  circonscription.  En  préparant  mon 
discours,  j’étais  en  train  de  revoir  les  dossiers  et  beaucoup  de  réunions  entre  moi  et  mon 
bureau,  moi  et  mes  conseillers,  avec  la  PPS  de  la  circonscription,  l’honorable  Madame 
Roubina Jadoo-Jaunbocus, beaucoup de lettres envoyées, de visites sur les lieux. 

Pendant  ces  deux  années  écoulées,  j’ai  veillé  à  ce  que  les  travaux  dans  la 
circonscription bougent.  Je suis contente de voir certains de ces projets ont abouti, ont été 
réalisés. Toutefois, je déplore que des projets très importants peinent à venir malgré le fait 
que je milite pour ces projets depuis des années. Un exemple, Madame la présidente, est le 
bus terminal à Crève-Cœur.  

Madame la présidente, ce projet est très important et doit nécessiter toute l’attention 
du gouvernement. C’est inconcevable que ce projet n’ait toujours pas vu le jour. Pourtant un 
gros travail a déjà été fait. Lorsque j’étais PPS de la circonscription, une lettre en date du 2 
avril  2014  de  la  NDU  et  on  peut  y  lire  ‘site  visit  carried  out  under  the  agies  of  NDU  in 
connection with the project. The project will be executed in two phases due to shortage of 
funds.’ 

En  tant  que  ministre  de  la  circonscription  en  2014-2016,  j’ai  continué  à  suivre  ce 
dossier. Suite à des réunions avec les stakeholders, la NDU, la NTA, le TMRSU, le District 
Council de Pamplemousses que j’obtiens une lettre datant du 9 octobre 2015 du TMRSU et 
qui se lit comme suit - 

 

193 

“Further  to  the  meeting  held  on  30  September  2015  under  the  chair  of  hon.  Mrs 
Aurore  Perraud,  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family 
Welfare, kindly find enclosed the following (…).” 

Et c’est là qu’on me donne le plan de cette  gare. C’était en 2015.  Il  y  a même une  lettre, 
Madame la présidente, de la NTA datant août 2015 qui parle de l’urgence de ce projet - 

“You will note that need for the early implementation of the project is deeply felt as 
Route  19,  Port  Louis  Crève-Cœur  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the  routes  to  be 
operated as smart route.” 

Aujourd’hui nous sommes en 2017 et ce projet dort toujours dans les tiroirs. Pendant 
ce temps, Madame Speaker, les femmes receveur d’autobus n’ont aucun endroit pour aller se 
soulager parce qu’il n’y a pas de toilettes et que les habitants sont pénalisés. 

Madame la présidente, je fais un appel pour que Crève-Cœur ne soit pas négligé par 
ce gouvernement. Je vois que ce budget prévoit la construction des centres communautaires. 
Je suis contente pour les habitants d’ailleurs mais il y a une nécessité pour un centre à Crève-
Cœur.  Crève-Cœur  est  le  grand  oublié !  Madame  la  présidente,  je  lance  un  autre  appel  au 
gouvernement pour qu’on trouve une solution au gros problème d’eau à Crève-Cœur surtout 
dans la région de Rivalland. 

Les habitants de Montagne Longue aussi attentent toujours leur bus terminal à Vallée 
du Paradis. Il est bon de rappeler à la Chambre, Madame la présidente, que ce projet remonte 
depuis des années et jusqu’à maintenant rien n’a été fait. J’ai des lettres, des notes of meeting, 
des réunions que j’ai présidées lorsque j’étais PPS, des documents qui attestent qu’un travail 
avait déjà commencé. Par exemple, Madame la présidente, cette lettre de la NDU datant du 
12 août 2014 –  

 “I am directed to inform  you that due to difficulties encountered by the passengers at 
bus terminal Vallée des Paradis this Ministry has approved the following (…)” 

Et il y a toute une série de mesures qui devaient être prises à la Vallée des Paradis. Madame 
la présidente, il y a beaucoup de projets qui nécessitent une attention urgente, le cremation 
ground  de  Les  Mariannes,  les  terrains  de  foot  et  vestiaires  de  Terre  Rouge,  Morcellement 
Raffray, Vallée des Prêtres. 

 

194 

Madame  la  présidente,  à  chaque  grosse  pluie,  chaque  inondation,  la  circonscription 
numéro  4  est  bien  affectée.  Beaucoup  de  maisons  sont  inondées.  C’est  pour  cela  que  la 
construction  de  drains  est  très  importante.  Madame  la  présidente,  la  réalisation  de  la 
construction du mini soccer, du terrain de foot synthétique à l’arrière du centre municipal, Sir 
Gaëtan Duval, à la Cité Briqueterie est une grande fierté pour moi personnellement. C’est un 
projet qui me tient à cœur. J’ai fait beaucoup de lobbying pour que ce projet aille de l’avant. 
Aujourd’hui c’est dommage que les conseillers du gouvernement pe declare piti pa pu zotte ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker : Hon. Jhugroo ! 

Mrs Perraud : Concernant les squatters, Madame la présidente, j’aimerais dire haut 
et fort que c’est Aurore Perraud, que c’est le PMSD qui a œuvré pour que les squatters de la 
circonscription numéro 4 soient relogés aujourd’hui… 

(Interruptions) 

Ena so boute la dan la, atane pe vini la ! Li pe vini la ! 

(Interruptions) 

L’honorable Raj Dayal, il n’est pas là, qui était sur le terrain… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, last time!  Next time you are out! 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Perraud: L’honorable Raj Dayal qui était sur le terrain toute la nuit jusqu’aux 
petites heures du matin pendant l’inondation un 24 décembre 2014. L’honorable Showkutally 
Soodhun  qui  s’était  fait  inviter  à  une  réunion  présidée  par  le  ministre  et  avait  défendu  les 
squatters avec force. 

Ceci dit, Madame la présidente, je ne peux passer sous silence ce qui a été dit ici dans 
cette Chambre par l’honorable Lesjongard et l’honorable Oree. Ils ont accusé à tort le PMSD 
de ne pas se préoccuper du sort des rodriguais vivant à Maurice. C’est dommage qu’ils font 
eux aussi parti du club ‘menti, menti’. Madame la présidente, laissez-moi rétablir les faits. Le 
Leader de l’Opposition n’a jamais, jamais critiqué et pointé du doigt les rodriguais qui vivent 

 

195 

comme des squatteurs à Maurice. A aucun moment, il ne l’a fait. Par contre, ce qui doit être 
dit c’est que Xavier-Luc Duval, le PMSD défend les rodriguais vivant dans des conditions 
d’extrême pauvreté à Maurice. C’est un fait que personne ne peux nier, démentir que parmi 
les squatteurs à Maurice, beaucoup sont des rodriguais. 

Madam Speaker, lorsque le premier groupe de squatteurs vivaient à Marjolain à La 
Cité  La  Cure  sans  eau,  sans  électricité,  c’est  Xavier-Luc  Duval  qui  avait  fait  installer  des 
réservoirs d’eau potable pour eux. C’est grâce à Xavier-Luc Duval que la région de Robert 
Scott  à  La  Cite  La  Cure  a  été  alimentée  en  électricité.  Beaucoup  de  nos  sœurs  et  frères 
rodriguais y vivaient sans électricité depuis plus de 10 ans. C’est grâce à Xavier-Luc Duval, 
au PMSD, la lutte que nous avons mené que les habitants de Marjolain seront tous relogés 
bientôt.  

Et c’est dommage que mon colistier a osé critiquer la présence de ces squatteurs, la 
plupart des rodriguais présents au Parlement, lors de la PNQ du Leader de l’Opposition, la 
semaine dernière. Et c’est grâce  au PMSD que les squatteurs de  Behind  NHDC, après des 
années, plus de 10 ans, ont été relogées à Karo Kaliptis. Et c’est dommage que l’honorable 
Georges  Lesjongard  ne  se  trouve  pas  dans  cette  Chambre  ce  soir,  parce  que  l’honorable 
Georges Lesjongard nous avait relaté, raconté la mort de cette petite fille, la fille d’Henry. Et 
il avait fait croire à cette Chambre que moi, en tant que député, que le PMSD n’a rien fait 
pour ces squatteurs de Behind NHDC. Donc, je tiens à rétablir les faits que ces squatteurs 
avaient été relogés par le ministère, mais beaucoup d’entre eux ont refusé de partir de Behind 
NHDC, là où ils sont.  

Je  crois  que  c’est  important  de  dire  la  vérité,  toute  la  vérité.  Et  que  Georges 
Lesjongard, quand il a dit que dans la Circonscription No. 4 il y a beaucoup de problèmes, je 
tiens à lui dire qu’en tant que député, moi-même, j’en ai parlé au PPS de Rodrigues ; aussi à 
Madame  Gaspard  Pierre  Louis,  Commissaire  de  la  Femme ;  au  Chef  Commissaire  de 
Rodrigues, Serge Clair ; d’ailleurs nous sommes allées, ensemble à La Cité La Cure, visiter 
les  familles  d’origine  rodriguaise,  l’honorable  Léopold,  l’honorable  François,  le  Chef 
Commissaire et moi-même. 

J’ai  aussi  attiré  l’attention  de  l’ancien  ministre  de  l’Intégration  sociale,  l’honorable 
Roopun. Nous sommes partis voir les squatteurs qui sont sur la montagne Paul et Virginie, 
mais je dois dire que rien n’a été fait. Que le problème de ces squatteurs qui se trouvent sur la 
montagne de Paul et Virginie, sont toujours… 

 

196 

(Interruptions) 

...justement je suis contente que l’honorable Roopun me le dit. Et je le dis à cette Chambre - 
c’est ce que l’honorable Roopun dit, c’est que l’honorable Showkutally Soodhun dit - je ne 
crois pas qu’il faut dire que parce que ces squatteurs se trouvent sur un terrain privée, point 
final, point barre, on ne peut rien faire et on ne va rien faire. 

Je  crois  qu’il  faut  s’asseoir,  tout  le  monde,  et  trouver  une  solution  pour, 
majoritairement, les rodriguais qui y vivent. Je crois que c’est important, si vous voulez, si le 
gouvernement veut montrer à quel point on a à cœur l’Ile Rodrigues, on a à cœur le peuple 
rodriguais, je crois qu’il faudrait commencer par les squatteurs de Paul et Virginie de La Cité 
La Cure. 

Alors, j’aimerai dire à l’honorable Georges Lesjongard, quand il a posé ses valises à 
la Circonscription No. 14, il a laissé les problèmes au No. 4, c’est moi qui ait fait tout pour 
résoudre les problèmes des squatteurs de la Behind NHDC à La Cité La Cure.  

Madame la présidente, à l’aube des 50 ans de notre indépendance, l’Ile Maurice ouvre 
un nouveau chapitre de son histoire, et entre dans une nouvelle phase de développement à 
tous les niveaux. Propulsé par de nouvelles aspirations, ayant construit une base solide après 
l’indépendance, le peuple mauricien, guidé par de nouvelles ambitions, demande aujourd’hui 
un leadership plus à son écoute, un leadership de proximité avec qui il peut communiquer 
sans  peur  de  représailles  et  de  vengeance,  qui  affronte  le  défi  de  demain  tout  en  prenant 
compte les réalités d’aujourd’hui.  

Madame la présidente, nous sommes ici unanimes à constater qu’après 50 ans, notre 
société  a  évolué  de  manière  spectaculaire.  Maurice  de  demain  avancera  grâce  à  des 
générations de femmes et d’hommes de plus en plus épanouis, de plus en plus éduqués, de 
plus en plus émancipés, brisant ainsi les complexes d’hier pour forger une nouvelle société 
moderne  taillée  sur  mesure,  partie  prenante  de  la  mondialisation  tout  en  gardant  son  code 
génétique, propre à lui-même, une vrai mosaïque mauricienne.  

Maurice a besoin d’un vrai mauricien, un leader qui inspire confiance en marchant 
ensemble  avec  le  peuple  dans  son  évolution.  Aujourd’hui,  comme  demain,  notre  peuple 
demande  à  nos  décideurs  politiques  d’évoluer,  comme  lui-même  a  évolué.  Dans  cette 
optique, seul Xavier-Luc Duval a embrassé ce processus d’évolution avec conviction.  

 

197 

Madame  la  présidente,  évoluer  pour  enfin  faire  comprendre  à  tous  les  mauriciens 
irrespective  de  leur  communauté,  religion  et  classe  sociale,  faisant  partie  intégrante  du 
développement économique de notre nation et tout en rendant les plus démunis leur dignité. 
Evoluer  pour  unifier  tous  les  acteurs  sociaux  et  économiques  autour  d’une  table  pour 
construire  une  société  plus  juste  et  toujours  écouter  pour  mieux  comprendre  les  enjeux. 
Evoluer avec Xavier-Luc Duval et arrêter nos jeunes gradués de s’envoler tous les jours, en 
prenant leur savoir-faire, vers d’autres horizons au lieu de rester au chômage ou être casés 
dans des petits jobs mal-payés, sans avenir. 

Evoluer avec Xavier-Luc Duval, c’est de dire à un jeune issu d’un quartier défavorisé 
qu’un jour il sera un top boss grâce à sa passion et sortira sa famille de la pauvreté. Evoluer 
avec Xavier-Luc Duval c’est donner espoir qu’une jeune mère entrepreneuse peut se faufiler 
un chemin dans notre espace  économique impitoyable à travers une égalité des chances  et 
encadrement favorisant la discrimination positive, c’est réassurer un père de famille que son 
emploi est en sécurité en retournant à la maison le soir, et que demain ses enfants vivront 
mieux que lui… 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order Please! 

Mrs  Perraud:  Evaluer  avec  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  c’est  embarquer  chaque 
mauricienne et mauricien, sans oublier nos amis de Rodrigues et outre-mer dans une aventure 
qui  ferait  naître  un  sens  d’espoir  dans  l’avenir  de  demain.  Construire  une  république 
mauricienne  forte,  reconnue  à  la  fois  sur  le  plan  régionale  comme  internationale,  car, 
Madame la présidente combien de temps Maurice croit échapper aux défis du monde global ? 
Pour réussir ce pari, il faut donc un vrai citoyen du monde. Évoluer avec l’honorable Xavier-
Luc  Duval,  c’est  enfin  faire  comprendre  aux  mauriciens  qu’ils  sont  avant  tout  des  enfants 
sous le même toit de la république: rouge, bleu, jaune, vert.  

Madame la présidente, dans cette optique, à travers son passage  comme  ministre, 
comme Premier ministre par intérim dans le passé, comme Premier ministre adjoint servant 
son  pays  avec  respect,  dignité  et  humilité,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  aujourd’hui  en 
poste comme Leader de l’opposition, nous montre qu’il est un vrai patriote qui a évolué avec 
le temps, prêt pour affronter la plus grande responsabilité que tout citoyen peut être appelé à 
endosser demain.  L’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, je vous rappelle encore, est le Leader le 
plus populaire du pays d’après les sondages.  Il incarne le modernisme et sera le prochain 
Premier ministre de cette nation à partir de ce processus dévalué.  

 

198 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  peuple  évolue  avec  son  temps.  A  partir  d’aujourd’hui,  le 
changement  est  inévitable  et  nul  ne  peut  le  barrer  ou  le  résister,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc 
Duval sera le prochain Premier ministre. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker : I will now ask the Deputy Speaker to take the Chair. 

At this stage the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

 
 (00.47) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me start 
by answering to some of the queries of the two hon. Members who intervened before me.  

I  will  start  with  hon.  Baloomoody  who  seems  to  be  very  worried  about  the  YEP 
trainees. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me reassure the hon. Member that the YEP trainees are 
not recruited to be on the establishment. They are, as the name implies, trainees who come 
for some experience. In fact,  the intention of the YEP project is to give them the experience 
so  that  eventually  they  may  be  recruited  by  the  private  sector  or  public  sector.  As  he 
mentioned  himself,  only  one  of  them  could  get  recruited  through  the  PSC.  Now,  the  PSC 
Regulations is not a thing that is linked to my Ministry. It is something that is overall and we 
have to abide by same. 

However, it is important to note - and I raise a point earlier - that never ever were they 
given to understand that they would be given a special or a priority treatment. However,  I 
must say that many of the private primary schools will be recruiting holistic teachers and the 
fact that they have been trained, they will automatically have the privilege of being recruited 
by these private institutions. The hon. Member also mentioned the Polytechnics. I will come 
to that in the body of my intervention. I will give explanations to whatever he had queried. 

Hon. Mrs Perraud made a long speech on the Education Sector. She started by saying 
that  the  amount  that  we  are  spending  on  the  preschool  sector  is  extremely  low,  that  the  
amount  that  we  are    spending  in  the  TVET  sector  is  inadequate  and  she  came  up  with 
percentages; 2% for the pre-primary sector and 3% of the budget is for the TVET sector. 

 

199 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we just draw the attention of the hon. Member that when we 
talked  about  the  budget  of  the  Education  Sector,  we  are  talking  about  Rs16.6  billion  and 
when we talk about 2% of Rs16.6 billion, it comes to around Rs250 m. When we talk about 
3% of this amount, it comes to around Rs500 m. It is totally wrong to say that we do not pay 
attention to these two sectors. I will, while going through my speech, come on these specific 
points again. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member stated that nothing was going on well in the 
Education  Sector,  that  teachers  were  unhappy,  students  were  unhappy,  the  preschool 
puéricultrices were not happy, no one in the sector felt that it was going in the right direction. 
The Tertiary Education Sector, she mentioned, has been given only Rs1.3 m. This is totally 
wrong,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir!  She  should  go  back  to  the  figures  and  check  the  value 
attributed to the Tertiary Education Sector. Only the University of Mauritius received around 
Rs650 m. So, coming to say that the amount allotted to the tertiary sector is Rs1.3 m., it is 
totally wrong. So, I will not talk about this any further. But as I go through my speech, I will 
come back to each and every sector that she has mentioned and I will show where she has 
been going wrong. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, much has been heard in this august Assembly on the 2017-
2018 Budget, depending obviously upon the party perspective from which it is used. It is true 
what  we  say  depends  on  where  we  stand.  The  same  Members  sitting  on  this  side  a  few 
months back, now sitting on the other side had totally different things to say. 

However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is something that many may not have really 
grasped,  although  it  is  at  the  core  of  this  Budget.  I  am  referring  here  to  the  overall 
overarching title of the Budget, which is, ‘Rising to the challenge of our ambitions.’ This title 
is  apt  in  more  ways  than  one,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  For  one  thing,  it  reflects  a 
characteristics hallmark of the Mauritius entity, a capacity to be ambitious on one side and for 
another  our  readiness  to  give  ourselves  the  means  to  realise  these  ambitions.  Because,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is where our strength lies, the ability to rise to the occasion and to 
prove wrong the prophets of doom. Who does not recall the pessimism that was highlighted 
by a Nobel Prize Winner, Margaret Mead? Who can forget the overcrowded barracoon tag 
latch  on  Mauritius?  But,  the  resilience  demonstrated  by  our  population  proved  them  all 
wrong. 

 

200 

Similarly,  we  can  and  we  will  rise  to  the  challenges  of  our  ambition  to  make  this 
country a lone star for the region. This Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, gives us the means 
to do precisely that.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Budget highlights five challenges facing 
the country as it sets itself firmly on the high-income economy transformation path. These 
five challenges relate to – 

(i) 

fostering higher growth for more and better jobs; 

(ii) 

investing massively in the infrastructure of the future; 

(iii) 

further improving the quality of life our people; 

(iv) 

 (v) 

ushering in a New Social Paradigm (inspirer une nouvelle vision d’une société 
juste et compatissante), and 

consolidating  macro-economic  fundamentals,  that  is,  consolider  les  piliers 
fondamentaux afin de s’assurer une base économique solide, M. le président.  

Who can deny that education and training are one of the central pillars that will help 
face  and  overcome  these  challenges?  Hence,  the  sustained  emphasis  this  Government  is 
placing on the implementation of the reform agenda embarked upon since 2015. This reform 
programme is articulated around a set of strategic planks. One of these planks is the Nine-
Year Continuous Basic Education Programme.  Another strategic plank is the reform of the 
TVET sector and the third is the transformation of a higher education sector.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, last year when the budget was presented, the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development laid necessary provisions for the Nine-Year Schooling 
programme both for the recurrent and capital budget. As implementation is being effected on 
a  phased  basis,  the  House  will  note  that  provision  has  been  made  for  successive  financial 
years. Indeed, the funding has been spread over five years, donc, M. le président, pour ceux 
qui s’inquiétaient à  propos du financement du Nine-Year Schooling, soyez rassuré les fonds 
sont bel et bien là. 

This year is a watershed year; it is a turning point for our education reforms both for 
the  primary  as  well  as  the  secondary  subsectors.  This  year,  we  have  done  away  with  the 
Certificate  of  Primary  Education;  we  are  introducing  the  Primary  School  Achievement 
Certificate, the PSAC as a new assessment at the end of Grade 6. We are now fully poised for 

 

201 

the  transition  of  all  Grade  6  learners  to  Grade  7  in  January  2018,  which  is  yet  another 
landmark. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will briefly highlight some major transformations that have 
been  articulated  and  that  are  to  be  sustained  in  the  context  of  the  implementation  of  the 
education reform.  

First, the pre-school subsector, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Today, no one can deny the 
importance of the early years of education and no one denies it. Early childhood development 
is, in fact, a starting point which will lead to the Nine Years of continuous basic education 
reform.  My Ministry is already investing in qualitative improvement of education in both the 
private  and  public  pre-primary  schools  in  Mauritius  so  that  children  get  to  be  ready  for 
primary school education.  

Let me now give an answer to the hon. Member, Mrs Perraud. She has been saying 
that  we  have  not  been  giving  sufficient  attention  to  the  pre-primary  sector.    In  this  very 
Budget, the hon. Minister of Finance has made it a point to come up with a fund to go to 125 
preprimary schools in the deprived areas. 

If this is not a critic, what is then, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? 

Now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir… 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  just  mentioned  that  a 

budget of Rs350 m. goes to the preprimary sector.  

Secondly, let me tell the hon. Member that from the moment we came into power, we 
have tried to bring up capacity building in the preprimary sector. The Authority has worked 
and  is  still  working  on  a  capacity  building  programme.    We  have  ensured  that  children 
profiling is done at the preprimary sector so that when the child leaves the preprimary sector 
to enter the primary schools, the child comes with his learner profile so that the teacher in 
Grade 1 knows what type of student is in front of her. We have also come up with a School 

 

202 

Readiness  Programme,  where  the  teacher,  using  a  particular  tool,  determines  whether  the 
child has attained the standard for her to start the curriculum in the primary school. 

It is important for people to know that a lot is being done for this sector and when we 
talk about the preprimary sector, we are doing a lot. And let me tell the hon. Member, she has 
been  saying  that  we  are  lagging  behind.  In  Mauritius,  from  2015  onwards,  we  have  been 
chosen  as  the  ICQN  Lead  (Inter-Country  Quality  Node)  for  Africa  by  the  ADEA  and 
Mauritius  is  leading.  We  have  just  had  a  workshop  two  weeks  back,  where  many  African 
countries have turned to us to learn how we have improved the preprimary sector and how we 
are heading in this particular sector. 

So, coming to say and to make gratuitous statements that the preprimary sector is not 

being taken care of is totally wrong, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

And I would like to come back to this, and let me say that the Budget provides funds to give 
means to reduce the disparity between the preprimary schools and this specially holds good 
for 125 preprimary schools operating in deprived regions. The provision was served to build 
the capacity of the staff and to enhance the quality of teaching/learning environment. And 
this, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is demonstrably equity in action and it is only proper that this 
starts right from the early stages of learning. 

We all know that for every dollar spent in the preprimary sector, you will save up to 
10 to 15 dollars later because you would not have to go for remediation, you will not have to 
provide psychological support and many other such services. The trend today is to provide a 
strong foundation at the level of the preprimary schools to ensure future learning by investing 
more in the preschool years and this is what we are doing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Now, the second plank of the reform, the Early Support Programme. One of the most 
significant and far-reaching reforms is the introduction of the Early Support Programme for 
Grades 1 and 2 pupils. A key element for in-time remediation since the very start, this is the 
means of preventing the accumulation of learning deficits and ensuring retention while also 
cutting down on drop-outs in the long term.  

M. le président, c’est un moyen puissant de diminuer le déficit d’apprentissage et de 
récupérer les enfants très tôt. On a si longtemps décrié le taux de décrochage scolaire très 

 

203 

élevé  à  Maurice.  Et  cela,  nous  le  savons  tous,  c’est  dû  à  l’accumulation  des  déficits 
d’apprentissage et finalement menant au décrochage. 

Let me share with the House that this Early Support programme has already started 

and is already yielding rich dividends.  

Cette année, le budget permet le recrutement  additionnel de 257 Support Teachers. 
On ne lésine pas sur les moyens, le ministre des Finances, je dois lui dire un grand merci pour 
cela. Si cette réforme réussit, c’est parce que le Cabinet est en faveur de cette réforme. Si 
cette  réforme  réussit,  c’est  parce  que  le  gouvernement  donne  les  moyens  au  ministère  de 
l’Éducation pour réaliser cette réforme. 

Et je crois là qu’il nous faut… 

(Interruptions) 

…remercier le Premier ministre et le gouvernement général pour le soutien qu’on a donné au 
ministère de l’Éducation pour que cela se réalise.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when we talk about the Early Support, we need to realise that 
it is useless to cry after the Grade 6 examinations come. We need to make sure that as many 
as possible children are kept on the rails and this from the very beginning.  And I would like 
here to put on record the good work being done by the Support Teachers who were recruited 
last year.  These young teachers have been trained and are working with our students using 
new techniques, des pédagogies novatrices to make sure that these students learn and  feel 
happy being at school and this is being done. This is extremely important to catch them early, 
to make sure that they do not accumulate learning deficits.  This is how we will allow them to 
succeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Third plank, holistic education, what makes the difference with the introduction of the 
NYCBE the Nine Years Continuous Basic Education, is the attention being paid not only to 
the cognitive development of learners but also the whole person, their integral development. 
The  goal  is  to  have  children  emerging  from  the  system  not  only  as  competent  but  also 
responsible citizens.  

M. le président, l’éducation concerne tout le monde.  Quel genre de personne nous 
allons rencontrer dans notre lieu de travail, la personne que nous côtoierons sur la route, notre 

 

204 

voisin, quel genre de personne nous allons travailler avec. Tout cela dépend de l’éducation et 
c’est normal que tout le monde, toute la population s’intéresse à l’éducation. 

The goal, I have told you, is to make of our children responsible citizens. The Budget 
gives  us  the  human  resources  to  just  do  that.  I  must  thank  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  having  given  us  the  means,  thus  the 
number  of  trainee  primary  teachers  now  moves  to  660  as  from  this  year’s  Budget.  The 
number of holistic education will be boosted to 430 and the present cohort of support teachers 
now at 53 will move on to 257. If this is not translating intent into action, I wonder what it is! 

Education holistique comprend l’éducation physique. With regard to the promotion of 
physical  education,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  adage:  ‘Mens  sana  in  corpore  sano’:  ‘A 
healthy mind in a healthy body’ certainly holds good here. Thus to promote the practice of 
sports  activities,  we  have  introduced  the  natation  scolaire  in  30  primary  schools  since 
January 2017 in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth and Sports and the Mauritius Sports 
Council. 

Now, that the Budget has made provision for four additional bassins d’apprentissage, 
one in each zone, the facilities would be extended to more students in the primary schools so 
as to make the teaching of swimming skills and water safety more accessible to learners. I 
must  add,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  it  is  sad  that  whilst  we  live  in  an  island  entourée 
d’eau,  entourée  de  l’océan,  chaque  année  nous  voyons  beaucoup  de  jeunes  perdre  la  vie 
bêtement  tout  simplement  parce  qu’ils  ne  savent  pas  nager.  Et  je  pense  que  la  natation 
scolaire c’est quelque chose de formidable qui permettrait à nos jeunes d’apprendre à nager 
mais qui les protégera aussi. 

Let me inform the House that my Ministry is equal implementing the After-School 
Sports  and  Fitness  programme,  a  well-structured  programme  launched  on  a  pilot  basis  as 
from May this year and in collaboration once again with the Mauritius Sports Council and the 
Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports.  This  programme  covers  some  1,850  Grade  4  pupils  in  56 
primary  schools  and  8  in  Rodrigues.  Obviously  enough,  the  programme  is  immensely 
popular. It is accordingly being rolled out in more schools this year.  

M. le président, cela devient encore plus important quand nous constatons, comme je 
l’ai  dit,  le  nombre  des  jeunes  qui  perdent  bêtement  leur  vie  au  bord  de  la  mer,  en  temps 
d’inondations et autres. 

 

205 

Again with regard to holistic education, the development of eco-friendly mind-set and 
behaviour  is  fundamental.  It  is  precisely  for  this  reason  that  sustainable  development 
initiatives  are  being  implemented.  The  campaign  ‘Clean-Up  Mauritius’  is  a  major 
preoccupation of the Prime Minister himself and rightly so. There is a necessity to sensitise 
our children and youth such that concern for sound environment is strongly embedded. As I 
have  said  earlier  in  this  Assembly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  181  primary  schools  and  63 
secondary schools have already embarked on the ‘Clean-Up Mauritius’, and embellishment 
programme launched in March this year under the aegis of the PMO. 

My Ministry has now given the means to extend this programme to all schools. As for 
the Eco-Schools Indian Ocean programme, 28 primary and 47 secondary schools in Mauritius 
and all the schools in Rodrigues are involved. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, la réforme enclenchée touche le cycle secondaire également 
et ce à partir de janvier 2018.  Dans cette optique, mon ministère travaille pleinement à une 
mise  en  œuvre  efficace  de  celle-ci.    Et  là  pour  répondre  à  l’honorable  Baloomoody,  je 
voudrai  dire  que  les  consultations  ont  déjà  commencé.    Nous  passons  à  la  phase  de 
l’implémentation.  La formation des professeurs débute le mois prochain.  Tout le travail se 
fait  d’une  façon  systématique.  L’honorable  Baloomoody  disait  tout  à  l’heure  que  les 
consultations  avaient  débuté  en  décembre  dernier  mais  ce  n’est  pas  vrai.    L’honorable 
Baloomoody a la mémoire courte. La première des consultations avait été faite en 2015 avec 
les membres de l’Assemblée et l’honorable membre était présent. Il y avait plusieurs autres 
consultations. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order! 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a number of changes regarding 
the secondary sector is in offing. Let’s take them one by one.  All the learners of Grade 6 will 
move  to  Grade  7  in  regional  secondary  schools  after  the  PSAC  evaluation.    All  of  them!  
After  three  years,  they  will  sit  for  the  National  Certificate  in  Education  and  at  the  end  of 
Grade 9, they will have three options.  Some would go to the academies; others will remain in 
their regional secondary schools to pursue their studies and some may even choose to go to 
vocational training centres. Now, when we talk about vocational training centres, it is under 
the MITD. They will get trained. The MITD is doing a wonderful job. I will later come to the 

 

206 

figures because I was told that they were not popular. This is totally wrong. I will give the 
figures  to  the  National  Assembly  after  some  time.  Now,  it  is  true  some  pupils  would  not 
attain  the  required  standard  at  the  PSAC  level.  These  pupils  would  enter  into  a  four-year 
extended stream. This stream will offer an adapted and flexible curriculum that best response 
to  their  new  learning  needs  and  their  learning  pace.  Every  regional  school  will  have  an 
extended stream class that will not have more than 20 students. Why? So that we can give 
them more attention! So that we can follow them; provide them with the support required! So 
that they manage to pass their NCE.  

Appropriate approaches have been devised to provide the students with a maximum 
chance of success including a foundation programme in the first year. During that period, the 
students  will  be  given  appropriate  help  to  regain  self-confidence,  to  build  up  their  self-
esteem,  to  learn,  to  relate  with  others  and  increase  their  trust  and  belief  in  schooling  and 
studies. 

Rectors have already been asked to identify those teachers they consider more apt to 
work with these young adults. This is obviously where the prevocational teachers with their 
stocks  of  hands-on  experience  are  better  placed  for  a  dedicated  approach  vis-à-vis  these 
students.  So,  once  again,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  reassure  hon.  Members  of  the 
House, as I have done a number of times before, all prevocational teachers would be on board 
and will be working with their students in schools.  

Let  me  stress,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  Extended  Stream  Programme  is 
different from the prevocational educational in two ways. Firstly, it preaches inclusion and 
secondly,  students  will  all  be  engaged  in  a  programme  that  will  ultimately  lead  to  the 
National  Certificate  in  Education  which  will  be  properly  graded  National  Assessment.  Le 
NCE  sera  conçu  de  la  sorte  à  ce  que  tous  les  élèves  ayant  fait  l’effort  voulu  auront  la 
possibilité de passer et de réussir.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, another innovation we are introducing as from next year is 
the Students Support Programme.  This programme aims at giving students the opportunity to 
have free access to the best learning materials that will be online and easily retrievable on 
digital devices.  Students will have the facility to learn at their own pace and place throughout 
the year after school hours.  M. le président, c’est une façon qu’on leur donnera afin qu’ils 
puissent consolider les acquis de la journée. We must not forget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

 

207 

that  the  use  today  are  digital  natives  and  they  will  easily  pick  up  and  learn  through 
technology.  

In a broad manner of speaking, this programme will bring tuition to the home of all 
the  students.    Allow  me  to  inform  the  House  that  the  MIE  and  the  Open  University  are 
collaborating and tapping the expertise of the National Council of Educational Research and 
Training of India for this venture. 

Let me, now come to the private providers of the secondary education. Again, to allay 
the apprehensions of hon. Baloomoody, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on several occasions I have 
made  it  a  point  both  inside  the  House  and  outside  it  to  allay  the  apprehensions  of  the 
management and staff of grant-aided Private Secondary Schools. No staff will lose his or her 
job. No schools will close down as a result of educational reform. 

On  the  contrary,  the  right  conditions  are  being  created  to  support  teaching  and 
learning  in  the  private  secondary  schools.  Let  me  clarify,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The 
existing practice for pedagogical inspection and quality assurance to be carried out in State 
and private secondary schools are done by officers of my Ministry. 

The  PSEA  will  now  be  call  upon  to  look  into  pedagogical  inspection  and  quality 
assurance in teaching and learning being carried out in the private secondary schools. 16 new 
posts  of  quality  assurance  officers  have  been  created  on  the  establishment  of  the  private 
secondary education authority. They will be operating under the national quality assurance 
framework of my Ministry. These posts will be filled within the next few months. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  PSEA  will  also  be  equipped  with  its  own  educational 
psychologists  and  educational  social  workers.  Let  me  inform  hon.  Mrs  Perraud  that  we 
presently  have  23  psychologists  and  one  head  of  the  department  at  the  Ministry.  This  is 
definitely  not  enough,  but  we  have  to  do  with  our  resources  and  these  psychologists  offer 
their services throughout the educational sector.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this will go a long way towards addressing the problem of 
indiscipline in schools, absenteeism and dropouts. All the reforms that I have been talking 
about so far are directly in line with the SDG 4. They stresses the need to ensure inclusive 
and quality education for all and promote lifelong learning. 

 

208 

Two key words, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, quality and inclusiveness, and practically all 
strategic actions in the reform agenda are moving in that direction. In fact, the inclusion of 
learners with special education needs remains a priority for this Government.  

Education is a matter of rights, and rights for all. To that effect and as stressed in the 
budget, we are working on the strategy document for SEN. In fact, the paper is almost ready. 
We have a consultant who is presently working with us at the Ministry, the draft paper has 
been prepared and it will soon go to Cabinet.  

Now,  this  strategy  views  inclusion  education  for  every  learner  across  the  entire 
spectrum of abilities as a right and not a privilege. Equally, the infrastructure is being adapted 
for  a  barrier  free,  disability  free,  friendly  environment  in  secondary  schools  for  physically 
challenged learners as well as personnel and other stakeholders. We are also making sure the 
schools are retrofitted with ramps, handrails and have links between building blocks as well 
as provided with adapted toilets. 

I have to thank the hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance for having increased 
the budget for the grant-in-aid to Rs115.2 m. and this will go to the 42 NGOs running 54 
SEN schools and this is over and above the integrated units that we have in our schools.  

I must also thank the Prime Minister for having given this year five scholarships for 

students with disability to go for higher education, to go for the tertiary sector.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, j’aimerais bien, à ce stade, dire tout le bien que je pense de 
ces ONG qui travaillent d’arrache-pied afin de promouvoir l’environnement digne pour ces 
enfants qui leurs sont confiés. Afin de mieux les encadrer, promouvoir leur savoir-faire, nous 
venons de l’avant avec une autorité pour ce secteur. 

The  overarching  aim  of  the  authority  will  be  to  enhance  learners  life  chances  and 
opportunities for active  participation in society  and to build the inclusive society in which 
Mauritius ethically aligns itself. The authority will also be responsible for the formulation of 
norms, standards, regulations and monitoring of all SEN institutions. They will also take care 
of the training requirements.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, reforms in education alone are a huge undertaking. For the 
sake  of  brevity,  I  will  just  take  up  some  other  high  points  of  the  vaste  chantier  we  are 
engaged  in.  Rs590  m.  will  go  for  the  upgrading  of  school  infrastructure.  The  digital 

 

209 

transformation that was mentioned by the hon. Member, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has already 
become a reality in our schools. 

I believe that right from the primary school level the appropriate technological tools 
need  to  be  provided  so  that  our  pupils  do  not  end  up  being  just  passive  consumers  of 
technology. We must not forget that we are dealing with digital natives. Accordingly, a huge 
procurement  exercise  is  on  for  the  provision  of  some  1,700  PCs  for  our  primary  and 
secondary schools.  

The early digital learning project is a major breakthrough project to expose Grades I 
and  II  pupils  to  ICT.  I  would  like,  here,  to  thank  the  Indian  Government  for  the  grant 
provided for the purchase of these tablets. We are currently at the tendering stage, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. As for the digital content, it has already been prepared by the MIE and is ready 
for  upload.  We  are  accordingly  welcoming  the  provision  of  some  Rs350  m.  in  the  next 
budget for the extension of the project to Grade III students. 

One of the objectives is to connect our schools and the school community on a single 
platform. In this context, Microsoft has provided us with the Office 365 platform to enable 
unlimited  online  collaboration  among  teachers,  between  students  and  teachers,  between 
schools and between schools and the Ministry. 

Another high point is, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the collaboration that we have with 
the Ministry of ICT.  We are going to have an e-platform for collaboration again between 
schools and between teachers. 

Another  high  point  in  this  budget  is  the  increased  allowances  to  laureates.  Our 
education system has always acknowledged and recognized those who invest a lot of efforts 
and shine at the national and often international scene. 

It is a fact that the quantum of allowances provided to our laureates at both graduate 
and post graduate levels has not been revised for more than a decade. The last revision, in 
fact, took place in 2004. I would like here again to thank the Minister of Finance for having 
taken on board the suggestion of the Ministry to increase the allowances for those scholarship 
awardees both at national and international level. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  budget  presented  by  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister of Finance goes a long way to its highlighting the transformation of Mauritius into a 
high income country by 2023.  

 

210 

The knowledge economy is the foundation on which every nation seeks to build its 
progress  in  the  21st  century.  My  ministry  is,  in  fact,  fully  engaged  in  strengthening  the 
foundation  for  the  future  economy  by  investing  in  both  skills  development  and  high 
education as a key to boosting growth. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  according  to  the  Africa  Competitiveness  Report  2017 
released  in  May  by  the  World  Economic  Forum,  skills  remain  an  important  barrier  for 
development on the African continent. The report recognises that in view of growing shortage 
of technicians, engineers and other high skilled workers, there is a severe risk of skills gap 
increasing. This is where it becomes vital to invest in the TVET for productive employment 
and future employability. What does this means for us in Mauritius? It means that we have to 
usher  a  change  in  mindset,  a  shift  in  attitude  towards  valorising  technical  education. 
Scandinavian  countries  as  well  as  Germany,  Korea,  Singapore  have  demonstrated  how 
successful such endeavours have been. This is why the reform in the TVET sector is so wide 
ranging.  

We are rebranding the sector, reviewing its curriculum, upgrading equipment as well 
as building capacity of trainers and this is why I have been telling hon. Mrs Perraud that she 
was wrong in what she was saying.  We have already got the expertise from Singapore. We 
are reviewing the curriculum. We are spending on equipment. We are renovating our centres. 
In this connection, the MITD has sought the assistance of Singapore’s Institute of Technical 
Education  Services,  a  principal  provider  of  career  and  technical  education  and  a  key 
developer of national occupational skills certification standards. 

On n’est pas en train de se croiser les bras, M. le président. Nous sommes en train de 
travailler. On ne fait pas de tam-tam chez nous. On travaille tranquillement et les résultats 
seront là. 

I would like here to mention that revalorising also implies budgetary increases. And 
again, I must thank the hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance for earmarking Rs310 m. 
for  upgrading  educational  hardware  and  infrastructure  in  our  training  institutions  namely, 
MITD and the projects that hon. Mrs Perraud was mentioning, l’Ecole Hôtelière Sir Gaëtan 
Duval,  Sir Rampersad  Neerunjun Training  Centre,  Le  Chou  Training  Centre,  all  these  are 
being done, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

211 

Let  me  give  you  the  project  status  for  these  projects.  L’Ecole  Hôtelière,  an  apex 
training  provider  in  hospitality  sector  and  given  the  rising  demand  for  trained  labour,  it  is 
imperative  to  undergo  further  expansion  to  the  growing  demand  for  trained  labour  in 
hospitality and tourism sector. And, let me tell the hon. Member that every year we receive 
students  from  Africa,  Ghana,  Burkina  Faso  and  other  countries  coming  to  Mauritius  for 
training  at  the  MITD.  Construction  work  is  starting  in  July  2017  for  Sir Rampersad 
Neerunjun Training Complex.  

We  have  not  forgotten  Rodrigues,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  context  of  the 
implementation  of  the  TVET  reform,  Le  Chou  Multipurpose  Centre  is  being  upgraded  to 
enable  introduction  of  high  level  courses  pitched  at  National  Certificate  Level  4,  increase 
enrolment  capacity,  provide  for  more  conducive  learning  environment  and  for  the 
introduction of new courses in Rodrigues. The estimated cost of construction will be Rs24.7 
m.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to also underscore the need for Mauritius to engage in 
strategic  partnership  with  renowned  foreign  training  institutions.  We  have  just  signed  la 
convention  de  partenariat  between  La Chambre  de  Métiers  et  de  l'Artisanat  de  La 
Réunion and the MITD. We have also an active collaboration with l’Académie de La Réunion 
for technical upgrading of MITD trainers, a programme that will run over two years.  

Coming to the National Skills Development Programme launched in December 2016, 
let me tell the hon. Member that the 3,000 people she was talking about who had registered, 
in fact, of them only 1,500 registered and many of them had already got employment. Finally, 
only  800  came  for  the  training  of  which  many  have  completed  and  the  others  are  still  on 
training. 

Let  me  state,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  National  Skills  Development 
Programme is building solid bridges between the world of work and the training providers in 
order  to  match  skills  needs  of  enterprises  at  the  sectoral  level.  The  direct  participation  of 
employers and workers together with training providers ensures the relevance of training.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  one  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  experts  from 

Singapore pertains to the elaboration of a National Manpower Plan to guide  

TVET efforts in support of Mauritius economic development. In this context, HRDC 
is  working  with  l’Agence  Française  de  Développement  to  develop  a  strategy  for  human 

 

212 

resource development in Mauritius. The policy document will establish competencies, skills 
that Mauritius requires at present and in the future and the means and strategies to achieve it. 
So,  I  must  add  that  the  Skills  Development  Authority  will  soon  be  set  up.  And  the  Skills 
Development Authority will have strategic policy objectives: the coordination and planning 
of the TVET sector, the identification of skills, sustainable financing mechanisms for TVET, 
regulation  of  skills  development  sector,  improvement  of  partnership  and  coordination, 
amongst its stakeholders, that is, HRDC, MQA and the MITD.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  come  to  the  higher  education  sector.  For  the 
information  of  this  august  Assembly,  the  World  Economic  Forum  released  its  Africa 
Competitiveness Report in May this year. The good news is that Mauritius figures at the top 
amongst  the  most  competitive  countries  in  terms  of  higher  education  and  training  in  sub-
Saharan Africa. It is followed by South Africa and Cape Verde. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for 
his  interest  and  concern  about  the  sector.  Let  me  reassure  the  House  that  a  number  of 
measures are being taken in the domain of higher education where we also have 65 private 
TEI  operators.  Measure  number  one  taken  up  by  hon.  Mrs  Perraud,  the  Higher  Education 
Bill, let me inform the House that the legislation has already been prepared and has been sent 
to  the  State  Law  Office  for  vetting  and  will  soon  land  on  the  table  of  the  Cabinet.  The 
proposed  legislation  has  already  been  forwarded,  as  I  have  said,  and  it  will  bring  up  the 
setting up of the Quality Assurance Agency, the research fund distribution mechanism and 
many other issues. 

Now,  the  second  measure  in  the  sector  refers  to  research  funds.  Much  has  already 
been  said  about  the  ranking  of  public  universities.  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has 
been  saying  a  number  of  times:  ‘This  is  the  rank  of  the  Mauritian  universities’, 
notwithstanding the fact that these universities especially the UTM was set up some 17 years 
back  only.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  the  improvement  of  a  University  ranking  at  the 
international level is usually dependent on two factors, quality of education and conduct of 
research. 

Research especially leads to the improvement of both the level of the lecturers as well 
as their teaching methods. Again, we have to thank the hon. Prime Minister and Minister of 
Finance for having provided my Ministry with the means through the Research Fund to start 

 

213 

promoting our portfolio of scientific research. Officers of my Ministry and those of TEC are 
already working on how best to operationalise this important Budget measure. 

The Mauritius High Education Desk is also being set up. It is worth remembering, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, that transforming Mauritius into an education hub rests on sound and 
even  aggressive  marketing  campaigns  to  recruit  international  students.  In  this  regard,  a 
dynamic  Mauritius  High  Education  Desk  will  be  set  up  to  showcase  the  higher  education 
landscape in Mauritius. 

The  hon.  Member  was  just  mentioning  that  she  was  surprised  that  hon.  Oree  had 

mentioned meeting, foreign students in Mauritius. It would appear that the  

hon. Member does not really know what is happening in the tertiary sector.  

 (Interruptions) 

You mentioned foreign students, you were wondering where they come from, etc. 

So, this is what I have to say. The medical colleges are filled with foreign students 
coming from South Africa and from India. In the tertiary institutions at Médine which is not a 
public  university  granted,  in  l’Université  des  Mascareignes,  in  UTM,  you  have  students 
coming from abroad and getting into these institutions. Obviously, when she talks about the 
declining number of students entering the tertiary sector, I would ask her to just have a look 
at the demographic trend as well. 

The number of students leaving the tertiary education sector last year, the number of 
students  leaving  this  year,  and  the  number  that  will  be  leaving  next  year  would  also  be 
declining. We have only 12,000 students who have entered the primary sector this  year in 
Grade I. So, obviously, there is a declining population, so this trend will be reflected in the 
number of students leaving or entering institutions, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

So, far from losing its attractiveness, our tertiary education sector is, in fact, drawing 
and  attracting  more  students.  The  Mauritius  High  Desk  that  I  was  talking  about  will  also 
disseminate information and provide the advice to those local and international students on 
high education opportunities in Mauritius. I must also say that we would need to ensure that 
information given on Mauritius on Air Mauritius, for example, should include information 
about  our  tertiary  education  sector.  Mauritius  is  poised  to  becoming  an  educational  hub, 
regional or even international one.  

 

214 

We  must  not  forget  that  people  send  their  children  to  us  for  studies  for  various 
reasons; the intercultural experience that  you have in Mauritius cannot be found anywhere 
else  in  the  world.  Mauritius  is  known  to  be  a  safe  haven,  isn’t  it?  The  safety  also  attracts 
students to Mauritius and, on top of that, you will find that, most of the British Universities 
coming to open their doors in Mauritius, are also trying to tap the students from the African 
continent.  We  all  know  that  every  year  there  are  African  students  entering  the  tertiary 
education sector. And we can definitely tap on this clientele.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what is also interesting is that we have been discussing with 
foreign  universities  to  see  how  best  we  can  collaborate.  We  have  been  discussing  with 
Australian universities, with the university from Reunion island to see whether we can move 
on  to  having  shared  modules,  where  modules  offered  by  the  University  of  Mauritius  and 
those by the University of Reunion could be recognised and could be accepted by the two 
different  institutions.  We  are  making  the  first  steps  towards  trans-border  recognition  of 
qualifications.  And  this  is  something  wonderful  that  we  can  do  in  terms  of  research 
possibilities jointly with Reunion Island, with the Seychelles in terms of papers that can be 
written, research on linguistic domain. So, lots of things can be done together with the foreign 
universities  and  we  are  moving  in  this  direction.  We  are  talking  about  multi-campuses. 
Certain  universities  get  their  students  moving  from  one  campus  to  the  other  to  provide 
exposure to these students. This is what we also can do.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me now come to the polytechnics. I have heard Members 
of the Opposition stating that the Director of Audit had mentioned that there is wastage at the 
level of the polytechnics. What they do not know is that the polytechnics were, in fact, - as 
mentioned by an hon. Member - brand new campuses that were initially meant to be rented to 
foreign institutions coming to Mauritius by the former Government, by the former regime. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are dealing with the needs of this country. We all know that this 
country  requires  middle  management,  high  level  technicians  for  the  Vision  2030,  for  the 
implementation of the economic pillars and this is the reason why these campuses have been 
converted into polytechnics.  

With regard to these buildings one of them was ready towards the end of 2015 and the 
other  two  were  completed  by  April  2016.  We  did  not  sit  back  and  rest.  We  have  been 
working with foreign institutions; we have been developing the curricular.  In a few weeks’ 
time,  we  shall  be  starting  courses  in  nursing,  along  with  MIH  at  the  polytechnics  in 

 

215 

Pamplemousses. For the ICT, I will come to it. I will tell you what we are doing. So, do not 
think that we did not do our work. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the concept of polytechnics, it seems is still not clear in the 
minds of many people. So, let me take it from scratch. One of the complaints of industry for a 
number of years has been that graduates coming on the labour market do not have the skills 
that  the  industry  requires  for  immediate  employability,  despite  the  graduates  having  an 
appreciable level of education. We are now working with industry for the development of the 
curriculum to ensure the relevance of the courses.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, within the next two years, polytechnics will produce highly 
skilled middle management-level professional staff. And these polytechnics graduates will be 
ready for immediate employment; they will be meeting exactly the needs of industry. This is 
the  modus  operandi  of  our  polytechnic  education  which  is  called  upon  to  help  Mauritius 
bridges skill mismatch gap, and gear Mauritius and its economy towards new heights in the 
near future.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  opted  for  some  of  the  best  collaborative 
international partners of repute from Canada, New Zealand for the fields of Tourism and ICT. 
On the other hand, we are forging ahead, as I have said earlier, with the Ministry of Health  in 
the nursing field. 

Other technicians for the medical sector will also be trained. Courses related to green 
energy, engineering related fields and new and emerging sectors in tourism sector are also 
being pursued. Additionally, and as announced in the Budget, courses related to robotics, big 
data and the internet of things will soon be launched at the Reduit Campus. We are already 
actively seeking international partners of high repute to help in the conduct of these courses. 
We are also envisaging having co-awards. Finally, polytechnics will also be a pathway for 
students who would have followed MITD run programmes so that they can move to higher 
education  and  higher  national  diplomas.  I  must  say  that  the  polytechnics  will  welcome 
students having completed their SC and HSC as well. We are also carrying out tracer studies 
to ensure that the training provided is adequate and we are also identifying the areas which 
need to be done.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there was a PNQ on the UTM and they were complaining 
that the infrastructures are not proper. Now, the UTM has started operating in the year 2000. 

 

216 

From the year 2000 to year 2014, no one saw that there was anything missing or lacking at 
the UTM. But, as soon as we came, we starting bringing about changes, and again, you will 
note that we have been à l’écoute. The best education or marketing or research will all fail if 
the students  are not happy in their learning environment. In this regard, this Budget shows 
that  Government  is  attentive  to  the  needs  and  demands  of  our  children.  The  decision  to 
provide  a  special  infrastructure  fund  to  revamp  the  infrastructure  of  our  public-tertiary 
education institutions starting with UTM is more than loadable. We are aware that no student 
will  enjoy  studying  in  an  inadequate  and  less  than  suitable  surroundings.  I  have  met 
personally the students and I have noted that whatever they were asking was légitime. And in 
a matter of weeks, we settle this problem. Obviously, we gave the boost that was required and 
we ensured that the students got what they needed.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  is  pledging  that  we  will,  over  the  next  few 
years, upgrade the infrastructure of public TEIs in keeping with the international ambition of 
the  country.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  to  consider  that  in  the  tertiary  sector,  co-
awarding, collaboration with other institutions should be the word of the day. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for 
bringing  up  the  issue  of  career  guidance  and  career  education.  This  allows  me  to  set  the 
record right. Just because it has not been mentioned in the budget, it does not mean that it 
plays second fiddle in the hierarchy of Government actions.  

We are fully aware of the need for the youth to be better informed about current and 
future labour market needs, to be aware of the ecosystem within which they will make career 
choices at various stages of their life. Work is already on for the development of an integrated 
career  counselling  system.  This  will  widen  access  to  career  awareness,  career  education, 
career information and career management services. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we must not forget that students today are being trained for 
careers, for jobs that have not yet been created. So, we need to make sure that they get the 
proper counselling. That is why we are talking about the reforms. We want the students to 
adapt  to  the  evolving  world.  ICT  enabled  instruments  will  also  be  used  to  deliver  this 
information in a far more reachable, flexible and cost-effective manner. The services of a UK 
based consultancy firm have been enlisted to the attempt and the consultants are working on a 
strategy to set up contextually relevant career counselling. 

 

217 

M. le président, bien que ce budget ne soit pas axé uniquement sur l’éducation et la 
formation, il y a d’autres mesures qui valent bien leur pesant d’or et je faillirai à ma tâche si 
je n’ouvrirais pas une parenthèse ici pour en parler même brièvement.  

M.  le  président,  le  Premier  ministre  et  ministre  des  Finances,  l’honorable  Pravind 
Jugnauth  nous  a  offert  un  budget  qui  nous  prépare  pour  un  avenir  remplit  de  grandes 
possibilités. Sa vision est claire: une meilleure qualité de vie pour le peuple, une nouvelle 
société basée sur l’équité, une économie stable et florissante tournée vers la modernité. J’ai 
suivi attentivement les interventions des membres de l’Opposition. Je ne parlerais pas que de 
ceux qui ont parlé aujourd’hui, mais je parle en général. C’est décevant de constater qu’ils 
n’ont guère saisi la portée même des mesures annoncées. Prenons quelques exemples! 

The negative income tax, l’impôt négatif sur le revenu est une mesure qui promeut 
l’effort. Celui qui fait l’effort, celui qui travaille et qui perçoit un salaire faible bénéficiera du 
soutien du gouvernement. Les salariés percevant un salaire mensuel de moins de R 10,000 
obtiendront une subvention de l’État allant jusqu’à R 12,000 l’an dépendant de leur salaire et 
cela si le revenu total du foyer ne dépasse R 30,000. Selon nos projections, ce sont quelques 
150,000 personnes qui devront en bénéficier. 

M. le président, il s’agit là d’un outil extraordinaire qui désormais nous permettra de 
mieux lutter contre la pauvreté, de réduire le chômage et d’augmenter le pouvoir d’achat des 
milliers de travailleurs à Maurice, qui puisaient les incitations à l’effort et à l’emploi et à la 
productivité sont plus que jamais maintenus. L’introduction du negative income tax demeure 
une mesure que je qualifie sans hésitation d’historique et de pragmatique. 

Deuxièmement, l’exemption fiscale chez les employés de maison. On le sait tous, la 
plupart de ces personnes travaillant principalement pour des particuliers ne recevaient pas de 
fiche  de  paye.  Désormais,  avec  cette  incitation,  les  employeurs  seront  encouragés  à 
enregistrer  leurs  employés  de  maison  ce  qui  représentera  un  win-win  situation  avec 
l’exemption de la taxe de l’employeur et la possibilité d’une pension à l’employé à la retraite. 

M. le président, on parle là des milliers d’employés de maison que ce gouvernement 
est en train de permette d’intégrer le système formel. Déjà la classe syndicale à Maurice se 
réjouit  d’une  telle  mesure.  Je  prendrai  toute  une  liste,  le  maintien  des  subsides  sur  le  gaz 
ménager, la baisse du prix de la farine, les logements sociaux, le recrutement des personnes 
dans le secteur public. M. le président, le gouvernement dans son élan à combattre la pauvreté 

 

218 

à  travers  le  pays  depuis  2015  fait  de  nouveau  cette  année  ci,  provision  dans  le  budget  de 
nombreuses mesures pour doter les familles en difficulté d’un toit décent. Pour le logement 
social, un montant de R 6.8 milliards y est prévu. Il serait bon de faire ressortir que depuis 
2015, plus d’un millier de maisons étaient construites et qu’actuellement 1,248 maisons sont 
en  voie  d’être  complétées.  La  situation  de  plus  de  250  squatters  a  été  régularisée  et  le 
gouvernement se penche en ce moment sur le cas de 140 squatters et une somme de R 225 
millions est prévue à cet effet. 

M. le président, dans notre démarche vers une meilleure distribution de richesses, le 
Premier ministre et ministre des Finances est venu avec un Solidarity Levy qui aidera les plus 
vulnérables.  Pour  la  première  fois,  une  personne  avec  quatre  ou  plus  de  dépendants  à  sa 
charge aura son income threshold pour la taxe amener à R 550,000. La liste des mesures que 
contient le budget affectant positivement la vie quotidienne de chaque citoyen est bien trop 
longue, et je m’arrête ici.  

Si l’opposition semble sceptique, la population, elle, se rend compte que ces mesures 
sont  très  louables.  M.  le  président,  l’attitude  de  l’Opposition  reste  triste,  décevante  et 
navrante. Ce qui dise que rien n’est bon, insulte l’intelligence des gens. Le syndrome comme 
dirait  mon  camarade,  l’honorable  Sinatambou,  ‘narien  pas  bon’  semble  les  toucher 
énormément. Je leur demanderai : mettez-y un frein ! Prenez un peu d’hauteur ! Car il y va de 
votre  image  et  de  votre  crédibilité  même.  Comment  peut-on  venir  sans  relâche  brosser  un 
tableau pessimiste et caractérisé par une morbidité aussi extrême ? 

M. le président, c’est inacceptable ! Certains membres de cette Chambre sont même 
allés jusqu’à prédire que le Metro Express will kill people on roads. On est même allé jusqu’à 
exprimer  le  souhait  qu’il  y  ait  des  riots,  émeutes  dans  le  pays.  On  n’a  même  incité  à  la 
violence,  M.  le  président.  Dans  cette  auguste  Assemblée,  j’ai  entendu  des  déclarations 
gratuites  et  ahurissantes.  À  titre  d’exemple,  certains  n’ont  cessé  de  marteler:  jeunesse  en 
perdition, génération perdue, ONG, un pitié, parmi d’autres. 

M. le président, de par le langage tenu par plusieurs membres de l’Opposition, c’est 
clair,  il  semblerait  qu’il  souhaite  qu’il  arrive  malheur  au  pays.  On  parle  du  chômage.  On 
parle : ‘Qu’est-ce que le gouvernement a fait pour la création de l’emploi ?’ Et là je voudrais 
dire. Tout à l’heure, l’honorable Baloomoody me demandait : ‘Qu’est-ce qui est arrivé aux 
personnes  qui  touchaient  R  1,500  par  mois?’    Laissez-moi  le  rappeler  que  l’honorable 
Lutchmeenaraidoo était venu avec une mesure. Ces gens-là touchent déjà de l’argent et si je 

 

219 

ne me trompe, dans les environs de R 8,500 par mois. Deuxièmement, vous avez mentionné 
qu’ils  sont  des  employés  du  ministère  de  l’Education,  ce  n’est  pas  le  cas.  Ce  sont  des 
employés de la PTA que le ministère de l’Education est en train de travailler maintenant pour 
trouver une formule pour les aider.  

(Interruptions) 

On arrivera avec une solution, mais ce ne sont pas des employés du ministère. Il faut le dire. 

Maintenant,  parlant  de  recrutement,  le  nombre  de  personnes  qui  ont  été  recrutées 
depuis que nous sommes au pouvoir par le secteur public est énorme. J’ai dit bien énorme 
parce qu’en comparaison avec ce qui s’est passé pendant les 10 dernières années, il n’y a pas 
eu  de  recrutement.  Laissez-moi  donner  des  chiffres.  Parce  que  semble-t-il,  vous  faites 
beaucoup  de  recherches,  laissez-moi  vous  donner  des  chiffres.  Si  je  ne  parle  que  de  mon 
ministère, nous avons l’année dernière recruté 347 Secondary School Educators et dans ce 
budget  nous  avons  prévu  210  autres.  L’année  dernière,  nous  avons  recruté  dans  le  secteur 
primaire 591 Trainee Teachers et dans ce budget nous avons prévu 477 autres. Si je prends la 
liste de General  Workers, l’année dernière nous avons recruté dans les  environs de 300 et 
cette année nous allons procéder au recrutement d’à peu près 300 autres. Je parle que de mon 
ministère. Je ne parle pas des autres ministères.  

Déjà là nous voyons un montant extraordinaire. Laissez-moi vous dire qu’est-ce qui 
s’est  passé  dans  l’ancien  régime?  Le  nombre  de  Secondary  School  Educators  recruited 
pendant 10 ans, 101. The number of primary school educators recruited, 112. Et vous là ! Et 
on vient nous dire qu’on ne fait pas de recrutement.   

Je ne vais pas reprendre les chiffres.  Il y a plein de chiffres, si vous allez continuer à 
suivre  vous  allez  voir  il  y  a  plein  de  personnes  que  nous  avons  recrutées  dans  le  secteur 
depuis notre arrivée. 

M. le président, venons maintenant à Agaléga, M. le président le projet d’une piste 
d’atterrissage à Agaléga vise un développement futur de notre territoire. Si ce gouvernement 
est allé aussi loin dans sa démarche en vue de maintenir sa souveraineté sur l’île Chagos c’est 
que nous tenons à tout prix à sauvegarder notre territoire dont Agaléga.  

L’honorable Bodha vient d’expliquer toutes les démarches entreprises par le Mentor 
Minister.  Aujourd’hui  venir  trouver  des  dessins  sombres  et  des  ulterior  motives  aux 

 

220 

intentions indiennes c’est vraiment aller très loin. L’honorable Bodha vient de le dire, quand 
nous parlons de Agaléga nous sommes en train de penser au développement touristique que 
peut proposer cette île. D’ailleurs si je ne me trompe il y a quelques années de cela on en 
parlait déjà  entre 2000  et 2005. Ce que nous faisons nous autres c’est que nous passons à 
l’action,  nous  ne  gardons  pas  des  projets  en  l’air.  Et  là  avec  l’aide  de  l’Inde  nous  allons 
sûrement réussir. Je demanderai  aux membres  de l’opposition de bien  suivre l’exemple de 
l’ancien  Leader  de  l’Opposition,  l’honorable  Paul  Bérenger,  qui  lui  s’est  félicité  de  la 
démarche indienne. 

La population, M. le président, a des attentes, le gouvernement en est conscient et agit 
en conséquent. Sombrer dans la démesure, faire de la surenchère et de la démagogie sont à 
éviter à tout prix et ne vous font guère honneur. La population vous juge, n’oubliez pas elle 
vous regarde. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  come  back  to  the  education  and  training  portfolio 

once again. I believe it was Victor Hugo who said and I quote –  

“Il  n'est  rien  au  monde  d'aussi  puissant  qu'une  idée  dont  l'heure  est 
venue” 

In Mauritius, education and training have come to occupy a centre stage in the psyche 
of  the  population.  The  people  want  to  see  societal  transformations  and  they  know  it  is 
education and training system that can give an accelerative thrust and translate intent into 
reality.  People  also  want  to  see  a  system  that  is  at  once  inclusive  and  equitable.  People 
equally expect to see youth being prepared for jobs that exist today and jobs that are called 
upon to emerge tomorrow. 

I have endeavoured to demonstrate how my Ministry is doing all that and more. I will 
now seize the opportunity to express my warm gratitude and thankfulness to the hon. Prime 
Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  for  giving  me  and  my  Ministry  the  means  to  serve  the 
children  and  learners  of  this  country.  The  various  measures  enunciated  in  the  Budget 
demonstrate  his  concern  for  the  well-being  of  the  nation,  his  determination  to  blaze  new 
economic trails and his commitment to fulfil the vision of the Republic. I must congratulate 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  for  this  endeavour.  This  Government  and  this  nation  are  all 
with him and all the way.  

221 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  no  lessons  to  learn  from  people  who  have 
themselves gone out of their way to put their hands in the coffers of this country,  and to 
spend it and waste it shamelessly. So let me end by once again quoting Victor Hugo –  

 

“No force on earth can stop an idea whose time has come” 

Thank you for your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baboo! 

 

 

Mr  S.  Baboo  (Second  Member  for  Vacoas  &  Floreal):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
first of all, thank you for giving me the opportunity to open this Budget. This year we have 
been gifted by the Ministry of Finance with a Budget described as ‘Rising to the Challenge 
of our Ambitions’.  

Unfortunately,  with  all  due  respect  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  view  of  the 
population  is  rather  a  paradoxical  one.  We  cannot  see  any  economic  vision  of  this 
Government  behind  this  Budget  but  only  fancy  words,  some  touching  based  on  a  few 
populist  social  measures  which  more  our  propaganda  and  manifesto  for  the  forthcoming 
General Elections. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my colleagues have spoken vastly on the measures proposed 
in the Budget. I would like to have some time to talk on a few proposed measures regarding 
water supply, electricity and road infrastructure. Firstly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on the 2 
MW Solar PV Farm which will be set up by the CEB that is Green Co. Ltd at Henrietta by 
March  2018.  It  is  aberrant,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  a  region  like  Henrietta,  region 
falling under my Constituency such an extremely humid region with low sunlight intensity, 
has been chosen by this Government to set up the CEB Solar Farm of 2 MW. 

Solar  Farms  go  through  a  rigorous  planning  procedure  before  they  are  approved 
where the suitability of the specific site is taken into account. Also as per best practice, Solar 
PV Farms should be set up on a non-agricultural land or land which is of lower agricultural 
quality. However, Henrietta is one of the wettest humid regions of the island and which has 
also the most fertile agricultural land.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  maybe  we  are  wrong  in  our  thinking,  I  would  therefore 
request the concerned Minister if he could please table to the House in due course the project 
details, feasibility, sociological studies so that the House and the population can understand 

 

222 

the  reason  for  setting  up  such  a  Solar  Farm  in  one  of  the  coldest  regions  of  less  sunlight 
intensity of the island and its project life. 

This Government has also made a pledge to provide water on a round-the-clock basis. 
In  the  last  two  Budgets,  big  fanfare  has  been  made  on  long-term  and  short-term  projects 
regarding the water system. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, certain areas of my Constituency, which 
has the highest rainfall and the biggest reservoir of the island, are suffering from inadequate 
water distribution. 

My  constituents  are  outraged  as  it  has  become  a  trend  for  them  that,  during  rainy 
days, water distributions are completely interrupted due to CWA water pumps being out of 
order.  On  this  side  of  the  House,  we  would  request  that  all  the  realized  projects  by  this 
Government - not the one started by the previous Government - be tabled for us to understand 
the current situation. 

I am sure my colleagues from this side of the House as well as from the other side 
should be having the issue of concern raised during their surgeries. We cannot pretend not 
understanding the plight on such a vital and essential element by the people who elected us. 
My two running mates - well they are not here - hon. Bodha and hon. Sinatambou will surely 
recall our electoral campaign in 2014. They will recall how we were convinced to solve the 
water supply problem of our constituency and the country’s development priority. An issue of 
concern  which  topped  the  electoral  manifesto  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  as  just  said  by  hon. 
Perraud. 

Hon. Bodha, I am sure, would recall how he himself complained against the Metro 
Express project and was promisingly de l’eau 24/7 to our people and at the same time the 
then hon. Leader of the Opposition was having a special meeting with Mrs Sushma Swaraj to 
explain to her that the Metro project was not a priority for the country. 

In the very first Budget of this Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, paragraphs 128 

and 129 mentioned and I quote - 

“(…)water is  a basic human right. Some countries such  as South Africa have  even 
enshrined it in their constitution and offering a certain level of water supply free of 
charge.  

 

223 

This Government fully subscribes to this philosophy. Therefore, every household in 
our  country  will  be  entitled  to  at  least  6  cubic  metres  of  water  per  month  free  of 
charge. The new Utility Regulatory Authority will be responsible to implement this 
decision.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what has happened to this proposed measure after two and a half 
years of tenure of this Government? Where is the Utility Regulatory Authority, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir?  This  Government  approved  the  amendment  to  the  URA  Act  2015  for  the 
constitution of the URA Board in September 2016. Let me tell you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
after two and a half years, it is this budget now which is making provision for the staffing and 
functioning of the Utility Regulatory Authority. This is what happened with this Government 
for all their projects, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir; putting the cart before the horse. We doubt if 
this authority will be result-oriented if it comes into operation or whether it will be additional 
wastage of public funds as we are getting used to with this Government.  

With  the  political  interference  of  this  Government  in  all  affairs  and  even  for  the 
recruitment of staff of Parastatal Bodies, instead of putting competent, apolitical people in the 
right place and recruiting from the masses, they are choosing from their people. We beg this 
Government,  in  this  modern  era,  to  forget  the  old  school  and  to  promote  a  spirit  of  equal 
opportunity and the concept of meritocracy where all professionals, the masses can have their 
chance. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  come  now  to  the  proposed  measure  regarding  road 
infrastructure.  Unfortunately,  we  hardly  see  any  new  measure  being  announced  in  this 
budget.  The  construction  of  the  Jumbo  roundabout  and  the  A1-M1  Bridge  keep  repeating 
itself in every budget of this Government. In this budget, for instance, we see the proposal for 
a flyover to connect directly M1 to the Terre Rouge–Verdun motorway in order to improve 
traffic  fluidity  in  and  out  of  Ebène.  One  thing  which  we  find  odd  is  why  the  super  mega 
project of Metro Express misses a crucial strategic area like Ebène Cybercity, our booming 
financial and business centre on its tracé.  But instead they are coming with the fixed tracé of 
Curepipe to Port Louis when Ebène is where the officers of Port Louis are migrating to the 
Ebène Cybercity area, they are suffering more and more from traffic congestion nowadays. 

The  hon.  Minister  has  tried  to  resell  a  dream  to  us  today  which  I  would  say  an 
emotional visionary  speech on this Government Metro Express project.  But  I think he has 
completely overtaken our rising public debt in his speech. Hearing him, I am more perplexed 

 

224 

with all the projects en chantier. We fail to understand the priorities of this Government in 
alleviating traffic. We heard that a third lane is being built from Bois Chéri to Grand Bassin.  
I sincerely doubt if we have any congestion problem or any urgent problem in that region.  

The  Metro  Express  project  which  had  started  in  fanfare  with  its  big  launching 
ceremony itself costing Rs7 billion is a hard pill to swallow from this side of the House and 
the population in general.  It is, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with the Metro Express project that 
this Government can bring its most nonsensical project to fool the population. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, how can we undertake such huge developments, make such 
financial  criss-cross  with  the  easy  money  of  friendly  overseas  helping  hands  with 
undoubtedly strategic interest while our public debt is dangerously looming the red zone of 
60% of our GDP? 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Government  made  big  announcements  in  the  Budget 
2016/2017 on Public Sector Reform programme in his endeavour to promote more efficiency 
to  adapt  fast  to  change  the  merger  of  CIB,  CISD  and  the  IT  Security  Unit;  the  merger  of 
ICTA and IBA; the merger of MRA and Registrar General.  Nothing as of now, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir! But the merger that was done en temps record, express, I would say, approved 
by the Cabinet and set up within two months was SPDC, BPML, SLDC and so on, regrouped 
under Landscope Mauritius which is being run by their people. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it 
was made to understand that directors of some parastatals were not being appointed because 
of these proposed mergers announced in that Budget.  

Currently,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  NTC,  the  FSC,  the  DBM,  the  SIC,  the 
SMEDA, the ICTA, the NCB and le Morne Heritage Fund are still operating without director 
or CEO.  With all the fuss made on the proposed mergers in the last Budget and with the only 
premature born Lansdcope, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development intelligently 
did put disclaimer clauses in this budget to shield the non-implementation of the major Public 
Sector Reform programme. 

If we look at page 50, paragraph 319 of the Budget Speech 2017-2018, you will see the 

tactful disclaimer exercise made. Paragraph 319 (ii) - 

“The NDU and the 35 Citizens Advice Bureaus are being reorganised with the on-line 
Citizens Support Portal;”  

 

Are being reorganised!  

225 

“(iv)  Public  sector  bodies,  including  DBM,  that  have  been  loss-making  under  the 
previous regime have submitted their turn-round plans and they are currently being 
implemented.” 

Currently being implemented!  

“(vi) A Broadcasting and Communications Authority Bill is being finalised to merge 
the  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority  and  the  Information  and  Communication 
Technology Authority” 

Is being finalised!   

“(viii)  Ministries  have  already  been  empowered  to  recruit  directly  consultants  and 
contractors for projects of up to Rs25 million” 

But, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what are these Ministries?  What are these projects? We don’t 
know!  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we would like to understand how this Government would be 
bringing the reforms, it is so hardly pledging, if it is not putting the right people in the right 
place. 

We have heard so much of the top advisers, the politically dominated people of this 
Government  who  are  heading  our  parastatals,  some  acting  as  brokers  and  some  treating 
themselves as the most privileged and terrorising staffs as we are currently seeing at the STC.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we  note that the measures of this Government, which are 
targeted for the vulnerable, are for the far future: the minimum wage, the negative income 
tax,  the  social  housing,  only  300  houses  under  construction  for  the  NHDC  by  this 
Government. We cannot see any strategies, plans by the Government for poverty alleviation 
and decreasing inequality traps. The Marshal Plan on the table since 2015, it is to be seen 
nowhere. When found, and if found, it would have become nearly obsolete.  

My hon. friend, Adrien Duval, during his speech, has made a very realistic description 
of  the  alarming  drug  problem  for  our  youth.  I  am  sure  that  the  other  two  MPs  of  my 
constituency, hon. Bodha and hon. Sinatambou, would agree on the devastating effect drug is 
having in our constituency, especially in the vulnerable areas. We cannot curve reality; it is a 

 

226 

truth today, that drugs are bombarding the cité or so-called résidence, the vulnerable areas. 
The most alarming problem is that these drug consumers, the prey of small children of 12 
years of age and above. 

Hon. Adrien Duval rightly enunciated that the problem is emanating due to a lack of 
social activities for these youth. Drug dealers are roaming freely in these regions. We are also 
having the problem of Policemen, as mentioned by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, being 
unable to enforce the law due to lack of equipment and training. Policemen who are rather 
using the easy way and turning a blind eye during the patrols. I am sure this Government also 
wants  to  eradicate  this  fléau  which  is  affecting  our  youth.  We  would,  therefore,  urge  the 
Government  to  work  hand  in  hand  with  the  NGOs  and  come  forward  with  short-term  and 
long-term plans and strategies in order to eliminate this alarming problem which is invading 
our society and to save our youngsters. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, every year the Minister of Finance comes to the House with 
a Budget Speech, but we can only assess a Budget upon its implementation and execution. If 
we take the last two  Budgets of this Government, the first one taking the population on  a 
lunacy ride, with its mega projects, SMEs, Ile Maurice Nation d’Entreprenuers. But, where 
are these projects, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? As the Leader of opposition righlty said: “Guet la 
dan! Zero!” 

Unfortunately, I doubt if the population remembers if there has been a second Budget 
as the content of the same has majorly been eclipsed by the fameuse mesure regarding the 
amendment of the Banking Act for the transfer of the investment banking business to the FSC 
in order to accommodate the controversial Mr Alvaro Sobrinho. But I must say that we have 
all been fascinated by the Budget of my good friend, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo:‘Mauritius at 
the Crossroad’. After two and half years, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we stand still at the same 
crossroad where hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo left us. 

The population has been waiting since then to see these promises materialised after 
two  and  half  years,  but  nothing.  Miracle  économique,  I  would  say:  ‘Keep  waiting  my 
friends!’ Not by this Government for sure! I think the population is more than fed up. We are 
now at a stage where the people cannot absorb most scandals and are more disgusted with all 
the  false  promises  of  this  Government.  The  then  Minister  of  Finance  had  also  stated  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I quote - 

 

227 

“Our system for transparency and good governance is also at the crossroad.  Do we 
stay with the present system characterised by opacity that breeds corruption or do we 
go  all  out  for  a  cleansing  that  will  inject  more  meritocracy,  transparency,  good 
governance in the management of public affairs?” 

But, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what is this Government doing apart from blaming the previous 
Government for their malpractices? After two and a half years in power, I think it is high time 
for them to forget the past and start being accountable for their actions.  

We are seeing with this Government is more corruption, bad governance, total opacity 
in State affairs management, blatant political interference, abuse of power, no meritocracy, 
full nepotism. Yes, you have your chance, but only if you are part of the lucky clique of a few 
family, political agents, boyfriends and girlfriends. History talks for itself and the population 
can no more be fooled. The MSM has never been known for meritocracy but one protecting 
its own people and interest.  

Going further, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Budget 2015/2016 also mentioned, and I 

quote – 

“(…)we plan to abolish a total of 70 - yes 70 permits and licences that have become 
obsolete, and irrelevant.” 

Nothing  heard!  The  new  invention  now,  in  this  Budget  the  Government  is  coming  at 
paragraph 52 of doing more to facilitate business, and I quote – 

 “To  eliminate  inefficiencies  and  duplications  in  the  licensing  processes,  BOI  will 
carry  out  a  business  process  reengineering  on  more  than  125  licences  and  permits 
where some 14 Ministries are involved.” 
I am telling you again, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this Government is taking us on a 
ride.  For  our  youngsters,  our  future  generation,  their  education,  no  measures  apart  from 
upgrading infrastructure, refurbishments, or financing of operational cost. I am sure that the 
Minister of Education - unfortunately, she is not here - has at heart the good interest of our 
children  and  their  education,  but  we  cannot  find  in  the  Budget  short-term  measures  to 
upgrade the situation. What are this Government’s plans to decrease unemployment among 
young graduates and school leavers? 

We are in a situation, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, where the country is saturated with 
young graduates and mismatch job. If we go with the same tendency, you would agree that 

 

228 

we  are  getting  into  a  precipice  and  we  must  act  quickly.  If  we  want  to  ensure  the 
employability of our young people, there should be career guidance and workshops starting 
from lower secondary classes to ensure that our young people choose the right subjects and a 
job career-oriented future. Also, educate them to get into training, internships, educating them 
in  taking  a  satisfactory  low-income  job  at  the  beginning  of  their  career  and  undertake  a 
proper growth plan. Since nowadays, we are having a white-collar job youth generation, who 
are overconfident, more inclined towards getting financially sound at the very start of their 
career,  instead  of  going  through  a  normal  growth  path  where  they  have  gathered  the 
necessary  experience,  knowledge  and  are  fit  for  the  job.  This,  unfortunately,  creates  an 
increase  in  frustration,  poor  performance  and  untapped  talents  of  the  youth  employable 
population. You will note that for those frustrated youth in not getting the job and the salary 
of their dream they are being inclined to going for further postgraduate studies, a way to kill 
time until they land in their perfect job which is creating more chaos in the youth graduate 
employment market. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  talk  a  bit  about  the  proposed  measure  at 
paragraph  321  relating  to  the  institutional  reform  in  establishing  the  Mauritius  National 
Investment Authority in order to invest locally the surplus funds of the NPF and NSF of some 
Rs130 billion. This measure is a terrifying one, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I will explain to 
you why. 

We  see  that  the  funds  and  the  Authority  falling  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of 
Social  Security  would  now  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  I  have  the 
impression that the latter Ministry is on full search for a State-owned milking cow. I am sure 
the population and Members on this side of the House are very keen to know as well how will 
this  Authority  be  set  up  and  function  and  in  what  degree  of  transparency  will  these 
investments  be  made.  For  instance,  we  would  also  like  to  know  who  will  be  heading  this 
Mauritius  National  Investment  Authority.  Will  it  be  one  of  those  political  nominees,  top 
advisers?  Will  it  be  putting  the  hard-earned  money  of  our  people  to  the  mercy  of  these 
gluttonous, hand-picked people? How can we rest on our laurels, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
thinking  that  the  hard-earned  money  of  our  classe  travailleur  will  be  in  the  hands  of  this 
Government?  

Government  with  a  record  of  gross  mishandling  of  State  affairs  within  the  shortest 
timeline, the same bad decision makers who are behind the crash of an investment group like 
BAI  which  instead  of  curing  the  BAI  liquidity  problem  by  having  a  hand  through  the 

 

229 

regulators to control any suspicious or Ponzi-like activities, but instead decided to, without 
second  thought,  revoke  the  banking  licence  of  Bramer  Bank?  The  population  has  been 
witness to the lack of transparency in which the BAI affairs had been handled. Authorities 
have been acting like puppets in the hands of this Government - lack of transparency by these 
authorities and no clarifications for not delaying the revocation process in order to reinstate 
the liquidity issue and the possibility of recapitalisation. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, everything 
was done en catimini until political interference was exposed where we could see how this 
Government  could  stoop  so  low.  Close  friend  pe  amuser  lor  asset  BAI  lor  le  dos  5000 
victimes !  One good example is that friend who was so lucky to be the best bidder for the 
acquisition of 43 vehicles and spare parts of IFRAMAC.  

Now, you have to get ready to pay the damage and interest of Rs200 m. No, we are 
the ones who are going to pay and suffer for this Government’s malpractices, the population 
and the taxpayers! Now, tell us, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, how can we trust this Government 
in  the  investment  of  NPF/NSF  surplus  funds?  This  same  Government  which  is  being 
compelled to pay Rs5 billion for Betamax for its incompetency in decision-making, for its 
overconfidence, or maybe arrogance, to even go against the advice of the Solicitor General, 
the cancellation of this Betamax contract without proper planning and advice, consequences 
which we are seeing now. 

Adding on that, we are now hearing a possible case of legal action by the CEB against 
STC for not honouring the sales agreement for crude oil entered between these two parties, 
situation  which  may  have  been  caused  by  the  sudden  termination  of  the Betamax  contract 
where the STC is finding itself not the capacity to secure the required stock of crude oil for 
the  CEB.  Therefore,  in  such  situation  what  else  can  the  STC  do  than  contour  the 
specifications of the sale agreement and supply in crude oil of 380 centistokes with a high 
sulfur  content  of  3.5%  instead  of  3%  which  is  causing  accelerated  degradation  of  the  two 
Sulzer engines at Fort George? Even Wärtsilä, the maker of these engines, has confirmed as 
per the Press that this engine degradation is being caused by high sulphur content of crude 
oil. 

We  know  that  my  friend  and  colistier  hon.  Sinatambou,  the  spokesperson,  the 
guardian  angel  of  this  Government  is  very  busy  with  all  the  responsibilities  put  on  his 
shoulders. However, this is a serious matter. The use of crude oil with high sulphur content 
may  have  significant  impact  on  public  health  and  our  environment.  For  public  interest  we 

 

230 

would  urge  him  to  take  some  time  to  investigate  the  matter  and  take  prompt  actions  to 
counteract any negative impact. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, coming to the financial aid we have received from the Indian 
Government and which is being injected in projects development as proposed in this Budget, 
on this side of the House we have nothing against India, our big brother. But, unfortunately, 
the  easy  way  is  being  used  again,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  digress  the  attention  of  the 
population. This time the Opposition, especially the PMSD, being shamelessly targeted and 
forcefully  criticised  for  being  communal  and  racist!  They  are  using  communalism,  cheap 
politics to cover their scandal laden bilan and trying to tarnish the image of the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition in the run.  

All the religions, ethnics, le vrai mauricianisme are represented in the PMSD, one of 
the  oldest  political  parties,  but  with  a  modern  mindset.  The  integrity  of  hon.  Xavier-Luc 
Duval cannot be questioned, a self-made man ki pa guet figure, un homme de principe, a true 
politician  with  true  idealism  and  surely  not  an  assoifer  de  pouvoir,  a  man  elected  first  in 
Constituency No. 18 of Belle Rose/Quatre Bornes in the last two general elections, being one 
of  the  most  or  the  most  multi-ethnic  constituencies  of  this  island.  What  else  they  say? 
L’Opposition souffert syndrome nanier pas bon? How should we call these scandals then? 
Should we also get into the game of cover up? We have been elected by the people and are 
liable to them for their votes. What else do they say? That we are anti-India!  

Let  me  remind  you  that  I  had  fully  supported  India  for  their  dossier  on  yoga  at 
UNESCO in November 2016 for it to be inscribed on the representative list of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage of Humanity.  I was then Minister from the same PMSD Party under the 
same leadership. We were not racist then! We were not anti-India then! I believe Members on 
the other side of the House should take the advice of hon. Bhagwan seriously and get out of 
their insulated incubator of VIPSUs and agent and walk around. You should be shocked to 
know the stands of the population on this Government. 

Coming  back  to  the  financial  aid  from  India,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  India  with 
which we share cultural ties, has always given a caring and attentive ear to our needs, and for 
the well-being of our citizens. We cannot forget its help in the infrastructural development of 
Mauritius. Further to the end of the DTA agreement between Mauritius and India, Mauritius 
has been and will be facing huge loss from this decision, and India is therefore compensating 
Mauritius in the process.  We note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this Budget does not make 

 

231 

any  provision  for  the  offshore  sector,  after  cancellation  of  this  DTA  agreement.  For  the 
safeguard of the jobs of our young professionals, in this particular Budget, the aid from India 
had been immensely referred to the Government’s proposed project development. A line of 
credit amounting to USD 500 m. from India for the proposed infrastructural projects, which is 
described as having been received on very concessional terms. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is clear that India is not dupe and will just give us grant 
when they themselves have their own internal problems to solve. We are all aware that India 
has increasingly high aspirations in the Indian Ocean with its continued focus on its Act East 
Policy.  India’s  Maritime  Strategy,  which  is  a  Six  Fold  strategy  of  increasing  its  naval 
spending,  strengthening  its  infrastructure,  increasing  its  naval  capabilities,  active  maritime 
diplomacy, exercising in the  Indian Ocean as a regional power and keeping open the talk-
points.  So,  it  is  clear  geo-economic  and  geopolitic  strategy,  it  is  soft-balancing  with  the 
United States, India hopes to secure its own position against the assertive rise of China, and a 
perceive growing Chinese challenge in the Indian Ocean. Reason why several countries like 
Myanmar, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Maldives, Seychelles and even Afghanistan, just to name a 
few, are benefiting from free aid and massive injection of funds through a line of credits from 
India.  There  have  been  PNQs  and  PQs  raised  in  this  House  on  the  Agalega  issue.  We 
sincerely hope that there is no cover up by this Government on the future of Agalega. That 
there will be no surveillance base for India built there, which will convert this peaceful region 
into a vulnerable one. 

I  would  conclude,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  by  saying  that  the  Government  should 
implement, execute whatever it promises in its Budget instead of turning the page and project 
disappearing in the air; big ordeals being made on the Metro Express by this Government, 
risking such a capital outlay with uncertain financial viability. We are having blatant political 
interference in our institutions. We are still awaiting for the ICAC investigation on rum and 
sugar.  We were expecting a fast track investigation and trial on the record drug burst in the 
Port, while the primary suspect is seeking immunity and he is benefiting enhanced protection 
form authorities. Fact-finding committee on the ex-director of the Trust Fund for specialised 
medical  care,  fact-finding  committee  on  the  ex-director  of  the  IBA,  just  to  name  a  few  as 
there are too many.  

On the other hand, we are having an ICAC and other authorities being instructed to 
investigate  on  those  from  this  side  of  the  House,  trying  to  divert  the  attention  of  the 

 

232 

population  from  their  frasques.  Not  to  forget  their  mainmise  in  the  Sobrinho  affair; 
instruction  and  participation  from  the  highest  level  of  the  State.  My  colleagues  of  the 
Opposition have spoken amply on this and the subject has been highly debated in this House. 
The Government cannot fool the population anymore on this issue.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  National  Audit  Report  2016  has  also  discernibly 
confirmed several areas of deficiencies and non-effective utilisation of the public funds. We 
on this side of the House would be more than happy if the Government could implement their 
promises for the best interest and benefit of the population for our children and the future 
generation.  We  want  this  Government  to  be  accountable  for  all  its  actions  instead  of 
burdening  the  population  with  a  leg-footed  amateurism  trying  to  brainwash  the  population 
each time their malpractices are out of the box. Scandals surfacing week-in, week-out for this 
Government,  and  it  is  becoming  a  routine  now  for  the  population  to  see  the  awesome 
threesome making their show on the MBC news to reassure comfort and playing the victim 
vis-à-vis the population.  

And before I end, my good friend, hon. Bodha has come; I just want to come on the 
vessel of Red Eagle, because I, myself, was having company in West Africa of shipbreaking. 
I have studied vessels in India as well in Port Alang.  He was talking about the vessel of Red 
Eagle. Red Eagle of Betamax is of capacity 75,000 metric tons, and it carries fuel, that is, Jet 
Fuel, Diesel super whatever of 64,000 tons to Mauritius. So, it is carrying less, and… 

(Interruptions) 

Let me talk, my friend, please! And its draft for this vessel to berth is 13m, whereas the Port 
here is 14.5. He is saying this vessel has many compartments; it cannot bring heavy fuel oil, 
furnished oil, whatever in so and so compartment. No, this vessel was built in 2009, and it 
was made especially to carrying different types of fuel, that is why if a vessel cannot travel, if 
it is dangerous, it will not get a Sea-Worthy Certificate. And this is being given by Lloyds, 
but these 2 vessels that have done the service for STC to bring fuel to Mauritius, these are 20-
year old vessels. And by Swiss standard, a vessel should not be - you can say more than 15 
years old. And the last vessel that just delivered to STC has gone for shipbreaking at Port 
Alang.  

And the other point is - I know he was Leader of the Opposition, he was talking about 
R 1, he talks a lot, we are the Opposition, we will say a lot also, no, but it happened that my 

 

233 

good friend, hon. Rutnah made a big mistake on 13 m., whatever. If a family a day buy 10 
breads, he is saving Rs1 per day. 

(Interruptions) 

Per day I am talking, please. Per day he is saving Rs1. 

(Interruptions) 

100 cents make Rs1. My friend,  you go and learn Mathematics first  yourself. Then in one 
month it makes Rs30. Rs30 today in Mauritius, what can you buy? No even one pound of 
fish.  

Anyway, let me end, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would end by saying that their blame 
game will shortly be over. Their days are counted as the population cannot be fooled further. 
With this, I thank you for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! 

(2.45 a.m.) 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): M. le président, le marchand de sable est passé, nous sommes 
toujours là. Je vais vous dire une chose.  Il y a une heure j’avais sommeil, j’aurai parlé 10 
minutes. Maintenant que je n’ai plus sommeil, je vais parler. 

Nous sommes sur le point de clôturer les débats de budgétaire. Je peux vous en parler 
j’ai fait une dizaine. Et à la fin de chaque budget, je me suis dit: ‘What next for our country?’ 
C’était la question qui m’a toujours poussé à réfléchir à l’action, aux paroles, à notre volonté 
et à notre vision sur tout de ce qu’on pense du devenir de notre pays. J’ai fonctionné pendant 
très longtemps sur la base de paramètres prévisibles. Tout économiste fait des projections sur 
la base de paramètres surs. C’est la première fois, dans ma carrière où je peux vous dire une 
chose, que les paramètres qui m’ont permis de faire de la projection ne fonctionnent plus. Qui 
aurait pensé, il y a deux ans, que l’Alliance MMM/Travailliste qui était portée par une vague 
furieuse et qui allait rapporter 60-0 et que cette alliance s’est retrouvée sur des récifs et que 
les deux rescapés, mon vieil ami, le Premier ministre adjoint et moi-même qui étions deux 
perdus du système se sont retrouvés finalement, nous, au gouvernement. Personne!  

 

234 

Qui aurait pensé qu’il y a quelques mois que le PMSD - avec mon ami, Xavier Luc 
Duval - avec qui on a fait campagne il  y a à peine deux ans, parlant le même langage, se 
retrouverait aujourd’hui avec un groupe dans l’opposition et l’autre au gouvernement. Je ne 
juge pas. Je me pose les questions. Qui aurait pensé il y a à peine deux ans que j’ai été élu 
avec Sir Anerood Jugnauth sur une plate-forme promettant un miracle économique et qu’à 
peine un an après, je me retrouve comme ministre des Finances à l’ICAC et  mené à l’ICAC 
non  par  l’opposition,  mais  mené  à  l’ICAC  par  un  de  mes  propres  collègues  avec  bien  sûr 
quelques soutiens. Je ne vais pas au sommet de l’État, mais dans le sommet des institutions 
de l’État. 

Personne!  Lorsque  je  vous  dis:  ‘What  is  next  for  our  country?’  I  mean  it.  Nous 
sommes entrés dans une période où l’électorat, qui est en train de nous regarder, se pose la 
question :  ‘mais  qu’est-ce  qui  se  passe?  Est-ce  que  nous  avons  été  élus  pour  chercher  nos 
gains personnels ou bien est-ce que nous sommes entrés en politique parce que nous aimons 
notre  pays;  parce  que  nous  avons  la  passion  de  ce  pays?  Nous  avons  la  passion  de  la 
population et nous pensons that Mauritius can live better with us. On l’a fait ensemble. Je 
suis entré en politique en 1975. J’ai 40 ans de politique. Donc, je ne parle pas parce que je 
viens de la dernière pluie. Donc, il y a quelque chose qui est en train de changer que personne 
dans  cette  Chambre  ne  peut  ignorer.  Nous  sommes  en  train  d’emprunter  des  chemins  les 
moins utilisés, the less used. Nous sommes en train actuellement de courir le risque de créer 
dans le pays une psychologie de doutes, une psychologie de gens qui disent : ‘Where are we 
going? What is next for our country?’  Excusez-moi, je donne ma langue au chat moi-même 
aujourd’hui parce que si je n’ai pas pu prévoir tous ces grands événements il y a deux ans, qui 
vous dit que je peux prévoir quels seront les événements dans deux ans qui viennent.  

We  are  depository  of  this  country  of  the  destiny  of  this  country  whether  it  be  the 
Opposition or Government, I mean, everywhere.  I have been with you there.  I have been 
you with here.  I have been everywhere. I have been with the Labour Party also. So do not 
speak of politics of ideology with me. Let us speak of the country. Are we doing the right 
thing for Mauritius? I am not here to judge. I am just trying to find a way through a situation 
which is not that easy.  

So, the first question which I put myself is this - we have gone through three budgets: 
‘Has this Government fulfilled its commitment?’ ‘Is this Government going on the line of its 
strategy?’  ‘Has  the  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance,  in  the  third  Budget  of  this 
Government, followed a clear strategy?’ I will say to the House I have no doubt that we are 

 

235 

following since 2014 a  very clear policy. Based on what? You know policies, philosophy, 
vision change with time and what was true in the 80s might not be true anymore. So when we 
took over Government we had to say: let us see how. Hon. Baboo, with reason, said that in 
the  first  Budget  I  used  these  words:  ‘We  are  at  the  crossroad’.  I  never  said:  ‘We  are  at  a 
crossroad’ which means that we can come out of it easily. I say that we are at the crossroad. 
Either we make it or we do not make it. 

Number  two,  we  said  that  we  are  taken  in  the  middle-income  trap.  Middle-income 
trap means that we have reached a level of development, but the growth rate is just stagnating 
at a rate where we cannot move further up. This is a trap. Most countries that have been in the 
middle-income trap could not come out of it and ended up drifting along the way and finished 
in not a beautiful way. So, the crossroad was mostly this. The middle-income trap means that 
all the sectors of the economy we have are playing their role beautifully whether it be the 
sugar  sector  a  long-time  back,  the  EPZ,  the  services  sector,  you  call  it.  When  you  add 
together  the  growth  of  all  those  subsectors,  you  come  to  an  anaemic  growth  of  3%.  With 
these 3%, we are doomed. So, in the first Budget we said we need to reinvent our vision of 
the  future.  Reinvent  the  vision  of  the  future  was  not  easy  and  was  easy  also.  It  was  easy 
because  what  were  asked  of  us  is  that  we  generate  energy,  we  generate  growth,  new 
subsectors of the economy.  

The Budget spoke of one thing. We said - look here – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

we are at the crossroad; 

we are in the middle income trap; 

this  is  my  conviction,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  are  a  nation  of  dream 
genius. 

I have never stopped saying it. In 1968, the maiden Titmus Report says – 

“This country would become a failed State” 

which meant, therefore, that, after independence, Mauritius had no chance of emerging as a 
nation, as a State. We did it!  We did it because we had in this country people who had the 
guts, the vision, the courage  and imagination to do it. We survive the  most difficult crisis 
through this capacity of the nation of behaving as one. If we are admired today, in the whole 
of Africa, it is because we have achieved what they are trying to achieve. Even in the depth of 
the 1983 crisis, I said we should not give up. That was very tough because the Government 

 

236 

just split, March 1983. We split for multiple reasons, but it ended up in one thing that we 
were at the centre of a major crisis, whether in terms of unemployment, reserve position very 
low. You call it! We were all in the red. You need to believe in what you are doing. You have 
to believe in what you are you saying. If you do not believe in what you are doing, you will 
never convince others that you can do it.  

This is a dream. Dreams are made of ideas which at one time mature because people 
start believing in them. In 1983, we would have put 20 vessels in this port, most youngsters in 
this country would have left this country because they are fed up; because they have given 
up. They said: ‘There is no longer any prospect for us in Mauritius.’ This is 1983. Maybe the 
Government was very good. My friend, hon. Anil Gayan, who is here, was with me at the 
time.  But I have in deep humility said one thing that whatever we did was by the grace of the 
Lord. We were very lucky. 

Secondly, all what we did was because we had a nation that needed to be convinced 
that  we  can  stand  on  our  feet  and  survive.  So,  there  was  no  miracle.  I  would  remove  this 
world of miracle from my mind because miracle is made by the people, by the nation, miracle 
is made by hard work, miracle is made by sacrifice. Miracle is made because we have the 
bright idea, the right ideas at the right time. 

So, in 1983, we came forward with the right people, the right team, the right ideas and 
the whole thing just moved together and the nation became one. We emerged from a country 
with a huge unemployment of 20% to full employment four years later. We moved from a 
country  with  2  weeks’  reserve  to  a  country  with  45  weeks  of  reserve.  We  moved  from  a 
country  deeply  indebted  to  a  country  5  years  later  paying  back  its  commercial  debt  in 
advance.  All euros were paid in 1988.  

I did not achieve it, neither Sir Anerood Jugnauth, neither this Government. We did it 
because  we  were  one  and  what  I  am  saying  today  is  exactly  the  contrary,  is  that  we  are 
putting together all the spices you need for things not to work. So, today I have listened to all 
of you, I think that if we have made it in 1968, I think that if we have made it 1983, there is 
no reason why we do not make it now. So, in the first budget, I came with a new vision for 
Mauritius based on things which looked obvious, expanding our economy with 3 new pillars 
which will become, in the next 50 years, the most important sectors of development, highest 
contribution to GDP.  

 

237 

Firstly, the Ocean Economy for obvious reasons,  I think my friend spoke of it just 
before me, saying that we have 2.3 million km2 of maritime hub, we are an ocean State.  We 
are not an island, we are not a small country, we are an ocean State of 2.4 million km2. 

Up to 2015, we have said we have to think, conceive and vision the future on the basis 
of a small pebble thrown in the ocean, hardly 2000 km2. All the sectors were built on the 
basis of this small country.  We came and we said forget the small country, we are an ocean 
State. 

Ocean  means  not  only  seafood;  ocean  means  also  protection  of  what  we  have 
inherited.  Ocean  State  also  means  probably  that  we  learn  how  to  exchange  information, 
protect it against disaster. But we are the owner of 2.4 million km2 of ocean. That is huge. So, 
this is no.1, the new pillar of the new economy, the ocean economy, the blue economy. 

Number 2, we say, well, let us give to Mauritius, - what you just said before - let us 
give to this country, the title that it has always had of being the Star and Key of the Indian 
Ocean. Let the port, the small port of 1 km become a maritime hub, the largest in this region 
and pretend then to develop, bunkering to develop, cruise to develop, fishing in a big way, to 
develop also a free port and to enlarge our business with whom? And this is number 3.  

The third pillar is the Africa Strategy. In 2015, very few people believed in it. They 
said: Oh, Africa is not for tomorrow, probably. But then, we said it is a strategy which is very 
homogeneous, the ocean, the port development and the continent which is our future. The 
question is whether we are following on the same strategy, I am confirming today that the 
Prime Minister and Ministry of Finance made a budget which goes exactly in the direction 
that we define. Therefore, we are very coherent when it comes to this. 

Have we made a few steps forward? I will say yes! In this year 2017, we hosted in 
this country the AU Conference organised by the foundation of the AU for development of 
the private sector. Huge conference! We have proposed that the same conference be held next 
year. A few weeks back, we received a series of delegations from Africa, which we never 
received before. We have been signing joint commissions with many countries with which 
we are going to work.  

The Africa Story could have been a non-starter. Do you know why? It’s very easy to 
have projects. In fact, when we are defining a joint commission with Ghana, we are speaking 
of  an  agenda  with  a  series  of  projects  where  Mauritius  will  play  a  role.  But  we  are  not 

 

238 

speaking of one million dollar, we are speaking of billion dollars of investment which we 
don’t have. So, the story can only work if those projects in Africa find the finance, find the 
investors. So, we started speaking of corridor. We spoke of air corridor because there need to 
be communications and we have started with it from Singapore, we had an agreement with 
Changi Airport, which is not bad. But I think more and more now that probably Mauritius 
will have to accept that the hub will not be in Mauritius, the hub will be in Africa, probably in 
Nairobi, in Kenya and from there split and send the people around Africa in regional airlines.  

The question was: could we find enough investors at a time when the financial sector 
was being threaten by the end of our DTA with India. So, we say, how can we be the right 
platform, the right connecting link between those who want and those who had and want to 
invest. And this is how it worked out so beautifully. I always say it is God’s grace. We can’t 
take the honour of saying that this is me and not you.  Because what happened is that the road 
just opened for the South East Asian Corridors, financial corridors to open one by one. My 
colleague,  the  Minister  for  Public  Infrastructure,  just  mentioned  the  visit  of  a  Japanese 
Industrialist. In fact, we received this week 27 industrialists from Japan with the opening of 
the Japanese Embassy  who have said they want to use Mauritius as a platform for Africa. 
They  said  it,  we  never  proposed  it.  We  went  to  China,  China  is  an  incredible  story  also 
because when we went to china the whole story of the belt and road means for Mauritius that 
China  has  agreed  that  Mauritius  will  be  the  stepping  stone,  will  be  the  platform  for 
transmission of finance from China through Mauritius to Africa. 

They have gone much further. They have said that they are going to establish their 
regional headquarters now in Mauritius to invest in Africa. And the 3rd story which we all 
know about is India. India has moved in an incredible way and will become probably together 
with  China  and  Japan,  3  major  financial  corridor  transiting  through  this  country.  All  the 
Funds  will  go  through  Mauritius,  through  SPVs,  number  1  and  number  2,  Mauritians  will 
have the opportunity of going in joint venture in those dozens and dozens of projects we are 
working with Africa.  I think that the Africa strategy project is working.  

The ocean economy is based on one thing, sustainable fishery.  Recently, we found 
that yellow Tuna is threatened and we went with it. We said let us reduce production fisheries 
by 15%. 15% was reduced because we also feel that we need to protect this ocean and make 
what it produces sustainable. And in the Maritime Hub that we are developing at Bain des 
Dames, there is a 1.2 km of quay going in the sea that can host 18 fishing vessels all the time.  

 

239 

We are in the process now of discussing with Brussels to see how we can have the 
right  agreements  to  reduce  poaching,  to  reduce  piracy,  to  reduce  those  who  are  fishing 
illegally in our waters and, on the other side, to see how we can best establish bilateral or 
regional agreements for fisheries. Fisheries, fruits de mer will be a major source of revenue. 
Major source of revenue for this country! So, as at today, I say my concern is no longer the 
vision which we have for the future. We have it! I do not fear the future. I fear the most, our 
division. I fear the most our incapacity of being coherent all the time on what we decide. This 
is why I put myself the questions when I see what has happened to all of us here. Moving 
from Opposition to Government, from Government to Opposition, and then, I say we have a 
problem.  

Now, we cannot expect an electorate to trust us if we cannot create trust in them and 
the  way  we  are  behaving,  does  not  create  trust.  The  risk  is,  do  you  know  where? 
Governments will be changed every six months in this country. People will be fed up with all 
Governments. They might not be right, but they might be right also because, finally, there is 
une rupture between the electorate and the Government and the political class. I do not say 
party.  We  have  reached  this  point  now  where  either  we  reinvent  ourselves.  And  in 
reinventing ourselves, I think we have to stop playing this game of being a Government who 
is  the  father  and  the  mother  and  the  grandfather  and  the  grandmother,  who  promises 
everything. 

I  was  listening  the  last  time  -  I  have  spent  my  life  working  for  the  poor  because  I 
believe  in  it.  It  is  not  just  compassionate.  It  is  a  deep  belief  which  I  have,  if  we  cannot 
share… So, when my friend, Xavier-Luc Duval, put the question on making something illegal 
legal, that is, those who are occupying lands illegally thatwe make those occupiers of State 
lands legal occupiers. I put the question to myself - and my hon. friend here was trying to 
please all of us saying that he will do his best - but I put the question today, I say: “Is it the 
right road that we have to follow?” Confucius said rightly: ‘don’t give me a fish to eat which 
lasts one day, teach me to fish.’ 

The poor do not need our charity. The poor need that we learn them how to stand on their 
feet. This is what we have to learn. Respect them! We cannot say that because they are poor 
they need to be kept in a position where we just behave in a charitable way.  To pauvre, mo 
done  twa  inpé  kas.    I  find  this  not  respectful  at  all  because  you  know,  my  friend,  the 
Minister… 

 

240 

(Interruptions) 

No, more than this! We are more than this because we are responsible for the whole plan, for 
the  Marshall  Plan.    The  Marshall  Plan  is  built  on  humanity,  but  on  humanity  which  we 
respect. A nation that comes to respect itself! So, I put the question today, I don’t give the 
answer. I say: “Are we doing the right thing in making legal what is illegal; in telling people 
that once you get this land which you have taken illegally that we will build a house for your 
there?” And then, came one incredible question: “And what about colonne électrique? Who 
will pay for it?” This is how we make Government unpopular because we think that being 
generous is the right way to gain the heart of people. This is not true! Prime Minister Modi in 
India proved it. He promised a lot, but he did his best. In Uttar Pradesh, he won one of the 
largest  victories  you  can  win  in  a  midterm  election.  He  did  it!  People  do  not  want  to  be 
treated as babies. Spoon fed! And it is not in our interest also to make as if we are father and 
mother;  if  you  need  money,  we  are  here;  if  you  are  short  of  this,  we  are  here;  if  you  are 
unemployed, this is our problem.  It is not our problem!   

A  nation  is  built  on  effort;  it  is  built  on  sweating;  it  is  built  on  sacrifice.  My 
grandfather  came  to  Mauritius  worked;  sweat  all  his  life  to  be  where  I  am  today  here, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs because we are a nation of builders. We are not a nation that is 
built on the basis of thinking that we will do good to someone, or we will catch his vote if we 
give him a little more. Surenchère politique, this is what we have been doing since the past 
20 years and no one will win in this game because the more you give, the more people will 
ask. And we have reached a point now, you know what is instant gratification? People expect 
you  now  to  instantly  gratify  what  they  want.  And  who  can  give  this  here?  No  one  can 
promise it here! No one in the Opposition! No one in this Government also!  

So,  this  is  the  time  of  questioning.  We  have  a  nation  of  genius.  We  have  all  to 
succeed. But then, we have, probably, also to return to the values of our forefathers, whether 
it comes to drug trafficking, whether it comes to corruption, whether it comes to getting an 
easy  life,  working  the  least  to  get  the  maximum.  This  is  not  our  culture!  This  is  not  our 
tradition! This is not the foundation on which this country has been built! So, we are going on 
the wrong track. And I am saying it because I do not care being in politics. I am 73, I can 
leave any time, but I can also speak out my mind. We are not on the right track! Not only we 
are not on the right track, the world environment is not playing in our field. We are living the 
end of a super cycle, we call it.  There are cycles. You cannot fight cycles! Cycles start, here 

 

241 

you have spring, summer, autumn and winter. Winter means things go bad.  Cycles whether 
you like it or not, it creates what it has to create. And we have reached now  the end of a 
major cycle that was built on one word ‘greed’.  Absolute greed! A civilisation that thinks 
that you should colonise; a civilisation that thinks that people should be treated as slaves; a 
civilisation  is  built  on  the  basis  that  the  Earth  is  made  to  be  violated;  unlimited  greed, 
whether it be at sea or land or under the land. 

Someone said that if we want to go on the trend that we are going on now, Planet 
Earth in 20 years, we will need two planets Earth. And you all know that this scenario does 
not exist. So, we are at the end of our cycle and I will not tell people that we are going to give 
them whatever they want. I never promised a miracle! A miracle is built on the basis of a 
vision for the future by a nation in a strong Government. But what we have to learn now, 
probably, with the end of this cycle, and it will come any time; the West can say whatever 
they want. Today, Japan is deeply indebted. The Eurozone is deeply indebted. America more 
than this!  And those three blocks know that they will never be in a position to refund the 
loans they have taken. If you increase interest rate by 2%, no one can service the loans. So, 
they know that we are at the end of the road. They have kicked the can down the road and, 
probably, now we have reached the point, the day of reckoning.  So, the world environment is 
not working in our favour. Let us not believe it! 

Look at the chart of exports of Mauritius. I had a meeting as Chairman of the Inter-
Ministerial Committee for exports. I called in MEXA and others and they showed me a chart 
of exports.  It was like this and then it just went down.  I said: “This, there is deep shit there!” 
Excuse me for the word. This does not augur well for the future of export.  If export is not a 
driving force, can we rely only on tourism to survive?  Can we, therefore, pretend that we can 
grow in an environment, which is not that good, which is hostile?  If  you were to ask me 
today to manage, I would say: “Let us prepare for the worst and hope for the best.” Number 
one - and not promise that we can do anything for people.  We can only give what we have, 
not what we do not have.  

Second basic principle, I would say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is very difficult to tell 
people we have to learn to be happy with less.  It is a new paradigm, it is a new philosophy, it 
means that we do not have two planets earth to save us in 20 years. It means therefore that as 
from day  one today, we say resources are not unlimited, we cannot do  anything  we  want. 
This is why I come with this sentence which might feel strong, not too human, but I feel that 

 

242 

we are going towards a period which is not that easy for us and where probably a nation that 
is built on the basis of instant gratification, that  is based on the principle that if things  go 
wrong  with  the  government  then  probably  what  is  coming  down  the  road  will  force  us  to 
learn to be happy, to be happier with less. This is probably what we are trying to do, and 
believe me in this game, there is no Opposition, no Government. If we fail, country will fail, 
and  anyone  who  will  take  this  Government  cannot  go  ahead.  Because  there  are  major 
changes,  the  crossroad  means  that  there  are  major  changes  which  have  to  be  done,  major 
reforms which will help you carried out and I feel, deep in myself, that the Prime Minister 
Pravind is the right man in the right place. I believe it, that Pravind Jugnauth is the right man 
in the right place, the right Prime Minister; I believe also that we have the right team here.  

Naturally, I am so sorry that you people left, that is your choice, but I think that we 
have  the  right  staff,  the  right  people  to  achieve  what  we  want  to  achieve,  a  prosperous 
Mauritius where people live happily. This is what we want, simple, and I hope, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, I have taken not too much time, and I threatened to speak for two hours, so I will 
allow le marchand de sable to come. I would ask therefore that we take what I said. I am not 
imposing anything, I am just making suggestions. Tomorrow would be the final discussions. 
Tomorrow, in fact, the Deputy Prime Minister will intervene… 

(Interruptions) 

Today, oh my God! I don’t know how I will wake up, I have to call little Suzy, 

maybe! No, that is a song!  

Anyway, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, thank you. I crave for your indulgence if I have 

gone too far, but really today I have spoken my heart to you. Thank you.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, can I have an indication how long your speech 

will be? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for me, the night is still young.  

The Deputy Speaker: Can we have a short break? The sitting is suspended for 5 

minutes.  

At 3.20 a.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 3.31 a.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!  

243 

Mr Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Merci, M. le président. 

M. le président, à cette heure si tardive, j’aurais préféré évidemment intervenir dans 
un environnement plus serein, avec des collègues de deux côtés de la Chambre, peut-être plus 
numériquement plus important, mais je pense moi que c’est un manque d’égard vis-à-vis de 
la Chambre, et tout le monde ici présent, pour ceux qui ont le pouvoir de décider a quelle 
heure  la  session  terminera,  ont  pris  la  décision  de  laisser  les  débats  continuer  jusqu’à  une 
heure aussi tardive que ça.  

Bien sûr, que vous êtes là, le quorum est suffisant pour me permettre de  faire mon 
intervention mais, comme je vous dis, je n’aurais pas souhaité à n’importe quel autre membre 
de la Chambre pendant des discours aussi importants que les débats budgétaires d’intervenir 
une  heure  aussi  tardive  et  avec  autant  de  membres  n’étant  pas  présents  dans  la  chambre. 
Comme dit mon ami, avec une audience aussi clairsemée. 

Mais,  en  tant  que  parlementaire,  puisque  c’est  mon  tour  de  m’exprimer,  c’est  avec 
beaucoup de plaisir que je le fais, M. le président, je me suis déjà exprimé sur le budget en 
dehors  de  la  Chambre.  Je  profite,  donc,  ce  matin,  de  l’occasion  qui  m’a  été  donné  de 
m’adresser à vous et à mes amis de la Chambre pour élaborer davantage sur mon analyse et 
mes appréhensions quant aux propositions du budget.  

J’ai écouté par politesse, peut être, le ministre des Affaires Etrangères, l’intervenant 
qui a fait son discours juste avant moi, pour moi, c’est un honorable illuminé qui a fait ses 
commentaires.      Je  ne  vais  pas  lui  répondre,  M.  le  président,  j’aurais  préféré,  donc,  venir 
directement à ce que j’ai à dire.  

Je le dis d’emblée, sans équivoque, pour moi, ce budget est un budget  qui manque 
d’audace, qui manque de tonus, M. le président.  Je ne vais pas être philosophique comme 
l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo a été, je suis un homme terre à terre, et je vais m’exprimer 
concrètement sur ce que je comprends, l’impact du budget et les conséquences des mesures 
budgétaire au niveau de la vie du quotidien de notre peuple. Donc, ce sont des remarques très 
politiques que je vais faire. Et comme je disais, pour moi, il y a aucun doute que ce budget 
vient dans un contexte précis. Il reflète l’état d’esprit d’un gouvernement qui n’a pas su oser. 
C’est pour moi un budget incohérent, insuffisant pour relancer notre économie. 

 

244 

L’honorable ministre des Finance et l’honorable Premier ministre aurait dû profiter, il 
a  raté  une  occasion  de  rééquilibrer  les  grands  axes  de  notre  structure  économique  et,  en 
vérité, il ne s’attaque pas aux bases macro-économiques de notre structure d’une part. D’autre 
part un budget qui prétend introduire des social measures mais en vérité des social measures 
largement  insuffisantes  qui  n’auront  aucun  impact  réel  sur  le  quotidien  de  ceux  qui  sont 
censés d’en bénéficier et j’y reviendrai. 

Tristement,  M.  le  président,  les  chiffres  et  les  données  que  nous  avons  démontrent 
clairement  que  les  principaux  indicateurs  économiques  se  sont  détériorés  au  courant  de 
l’année  financière.  Je  vais  peut-être  répéter  ce  qui  a  été  dit  avant  moi  mais  je  n’ai  pas  le 
choix, la croissance réelle du PIB estimé par le ministre à 3.9% pour cette année financière 
était  prévue  à  4.1%.  L’investissement  global  prévu  à  18.9%  s’est  plafonné  à  17.6%, 
l’inflation prévue à 2% à atteint 2.2%, l’exportation des goods and services prévue à 48.2% 
du PIB est restée à 44% du PIB, la dette du secteur public qui a été l’objet de beaucoup de 
commentaires déjà dans la Chambre prévue à 52.8% du PIB a grimpé à 66.1% pour toutes les 
raisons que l’on sait et sur lesquelles je ne m’attarderai pas. 

M. le président, le déficit budgétaire reste toujours relativement  élevé  et au lieu de 
l’avoir  ramené  à  3.3%  comme  prévu  il  atteint  3.5%  pour  l’année  2016-2017.  En  montant 
absolu le déficit budgétaire se chiffre à 900 millions roupies de plus que prévu. En terme de 
performance économique, M. le président, les chiffres donnés démontrent que l’économie a 
stagné et qu’aucune relance économique n’a eu lieu. Comme preuve 1.2 milliards roupies en 
moins ont été collectés en termes de VAT et s’agissant des taxes  revenues 1.1 milliard en 
moins  que  prévu  ont  été  collectés.  Tout  ceci  est  vérifiable  dans  les  Estimates  qui  ont  été 
circulés à tout le monde. 

Sur le chapitre de underspending ou de sous-utilisation des fonds de notre budget de 
développement,  seulement  69%  des  fonds  alloués  ont  été  dépensés  alors  qu’en  2013,  par 
exemple, 83% des fonds alloués avaient été dépensés. Ce qui démontre aussi l’incompétence 
et l’incapacité du gouvernement d’implémenter les projets annoncés en grande pompe dans le 
budget précédent. M. le président, je ne vais pas m’étaler davantage sur tous les pourcentages 
et tous les chiffres.  

Venons  sur  la  production  industrielle.  Le  secteur  textile,  en  particulier,  a  régressé. 
Comme nous le savons tous, l’ancien ministre des Finances, l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo 
nous avait promis à l’époque une croissance économique de 5.3% pour l’année 2015-2016, 

 

245 

5.7% pour l’année 2016-2017, un investissement global de 24.8%, des exportations de biens 
de service de 52.8%. Tout ceci n’était que des promesses. Quant à l’investissement privé, il a 
été bien inférieur de celui de 2012 et il sera toujours bien inférieur en 2017. 

En 2012, M. le président, l’investissement privé a été de l’ordre de 17.5% du PIB. En 
2013, c’était 16.2%, 2014 à 14% du PIB, 2015 à 12.6% du PIB, 2016 à 12.8% du PIB et 2017 
il est prévu à rester à 12.8% du PIB. Nous voyons donc la chute de l’investissement privé. 
Quelle est la conclusion donc, M. le président ? Que l’honorable ministre des Finances n’a 
atteint  aucun  de  ces  objectifs  et  nous  pouvons  sans  équivoque  arguer  que  par  rapport  à 
l’exercice du budget précédent, il a été une véritable contre-performance.  

S’agissant du secteur de l’exportation et en termes de la production industrielle nos 
espérances  sont  restées  au-dessous  de  nos  prévisions.  En  effet,  M.  le  président,  en  2016 
l’exportation de merchandise a baissé si drastiquement qu’elle a financé seulement la moitié 
des importations de nos biens. 

Therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the last Budget did not fuel the economic engine 
nor did it set the foundations for the country to propel itself into a new era of development 
and  the  reasons  are  as  anticipated  that  the  hon.  Minister  did  not  address  the  structural 
weaknesses of the economic foundations and the macroeconomic fundamentals, neither did 
he take appropriate measures nor implemented the deep-rooted reforms to address the serious 
imbalances of our economy. Hence, unfortunately, the Minister of Finance never drove the 
country on the path of economic recovery. The indicators worsened because the hon. Minister 
failed to do what he pledged last year, that is, to improve the fiscal health of our economy by 
means of strict fiscal discipline. 

Comme  je  vous  ai  dit,  M.  le  président,  ce  budget  que  nous  a  été  proposé  est  en 
d’autres  mots  fade  sur  le  volet  économique  tant  il  manque  d’inspiration  et  frappe  par  son 
manque d’ambition que ce soit en termes d’investissements privés, d’exportations ou dans le 
secteur offshore. Nous sommes frappés par l’inconscience du ministre par rapport à ces trois 
secteurs et j’y reviendrai au cours de mon discours. 

Therefore, it is in this context of the degradation of the socio-economic context of the 
country including the unprecedented level of public debt that this Budget is being presented 
to this House.  

 

246 

Et pourtant nous le savons, M. le président, que pour devenir un pays à revenu élevé, 
il  est  impératif  de  générer  une  croissance  économique  plus  importante  que  4%  et  un  taux 
d’investissement d’au moins 25% du PIB. Ce qui manque cruellement dans la formulation de 
ce budget en vérité et je lisais quelques jours de cela M. Gnany dans son analyse du MCB 
Focus et il disait exactement ce que je voulais dire, et je le cite –  

« (…) des réformes structurelles plus ambitieuses dans divers domaines (…) pour que 
le  pays  puisse  réaliser  une  croissance  de  5%  et  favoriser  la  création  d’emplois 
soutenus » 

Et –  

«  (…) l’adoption  d’une  panoplie  de  mesures  de  restructuration  économique  va 
grandement aider à rehausser la performance macroéconomique. » 

Mais  le  plus  grave,  M.  le  président,  c’est  qu’aujourd’hui  l’île  Maurice,  nous,  notre  pays, 
faisons  face  à  de  nouveaux  défis  et  les  règles  du  jeu  ne  cessent  d’évoluer   -  le  Brexit, 
l’abolition complète du filet de protection pour le sucre avec la libéralisation des quotas en 
Europe  au  profit  des  betteraviers,  le  retour  au  protectionnisme  avec  l’arrivée  du  Président 
Trump,  le  nouvel  ordre  mondial,  et  pire  au  niveau  du  global  business,  nous  sommes 
confrontés  avec  le  risque  de  l’érosion  de  la  base  d’imposition  et  le  transfert  de  bénéfices, 
c’est-à-dire  l’avènement  du  BEPS,  du  MLI  (Le  Multi  Lateral  Instrument)  et  du  GAAR,  la 
démarche  de  l’OCDE  et  de  l’Union  Européenne  par  le  billet  des  pressions  qu’ils  nous 
impose,  et  qui  nous  ferons  perdre  beaucoup  de  nos  avantages  compétitifs.  Voilà  donc  les 
multiples défis qui vont substantiellement peser sur notre économie durant les années à venir 
M. le Président. Dieu seul le sait comment nous surmonterons toutes ces difficultés. Et tout 
ceci doit nous donner la chair de poule, doit nous effrayer M. le Président.  

C’est pourquoi pour moi ce Budget est une grande déception, j’avais moi-même cru 
qu’après  2  ans  et  demi  de  retard  en  terme  de  développement  économique,  2  ans  et  demie 
d’instabilités  politique  chronique;  je  parle  de  la  désintégration  de  l’Alliance  Lepep,  de  la 
démission d’un de ses ministres M. Bhadain après une cascade de scandales, de multiples cas 
de fraude et de corruption qui ont éclaboussé les proches du Gouvernement, les innombrables 
cas  de  favoritisme  et  de  népotisme  qui  sont  devenus légende.  J’étais  convaincu  que  le 
nouveau Premier Ministre allait renverser la vapeur en proposant un Budget qui jetterait les 
bases  solides  d’une  île  Maurice  moderne  tout  en  instaurant  un  nouvel  ordre  économique, 

 

247 

moral  et  social  mais  il  n’y  a  eu  absolument  rien.  Rien  en  termes  de  propositions  pour 
combattre le gaspillage des fonds publics and décourager les irrégularités au niveau de l’Etat. 
Rien en termes de réductions de dépenses de l’Etat. Même au niveau symbolique, en terme de 
baisse des allocations pour les ministres, rien, absolument rien pour donner l’exemple, pour 
embrigader la population, pour dire à la population, tournons une nouvelle page, envisageons 
l’avenir avec plus de confiance et de sérénité. Malheureusement, ceci n’a pas été le message 
de ce Budget, business as usual, M. le président.  

On the contrary, the measures announced are a rehash of the same strategy which has 
in the past Budgets of this Government or other Governments proved to be sterile and of no 
lasting effect. This is why on a deeper analysis, we can see how this Budget is deeply flawed 
with no strong foundation to succeed, and containing no necessary measures to stimulate the 
economy. Let us take one example, bringing the tax rates from 15% to 3% is insufficient to 
stimulate  exports,  and  I  will  explain  why  in  a  few  minutes  Mr  Speaker,  Sir.  The  same 
reasoning applies as far as the SMEs are concerned. Our exports have being declining, we are 
importing more. We have not created sufficient jobs in the export manufacturing industries 
and the prospects are bleak. not a single manufacturing export firm has opened its doors this 
year. Our firms are no longer competitive.  

Our  export  model  is  no  longer  working  because  we  have  lost  our  international 
competitiveness. Why is that Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? The incentives we have provided will 
be  ineffective;  our  present  model,  itself,  has  to  be  reviewed.  It  is  because  of  the  in-built 
contradictions of our model. Let me explain myself. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Can we have a 
successful financial sector, new economic sectors with high value-added jobs with innovative 
products, a technological and sophisticated financial industry, and, at the same time, a model 
utilising low technology and labour intensive operations. This is precisely the point that those 
who prepared the Budget missed.  

In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, we need to revamp our model. We must have a better 
understanding of real sector economics, monetary policy, exchange rate policy, and how the 
economic  transmission  operates  with  a  financial  sector  growing  robustly,  huge  foreign 
exchange  flow  into  Mauritius  and  hibernate  for  a  significant  number  of  days.  Then  we 
borrow USD 500 billion, the foreign exchange reserves build-up. Currently, foreign exchange 
reserves are the equivalent of 9.4 months of import. This is clearly on the high side and it 
bears considerable pressure on the exchange rate. When the rupee appreciates, the Mauritian 
entrepreneur  manufacturing  low  value  added  products  based  on  labour  intensive  and  low 

 

248 

technology production methods finds it harder to sell its product on the international market. 
It is, therefore, futile giving an incentive of 3% tax on profits when no sales or hardly any 
sales take place. In some way, the growth and success of a revamped financial sector or a 
new  innovative  high  technological  sector  are  incompatible  with  the  low  technology 
manufactured exports Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

If we wish to revamp our manufacturing sector, we need to understand the basics : 
distil lessons from the past, learn from the experience of others and examine empirical studies 
before  adapting  them  into  a  Mauritian  context.  Textile  is  a  low  value  product,  and  has 
completed  its  product  life  cycle.  It  is  right  for  delocalisation  to  other  countries  like 
Madagascar,  Comoros,  Mozambique  or  Kenya.  It  is  a  process  already  in  progress  as  we 
know. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that is what I mean by rethinking the model. We need to shift 
to sectors that require higher technology and bring higher revenue.  

To  be  fair,  there  has  been  in  the  Budget  a  timid  attempt  to  innovate  in  terms  of 
artificial intelligence and robotics which are necessary conditions but not sufficient. Here was 
the  opportunity  for  the  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  to  take  a  comprehensive 
outlook.  How  do  you  introduce  robotics  or  digitalise  the  economy  without  a  trained  and 
skilful pool of high calibre achievers. One would have expected more resources geared to the 
Universities,  an  import  of  high  calibre  lecturers  from  the  world’s  best  universities,  and 
scholarships to our best students to go to the best universities in the world. The Budget has 
nothing of this sort. So, we will continue to wallow in the middle income trap, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. Our growth matrix for the next 20 years has to be different. Our economy must 
mature, must depart from the strategies of before, must make of Mauritius a reliable centre 
for high value added activities in a global supply change. We shall have to move from value 
adding to value creation, and establish Mauritius as a leading centre for value creation in the 
business strategies for foreign companies.  

To illustrate what I mean, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is perhaps worthwhile to look at 
the  strategy  that  a  country,  known  to  all  of  us,  Ireland,  which  was  a  few  years  ago  an 
agricultural  economy,  but  which  has  positioned  itself  today  as  a  recognised  centre  of 
excellence  for  innovation  and  development  in  pharmaceutical,  bio-pharmaceutical  and 
chemical supply thereby becoming a location of choice for the launch of new products. 

 

249 

The pharmaceutical sector in this country has become a major contributor to Ireland’s 
economy  by  paying  more  than  €1  billion  in  corporation  tax  in  2008  and  employing  over 
24,000 people and continuing to grow steadily, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Ireland succeeded to attract some of the world’s leading pharmaceutical companies. 
Ireland  did  not  focus  its  strategy  and  compete  directly  with  low-cost  economies  on  cost 
grounds alone, it secured its competitive advantage through smarter ways of doing business, 
including  better  use  of  technology,  innovation,  cost-control,  upgrading  the  skills  of  his 
employees  and  making  them  flexible  and  adaptable  to  change  in  technologies.  Keeping  in 
mind,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  manufacturing  alone  will  not  be  enough  to  ensure  the 
long  term  presence  of  the  industry,  research,  development  and  innovation  drive  the 
transformation process forward. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  us  look  at  the  incentives  given  to  stimulate  the 
pharmaceutical  industry  in  our  country  because  we  all  subscribe  to  the  idea  of  creating  a 
pharmaceutical sector. We need to learn from our past experience and use our knowledge to 
build the future. This is what the budget has totally ignored. The pharmaceutical industry was 
first  mentioned  as  a  potential  sector  in  2006,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  the  Labour 
Government was in power. 12 years later, the idea lingers on without anything substantial and 
I fear this trend will persist for the years to come because, unfortunately, Government seems 
to have no idea how to proceed. What do we see, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? There is no site so 
far, no industrial park, no industrial pharmaceutical village created. 

A  first  step  would  have  been  to  identify  a  site  of  some  50  acres,  provide  it  with  a 
state-of-the-art  infrastructure,  create  a  Faculty  of  Chemistry  or  Pharmacology,  provide 
priority scholarships to create a critical, intelligent pool of skills specialised in the sector, use 
the excess liquidity to enable easy accessibility to finance as was done in the past.  

The  budget  is  vague,  without  a  purposive  sense  of  direction,  without  any  planning 
how to launch this sector. While a tax holiday is a stimulating factor, until and unless firms 
start producing, the tax incentive is a sterile incentive. If we wish to launch a new sector, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, we need a comprehensive package adapted to the situation so that we 
can convince the Indians, the Swiss or the French to come here, as we did in the case of the 
EPZ, with a greater degree of professionalism. 

 

250 

Here  was  an  opportunity  for  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  impress  on  the  Indian 
Government to hold road shows with the Indian pharmaceutical entrepreneurs to set up firms 
in Mauritius. Here was an opportunity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to divert part of the line of 
credit to finance the pharmaceutical sector. Here was an opportunity for the Prime Minister to 
use his prerogative to formulate a policy and persuade the IMF, as we did in the past, to agree 
to use a line of credit from the Bank of Mauritius to finance this industry under concessionary 
terms. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the other sector, which according to me require much greater 
attention is another sector which has been referred to by other Members of this House. I am 
talking of the Ocean Economy. This budget devotes 8 paragraphs to the Ocean Economy, but 
all  dealing  with  fishing  and  low  to  medium  level  training.  Fishing,  according  to  me,  is  a 
medium technology, low-wage seasonal sector, which will not allow us to graduate to a high 
income status country, a contradiction with the objective of this budget. 

This  is  another  Ministry  responsible  for  the  Ocean  Economy  which,  unfortunately, 
has showed no clout so far, no clear purpose, groping in uncertainty. This budget is silent on 
the potential of this fairly high technology sector, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Ministry of Ocean Development has missed its opportunities. Until now we can 
see no Master Plan. Here was an opportunity to apply high technology to exploit the sector. 
Other countries in Europe and elsewhere, the US, Japan and India are either experimenting or 
have put in place floating windmill farm. Even Germany has set up a windmill farm to cater 
for 250,000 households. We should have approached KFW and Siemens or we could have 
approached  STATSOIL  from  Norway  to  explore  this  potential.  The  Ministry  has  no  such 
plan. We could have exploited the cultivation of seaweeds as an input for the pharmaceutical 
industry or cosmetic industry to produce high value goods. The initial project of creating a 
land-based industry remains valid. We can replicate, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the experience 
of  Hawaii  with  the  support  of  NELHA  and  MAKAI  of  Hawaii.  This  Ministry  of  Ocean 
Economy  has  been  so  far,  unfortunately,  slow  and  lethargic,  more  involved  with  special 
interest such as oyster or the exploitation of fisheries than caring for the future of this country 
so  much  so  that  it  is  time  now  for  a  thorough  revamping  of  the  role  and  potential  of  this 
Ministry. 

Let me, now, come to the Financial Services Sector, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Again, 
to my mind the budget has failed to focus properly on this sector with so much potential, but 

 

251 

facing so much enormous challenges. In 2019, the present arrangement expires and some of 
the incentives that made our country so successful will come to an end. Worst, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, the Government of the day has committed to replace the Deemed Foreign Tax 
Credit for Global Licence One Company. The DFTC regime has served our country well for 
almost  20  years  and  has  accounted  for  the  successful  growth  of  the  financial  sector  and 
Government has now agreed to review and replace this regime. 

We may ask ourselves, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what business is it for the European 
Commission to sit on judgement on Non-EU Member States tax regimes and what will the 
European  Union  do  if  we  decide  not  to  change  the  DFTC,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir?  Of 
course,  greater pressure  will be exerted on us.  Of course, we could be  perceived as a tax 
haven.  But  as  a  sovereign  nation  why  did  we  not  pursue  further  discussions  with  the 
European Commission concerning the reform of the DFTC in order to come up with solutions 
and other possible options that might be feasible? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, although Mauritius manages, historically speaking to rise to 
every circumstance, it is vital we stay alert and get prepared to address the challenges in this 
sector.  Honestly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the problems in this sector are difficult, but they 
are not irremediable. We must be cautious that the blueprint, for example, which has been 
proposed in the budget, does not become a subtle way to put the problem on the back-burner.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, according to me, what is smothering the global sector, what 
is the main problem of this sector is the legal instability and the overregulation in this sector. 
The  amount  of  FSC  circulars  and  the  amount  of  conventions  for  mutual  exchange  of 
information  that  we  have  been  signing  lately  has  made  Mauritius  to  be  an  overregulated 
jurisdiction. More importantly, the excessive application or interpretation of the rule by the 
overzealous  officers  of  the  FSC  has  made  obtaining  a  licence  un  parcours  du  combattant 
unless you have some political connection at higher level of the State. 

Investors,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  do  not  want  to  go  through  these  onerous 
procedures  when  other  well-established  jurisdictions  like  London,  Luxembourg  have 
expedient  and  simpler  licensing  procedures.  Should  the  same  investor  opt  for  a  domestic 
company instead of a GBC1 company, he would not have to suffer all these investigations 
and verifications! Regulation is important … 

(Interruptions) 

 

252 

Don’t worry I will come to Mr Alvaro in a few minutes. 

Regulation is good, but overregulation can stifle the sector… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

Mr  Ganoo  The  new  tax  of  3%  on  profits  earned  from  export  by  manufacturing 
 
companies  should  have  been  extended  to  the  export  of  services  also.  This  would  have 
encouraged many professional companies such as Consultants, Design, Pensions Company, 
Risk Assessors, Intellectual Property Companies to be located to Mauritius with this tax of 
3% only on profits earned. Mr Deputy Speaker, besides the levelling of the playing field, our 
global sector needs supportive sectors to thrive. 

 
These  include  not  only  International  Law  Firms  but  also  financial  houses  for  more 
Asset  Management  Capabilities.  Our  bank  should  be  able  to  broaden  their  activities  to 
provide  Trade  Financing,  Custody  Structured  Finance,  Pensions  Management,  Intellectual 
Property and International Leasing Facilities at simpler terms and competitiveness cost. To 
encourage these entities to set up in Mauritius, the licensing procedures should be simplified, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker.  An  incentive  should  be  provided  to  attract  them  reporting  excessive 
licence cost and restrictions on the amount of funds that can be remitted to Mauritius through 
bank transfer should be made easier. 

 
Therefore,  this  is  why,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  this  important  sector  is  today  a  sector 
without a sense of direction. For nearly two years, there is no Substantial Chief Executive. 
Can such a vital sector grow, expand and inspire in these present circumstances? This sector, 
as we all know, was blasted by the most abominable scandals that shook the country with 
serious implications in terms of economic impact, international image and governance issues. 
It lost seven places in Wall Street Heritage Index, ranked 16 in Africa when only a few years 
it held the place of pride. 

It takes years to build the image of a country but only a few minutes to destroy it, Mr 
 
Deputy Speaker. We find it strange that the hon. Minister went on public air stated he could 
not  find  competence  in  this  country.  This  was  an  insult,  in  fact,  to  the  thousands  of 
Mauritians who built this country from scratch. Does it make sense, Mr Deputy Speaker, for a 

 

253 

country that relies so strongly on the private sector to have such a great dominance of public 
servants on the Board of the FSC, which is the second most important financial institution? 

 
Is it good governance that the Financial Secretary should chair FSC and its Deputy is 
the first Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius? In which incestuous world are we living, 
Mr Deputy Speaker? Doesn’t it strike anyone in this model of democracy  where we pride 
ourselves for the rule of law that we are creating potentials for conflict of interest? And in so 
doing, are we sending the right signals to foreign investors? Mr Deputy Speaker, it took years 
to get Mauritius out of the OECD backlist.  

Today,  we  are  accepting  Alvaro  Sobrinho,  considered  as  a  toxic  investor  and  on 
whom investigation is going on in Switzerland. Being the Minister of Good Governance - and 
I said it to the Minister although he is not present - it requires great responsibility towards the 
country. No Minister of Good Governance could continue to hold office when licences are 
granted  to  an  investor  with  a  reputation  like  Alvaro  Sobrinho!  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  leave 
alone our political divide, no sensible person will dare to deny that Mr Sobrinho affair has 
diminished the credibility of this country! 

How many times, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the past, the FSC announced its wish to 
fill the post of Chief Executive Officer! It made many advertisements, called candidates for 
interview but stayed action. All the vacancies that the FSC, an institution responsible for over 
12% of the economy, have not been filled for nearly two years. How then are we to produce a 
blueprint that will chart the future of the Financial Services Sector? All this does not send the 
right signals in terms of seriousness of purpose.  

This sector, Mr Deputy  Speaker, has become too important to be managed  with so 
much levity and in such an amateurish manner. Mr Deputy Speaker, before I comment on a 
few other issues in the Budget, I would like to say a few words on what is now commonly 
termed as the social measures.  Let us take the measure of  a drop of 10 cents on a loaf of 
bread, Mr Deputy Speaker. To me, this measure has virtually no impact. Assuming a person 
consumes two loaves per day, this allows him a saving of Rs6 per month and Rs72 a year. 

This  is  such  a  negligible  proportion  on  the  income  of  people  that  it  has  really  no 
impact in alleviating poverty. Just as the decrease sur la farine, M. le president, no impact 
really on the day-to-day life of the average Mauritian. The negative income tax, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, to me, it is a positive measure, but you must be careful. It is a redistributive toll, but 

 

254 

in so doing, in proposing this measure, Mr Deputy Speaker - I agree with the Trade Unions 
when they argue that this is an indirect way of subventionner le patronat because, true it is, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, I have said it myself, many friends in this House or the Trade Unions 
have said it, we know the large number of employees in this country, in the private sector 
who earn less than Rs9,000 or Rs10,000, nearly more than 100,000 in our labour force in the 
private sector.  But, Mr Deputy Speaker, was it the role of the State to give an increase in 
wages? Because this is what it is in fact. 

It  was  subventionner  le  patronat;  it  was  also,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker  covering  up 
Government  Institution  like  the  NRB  which,  in  fact,  had  failed  not  only  under  this 
Government, but under past Government also for updating. This is the role of the NRB for 
updating the wages of the different sectors of the workers in the private sector. By failing to 
do so, Mr Deputy Speaker, for years, as I said, we know that there have been sectors in this 
country where the  Remuneration Orders have not been updated for 8 or 10 years sometimes, 
Mr Deputy Speaker. 

So, this is why il y avait un rattrapage à faire in terms of wages, in terms of salary of 
certain categories of workers in the private sector. So, by providing, therefore, this increase of 
the negative income tax of the amount that has been proposed in the Budget - nous avons vu 
le barême, M. le president - by coming with this proposal, as I said, Government was, in fact, 
substituting itself for covering up what the NRB had failed to do in the past. The solidarity 
tax,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  is  a  measure  I  applaud,  I  agree  with  the  measure.  It  is  another 
measure  of  redistribution.  It  is  a  measure  of  social  justice,  but  when  I  think  about  it,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, the hon. Minister should have gone further, should have thought about other 
measures providing for more social justice in this country. 

I give you one example, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, which you will easily understand 

and also all hon. Members of this House. We know what Land Transfer Tax is all about. 

Land Transfer Tax is a tax which all of us pay when we sell a property. We pay a 
registration duty when we acquire, and when we sell our property, it is 5% tax on the value 
declared in the title deed. We all know that. I have thought about that for a few years, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  A  small  man  sells  his  house,  sometimes  it  is  a  CHA  house  for 
Rs500,000, Rs600,000, Rs700,000, Rs800,000; sometimes he has to send his son somewhere; 
his child who is sick or who is in university or he wants to sell his house to share the money 
between  his  two  children  who  have  grown  up  now,  for  whatever  reason  he  is  selling  his 

 

255 

property which is not of much value  - aujourd’hui R 700,000 R 800,000 - he has to pay 5% 
on that, excluding notary fees and so on.  5% sur R 800,000, ça fait combien, M. le président?  
Rs40,000!  5%!    10%  sur  R800,000  c’est  R  80,000  et  5%  c’est  R  40,000.    R  40,000  pour 
quelqu’un  qui  vend  sa  petite  demeure  pour  des  raisons  quelquefois  difficiles.    C’est 
beaucoup, M. le président! He has to pay that.  

Now,  think  of  another  scenario!    This  gentleman  who  has  means,  he  is  selling  his 
yacht, his Porsche for Rs4 m., Rs5 m., Rs3 m., of course, this not an immovable property, but 
he did not have to pay anything, one single cent! All these yachts in our blue azure waters, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir; I have nothing against yachts or Porsche owner, but is that justice in 
our society when you think about it? Either we do two things: we impose a 5% tax on these 
people who have all these big limousines, all these yachts and who can sell one today and buy 
another  one  in  one  month  -  we  impose  a  5%  tax  -  or  we  must  have  thought  about  the 
possibility of excluding these people who are selling a small house of Rs600,000, Rs500,000, 
allowing them, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the liberty not to have to pay this Land Transfer Tax. 
It is unjust, I say it again. Why should a poor man, when he sells his house pour R 500,000, R 
600,000, paie 5% le gouvernement and why should this rich man who is selling his yacht for 
Rs8 m. or Rs6 m. or his car for Rs4 m., Rs3 m., does not pay one single cent to government, 
to the coffers of the State? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I think we must reflect upon this and there are other cases, 
examples if the hon. Minister wanted to play Robin Hood, and it is a good thing that we play 
Robin  Hood  because  we  have  been  elected  by  the  people  and  we  must  seek  for  each  and 
every  opportunity,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  do  justice,  to  redistribute  wealth  in  this 
country. We have nothing against people who have acquired wealth legitimately, licitly, but 
this is precisely the task of Government to redistribute wealth, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

As I am on this score, I want also to make an appeal to the hon. Minister of Housing 
and  Lands,  who  is  not present,  about  an  appeal  which  many  of  us  have  made  in  the  past, 
concerning the housing sector, the asbestos houses, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, where there are 
thousands of them around in this country. The EDC houses were built after cyclone Carol or 
Alix in the 60s, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Some of us were not born during those days, but we 
remember  in  what  circumstances  these  houses  were  built  of  asbestos  and  CIS.  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, many of these people who bought these houses at that time, who were renting it, 
in fact, who were leasing it from the CHA at that time, have now become owners, but they 

 

256 

have become so old that they cannot pull down and rebuilt and reconstruct a new house of 
concrete today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

I have made so many appeals to the previous Governments, to hon. Soodhun also - 
you  can  check  from  Hansard  -  to  come  up  with  a  scheme.  There  is  so  much  money  now 
which are available and are being pumped in the social housing sector, I would have again 
appealed to him to come up, to conceptualise, design a scheme pertaining to these asbestos 
houses which are, as we know, a threat to the health of the occupiers, and to come up with a 
scheme to allow them, to give them the possibility of pulling down their houses. In fact, they 
don’t  have  the  right  to  pull  down  the  houses.  It  is  a  District  Council  or  the  Ministry  of 
Environment which is supposed to do that, but to give them this possibility of living in a new 
and in a safer home, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

It is still early, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! 

(Interruptions) 

I promise I would finish at 5.30 a.m. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, India and Agalega, let me also say a few words on this issue. 
We all know, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, of the history of this special relationship between our 
two countries. India has been our leading trade partners and is still is, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  and  we  know  in  terms  of  donor  country  what  India  has  represented  to  us,  to  little 
Mauritius. We all have to be respectful of this relationship. We all have to be careful and not 
to cause any harm or distress to this relationship and we must be realistic today and be alive 
to the fact that India is a growing economic and military power and that Mauritius falls into 
the geopolitical sphere of its influence. 

 I was reading a few days ago, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, somewhere on the Net, an 
article  entitled  ‘Towards  strategy  economic  cooperation  between  India  and  Japan.’  And  in 
this  article  the  author  was  writing  about  this  partnership  between  these  two  countries  to 
counter, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, China’s influence in our neighbourhood. I am quoting – 

 

257 

“On the maritime front as well, New Delhi has been wary of the growing number of 
Chinese  infrastructure  projects in  its  neighborhood  especially  in  the  Maldives, 
Mauritius, and Sri Lanka. 

India has watched China’s presence in the Indian Ocean grow with some concern.”  

The  Republic  of  India  has  tied  up  with  Japan,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  this 
common project of countering the People’s Republic of China’s influence in the region and in 
other regions of the world also.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, having said this, the respect that we owe to this relationship, 
the realisation that things have changed; we are living in a new era of geopolitics, yes, but the 
geopolitical strategy of India cannot be above the social economic interests of Mauritius. I am 
sure even the Indian authorities and leaders are aware of this. Yes, India has its geopolitical 
strategy, but Mauritius also has its own socio-economic interests.  Of course, we are too small 
to wield influence as to change the course of international events, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  
On  the  one  hand,  as  I  said,  we  have  the  Chinese  One  Belt,  One  Road,  the  Silk  Road 
Diplomatic Policy of economic and political policy. We know, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we 
have the issue of the American presence in our region, in Diego Garcia and its obsession to 
police the world and protect the oil route. We have the British with their double standard, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  still  perceived  as  wielding  their  imperialist  ambitions.    The  French 
presence in the Indian Ocean is also quite visible. India, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will in all 
logic  and legitimacy seek also to exercise its influence.  But, at the end  of the day, we, as 
Mauritians and a sovereign nation, we need to keep our territorial integrity. It may be a good 
diplomatic and strategic ploy to woo another power, to play one another, to bargain, to set up, 
to come up with bargaining mechanism in our endeavour to recoup Diego Garcia, to retrieve 
that territory which is ours. But we need to be cautious, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

That is why we must be aware as a Mauritian nation of what exactly is going on in 
Agalega. The Prime Minister has a moral right to inform the nation. He cannot escape not 
being transparent, he must play the card of transparency. He must answer the questions of the 
nation. Why a runway of 3,600 metres, when for years Plaisance Airport with an impressive 
tourist industry had a runway of only 2,850 metres until 1987. 

In  the  interest  of  the  whole  nation,  such  questions  have  to  be  answered.  The  hon. 
Prime Minister has to spell out what he has agreed with the Indian Government. He must not 

 

258 

act in any way and be responsible if suspicions are created in the minds of certain sectors of 
our population, mistrust in the minds of the population with regard to India’s presence in that 
part of the region.  This is what Mr Rocard once said and it has always stuck in my mind – 

“En politique, il faut faire ce qu’on dit et dire ce qu’on fait. » 

So, so much so on the issue of Agalega and India, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

I come to another issue which is very close to my heart, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is 

about the drug issue.  

And  I  have  no  doubt,  when  I  am  talking  about  the  drug  issue.  I  have  heard  a  few 
Members  on  the  other  side  of  House  and  this  side  of  the  House  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
unanimity  prevails  in  this  House  and  in  the  whole  country  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with 
regard to the extent that this scourge is devastating our social fabric and our youth in all four 
corners of our country. 

Unfortunately again, besides announcing for the Master Plan which has already been 
announced in a Cabinet communiqué at the beginning of the year, there is hardly anything 
new on the chapter on drugs.  

There  is  an  announcement  with  regards  to  new  equipment  and  modern  and 

sophisticated tools, logistics and so on, this was already announced in last year’s budget. 

But to come back to the ravage de ce fléau, M. le président, I just read an article and I 

am sure you all read it in “Le Mauricien” a few days ago. The article was entitled – 

“Drogues Synthétiques: l’Ouest touché en plein cœur. » 

And a few days afterwards, there was another article in “l’Express” this time. I am sure you 
have all seen it – 

“Pourquoi Maurice se drogue ?”  

To come back on the article in « Le Mauricien »   « L’Ouest touché en plein cœur. », I am 
quoting one line - 

« Les habitants des régions de Bambous et de Rivière Noire assistent impuissants à la 
recrudescence  des  drogues  synthétiques  et  ses  dégâts  dans  leurs  quartiers.  Depuis 
quelques années déjà, ils voient certains de leurs jeunes se détruire. Ils ont constaté 

 

259 

que même des adultes plus âgés se laissent tenter par l’expérience destructrice de ces 
produits. » 

Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, c’est une épidémie qui ronge toutes les régions du 
pays. So much so, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, because in my constituency there are many of 
these foyers infested by these dealers, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that I know of localities, but, 
of course, I won’t name it, where citizens are now selling their properties at a loss in order to 
flee that precise neighbourhood for their own security and the future of their children. Selling 
their house which they had bought, with so much sacrifice, blood and sweat, selling it at a 
loss just to get away from these areas for l’avenir of their children who are growing up, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. By reflecting on what I just said, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, imagine how 
deep-rooted  is  this  fléau  in  our  country!  Deep-seated!  And  how  can  we  win  this  war,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir?  We all want to win this war and sometimes the social workers and the 
experts  say  it  is  a  lost  battle.  Indeed,  year  in  and  year  out,  our  Government  and  all  the 
Governments  in  the  world  are  budgeting  millions  and  millions  of  rupees,  of  pounds  or 
whatever foreign exchange, whatever money you can call it, we are budgeting millions and 
millions of rupees or dollars to repress this ill, but like the mythic dragon, it keeps on rearing 
its ugly heads, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. How will we win this war?  

Hon. Bodha talked about Iceland. I read also what is taking place in Iceland - and I 
will come to it in a few minutes not to repeat what you have said – but one of the best ways to 
hit the mafia, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is to strike them at a place, at the spot where they can 
be weakened the more, their financial resources, their pockets. This is why in the past, we, I 
mean  all  of  us  in  this  House,  all  Governments,  have  tried  in  the  past  to  destroy  this 
flourishing and lucrative illicit trade by legislating, for example, to seize the property of drug 
traffickers. 

Let us admit it!  This is a measure that did not yield the expected results. But there is 
another suggestion that we have been made on this side of the House, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, to hon. Prime Minister, to Government. Government should do like what Mr Modi has 
done, demonetise the Mauritian rupee and issue new notes like the Indian Prime Minister did 
so that all the millions and millions of bank notes which are the rotten fruits heaped, amassed 
and hidden by these public poisoners should become useless, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Yesterday, I read in the newspapers “l’Express” entitled – I’ll just show you the title: 

“R 3 millions dans des boîtes de carton.” You have all seen it I am sure. 

 

260 

(Interruption) 

‘Drogues et blanchiment: R 3 millions chez un marchand de fruits.  Les limiers ont 
fait main basse sur six boîtes de cartons dans lesquelles étaient dissimulées plusieurs 
liasses de billets. Montant total R 3,016,100. Cet argent proviendrait d’un trafic de 
drogues. »  

This is what “L’Express” is saying.  

Therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I urgently appeal to the hon. Prime Minister to 
review  his  decision  -  this  decision  to  issue  new  banknotes  was,  in  fact,  proposed  by  the 
Central Bank for other reasons not necessarily for the reason I am talking about – to issue 
banknotes. I will appeal to him, beg him, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to review that decision 
before  the  mafia  has  time.  You  know  what  they  can  do  or  what  they  are  still  doing. 
Fortunately, I have heard that measures have been taken… 

(Interruptions) 

They  go to the money  changers  and so on, Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir, but  I understand that 
control has also been extended there. So much the better but we must, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, reflect seriously on this possibility. 

I was asking the question: pourquoi la drogue? Why, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? There 
are many social workers working on this issue but why has our youth today become so much 
a  prey,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  these  dealers,  to  these  public  poisoners,  to  this  mafia? 
Why is la drogue doing so many ravages? There is one answer to it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
of course, we have all reflected on this, all of us have our own analysis and we have got our 
own ideas.  

In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, notre jeunesse aujourd’hui souffre d’un mal être, M. 
le  président,  qui  les  envahit,  une  souffrance  intense  qui  les  étreint.  C’est  une  des  raisons 
principales, je ne vous dis pas que c’est la seule raison. Il y a un problème psychologique, M. 
le président.  

The  reference  of  hon.  Minister  Bodha  to  the  success  story  of  Iceland  on  treating 
addiction amongst teens can be emulated, can be copied in our country, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir. The percentage of 15 and 16-year old in this country who were addicted to drinks fell 
from 42% to 5% in 2016. The percentage of those who had ever used cannabis is down from 
17%  to  7%.  Those  smoking  cigarettes  everyday  fell  from  23%  to  just  3%.  This  is  the 

 

261 

experience of  Iceland.   Surveys were conducted. Alarming findings were detected. Almost 
25% of the youth aged 16-18 were smoking every day, 40% were consuming alcohol in the 
month that the survey had been carried out. The experts, who were conducting the enquiry, 
identified precisely what was the cause of all this souffrance, what was the cause of so much 
addiction.  

The analysis revealed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, clear differences between kids who 
took up drinking, smoking and other drugs and those who did not. Some factors emerged and 
they were made to participate in organized activities, to do sports three or four times a week, 
to spend time with their parents during the week, as hon. Bodha was telling us. They were 
made  to  feel  cared  for,  to  feel  loved  in  their  schools  or  wherever  they  were,  not  being 
outdoors in the late evenings.  

Before that experience there had been all kinds of substance prevention  efforts and 
programmes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, but these programmes were not working. Then came 
the  different  approach  and  a  new  national  plan  was  introduced,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
which was called ‘Youth in Iceland’. Laws were changed. It became illegal to buy tobacco 
and alcohol under the age of 18 and so on. Parents were encouraged to attend talks on the 
importance  of  spending  quality  time  with  their  children  and  talking  to  their  kids.  Curfews 
were imposed, as hon. Bodha reminded us. What happens today in our modern society is that 
we  do  not  even  have  time  to  talk  to  our  kith  and  kin,  to  talk  to  our  kids  and  to  keep  the 
children home in the evening.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  we  are  not  pointing  fingers  at  our  travailleurs  sociaux  or  the 
NGOs and so on, but I think repression is not the only answer. Government has to stand to its 
responsibilities, State funding for sports, music, arts, dance to give these kids the alternatives.  

This is true, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. When I go to one of my cités and I see so much 
drugs being sold I realize that there are no sports facilities in that area. What will these young 
people do in the afternoon, in the evening or  even during the day? Most of them have no 
School Certificate. They try to find a job and we know the question of adaptation; they have 
no work culture; they are easy preys.  

 and once we don’t provide them with all these facilities, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this 
is an alternative to feel part of a group, to feel good rather using alcohol and drugs. These 
kids from low-income families receive help from the State, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

262 

 I know it is perhaps an ambitious project for us but we have to rethink about ways to 
curb the drug scourge, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. More importantly and I will finish on that on 
the drug issue, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir … 

(Interruptions) 

Ce qu’on devrait faire aussi c’est la mise en place d’un service d’addictologie dans le 
pays  que  l’on  n’a  pas  M.  le  président.  Nous  témoignons  aujourd’hui  cette  augmentation 
significative  des  troubles  liés  à  ces  nouveaux  produits  synthétiques  et  aux  complications 
graves  menant  jusqu’à  la  mort  de  certains  consommateurs,  M  le  président.  Nous  avons 
entendu beaucoup de cas. Nous devrions mettre en place d’urgence un service spécialisé pour 
la prise en charge des troubles d’addiction.  

Qu’est-ce  que  c’est  que  l’addiction,  M.  le  président?  L’addiction  est  une  maladie 
complexe  et  une  discipline  médico-psycho-sociale,  M.  le  président.  Eu  égard  de  la  nette 
progression  des  addictions,  l’État  doit  mettre  en  place  cette  facilité  d’hospitalisation  en 
addictologie,  M.  Le  président.  Ce  que  j’ai  appris  c’est  que  nous  avons  qu’un  seul 
addictologue à Maurice, M. le président. Donc, comme nous le savons tous dans notre pays… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

Mr  Ganoo:  L’addiction  de  toute  substance  est  possible,  l’alcool  est  un  produit 
hautement  consommé,  le  rhum  local,  le  tabac  importé,  le  cannabis  est  consommé,  M.  le 
président.  Donc  voilà  toutes  les  raisons  de  l’addiction.  Il  nous  faut  émuler  l’exemple  de 
Iceland et aussi réfléchir pour mettre sur pied ce centre d’addictologie. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will go very briefly on the Betamax affair. M. le président, 

en 2010 sept ans de cela… 

(Interruptions) 

It is getting late, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Sept ans de cela, 7 years ago, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  I  was  a  Member  of  the  Opposition  and  I  remember  there  was  the  Labour  and  MSM 
Government and, I think, PMSD also, Bleu/Blanc/Rouge was in power, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir.  I  remember  this  was  the  first  question  which  was  asked  on  the  Betamax  affair,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. je vais vous dire la date exacte – I will ask my hon. friends to bear with 
me because I will be finishing in a few minutes… 

(Interruptions) 

 

263 

On 10.08.2010, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the question was about Betamax.  It was a 
PNQ put by the hon. Leader of the Opposition then, Mr Bérenger, and the question was about 
the Betamax project. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I asked this question and it was the first time 
that it was asked in this House. The hon. Minister is talking of the procurement practice and 
so on.  Since we have to give a guarantee of 15 year cargo to Betamax Ltd and this project 
amounts to nearly Rs1 billion; the expression of interest was issued in March 2008, and the 
Public  Procurement  Act  came  into  effect  in  January  2008,  we  are  dealing  with  a  major 
project, does not the hon. Minister think that this transaction should have been monitored by 
the  Central  Procurement  Board  and  everything  should  have  gone  through  this  Board?  The 
STC should have never issued directly an expression of interest and thus acted in breach of 
the PPA which came into effect in January of 2008. From that time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
many of us had doubts on the legality of this transaction. I asked the hon. Minister whether a 
proper procurement exercise had been conducted. 

Everything goes bulldozed at that time. It was hon. Soodhun who was answering this 
question since he was then the Minister responsible for trade and industry. After the elections 
of 2014, l’Alliance Lepep came to power portée par l’euphorie de la victoire, Monsieur le 
Président, et dans l’ivresse d’un mandat électoral sans équivoque, le gouvernement croyait 
que  tout  était  permis  dans  le  royaume  du  soleil.  L’essence  de  notre  état  de  droit  s’est 
affaiblie, Monsieur le Président. J’ai écouté le ministre ce matin et j’ai relu le discours de 
l’honorable ministre Gungah il y a une semaine de cela. Pour moi, il n’y a pas de doute que 
des négociations auraient pu aboutir à une meilleur solution. Je ne pense pas que the root of 
negotiations  was  fully  utilised,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Je  pense  que  des  négociations 
auraient pu aboutir à une meilleur solution, mais malheureusement c’est fort de cette victoire 
peut être que c’est une attitude condescendante qui a prévalue ces jours-ci et cette attitude, 
Monsieur  le  Président,  a  même  continué  pendant  tout  le  long  du  mandat  depuis  2014, 
concernant  l’affaire  de  Betamax.  Je  vais  vous  dire  pourquoi.  Je  vous  cite  une  question 
parlementaire  que  j’avais  moi-même  posé  à  l’honorable  ministre  le  5  avril  2016,  as  to 
whether he will obtain information from the STC indicating if the prior advice of the State 
Law Office was sought and obtained before the termination of the contract; if Government 
has  been  apprised  of  any  indemnities  that  would  be  payable  to  Betamax;  if  there  is  a 
possibility  to  renegotiate  the  price  and  if  an  arbitrator,  mediator  has  been  appointed  the 
profile and the current status of the arbitration. 

 

264 

Le ministre, Monsieur Le Président, ce jour-ci avait réclamé son droit de silence car 
il aurait pu nous donner certains renseignements. This is what he said Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir - 

 “I want to give the information but I cannot”.  

Hon. Uteem asked him – 

“I  can  understand  confidentiality  as  regards  the  content  and  the  defence  of  the 
Government.  What  we  are  asking  here  is:  who  is  representing  the  Government  of 
Mauritius and how much this is costing taxpayers?”  

Je suis sûr que you would have answered the hon. Attorney General and this had nothing to 
do with our defence and so on. But the hon. Minister again refused to give any information. A 
few  PQs  were  asked  in  the  past  years  about  this  Betamax,  and  this  was  shrouded  in  a 
mystery.  The  old  subject  matter  was  shrouded,  as  I  said  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir. 
Aujourd’hui,  nous  aurons  à  payer  cher  cette  arrogance  etcette  désinvolture.  Hier  matin, 
l’honorable ministre a réitéré son exploit, à son tour maintenant le manque de transparence, 
en  refusant  de  répondre  la  question  concerning  the  law  officer’s  opinion.  This  is  what  he 
said: “Because I tried to have a copy of the reply you gave, but I read it from Le Mauricien, I 
hope they gave the correct version.” Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wanted to make a Point of 
Order this morning, but there was so much brouhaha and pandemonium in the House that I 
did not have time and I am not usually allowed to ask supplementary in this House, which are 
reasons well known to everybody. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is what Erskine May says about Law Officer’s opinion. 

You said!  Do you want me to read? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No, the Attorney General said the advice came from the Law Officers and also from private 
lawyers and this is why he did not want to disclose. Therefore, this is what I can read from 
Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, page 443, Law Officers’ Opinion - 

 “The opinions of the law officers of the Crown, being confidential, are not usually 
laid  before  Parliament,  cited  in  debate  or  provided  in  evidence  before  a  select 

 

265 

committee, and their production has frequently been refused; but if a Minister deems 
it  expedient  that  such  opinions  should  be  made  known  for  the  information  of  the 
House (…).” 

The Speaker has ruled that the orders of the House are in no way involved in the proceedings.  
So, it depends on the Attorney General. He has to take the decision. But I think that in the 
interest of transparency he should have given his opinion, and this is what Erskine May says 
and Erskine May never errs, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Monsieur  le  Président,  Betamax  doit  servir  de  leçon  pour  tout  le  monde,  pour  ce 
gouvernement  et  pour  l’ancien  gouvernement.  Mais  le  gouvernement  doit  adopter  une 
attitude  responsable  pour  que  notre  pays  ne  doit  pas  être  taxé  comme  un  État  voyou,    un 
rogue State, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In fact, we have all again read what an expert in the 
course  of  an  interview  said  regarding  the  Betamax  affair:  “What  are  the  consequences  for 
Mauritius if it decides not to pay?” The answer was, “Not paying an international Arbitration 
Award  would  invariably  damage  Mauritius  reputation  as  an  investor-friendly  country  and 
ultimately its economy. A country which is heavily dependent on foreign investment, on the 
support from foreign lenders and international organisations, would send the wrong signal by 
refusing to comply with an international Arbitration Award.  Monsieur le Président, c’est ce 
que j’avais à dire sur le passé, mais pour l’avenir, I think, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, aucune 
transaction de l’État, entre l’État ou une de ses entités, comme la STC, et une autre personne 
morale ne doit contenir des clauses de confidentialité, ne doit voiler le contenu du contrat, 
Monsieur  le  Président,  parce  que  c’est  une  transaction  financée  par  l’argent  publique, 
relevant  du  droit  publique.  Il  ne  peut  être  un  secret  face  au  grand  public,  Monsieur  le 
Président. C’est pourquoi je suis convaincu, Monsieur le Président, que pour l’ile Maurice 
qui  est  une  démocratie  mature,  avec  toute  l’expérience  riche  que  nous  avons  en  terme  de 
Good Governance et de transparence, après le saga Betamax, je suis convaincu que tous les 
contrats entre l’État et les sociétés privées, les IPPs, les autres promoteurs, sans distinction, 
incluant les promoteurs des établissements hôteliers sur les pas géométriques.  

Tous ces contrats doivent sans distinction être déposés sur la Table de l’Assemblée 
nationale. It is a reasonable demand that I am making, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I think we all 
need  that.    Even  next  time,  when  you  will  be  in  the  Opposition,  there  will  be  another 
Government,  I  am  sure  that  will  help  you.    All  these  transactions  involving  les  finances 
publiques doivent être déposées sur la Table de l’Assemblée. 

 

266 

M. le président, j’avais dit à cinq heures, trois minutes. M. le président, je termine. A 
l’aube de nos 50 ans, il est grand temps de moderniser notre république et ses institutions, à 
commencer par notre Constitution et notre Parlement, M. le président. C’est pourquoi, moi et 
mon ami, l’honorable Barbier, nous avions proposé le repatriation de notre Constitution qui 
fut rédigé au White Hall par des Britanniques, nous fut octroyé par ces Britanniques par le 
biais d’un Order in Council, M. le président, annexé.  

Notre  Constitution  n’a  jamais  été  votée  par  cette  auguste  Assemblée.  Plusieurs 
anciennes  colonies  nous  ont  précédées.  Nous  devrions  suivre  leur  exemple  et  ceci  nous 
permettra  dans  le  même  souffle  de  dépoussiérer  et  mettre  à  jour  notre  Constitution  en 
introduisant des clauses qui reflètent les changements sociétales que Maurice a connus. 

La limitation du mandat du Premier ministre, l’épineuse question du transfugisme en 
particulier, la révocation des élus par leurs mandants dans des circonstances exceptionnelles 
et le second generation of rights, M. le président. Ça c’est pour la Constitution. 

Il nous faut dans le cadre de la célébration de nos 50 ans d’anniversaire, l’Attorney 
General doit présider un comité pour réfléchir sur the advisability of this House voting a new 
Constitution with new clauses pour update our Constitution. 

Quant  à  notre  Parlement,  M.  le  président,  il  nous  faut  moderniser  nos  Standing 
Orders, introduire le comité système pour favoriser plus de transparence, pour sanctionner 
des ministres qui refusent de circuler les réponses des questions qui sont restées sans réponse 
à  cause  du  temps.  And  this,  Madam  Speaker,  cited  the  relevant  Standing  Orders,  the 
Ministers  are  bound  by  Standing  Orders  to  circulate  the  answers.    Il  nous  faut  de  la 
transparence, M. le président. 

Finalement,  pour  moderniser  ce  Parlement,  vous  savez  qu’est-ce  que  nous  avons 

besoin, M. le président? 

(Interruptions) 

I am finishing on that! 

Introduire la langue Créole, M. le président. 

M. le président, nu bizin capav cause Creole, pour qui la population capav comprend 
nu ek seki pe passer dans sa parlement là.   C’est ene question de justice, M. le président.  

 

267 

C’est ene question de respect pour nu population.  Est-ce ki ou conner, M. président, en 1977, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth ki ti Leader lopposition sa lepoque-la, li ti amene 3 motions privés, M. 
le président, … 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  The  Standing  Orders  would  apply  and,  therefore,  I  would 

invite you to continue your speech in English or in French! 

Mr Ganoo:  Okay!  I have the solution, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, because Standing 
Order 5 provides that we have to speak in French and English.  But we have another Standing 
Order whereby we can suspend any Standing Order with the will of the House, of course, 
with the pleasure of the House. 

(Interruptions) 

This Motion does not need notice. So, I could have moved that we suspend Standing 

Order 5 and the House allow me to talk in Creole.   

Okay, I will finish! 

(Interruptions) 

M. le président, nous avons aujourd’hui un dictionnaire en Créole. Cette langue a son 
lexique.  Elle  est  enseignée  dans  l’école,  dans  les  universités,  au  MIE,  des  chercheurs  de 
l’université sont en train de travailler sur un logiciel pour corriger le Créole sur le Microsoft 
Office, M. le président. 

Donc, cessons d’avoir des préjugés contre la langue Créole, M. le président, que la 

majorité des mauriciens utilisent. 

(Interruptions) 

Puisque  nous  sommes  tous  d’accord,  M.  le  président,  je  demanderai,  donc,  au  Premier 
ministre,  à  travers  les  ministres  présents,  de  venir  avec  un  Statement  et  d’informer  la 
Chambre et la population que oui, un Select Committee peut être nommé et peut travailler sur 
toute la question, M. le président. 

M.  le  président,  je  termine  en  disant  ceci.  Ce  budget  sera  sans  doute  adopté  par  le 
Parlement compte-tenu de la majorité dont dispose le gouvernement, mais un budget, M. le 

 

268 

président,  n’est  qu’un  exercice  comptable,  financier  et  économique.  L’économie,  M.  le 
président, est le concentré de la politique. Ce dont a besoin l’Ile Maurice aujourd’hui est un 
nouvel ordre moral, social et économique. 

En effet, notre pays a besoin d’une moralisation de la vie publique et d’un nouveau 
cadre  technique  pour  ne  pas  exploser  sous  le  poids  de  la  décadence  morale.  Notre  pays  a 
besoin de compétences, M. président, pour ne pas dépérir sur le poids de la médiocrité. Notre 
pays a besoin de solidarité, de justice sociale  

pour ne pas exploser sous le poids des inégalités et d’une pauvreté grandissante. Notre pays a 
besoin de méritocratie, d’une vraie égalité des chances pour ne pas sombrer sous le poids du 
népotisme, du favoritisme et de passe-droit.  

M. président, face aux attentes d’une population en désarroi et d’une jeunesse sans 

espoir, réunissons nos forces patriotiques pour construire ene nouvo Maurice! 

Merci! 

Mr Gobin: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned.  

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 20 June 2017 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 5.03 a.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 20 June at 11.30 

a.m. 

