 

 

1 

 

 

No. 01 of 2014 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

MONDAY 22 DECEMBER 2014 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

PROCLAMATION 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATH TO MEMBERS 

SPEAKER - election 

DEPUTY SPEAKER - election 

DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES - election 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

END-OF-YEAR MESSAGE 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth) 

THE CABINET 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Communications 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, National Emergency Centre and 

QPM 

Beach Authority  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen  

Minister of Civil Service Affairs 

Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Perraud 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Empowerment 

International Trade 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Family Welfare 

Institutional Reforms 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

 

 

4 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs B. Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

 

 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 01 of 2014 

 

                                       Sitting of 22 December 2014 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.00 a.m. 

 

6 

(The  Mace  is  brought  into  the  House  by  the  Serjeant-at-Arms  and  is  laid  near  the 

Table). 

The National Anthem is played. 

The  Clerk:    Hon.  Members,  today’s  sitting  is  being  held  following  the  issue  of 
Proclamation  No.  42  of  2014  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  His  Excellency  hon.  Rajkeswur 
Purryag, GCSK, GOSK, President of the Republic of Mauritius. 

I shall, in compliance with Standing Order 3 of the Standing Orders and Rules of the 

National Assembly, read out the Proclamation. 

Proclamation No. 42 of 2014 

 

TO PROCLAIM THE OPENING OF THE  

FIRST SESSION OF THE SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SIGNED BY  

RAJKESWUR PURRYAG, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC 

 

RAJKESWUR PURRYAG  

- 

 

RAJKESWUR  PURRYAG  
President of the Republic 

By  His  Excellency  Mr  RAJKESWUR 
PURRYAG, Grand  Commander of the Order of 
the  Star  and  Key  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  Grand 
Officer of the Order of the Star and Key of the 
Indian  Ocean,  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius.  

 

&c.,      &c.,      &c 

 

WHEREAS by section 56(1) of the Constitution of Mauritius it is provided that the 
sessions of the National Assembly shall be held in such place and begin at such time as the 
President by Proclamation may appoint; 

 

7 

AND  WHEREAS  it  is  further  enacted  by  section  56(4)  of  the  Constitution  that  a 
session of the National Assembly shall be appointed to commence within thirty days of the 
date prescribed for polling at any general election; 

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers vested in me as aforesaid, I do 
hereby  proclaim  that  the  First  Session  of  the  Sixth  National  Assembly  shall  begin  on  the 
twenty second day of December, two thousand and fourteen, and that the first sitting of the 
Sixth National Assembly in its First Session shall be held on the day aforesaid at 11.00 hours 
in the Chamber of the Assembly in Port Louis. 

Given at State House, Le Réduit, this sixteenth day of December, two thousand and 

fourteen. 

Hon. Members, Standing Order 4(1) of the Standing Orders and Rules of the National 
Assembly requires that an Oath of Allegiance shall be subscribed or made, as the case may be 
prior to any Member taking part in the proceedings of the House. 

I shall, therefore, invite hon. Ministers to kindly come forward in order of precedence 
to the Table to make and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance prescribed in Schedule 3 of the 
Constitution and sign the Roll of Membership and thereafter to take their respective seats. 

When  hon.  Ministers  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  would  have  made  and 
subscribed  to  the  Oath  of  Allegiance,  hon.  Members  of  the  House  shall  be  invited  in 
alphabetical order for the same purpose.   

ADMINISTRATION OF OATH TO MEMBERS 

The following hon. Members made and subscribed before the Assembly, the Oath of 
Allegiance  prescribed  in  the  Third  Schedule  of  the  Constitution  and  signed  the  Roll  of 
Membership - 

The Right Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC (Prime Minister, Minister 
of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit) 
Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, GCSK (Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
Tourism and External Communications) 
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun (Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands) 

 

8 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo (Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 
Utilities) 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo (Minister of Finance and Economic Development) 
Hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth  (Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and 
Innovation) 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden (Minister of Youth and Sports) 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha (Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport) 
Hon.  Mrs  Leela  Devi  Dookun-Luchoomun  (Minister  of  Education  and  Human 
Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research) 
Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan (Minister of Health and Quality of Life). 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo (Minister of Local Government). 
Hon.  Prithvirajsing  Roopun  (Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment). 
Hon.  Marie Joseph Noel Etienne Ghislain Sinatambou (Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Regional Integration and International Trade). 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo (Attorney General). 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun (Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security). 
Hon. Santaram Baboo (Minister of Arts and Culture). 
Hon.  Ashit  Kumar  Gungah  (Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer 
Protection). 
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce  Perraud  (Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare). 
Hon.  Sudarshan  Bhadain  (Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms). 
Hon. Soomilduth Bholah (Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives). 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo (Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity 
and Reform Institutions) 
Hon. Premdut Koonjoo  (Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands) 
Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, QPM (Minister of Environment, National 
Emergency Centre and Beach Authority) 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen  Cheong,  MSK  (Minister  of  Civil  Service 
Affairs) 

 

9 

Hon.  Soodesh  Satkam  Callichurn  (Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training) 
Hon. P. R. Bérenger, GCSK (Leader of the Opposition) 
Hon. M. S. Abbas Mamode 
Hon. J. N. A. Aliphon 
Hon. S. M. A. Ameer Meea   
Hon. P. K. Armance 
Hon. V. V. Baloomoody 
Hon. J. C. Barbier 
Hon. T. Benydin  
Hon. R. A. Bhagwan 
Hon. M. C. E. Boissézon 
Hon. Mrs D. Boygah 
Hon. A. C. Duval 
Hon. S. Fowdar 
Hon. J. F. François 
Hon. A. Ganoo 
Hon. M. Gobin 
Hon. J. H. T. Henry 
Hon. M. S. Hurreeram 
Hon. Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus  
Hon. A. B. Jahangeer 
Hon. E. S. Jhuboo 
Hon. P. Jhugroo 
Hon. Z. H. I. Joomaye 
Hon. J. B. Leopold 
Hon. J. C. G. Lepoigneur 
Hon. G. P. Lesjongard 
Hon. M. O. C. Mahomed 
Hon. Mrs M. C. J. Monty 
Hon. G. Oree 
Hon. J. P. F. Quirin 
Hon. K. Ramano 
Hon. D. Ramful 

 

10 

Hon. S. Ramkaun 
Hon. R. Rampertab 
Hon. S. Rughoobur 
Hon. S. Rutnah 
Hon. Mrs M. D. Selvon 
Hon. D. Sesungkur 
Hon. Mrs M. Sewocksingh 
Dr. the Hon. M. R. Sorefan 
Hon. K. Tarolah 
Hon. K. Teeluckdharry 
Hon. J. C. S. Toussaint 
Hon. M. R. C. Uteem 

SPEAKER - ELECTION 

The  Clerk:  Hon.  Members,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  32  of  the 
Constitution  and  Standing  Order  7  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National 
Assembly, the House will now proceed with the election of a Speaker. 

I  will,  therefore,  invite  two  hon.  Members  to  move  and  second  the  election  of  a 
Member present in this Assembly, or otherwise, to be nominated to the office of Speaker and 
to take the Chair of the House as such. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Clerk, in accordance with the provisions of Section 32 of 
the  Constitution  and  Standing  Order  7  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National 
Assembly, I move that Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee be elected Speaker of the House. 

Madam Clerk, Mrs Hanoomanjee had her secondary education at the Queen Elizabeth 
College,  after  which,  she  joined  the  Civil  Service  and  she  climbed  up  to  the  post  of 
Permanent  Secretary,  in  which  capacity  she  served  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance.    She  also 
presided over different Boards and she was in charge of putting up the MRA of which she 
became the first Chairperson.  After 33 years of service, she retired and she joined politics. 
She was first elected in 2005 as a Member of Constituency No. 14 Savanne and Black River, 
and  was  again  re-elected  in  the  same  Constituency  in  2010,  but  unfortunately  in  the  last 
elections she lost.   

Today, it is my pride and pleasure to move that she be elected Speaker of this House. 

 

11 

The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications 

rose and seconded. 

The Clerk: Is there any counter proposal? Hon. Members, as there appears to be no 
counter proposal, I declare hon. Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee, present in the House, elected 
Speaker of the House and I invite her to come to the upper step to make and subscribe before 
the Assembly, the Oath of Allegiance prescribed in the Third Schedule of the Constitution, in 
the first instance, and then to take the Chair. 

(The House having called hon. Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee to the Chair, she 

proceeds to the upper step of the Chair.) 

Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee then made and subscribed before the Assembly the Oath 
of  Allegiance  prescribed  in  the  Third  Schedule  of  the  Constitution  and  signed  the  Roll  of 
Membership. 

Madam Speaker:  (Standing on the upper step) 

Hon. Members, it is with a deep sense of pride and gratitude that I stand in this august 
Assembly today to take the Chair. I wish, at the outset, to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
for proposing me as Speaker of the House.  

I am pledging to submit myself to the will of the House and to uphold the dignity, 

serenity and decorum it rightfully deserves and the respect it commands. 

Hon. Members, I have had the privilege of serving this House for the past ten years. I 
am,  therefore,  fully  aware  of  the  exacting  tasks  that  await  me  ahead.  I  have,  however,  no 
doubt that I can rely on your support, collaboration and understanding in the discharge of my 
responsibilities. 

I wish to reassure the House that impartiality and understanding will be my guiding 

principles in the conduct of the business of the House. 

In  the  same  breath,  my  overriding  concern  will  be  ensuring  that,  the  rights  of  all 
parties  are  protected  and  upheld  at  all  times  in  the  House.  I  will  always  be  available  to 
provide such advice and guidance as hon. Members may require, especially the newly elected 
Members. 

Hon. Members, my election as the first woman Speaker in the history of Parliament of 
Mauritius is a tribute to the women of our country and  I dedicate my election today to all 

 

12 

women of Mauritius who will no doubt share the pride and sense of achievement I am feeling 
today. 

Before I take the Chair, I wish to reiterate my deep appreciation and thanks for the trust 
and  confidence  of  the  House  in  electing  me  as  Speaker  of  this  august  Assembly.    Hon. 
Members can rest assured that I will not falter in my duties and I hope I will be able to stand 
up to your expectations. 

I thank in anticipation the Clerk, her officers and all the Members of the Staff for their 

invaluable contribution in ensuring the proper and effective functioning of the Assembly. 

I thank you for your attention. 

(Applause) 

(Madam Speaker then takes the Chair) 

(The Mace which is, up to that time, near the Table, is placed upon the Table by the 

Serjeant-at-Arms). 

 

DEPUTY SPEAKER - ELECTION 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Section 
32 of the Constitution and Standing Order 7 of the Standing Orders and Rules of the National 
Assembly, I move that the hon. First Member for Curepipe and Midlands, Mr Adrien Charles 
Duval, be elected Deputy Speaker of the House. 

Mr Soodhun rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker:  Is there any counterproposal? 

There being no counterproposal, I declare the hon. First Member for Constituency No. 
17,  Curepipe  and  Midlands,  Mr  Adrien  Charles  Duval,  elected  Deputy  Speaker  of  this 
Assembly. I offer him my sincere congratulations. 

I  wish, 

first, 

Mr  A.  Duval: 

to  congratulate  you,  Madam  Speaker,  
for having been elected  to this high office.   I wish also to express my deepest thanks  and 
gratitude  to  all  hon.  Members,  but  more  particularly  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and 
Leader of the House for his trust. 

 

13 

I feel deeply honoured and privileged to be working alongside Madam Speaker. 

I give the assurance to all hon. Members that I will do my level best to conduct the 

affairs of this Assembly and uphold the dignity of the House. 

I wish all hon. Members well and thank you once again. 

DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES - ELECTION 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Standing 
Order 7 of the Standing Orders and Rules of the National Assembly,  I move that the hon. 
First Member for Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, Mr Mahendranuth Sharma Hurreeram, be 
elected Deputy Chairperson of Committees. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker:  Is there any counterproposal? 

There being no counterproposal, I declare the hon. First Member for Mahebourg and 
Plaine  Magnien,  Mr  Mahendranuth  Sharma  Hurreeram,  elected  Deputy  Chairperson  of 
Committees of this Assembly.  I offer him my sincere congratulations. 

Mr Hurreeram:  Madam Speaker, I am deeply honoured to be elected by this august 
Assembly as Deputy Chairperson of Committees.  I can assure the House that I will discharge 
my responsibilities to the best of my abilities faithfully. 

I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the trust he has placed in me.  

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

OBITUARY - MR JOSEPH CLAREL DÉSIRÉ MALHERBE 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it is with deep regret that we have learnt of 

the demise of Mr Joseph Clarel Désiré Malherbe on 28 August 2014 at the age of 79. 

Mr Malherbe was born  on 7 October 1934 at  Mont  Lubin.   He attended the Royal 

College of Curepipe for his Secondary Education.  

 In  1959,  Mr  Malherbe  joined  the  Civil  Service  and  was  posted  at  the  Ministry  of 
Finance.  However,  Mr  Malherbe  continued  to  pursue  further  studies  in  Mauritius  and  in 
1989, he graduated with a BSc in Economics.   

 

14 

In 1971, Mr Malherbe left Mauritius to work with the United Nations under contract 
with  UNICEF  as  Programme  Officer  for  East  African  countries,  including  Mauritius.  He 
resigned  from  that  post  in  1975  and  returned  to  Mauritius  and  continued  to  work  in  his 
substantive post at the Ministry of Finance. 

 In  1976,  Mr  Malherbe  resigned  from  the  Civil  Service  for  active  politics.  
He consequently stood as a candidate for the 1976 general elections under the banner of the 
Independence Party in Constituency No. 17 – Curepipe and Midlands, but was not returned.  
He was nominated to serve the Assembly under the Best Loser System. From 1977 to 1981, 
Mr Malherbe occupied the post of Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Health. 

Mr  Malherbe  ran  for  the  1982  and  1983  general  elections  in  Constituency  
No. 17 – Curepipe and Midlands under the Banner of the Parti  de L`Alliance Nationale  and 
Constituency  No.1 Grand River North West and Port Louis West under the banner of  the 
PMSD respectively, but was not elected.  

In  1987,  Mr  Malherbe  once  again  stood  as  a  candidate  for  the  general  elections  in 
Constituency  No.  17  Curepipe  and  Midlands  and  was  returned  First  Member  for  the  said 
Constituency. He was appointed Minister of Local Government and occupied that post until 
September 1988. From October 1988 to August 1990, Mr Malherbe held the portfolio of the 
Ministry of Industry. 

Mr Malherbe also ran for the 1991 general elections in Constituency No. 17 Curepipe 
and Midlands under the banner of the Labour Party and PMSD but was not returned. He was 
nominated to serve the Assembly under the Best Loser System. 

Mr  Malherbe  contested  general  elections  in  Constituency  No.  17,  Curepipe  and 
Midlands, for the last time in 1995 under the banner of the Labour Party and MMM and was 
returned  First  Member  for  the  said  constituency.  From  July  1997  to  October  1998,  Mr 
Malherbe was Minister of Housing and Land Development. In November 1998, he became 
Minister of Land Transport, Shipping and Port Development, a portfolio which he continued 
until August 2000.   

Madam  Speaker,  may  I  request  you  to  be  kind  enough  to  direct  the  Clerk  of  the 
National Assembly to convey the deep condolences of the Assembly to the bereaved family.  

Thank you. 
Mr Bérenger:  I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and with his request to you, Madam 

Speaker, to convey our condolences to the bereaved family of late Clarel Malherbe. 

 

15 

Madam Speaker: I associate myself with the tribute paid to the late Mr Clarel Désiré 
Malherbe by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition and I direct 
the Clerk to convey to the bereaved family the assurance of our sincere condolences. 

 

OBITUARY - MR HURRYDEW RAMCHURN  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it is again with deep regret that we have learnt 

of the demise of Mr Hurrydew Ramchurn on 04 September 2014 at the age of 81. 

Mr Ramchurn was born on 20 September 1932 at Dagotière. He attended the Church 
of England Aided School of his native village for his Primary Education and the New Eton 
College of Rose Hill for his Secondary Education.  Mr Ramchurn was a Civil Servant and has 
worked as an Executive Officer at the Ministry of Education.  In the 1960`s, he occupied the 
post of Treasurer of the Moka/Flacq Youth Federation. 

Mr Ramchurn stood as a candidate for the 1967 general elections under the banner of 
the PMSD in the Constituency of Quartier Militaire and Moka but was not returned. From 
November 1968 to November 1969, he held the post of President of the Moka/Flacq  District 
Council and in November 1973 he was again called upon to occupy that post which he held 
until November 1979. 

In 1976, Mr Ramchurn again ran for the general elections in Constituency No. 14 - 
Savanne and Black River under the banner of the Independence Party and was returned First 
Member for the said constituency.  In 1977, he was appointed Minister of Youth and Sports, 
a portfolio which he occupied until 1981.  

Mr Ramchurn also contested the 1982 general elections under the banner of Parti de 
L`Alliance Nationale in Constituency No. 11 – Vieux Grand Port and Rose Belle, but was not 
elected. 

Mr Ramchurn has also served as administrator of the Swami Krishnanand Ashram at 

Calebasses.  

Madam Speaker, may I once again request you to be kind enough to direct the Clerk 
of the National Assembly to convey the deep condolences of the Assembly to the bereaved 
family. 

Thank you. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, for the second time today, I join with what the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  has  just  said  concerning  late  Hurrydew  Ramchurn  and  would  also 

 

16 

request,  like  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  done,  for  the  Chair  to  convey  our  deepest 
condolences to the family of late Hurrydew Ramchurn. 

Madam Speaker: I associate myself with the tribute paid to the late Mr Hurrydew 
Ramchurn by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition and I direct 
the Clerk to convey to the bereaved family the assurance of our sincere condolences. 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table. 

 

A. 
 

 

 

 

 

B. 
 

 

 

 

 

Office of the President 
(a) 

 

The Annual Report of the National Human Rights Commission for the 
year 2013. (In Original) 
The  Annual  Report  2013-2014  of  the  Ombudsperson  for  Children’s 
Office.  (In Original)                            
The  National  Assembly  Elections  Regulations  2014.  (Government 
Notice No. 201 of 2014). 
The  National  Assembly  Elections  Polling  Stations  Order,  2014 
(Government Notice No.211 of 2014). 
The  National  Assembly  Elections  (Amendment)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No. 215 of 2014) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

Prime Minister’s Office – 
(a)   Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Additional  Remuneration 

(2015) Bill       (No. IX of 2014). (In Original) 

(b)   The National Identity Card (Extension of Validity Period) Regulations 

2014 (Government Notice No.146 of 2014). 

(c)   The  National 

Identity  Card 

(Extension  of  Validity  Period) 
(Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice  No.  186  of 
2014). 

(d)   The  Passports  (Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice 

No. 192 of 2014). 

(e)   The  Financial  Statement  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Relief  Fund  for 

period  
01 January 2013 to 31December 2013. (In Original) 

 

 

 

 

 
 

17 

(f)    The  National 

Identity  Card 

(Extension  of  Validity  Period) 
(Amendment No.2) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 200 of 
2014). 

(g)   The  Firearms 

(Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2014 

(Government Notice No. 209 of 2014). 

 

 

C.  Ministry of Tourism and External Communications  – 
 

(a)  The Annual Reports and Audited Financial Statements of the Tourism 
Employees Welfare Fund for the periods July 2009 to December 2010 
and January to December 2011. (In Original) 

 

(b)  The Annual Report 2009/2010 of the Tourism Authority. (In Original) 

D.  Ministry of Housing and Lands -  
 

The  Annual  Report  and  the  Audited  Financial  Statements  of  the  Town  and 
Country  Planning  Board  for 
the  year  ended  31  December  2012.  
(In Original) 

E.  Ministry of  Energy and Public Utilities – 
 

(a) 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

The Annual Report 2013 of the Wastewater Management Authority. 
(In Original) 
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Wastewater Management Authority for the year ended 31 December 
2013. (In Original) 
The  Annual  Report  of  the  Central  Electricity  Board  for  year  ended  
31 December 2011. (In Original) 

F.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
 

(a) 

 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The Report of the Director of Audit on the Accounts of the Republic of 
Mauritius for the year ended 31 December 2013. (In Original) 
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Accounts of the Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly for the year ended 31 December 2013. (In Original) 
The  Activity  and  Performance  Report  for  the  period  01  January  to  
31 December 2013. (In Original) 
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Treasury’s  Accounts  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  for  the  fiscal  year  
ended 31 December 2013. (In Original) 

 

18 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 
(k) 

(l) 

(m) 

(n) 

(o) 

(p) 

(q) 

(r) 

(s) 

(t) 

(u) 

The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  31  December 
2013.  
(In Original) 
The  Performance  Audit  Report  No.  11  –  Government  Response  to 
Mitigate Beach Erosion. (In Original) 
The  Performance  Audit  Report  No.  12  –  Livestock  Production  and 
Development – Quarantine Services. (In Original) 
The  Performance  Audit  Report  No.13  –  Provision  of  Emergency 
Service – Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service.   (In Original) 
The  Performance  Audit  Report  No.14  –  Livestock  Production  and 
Development – Cattle and Goat Sector.  (In Original) 
Mauritius in Figures 2013. (In Original) 
The Finance and Audit (de Chazal Maternity Home Fund) (Revocation) 
Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.151 of 2014).  
The  Finance  and  Audit  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.152 of 2014).  
The  Customs  Tariff  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.154 of 2014).  
The  Excise  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.3)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.155 of 2014).  
The  Income  Tax  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.156 of 2014).  
The  Land  (Duties  and  Taxes)  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations 
2014 (Government Notice No. 162 of 2014).  
The Securities (Brokerage Fee for Government of Mauritius Securities 
and  Bank  of  Mauritius  Securities 
(Amendment)  Rules  2014 
(Government Notice No.163 of 2014).  
The Statutory Bodies Pension Funds (Amendment of Schedule) (No.2) 
Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.170 of 2014).  
The  Excise  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.4)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.173 of 2014). 
The Customs Tariff (Amendment of Schedule) (No.2) Regulations 2014 
(Government Notice No.174 of 2014). 
The Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (Arab Republic of 
Egypt) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 175 of 2014). 

 

 

 

19 

(v) 

(w) 

(x) 
(y) 

The Customs Tariff (Amendment of Schedule) (No.3) Regulations 2014  
(Government Notice No. 183 of 2014). 
The  Excise  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.5)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No. 184 of 2014). 
The Digest of Industrial Statistics 2012 and 2013. (In Original) 
Digest  of  Productivity  and  Competitiveness  Statistics  2013.  (In 
Original) 
The Annual Digest of Statistics 2013. (In Original) 

(z) 
(aa)  The Digest of Education Statistics 2013. (In Original) 
(ab)  The National Accounts of Mauritius 2013. (In Original) 
(ac)  The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Central  Procurement  Board.  (In 

Original) 

(ad)  The Annual Report 2013 of the Civil Service Family Protection Scheme 

Board. (In Original) 

The Digest of Statistics on Rodrigues 2013. (In Original) 

(ae)  The Digest of Social Security Statistics 2012. (In Original) 
(af) 
(ag)  The Digest of Labour Statistics 2013. (In Original) 
(ah)  The Digest of Demographic Statistics 2013. (In Original) 
(ai) 

The  Digest  of  Road  Transport  and  Road  Accident  Statistics  2013.  (In 
Original) 
The  National  Pensions  (Collection  of  Contributions)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 203 of 2014).  

(aj) 

(ak)  The  National  Pensions  (Amendment  of  Schedules)  Regulations  2014 

(al) 

(Government Notice No. 204 of 2014).  
The  National  Pensions  (Industrial  Injuries)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2014 (Government Notice No. 205 of 2014).  

(am)  The Digest of Agricultural Statistics 2013. (In Original) 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

G.  Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 
 

(a)  The  Report  of  the  Information  and  Communication  Technologies 

Authority for the 18 months ended December 2010.  (In Original) 

 

(b)  The  Annual  Report  2011  of  the  Information  and  Communication 

Technologies Authority.  (In Original) 

H.  Ministry of Youth and Sports – 

20 

 

I. 
 

 

 

 

 

J. 

 

The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Mauritius Sports Council for the years ended 2011 and 2012. (In Original) 

Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport – 
   (a)  The  Road  Traffic  (Immobilisation  of  vehicles)  (Amendment) 

Regulations 2014 Government Notice No.139 of 2014). 

   (b)  The  Construction  Industry  Development  Board  (Registration  of 
Consultants  and  Contractors)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice 
No.144 of 2014). 

   (c)  The  Pouce  Stream  (Authorised  Construction)  (Amendment  of 

Schedule) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.168 of 2014). 

   (d)  The Annual Report of the Bus Industry Employees Welfare Fund for 

the year 2013. (In Original) 

   (e)  The Road Traffic (Taxi, Bus and Lorry Stands) (Amendment No. 2) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 224 of 2014) 

Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific Research – 
The Annual Report 2012 of the Mauritius Institute of Education. (In Original) 

K.  Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 
 

(a)  The  Medical  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.3) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 142 of 2014). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)  The Dental Council (Medical Institutions) (Amendment) Regulations 

2014 (Government Notice No. 143 of 2014). 

(c)  The  Medical  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.4) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 182 of 2014). 

(d)  The  Dental  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.2) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 195 of 2014). 

(e)  The  Annual  Report  and  the  Report    of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the 
Financial Statements of  the Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care 
for the year ending 31 December 2013. (In Original) 
 The  Dental  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.3) 
Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 217 of 2014). 

(f) 

(g)  The  Medical  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.  5) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 223 of 2014). 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

21 

L.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 
 

(a)  The Municipal Town Council of Curepipe (Fees for Outline Planning 
Permission  and  Building  and  Land  Use  Permit)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.148 of 2014). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)  The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Beau  Bassin-Rose  Hill  (Street 

Naming) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.158 of 2014). 

(c)  The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Vacoas-Phoenix  (Street  Naming) 
(Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice  No.169  of 
2014). 

(d)  The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Curepipe 

(Traffic  Centre) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 171 of 2014). 

(e)  The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Curepipe  (Environmental  Health) 

(f) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 172 of 2014). 
The Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes (Naming of Public Places at 
Morcellement  Dookun)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice 
No.177 of 2014). 

(g)  The  Curepipe  Carnegie  Library  Regulations  2014  (Government 

Notice  
No. 178 of 2014). 

(h)  The Municipal Town Council of Quatre Bornes (Fair) (Amendment) 

(i) 

(j) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.189 of 2014). 
The  District  Council  of  Grand  Port  (Environmental  Health) 
Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 193 of 2014). 
The  Annual  Performance  Report  2013  of  the  Local  Infrastructure 
Fund.  and  the  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial 
Statements  of  the  Local  Infrastructure  Fund  for  the  year  ended  31 
December 2013 (In Original) 

M. 
 

Attorney General’s Office – 
(a)  The  Revision  of  Laws  (Revised  Laws  of  Mauritius)  (Supplement  – 

Issue 5) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.153 of 2014). 

 

 

(b)  The Accounts of the Curatelle Fund for the year ended 31st December 
2012  and  the  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial 
Statements  of  the  Curatelle  Fund  for  the  year  ended  31st  December, 
2013. (In Original) 

(c)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Curatelle Fund for the year ended 1st January to 31st December 2012 
(In Original) 

 

 

 

 

22 

N.  Ministry of  Agro – Industry and Food Security – 
 

(a)  The Annual Reports and Accounts of the Irrigation Authority for the 

years 2006/2007, 2007/2008and 2008/2009. (In Original) 

 

 

(b)  The  Annual  Report  2008/2009  of  the  Small  Planters  Welfare  Fund.            

(In Original) 

(c)  The  Food  (Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice  No. 

181 of 2014). 

O.  Ministry of Arts and Culture – 
 

The Films (Amendment) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 161 of 
2014). 

P.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 
 
 

(a)  The Annual Report 2011 of the State Trading Corporation. (In Original) 
(b)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and           

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.140 of 2014). 

(Amendment  No.18)  Regulations 

2014 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
2014 

(Amendment  No.20)  Regulations 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.141 of 2014). 

(d)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
2014 

(Amendment  No.21)  Regulations 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.145 of 2014). 

(e)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
2014 

(Amendment  No.22)  Regulations 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.147 of 2014). 
 
The  Consumer  Protection  (Importation  and  Sale  of  Second-hand  Motor 
Vehicles) (Amendment) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.150 of 
2014). 
 

(f) 

(g)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  35)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.207) of 2014 

(h)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  36)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.208) of 2014 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23 

(i) 

(j) 

The Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods)  (Amendment  No.  2)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice 
No.212 of 2014 
The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Amendment  No.  37)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No.213) of 2014 

(k)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  38)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.214) of 2014 
The Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods)  (Amendment  No.  3)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice 
No.218 of 2014 

(i) 

(k)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  39)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.219) of 2014 
The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
Non-Taxable  Goods) 
)  Regulations  2014 
(Government Notice No. 220 )of 2014 

(Amendment  No.40 

(l) 

(m)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  41)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No.212) of 2014 

(n)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and 
(Amendment  No.  42)  Regulations  2014 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No. 222 of 2014 

Q.  Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development  and Family Welfare – 
 

The Financial Statements of the National Women’s Council for the year ended 31 
December 2010. (In Original) 

R.  Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms– 
 
 

   (a)  The Annual Report 2013 of the Financial Intelligence Unit. (In Original) 
   (b)  The Annual Report of the Financial Reporting Council for the year 2013.  

(In Original)  

 

   (c)  The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Financial  Services  Commission.  (In 

Original) 

S. 

Ministry of Business , Enterprise and Cooperatives – 

24 

 

 

 

(a)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the  
Co-operative  Development  Fund  for  the  year  ended  30  June  2009.  
(In Original) 

(b)  The Annual Report 2013 of the Saint Antoine Planters Co-operative 

Trust. (In Original) 

(c)  The  Annual  Report  2009-2010  of  the  former  Small  Enterprises  and 

Handicraft Development Authority. (In Original) 

T.  Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 

– 
(a)  The Social Aid (Amendment) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice  

No. 190 of 2014). 

(b)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Senior Citizens Council for 

Financial Year 2013. (In Original).  

(c)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Chagossian  Welfare  Fund  for  the  year  ended  December  2013.  (In 
Original) 

(d)  The  Audited  Accounts  of  the  National  Solidarity  Fund  for  the  year 

ended  
31 December 2013. (In Original) 

(e)  The Reports of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of 
the National Pensions Fund and the National Savings Fund for years 
2008 and 2009. (In Original) 
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Training  and Employment of Disabled Persons Board  for the period 
ending 31 December 2011 (In Original) 

(f) 

U.  Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 

Outer Islands – 
   (a)      The  Annual  Report  of  the  Fishermen  Welfare  Fund  for  the  year 

ending  31 December 2013. (In Original) 

   (b)        The  Fisheries  and  Marine  Resources  (Extension  of  the  Net  Fishing 
Season)  Regulations  2014  (Government  Notice  No.  191  of 
2014). 

   (c)        The Merchant Shipping (Fees) (Amendment No.2) Regulations 2014 

(Government Notice No.197 of 2014). 

   (d)  The Merchant Shipping (Fees) (Amendment No.3) Regulations 2014 

(Government Notice No.198of 2014). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

25 

V.  Ministry of Civil Service Affairs  – 
 

The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Public  Officers’  Welfare  Council.  (In 
Original) 

W.  Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training – 

(a)  Annual Report of the Export Processing Zone Labour Welfare Fund 

for the year 2012. (In Original) 

(b)  The Catering and Tourism Industries Remuneration Regulations 2014 

(Government Notice No. 202 of 2014). 

(c)  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (Transportation  of  Employees) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No.210 of 2014). 

(d)   The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (Control  of  Asbestos  at  Work) 

Regulations 2014 (Government Notice No. 216 of 2014). 

 

 

 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today's 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

 The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(12.36 p.m.) 

PUBLIC BILL 
First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill (No. IX of 

2014) was read a first time. 

Second Reading 

THE ADDITIONAL REMUNERATION (2015) BILL  

(No. IX of 2014) 

Order for Second Reading read. 
The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
S. Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill 
(No. IX of 2014) be read a second time.  

 

26 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  seize  this  golden  opportunity  to  congratulate  you  on  your 
election as Speaker of this august Assembly and I wish you plenty of success in this arduous 
task which lies ahead. I congratulate fellow hon. Members of the National Assembly on their 
election to this august House. I am, indeed, honoured and privileged to present the first Bill 
of this Government to the House namely the  Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill (No. IX 
of 2014).   

Madam  Speaker,  on  10  December  2014,  the  nation  has  voted  massively  for  this 
present Government led by the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, Prime Minister, Minister of 
Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit.  I seize this 
opportunity, Madam Speaker, to pay tribute to the great statesman, the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth,  the  father  of  modern  Mauritius,  the  one  who  has  led  this  coalition  to  steer  the 
destiny of our nation. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Mauritian  population  has  again  chosen  ce  grand  homme  de 
vision known by one and all for his hard work, his courage, loyalty, honesty and his high 
sense of patriotism to lead this country once more to prosperity.  There is no doubt, Madam 
Speaker, that each and every Mauritian today feels extremely proud of our Prime Minister 
who did not look at his personal comfort, but decided to return to the political arena against 
all odds so that Mauritius can realise a second miracle économique. 

Madam Speaker, the object of this Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill is to provide 
for  payment  of  an  additional  remuneration  as  from  1st  of  January  2015  to  employees  to 
compensate them to the loss in the purchasing power with the increase in the cost of living 
for the Financial Year 2014 which is 3.3% according to Statistics Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, as soon as the new Government has assumed office and as promised 
in  its  commitment  as  a  caring  Government,  it  has  decided  to  review  the  decision  of  the 
former Government to grant a salary compensation of Rs400 to those drawing a basic wage 
up to Rs10,000 per month, 4% increase to those drawing between Rs10,000 and Rs20,000 
per month and Rs800 to those drawing above Rs20,000 per month. With a view to protecting 
the most vulnerable and in a spirit of the nation building and in its endeavour to foster social 
justice,  this  Government  has  decided  the  bold  decision  to  grant  with  effect  as  from  1st  of 
January  2015  to  all  employees  a  salary  compensation  of  Rs600  across-the-board  which  is 
well over and above the inflation rate of 3.3%. Part-time workers drawing up to Rs10,000 

 

27 

will  be  granted  an  increase  of  6%  and  those  drawing  above  Rs10,000  will  be  granted  an 
increase of Rs600. 

Madam Speaker, the House will surely agree with me that those who need to be most 
adequately  compensated  for  the  loss  of  purchasing  power  are  those  who  are  at  the  lowest 
rung of the ladder. Hence, the decision of the Government to increase the quantum of salary 
compensation  to  Rs600  to  all  full-time  employees  drawing  up  to  Rs10,000,  the  additional 
Rs200 to those at the lowest rung of the ladder carries more value to them than all of us. This 
symbolic gesture will contribute to further improve the quality of life of our fellow citizens. I 
am sure, Madam Speaker, that workers drawing above Rs15,000 will understand that they 
will  not  get  more  than  Rs600  per  month  as  salary  compensation  in  a  spirit  of  national 
solidarity with the less fortunate counterparts. 

Madam Speaker, Government’s decision is in line with its electoral manifesto and the 
fight against poverty which states that le combat contre la pauvreté et les injustices sociales 
figure au premier plan de notre programme de même que l’amélioration du pouvoir d’achat. 
L’île  Maurice  a  les  moyens  de  gagner  cette  bataille.    Nous  le  ferons  ensemble,  Madam 
Speaker. 

Government’s decision to approve the payment of a salary compensation at the rates I 
have just mentioned, in spite of the difficult economic situations and global financial crisis, 
strikes  the  right  balance  between  responding  to  the  current  economic  imperatives  and 
granting workers at the lowest rung of the ladder with the maximum compensation possible 
of Rs600 which I again repeat is over and above the 3.3% inflation rate.   

Employees of the public sector will also benefit from the above salary compensation.  
An  administrative  arrangement  will  be  made  accordingly  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development.  The  Additional  Remuneration  (2015)  Bill,  once  enacted,  will 
impose a legal obligation on all employers to pay the prescribed minimum compensation of 
Rs600 to their employees.  I am, in the same breath, Madam Speaker, making an appeal, un 
appel spécial, to all enterprises which can afford to pay a higher compensation to do so in a 
gesture of solidarity, as there are some enterprises which are performing very well and may, 
therefore, have the capacity to pay more. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend this Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo rose and seconded. 

 

28 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that we break for one and a half hours 

for lunch. 

Madam Speaker:  Can we break for lunch for one and a half hours, please! 

At 12.45 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 3.46 p.m with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  for  the  year 
2012, the inflation rate was 6.5%, and the then Minister of Finance, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, 
gave a wage compensation of Rs330 only.  The following year, 2013, hon. Xavier Duval was 
Minister of Finance, the rate of inflation had dropped to 3.9 %... 

(Interruptions) 

No, I am saying two years, but I am talking of the year where the wage compensation started 
as from 01 January 2012.  Then, for the year 2013, the rate of inflation dropped to 3.9% and 
only  Rs300  of  wage  compensation  was  granted.    At  the  beginning  of  this  year,  2014,  the 
inflation rate stood at 3.5% and the then Minister of Finance, hon. Xavier Duval, gave again 
only Rs300 as wage compensation.  At the same time, the wage earners at the bottom of the 
ladder got Rs300 only, and the pensionnés, the old-age pensioners got only Rs129 as from 01 
January of this year, that is, much less than what the lowest wage earners got; Rs300, Madam 
Speaker. 

We, now in the Opposition, proposed, as was pointed out by the new hon. Minister of 
Labour,  Rs400  instead  of  Rs300  that  had  been  granted  during  the  two  previous  years, 
although, if I go by the latest figures which the new Minister of Labour has used, that is, the 
rate of inflation has gone down to 3.3%, according to the latest figures that we have.  We had, 
therefore, proposed – we, now in the Opposition – Rs400 instead of Rs300.  And we have, 
when  we  talk  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  new  Government  has 
already increased pension vieillesse to Rs5,000, whereas we, in the Opposition, then proposed 
Rs4,000, Madam Speaker. 

The key question that I put to Government is: that increase in the wage compensation to 
Rs600 and that increase in the pension vieillesse to Rs5,000, is it a one-off electoral event? Is 
it  a  one-off  electoral  wage  compensation  and  old-age,  pension  vieillesse,  or  rather  is  this 
going to be repeated more or less every year, depending on the rate of inflation, of course? 
That is the key question that we and the country are entitled to ask. Is this a one-off electoral 

 

29 

decision,  measure,  or  is  that  going  to  be  the  trend  during  the  years  to  come?    The  new 
Minister  of  Labour  has  said  nothing  about  that,  and  I  am  not  surprised.    Je  ne  le  dis  pas 
méchamment.  I am not surprised. 

I hope that the new Minister of Finance who is going to speak after me will enlighten 
us, will give us a hint, at least, of what we can expect.  Because after all, en tout cas, the new 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  used  very  strong  words  to  justify,  to  explain  this  increase  in 
wage compensation to Rs600 and this increase dans pension vieillesse  to Rs5,000. He has 
used very strong words indeed : « Nous sommes dans une situation de grande misère. L’écart 
entre  les  riches  et  les  pauvres  nous  a  amené  au  risque  d’explosion  sociale. »  Such 
expressions, Madam Speaker, seem to indicate that there is going to be a trend that it is not a 
one-off électoral.  En passant - before I say where we do agree -, when the new Minister of 
Finance uses such strong words, « nous sommes dans une situation de grande misère. Nous 
sommes au seuil de l’explosion sociale », well, it speaks volumes on the performance of the 
two Ministers of Finance who preceded him.  It speaks volumes. 

(Interruptions) 

I  think  everybody  is  aware  of  that.    But  that  being  said,  of  course,  we  agree  that  the 
differential between the lowest paid, those who are prisonniers de la misère, and the highest 
paid and those les plus riches should be closed.  We agree on that.  We have always agreed, 
and we agree also on the need to faire reculer dans un premier temps, et éliminer la misère 
dans les délais les plus brefs possible.  So, that is where we are.  We have the performance of 
the two précédents Ministers of Finance.  We have very strong words from the new Minister 
of Finance. 

We  are  entitled  as  an  Opposition,  and  the  country  is  entitled,  to  expect  to  be 
enlightened whether this is a one-off electoral measure or whether it signals a trend that, year 
after year, the wage compensation and the old age pension are going to be increased in the 
light of the inflation rate, of course, but more or less, along the same lines. To me, this is the 
key question that pending budget time, of course, we cannot have a debate here, as if it was 
already  budget  time  but,  pending  budget  time,  we  are  entitled  to  know  in  what  direction, 
economically speaking, the new Government intends taking the country. 

I have two other questions, Madam Speaker. One is the impact of these two measures. 
Of course, we are debating only the wage compensation, but there is economic impact of the 
two measures must be considered as one. Therefore, the two other questions that I ask myself 

 

30 

as the Leader of the Opposition: what will be the impact on the budget, and how will those 
two measures be financed as far as the public sector is concerned and, secondly, what will be 
the impact on the private sector? These are the two other questions that I wish to raise. 

Fortunately,  in  terms  of budget  deficit,  we  have  a  good  marge  de  manoeuvre.  But, 
nevertheless, it would be interesting to know what the new Minister of Finance expects the 
budgetary impact of these two measures to be, including on capital spending, infrastructure 
spending, creation of employment spending, that is, capital spending. 

As we know, we do not have enough money to do everything. Therefore, the more we 
spend on recurrent, the less we will be able to spend or we will have left to spend on capital 
spending. So, I hope that later on the new Minister of Finance does enlighten us on what the 
impact  of  those  two  measures  will  be  on  the  budget  deficit  and  on  capital  spending,  in 
general.  How  those  two  measures  are  going  to  be  financed?  Of  course,  the  State  Trading 
Corporation comes in. 

As the new Leader of the Opposition, it would be easy for me to say: bring down the 
price of diesel, of essence, of petroleum products by so much more. But I sound a note of 
warning. It is true we all know that the price of oil products on the world market has crashed 
by 40% since the beginning of this year, as compared to an average for the last three years. 
As from the beginning of this year, the price has crashed by 40%. I read a lot. All the experts 
and so on expect that it will go down further. At least, no one really expects that it will pick 
up in the one, two, three years ahead. We will see; we are never sure in that kind of situation. 
So, I would advise Government – although, as I said, as Leader of the Opposition, it would be 
easy for me to say: ‘bring down again the price of diesel, of essence, of petroleum products 
on the local market’. But clearly, with the financing issue of these two measures that have 
already been taken by the new Government, clearly there is equilibrium to be found. Billions 
- not millions, des milliards - if the price of petroleum products on the world market stays as 
it  is  in  the  one,  two,  three  years  ahead,  des  milliards  will  be  cashed  by  the  State  Trading 
Corporation  on  behalf  of  Government.  I  would  advise  Government  to  be  very  careful  in 
striking the right equilibrium in bringing the price of petroleum products down as much as we 
can, but taking into consideration the need to finance the two measures we are considering, 
but also capital spending this year, in the next Budget and in the years ahead. Therefore, it 
will  be  very  interesting  to  hear  both  the  new  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister – because he is now on the list of orators, he will be speaking after hon. Uteem. It 
will be very interesting and it will be very important for the country to get a signal as to how 

 

31 

the situation is going to evolve as far as the public sector is concerned, the Budget and the 
Capital Budget, in particular. 

Then, there is the question of the private sector. Very strong words  again, the new 
Minister of Finance has used. He said bluntly that this new Government – I hope everybody 
agrees with him; but he said very bluntly, strongly, before embrasser Raj Makoond, he nearly 
choked him, if not to death, but to silence – est un gouvernement pro-secteur privé. And he 
added – 

“Car c’est de là que viennent les emplois.” 

They are very strong words again from the mouth of the new Minister of Finance. He went so 
far as to say that before granting this wage compensation, he has met the private sector, that 
there has been consensus reached, I beg to raise the question whether this is the case. As I 
said, the way he embraced Raj Makoond probably prevented the gentleman from expressing 
what  the  private  sector  really  thinks  about  what  is  happening,  but  anyway  it  will  be  very 
interesting to know. He said que le secteur privé a compris what he is trying to do and then 
he added that, him, the new Minister of Finance, for his part, he has compris les difficultés du 
tourisme, de l’industrie textile en particulier. 

Now  I  think  we  are  all  aware  that  a  lot  of  firms  are  in  deep  trouble  in  the  private 
sector, not just in tourism and in textile, but specially the Small and Medium Enterprises are 
already in serious problems. I hope we are all aware of the level, le niveau d’endettement, a 
lot of firms specially the Petites et Moyennes Entreprises, but a lot of firms in tourism, in 
textile and elsewhere have been borrowing, have been surviving on borrowed time and now 
we have  reached where  we have  reached. Therefore, it will be very interesting to know.  I 
have been listening very carefully to know, especially when the new hon. Minister of Finance 
says that this Government is a Government pro-secteur privé. It will be very interesting to 
know what measures will be taken to help those firms that are already over indebted and, in 
particular, les Petites et Moyennes Entreprises. 

I  think  to  be  taken  seriously,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  need  to  fine-tune  -  the  new 
Minister of Finance who said that le consensus has been reached with the private sector. He 
said  that  what  the  present  Government  is  going  to  pay  in  terms  of  wage  compensation  is 
going  to  cost  only  a  hundred  million  additional  to  the  private  sector,  whereas  the  private 
sector gives other figures completely. So, I think we are mature enough to deal seriously in 
the figures concerned. It is not difficult to come to agreement of what the impact will be on 

 

32 

the  private  sector  wage  bill  generally.  Therefore,  I  will  be  listening  carefully  to  the  new 
Minister  of  Finance  on  the  impact  as  far  as  the  private  sector  is  concerned  of  the  wage 
compensation proposed. 

Finally,  as  far  as  the  private  sector  is  concerned,  it  will  be  very  interesting  to  see, 
because we are talking about the wage compensation that will impact on the private sector, 
we are talking about la nouvelle pension de vieillesse that will impact on the budget deficit.  

The  key question as far as the private sector is concerned - one key question is: quelle 
sera  dorénavant  la  politique  monétaire.  In  the  recent  past,  we  had    disagreement,  serious 
disagreement  between  the  Governor  of  the  bank  and  the  then  Minister  of  Finance,  hon. 
Xavier-Luc  Duval,  on  what  the  monetary  policy  should  be.  Now,  the  law  is  the  law.  We 
know how the law governing the functioning of the Bank of Mauritius has changed over the 
recent years but the law is the law. Therefore, I hope that when he speaks, the new Minister 
of Finance gives us an indication, he does not dictate to the Bank of Mauritius, but what is 
wished is, as I said earlier on, we must take certain decisions as far as especially the SMEs 
are concerned and a key issue will be the monetary policy of the Bank of Mauritius  which, 
under  the  law,  has  to  be  coordinated  -  not  dictated  but  coordinated  -  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance. Therefore, I will be listening again very carefully when the new Minister of Finance 
will be speaking. 

So,  these  are  the  three  questions  that  I  raise  today,  Madam  Speaker,  with  your 
permission: one, is it a one-off electoral measure or can we expect the same trend in the years 
ahead? Secondly, what will be the impact on the public budget, on the budget deficit, on the 
capital budget? And thirdly, what will be the impact on the private sector and what measures 
are expected to be taken? 

Madam Speaker, during the electoral campaign that has just finished, I made it a point 
to say two things: one was to say que le réel défi à être relevé par le prochain gouvernement 
would be le défi économique. The rest is a question of volonté politique. But the economy is 
the  economy;  the  world  economy  and  the  Eurozone  do  not  depend  on  our  list  of  wishes. 
Therefore, I say it repeatedly that le vrai défi pour le prochain gouvernement would be le défi 
économique  and  I  repeatedly,  from  where  I  was,  said  that  we  must  all  show  un  esprit  de 
responsabilité.  We  have  seen  many  countries  where  elections  come  and  go,  Governments 
come in and take decisions that bring the Government either to success or to failure within a 

 

33 

few  years.  These  two  points  I  made  repeatedly:  one,  that  le  plus  grand  défi  sera  le  défi 
économique and, secondly, that we must all show un esprit de responsabilité.  

I said also Madam Speaker, that it will be difficult to do two things at the same time - 
le maximum de justice sociale and when we are talking of pension vieillesse and the wage 
compensation,  we  are  talking  of  justice  sociale  in  general.  Therefore,  I  say  it  will  be 
particularly difficult to do two things at the same time - le maximum de justice sociale, but, at 
the  same  time,  investing  the  billions  that  are  required  to  create  productive  employment  to 
eradicate poverty, to develop infrastructure, to develop education, formation, etc. This is the 
challenge that is before us.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I thank you for having allowed me, en attendant que le 
débat sur le budget au début de l’année prochaine to have raised those issues because, as I 
said, as a mature country, as an adult country, democratically  speaking, we are entitled to be 
enlightened as from today on the main issues which I have raised. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(3.08 p.m.) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, on a point of personal explanation. 

Madam Speaker: What is the point of personal explanation of the hon. Deputy Prime 

Minister? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The hon. Leader of the Opposition has got one thing 
wrong  at  least.  I  was  appointed  Minister  of  Finance  in  mid-2011  and  the  2012  salary 
compensation was given by me and the Government. I headed the Tripartite Committee.  So, 
that part of his speech at least is factually incorrect and can be easily verified.  

Thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! 

Hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo ! 

(3.09 p.m.) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

34 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madame la présidente, permettez-moi de vous féliciter à l’occasion de votre élection en tant 
que Présidente et je souhaite aussi la bienvenue à tout le monde qui a été élu ici, y compris 
moi-même. 

La  question  de  compensation  est  liée  à  un  concept  global.  Le  jour  où  je  sépare  la 
compensation et la philosophie du développement, effectivement il y aura des problèmes de 
contradiction dans les décisions. Ce qui fait que depuis le début de la campagne électorale, 
nous avions vécu une expérience extraordinaire - je parle des deux côtés de la Chambre - et 
nous avons vu la misère, la souffrance au niveau du citoyen. Tout le monde ici, je suis sûr, a 
réalisé à un moment qu’entre le langage de croissance économique et tout, il y avait d’une 
part le langage gouvernemental qui voulait faire croire qu’il y avait une distribution équitable 
de la richesse nationale et là on avait réalisé nous dans les circonscriptions, on avait dit mais 
s’il  y  a  un  problème,  les  gens  vivent  de  plus  en  plus  mal!  Et  le  rapport  de  la  Banque 
Mondiale, qui est sorti en juin, est venu confirmer une chose très simple que les réformes 
Sithanen - je parle bien des réformes Sithanen parce que ce sont les réformes de 2005 à 2010 
qui ont jeté les bases de cette nouvelle économie qui faisait la part belle à la grande entreprise 
et qui faisait la part très mince à ce que j’appellerai moi les consommateurs. 

Le gouverneur de la Banque Centrale est venu confirmer ce que nous pensions aussi.  
C’est que les réformes de Monsieur Sithanen ont appauvri les pauvres et nous avons vécu 
l’expérience  durant  la  campagne  que  c’était  vrai.  Lorsque  le  gouverneur  de  la  Banque 
Centrale nommé par le Premier ministre vient lui aussi confirmer que l’écart entre les riches 
et les pauvres a tellement augmenté que si ça  continue, nous allons faire face à une  grave 
exclusion  sociale,  nous  ne  pouvions  pas  -  gagner  ou  perdre  n’était  pas  important  -  ne  pas 
réaliser  que  notre  pays,  la  nation  mauricienne,  a  subi  une  politique  économique  qui  a 
appauvri les pauvres et qui a enrichi un petit groupe au sommet de l’économie!  Je parle en 
tant que mauricien et non pour une polémique, loin de là ! Et c’est à partir de ce moment que 
j’en ai parlé à Sir Anerood et je lui ai dit : «We have a real problem. »  Est-ce qu’on pourra 
parler  d’un  deuxième  miracle  économique ?  Est-ce  qu’on  peut  parler  d’un  nouveau  départ 
économique sur une base sociale qui est elle-même menacée d’éclatement ? On ne peut pas le 
faire ! Nous avions fait l’expérience entre 1983 et 1990 et nous avions réalisé que sans un 
soubassement social, sans la paix sociale, il est presqu’impossible de pouvoir construire une 
nouvelle économie. C’est la raison pour laquelle nous avons donné priorité au social. Non 
pour faire plaisir, non parce que ce sont des mesures électorales, loin de la !  

 

35 

Au fait, élection ou pas, il n’y a aucune démagogie dans notre volonté de rétablir le 
pouvoir d’achat des pauvres dans ce pays. Il n’y a pas de politique dedans. Il y a une situation 
où nos concitoyens, ceux qui sont les plus vulnérables, ceux qui sont au bas de l’échelle ont 
été  oubliés.  Le  coefficient  de  Gini  s’est  détérioré  énormément  entre  2005  et  2010.  Le 
coefficient de Gini montre le taux finalement de pauvreté au niveau de la nation. Donc je ne 
souhaite pas faire un débat sur une réalité qui est une réalité. Les chiffres viennent montrer 
que  le  gouvernement  2005-2010  a  mené  une  réforme  économique  qui  a  fait  du  mal 
énormément aux consommateurs et surtout aux gens au bas de l’échelle. C’est à partir de là 
que j’ai dit : « Let us start, commençons par là où il faut. Commençons à reconstruire cette 
base sociale. » 

Commençons à ramener dans le pays le consensus social, la paix sociale nécessaire - 
je  vous  le  dit  franchement,  nous  sommes  tous  ici,  on  ne  pourra  pas  reconstruire  cette 
économie si cette base sociale ne repose pas sur un fondement solide.  Évidemment, j’étais 
ministre  des  Finances  pendant  huit  ans  et  vous  tous  vous  le  savez,  il  n’y  a  jamais  eu  des 
décisions que je puisse qualifier de démagogiques. Loin de là. Je suis parfaitement conscient 
que les décisions qu’on a prises sur le plan social coûtent très chères. Je ne vais pas cacher le 
fait que cette décision monumentale nécessaire coûtait très chère au budget, à l’économie.  

Quand je me suis posé la question: Is there any way around?  Non, il n’y a pas. Si 
nous voulons apporter un soulagement aux souffrances de ceux au bas de l’échelle, il fallait 
commencer là où il fallait, c’est-à-dire, à ceux qui attendaient leur fin de mois, leur pension 
afin de pouvoir tirer leur ration comme on dit. Et c’est cet élément qui a été la motivation de 
base. Vous savez tous que lorsqu’on veut rattraper le pouvoir d’achat on commence toujours 
par les pensions. C’est par les pensions qu’on rattrape le plus vite le pouvoir d’achat national. 
Donc, on l’a fait. On n’a aucun regret.  Il n’y a  qu’à voir le sourire sur le visage des  gens 
actuellement, ce sentiment de bien-être pour réaliser que nous avons pris la bonne décision. R 
4.7 milliards c’est beaucoup, je suis d’accord avec le Leader de l’opposition qu’on ne joue 
pas avec les chiffres comme cela. R 4.7 milliards, cela coûte énorme.  

Durant la campagne j’avais dit que le gouvernement d’alors avait insisté sur le fait 
qu’une  dépense  aussi  importante  ne  peut  se  faire  sans  l’augmentation  de  la  TVA.  J’avais 
assuré la population, vous n’avez pas assuré la population, vous avez dit non.  Nous allons 
financer les R 4.7 milliards sans augmenter la TVA. J’irai plus loin aujourd’hui. Je dirai que 
le  prochain  budget  n’aura  aucune  taxe  additionnelle  qui  va  affecter  les  gens  au  bas  de 
l’échelle, sinon ce serait neutraliser le travail qu’on fait en voulant soulager les gens au bas de 

 

36 

l’échelle.  Alors cette action touchant la pension devait être accompagnée par un deuxième 
train de mesure, c’est-à-dire les travailleurs, les ouvriers, ceux au bas de l’échelle. Et on est 
arrivé  donc  au  moment  de  la  compensation  salariale  et  la  compensation  salariale 
effectivement est un instrument - je l’ai toujours pratiquée - de rééquilibrage national, c’est-à-
dire qu’en faisant bénéficier aux gens au bas de l’échelle le maximum de la compensation, on 
privilégie encore une fois les gens au bas de l’échelle. 

Maintenant  pour  corriger,  peut-être,  ce  qui  a  été  dit  sur  mes  collègues:  le  Premier 
ministre adjoint et ministre du  Tourisme  et des  Communications externes et mon  collègue 
l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth,  le  ministre  de  la  Technologie,  de  la  Communication  et  de 
l’Innovation, il faut se rappeler une chose, ce sont les chiffres encore une fois. En 2005 et 
2010, Sithanen a fait tout ce qu’il pouvait pour ne pas donner de compensation. Il avait fait 
dissoudre même le tripartisme, cette instance suprême, magique - le seul instrument qu’on 
avait de médiation. 2000 et 2005, le taux d’inflation de 3%, 4% à 5% avait une compensation 
minimaliste de cent roupies. Pour comprendre pourquoi les gens souffrent dans ce pays, pour 
comprendre  pourquoi  nous  avons  une  nation  aujourd’hui  -  ou  ce  qu’on  appelle  les  plus 
vulnérables – qui est en train de croître de jour en jour. Il faut comprendre que Sithanen avait 
tout fait pour ne pas compenser ceux qui le méritaient. Cent roupies pour des taux d’inflation 
- plus grave encore, je crois que l’opposition et le Leader de l’opposition aussi sont| d’accord 
avec  moi  -  le  tripartisme  reste  une  instance  magique,  une  instance  essentielle  au 
fonctionnement  de  la  démocratie.    Vous  avez  d’un  côté  les  syndicats,  de  l’autre  les 
employeurs et puis le gouvernement. Et le gouvernement a ce rôle de médiateur de trouver le 
bon  milieu.  Le  bon  milieu  c’est  quoi?  Une  compensation  qui  soit  nécessaire  pour  les 
travailleurs mais aussi un niveau de compensation qui ne met pas en danger le secteur privé. 
Aussi pour arriver à aujourd’hui, la question qui est posée: est-ce que le secteur privé pourra 
supporter la compensation qu’on a annoncée?   

Avant  d’arriver  à  ce  point,  j’avais  regardé  le  tableau  proposé  par  l’ancien 
gouvernement, c’est-à-dire, une compensation de quatre cents roupies au bas de l’échelle et 
puis allant jusqu’à huit cents roupies pour ceux qui touchent plus de vingt milles roupies. Je 
me suis dit : est-ce que  ce tableau, est-ce que cette grille va dans la direction de ce qu’on 
veut,  c’est-à-dire,  compenser  au  maximum  les  gens  au  bas  de  l’échelle ?  J’ai  dit  non. 
Évidemment, on ne veut pas tuer la classe moyenne, mais si on veut vraiment empêcher que 
le pays sombre dans une crise sociale, moi je dis qu’il faut donner le maximum actuellement 
à ceux qui ont le plus besoin. Alors j’ai revu cette structure très complexe qui était déjà très 

 

37 

généreuse je dois dire avant les élections et nous avons worked it out. Nous avons vu que 
finalement ce chiffre magique de six cents roupies across the board privilégiait les gens au 
bas de l’échelle ce qui explique pourquoi il y a le sourire aujourd’hui sur toutes les lèvres 
dans ce pays ; sourire de satisfaction de comprendre qu’ils ont un gouvernement, qu’ils ont 
une ministre des finances qui sait que finalement le VVIP restera toujours les gens les plus 
pauvres dans ce pays sans tuer ni affecter le secteur privé.  Le Leader de l’opposition a posé 
une question sur le fait que j’ai dit que le secteur privé reste ma priorité, eh bien le secteur 
privé restera toujours ma priorité. Sans le secteur privé il n’y aura pas de création d’emplois ; 
il n’y aura pas de richesse nationale. Donc, on ne peut pas jouer sur le mot mais par contre 
lorsqu’on me parle du secteur privé, il faut définir ce qu’on dit, ce qu’on veut qualifier par 
secteur privé.   

Quand le rapport de la banque mondiale vient dire que les années Sithanen ont rendu 
les riches encore plus riches, c’est-à-dire que le taux de croissance économique n’a pas été 
distribué.  Avec  le  peu  de  croissance  économique,  il  y  a  eu  une  concentration  de  la 
distribution vers ceux qui étaient déjà puissamment riches.  Si on veut me poser la question : 
le secteur privé - ce sont ces dits-conglomérats qui aujourd’hui contrôlent le pays, je dis non. 
Non. Je n’ai rien contre eux, mais en même temps je leur dit, vous ne représentez plus mes 
priorités. Vous avez beaucoup gagné.  L’avidité vous a gagné tous car l’ancien gouvernement 
vous a habitué à gagner facilement beaucoup. Donc ce groupe n’est pas ma priorité, mais ce 
groupe ne sera pas non plus menacé par ce gouvernement.  On n’est pas là pour punir. On 
n’est pas là pour faire payer aux autres encore moins pour se venger.   

Le secteur privé pour nous c’est essentiellement - et le Leader de l’Opposition l’a dit 
avant - ce blog de SMEs qui a une contribution massive à la création de la richesse nationale. 
Nous l’avons dit et nous le disons aujourd’hui encore on ne menace pas les conglomérats, 
mais  nous  allons  concentrer  notre  action  économique  pour  que  dans  cinq  ans  la  colonne 
vertébrale de l’économie soit les SMEs.  Nous allons le faire. Difficile, pas facile je sais, mais 
nous allons réaliser une performance durant ces cinq ans où la colonne vertébrale, la richesse 
nationale  ou  bien  la  création  de  la  richesse  nationale  sera  le  fait  des  petites  et  moyennes 
entreprises. C’est la raison pour laquelle le prochain budget - malgré le fait qu’on aura des 
contraintes réelles - aura un item Ile Maurice Nation d’Entrepreneurs, un item budgétaire de 
dix milliards qui sera de l’argent mis à la disposition de nos jeunes. Qu’il soit fils d’ouvrier, 
qu’il soit fils de chauffeur de taxi, qu’il soit fils de planteur, fils de policier - nous pensons 

 

38 

qu’un  jeune  qui  a  de  l’ambition,  qui  a  des  idées ;  des  jeunes  qui  ont  en  eux  le  génie  de 
créativité doivent nécessairement avoir accès au financement. 

Madam Speaker: Order, order please! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Ce projet sera mis en route dès le Budget. Je redis encore 
c’est cher. Dix milliards ! Et je dois vous dire ici une chose, on avait fait la même expérience 
entre  1983  et  1990  -  Ile  Maurice  Nation  d’Entrepreneurs  et,  en  ce  temps-là,  on  avait  un 
problème parce qu’on donnait de l’argent sans garantie. Mais je pose la question en tant que 
parlementaire,  une  banque  n’est  pas  supposée  de  prêter  sans  garantie.  C’est  le  rôle  d’une 
banque de demander une garantie ou une hypothèque. Donc, une banque ne pourra jamais 
sortir les jeunes de leurs impasses et leurs aider au financement dont ils ont besoin. Donc, 
c’est le rôle de l’État. Et nous avions pris notre responsabilité, nous avons dit que nous allons 
prendre  le  risqué.  Et  en  ce  temps,  sur  les  milliers  d’entreprises,  des  jeunes  qui  avaient 
emprunté, je dois vous avouer qu’aujourd’hui 75% avait fait faillite. Lorsqu’on voit un verre, 
est-ce qu’on doit dire si c’est rempli au trois quarts ou un quart. Dans le cas de ce projet, 
effectivement  75  %  des  investissements  avaient  été  perdus  parce  que  beaucoup  de  jeunes 
n’avaient pas d’expérience, n’avaient pas le know-how. L’encadrement n’était pas suffisant.  
Mais, moi, Je vous dis une chose aujourd’hui, les 25 % qui ont survécu sont les jeunes et ce 
sont  eux  qui  roulent  cette  économie  aujourd’hui.  Ce  sont  eux  qui  sont  en  train  d’apporter 
cette  valeur  ajoutée  qui  fait  qu’il  y  ait  cette  croissance  économique.  Donc,  je  le  vois  dans 
cette perspective, 75 % de perte oui, mais ce sont les 25% qui représentaient l’avenir et qui 
ont apporté à ce pays une véritable démocratisation qu’on n’a jamais eu après. Ce sont eux la 
véritable démocratisation.  Et une nouvelle fois encore, avec cet item de 10 milliards, nous 
allons faire confiance aux jeunes. Est-ce qu’on a un choix ? Moi, je suis côtoyé en politique, 
je suis en transition. Donc, mon rôle n’est pas de penser à moi mais de penser aux jeunes et 
c’est en pensant aux jeunes que j’ai dis - faisons le maximum pour que dans cinq ans nous 
ayons  une  génération  de  jeunes  qui  soient  capables  de  diriger  ce  pays.  C’est  ça  qui  est 
important.  Maintenant,  le  challenge  c’est  quoi  ?  Le  challenge  évidemment  il  faut  que  ces 
jeunes  soient  maintenant  de  plus  en  plus  encadrés.  On  ne  peut  pas  sinon  juste  prêter  de 
l’argent, pas de garantie et ne pas avoir les mesures d’accompagnement pour les soutenir, on 
le fera aussi. 

Je me suis éloigné un peu du sujet pour faire comprendre que finalement il y a une 
grande cohérence dans ce que nous avons fait. On n’a pas été généreux parce qu’il y a une 
campagne électorale, non. On a uniquement remboursé une dette qu’on doit à nos anciens. 

 

39 

(Interruptions) 

Cette  dette  consistait  à  quoi ?  Une  chose  très  simple.  Sans  eux  on  ne  serait  pas  là. 
Sans eux personne ne serait là. Et ce sont eux qui ont le plus souffert des mesures Sithanen. 
Ce sont eux qui ont le plus payé en termes de prix. Aussi ce n’est pas une mesure politique, 
démagogique, loin de là. C’est une mesure nécessaire. C’est tout ! Nécessaire pour renflouer 
le pouvoir d’achat de ceux qui ont le plus besoin. 

Maintenant, touchant évidemment la question du financement de toutes ces dépenses, 
c’est vrai que nous allons injecter dans l’économie l’équivalent de R 8 milliards, presque R 9 
milliards et il faut être insensé pour prendre une telle décision si on ne sait pas quoi faire 
après.  L’injection  des  R  9  milliards  dans  l’économie  va  pousser  à  la  consommation,  pas 
consommation de luxe, consommation de base. Je parle d’huile, de farine, de riz, je parle des 
choses essentielles. Quelque part ça va profiter aux commerces, cela va profiter à l’économie 
parce qu’il y aura de plus en plus de roulements comme on dit. Est-ce que c’est ma faute si on 
a de la chance ? Est-ce que c’est ma faute si le prix de l’essence a chuté de 106 dollars à 56 
dollars, mais Dieu nous aime sûrement ! Pas comme gouvernement, mais toute la nation, je 
pense que vraiment nous avons un pays merveilleux qui méritait ceci car cette baisse du prix 
de pétrole va nous permettre d’économiser R 10 milliards. Vous savez vous-même que c’est 
notre balance de compte courant qui avait poussé le gouvernement en 1979 à dévaluer. Donc, 
ces  R  10  milliards  d’économie  sur  les  produits  pétroliers  vont  nous  aider  énormément  à 
prendre  en  charge  cette  augmentation  de  la  dépense  des  ménages  donc  70  %  en  moyenne 
vont à l’importation. 

Donc, voilà un peu pour les décisions. Est-ce que le secteur privé peut absorber ce 
choc ? Cette augmentation de la compensation à R 600 ? Je pense que la paix sociale encore 
une fois à un prix. Si vous voulez être très riche et vivre entre quatre murs avec des bulldogs 
et des fusils c’est votre droit. Mais si vous pensez que ce pays appartient à chaque Mauricien, 
il faut partager. Il faut apprendre maintenant à partager, à créer de la richesse mais aussi à 
partager. Il n’y aura pas de miracle économique nouveau si nous, comme mauricien, comme 
nation, on n’apprend pas que la richesse qui est créée doit être distribuée. C’est le message 
que  j’ai  eu  pour  le  secteur  privé  tout  en  étant  conscient  qu’il  y  a  des  sous-  secteurs  de 
l’économie qui ont de véritables problèmes et je vais évidemment prendre des mesures au 
niveau du budget et au niveau de la gestion économique pour que nous soutenions justement 
ces secteurs qui ont des problèmes. Je vais le faire. 

 

40 

Donc je pense que ce qu’on a fait au niveau de la compensation reflète la philosophie 
d’un gouvernement qui est ici et qui pense que d’une part il faut créer la richesse mais que de 
l’autre part il faut savoir aussi la distribuer. Je pense que jusqu’ici on a réussi. On a réussi, je 
suis très content pas pour nous, je suis très content pour la nation. Je suis très content pour 
ceux qui vivait vraiment dans une misère extrême. Voilà un peu mon message, Madame la 
présidente, pour soutenir finalement la motion que le ministre du travail a apporté aujourd’hui 
et  évidemment  nous  sommes  en  période  de  fin  d’année  avec  le  sourire  sur  les  lèvres  je 
souhaite évidemment à chaque mauricien un joyeux Noël et une très bonne année. 

Merci. 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. May I start by congratulating all hon. Members on their elections and 
all  office  bearers  on  their  elections  and  also  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  on  his  maiden 
speech.  

Madam  Speaker,  every  year,  we  have  the  Additional  Remuneration  Bill  and  every 
year  the  Government  comes  and  gives  you  the  explanation  about  why  it  is  increasing  the 
salary  by  so  much  and  we,  in  the  opposition,  we  criticise  that  figure  and  we  ask  them  to 
adjust it, to take into consideration the fact that people are getting poorer in this country. And 
I am glad today to hear the hon. Minister of Finance and also the hon. Minister of Labour talk 
about new factors that are being taken into consideration today to determine the additional 
remuneration. We are not talking just about compensation for increase in the cost of living, 
we are also talking about reducing the gap between the poor and the rich and it is a welcome 
step. But where I don’t agree at all is when the hon. Minister of Finance try to come and put 
the blame exclusively on Mr Sithanen. We are talking about the method of calculating the 
compensation and as the hon. Leader of the Opposition just said we need to know whether it 
is a one-off method of calculation or this is the policy that will continue again and again in 
the Government. So, let me quote what hon. Pravind Jugnauth, the then Vice-Prime Minister 
and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  said  in  2010,  when  addressing  the 
House  on  the  Bill.  He  laid  out  basically  the  factors  that  a  Government,  should  take  into 
consideration determining compensation and I quote –  

 “Salary compensation under the Tripartite Mechanism for a particular financial year 
has always been paid with respect to the rise in the cost of living which is measured 

 

41 

by the rate of inflation and also with regard to other economic factors that have been 
prevailing for the past year.” 

So, the first criteria we need to look at is inflation rate. Then, the second thing that has 
guided all Government throughout is that ‘the maximum percentage of salary compensation 
has always applied to those workers at the lowest rung of the ladder’. Here, the Government 
has decided to get rid of the maximum eligibility ceiling. Everybody across the board except 
for  part-time  workers  will  get  a  flat  rate  of  Rs600  which  obviously  would  mean  a  lower 
percentage increase for those earning above Rs15 000. Third and I quote the hon. Pravind 
Jugnauth –  

“No Government since independence has ever given any compensation for what we 
call rattrapage in terms of inflation that is not accounted for in previous years.” 

And I listened very carefully, neither did the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 
Employment and Training nor did the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
talk about rattrapage, compensation for previous loss in cost of living because this is exactly 
what the hon. Pravind Jugnauth said we can’t do. Government is not going to compensate for 
rattrapage and then, he went on, it is very important to quote this - 

“Standing and saying that we would wish that workers be compensated is easy, but 
one  must  always,  especially  when  you  are  in  a  position  of  responsibility,  take  into 
account all the factors that prevail, particularly the economic factors, and also what 
the country can afford, in order to try to strike the right balance and compensate the 
workers  of  this  country,  whilst  creating  also,  at  the  same  time,  the  necessary 
conditions for economic growth.” 

So, whenever we, in the Opposition, were saying that we needed more compensation 
not  just  to  compensate  for  cost  of  living,  but  also  rattrapage  and  to  reduce  the  Gini 
inequality, this is what hon. Jugnauth said when he was in Government and it is not just him. 
And that is why I find it very unfair to blame only Mr Sithanen, because in 2012, yes, when 
hon. Xavier Duval was also… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Uteem: When hon. Xavier Duval was also the Minister of Finance… 

(Interruptions) 

 

42 

Madam Speaker: Order! No cross talking, please! 

Mr Uteem: …and we asked for an increase to compensate for loss of cost of living, 
when we asked for compensation to fill the gap of inequality, this is what the hon. Xavier 
Duval, then Minister of Finance in 2012 said - 

“What  is  important,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  above  all,  to  avoid  what  these 
gentlemen  were  not  able  to  avoid,  that  is,  massive  unemployment  in  Mauritius.  If 
there is some inflation, there will be compensation. But if you lose job, usually it is 
gone forever. And this is the whole issue also concerning monetary policy.”  

So, refusal to increase wage because it was going to create unemployment. And then 

he goes on, another reason - 

“Not to mention, of course, that we have this international crisis.”  

So, you can’t give more compensation. 

“We have very little room to spare.” And then, the third reason: productivity. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Let the hon. Member talk! 

Mr Uteem: And I quote - 

“Productivity  remains  an  issue  in  this  country  and  we  must  get  the  population  to 
understand  that  huge  increases  in  wages  can  only  come  with  huge  increases  in 
productivity.” 

So, the reasons have always been, we are compensating for increased cost of living, 
we  can’t  pay  more,  there  is  unemployment,  there  is  international  crisis,  there  is  no 
productivity.  So,  I  am  very  glad  that  today  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development talk a language which he knows reflects the feelings of the MMM 
because he was then… 

Member of the MMM …  

and I will quote… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Members, can you allow the hon. Member to talk! 

 

43 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I am on my feet! Can you allow the hon. Member to talk, please! 

Mr Uteem: And I will quote what we said in 2010. I will quote what we said in 2010 

in answer to the remark of hon. Pravind Jugnauth.  This is what we said, and I quote - 

“An increase in salary should bear in mind that it should not only compensate for the 
rise in the cost of living, but also to try, as far as possible, in the name of social justice 
to reduce the income inequality and the gap between the rich and the poor.”  

We  are  not  changing  guns  from  our  shoulders.  In  2010  when  you  were  in 
Government, when hon. Pravind Jugnauth was the Minister of Finance or when hon. Xavier 
Duval was Minister of Finance, we, on this side of the House, were always saying that for us 
compensation should be a social justice to reduce the income inequality and the gap between 
the rich and the poor. That was in 2010. So, of course, we are… 

We are very happy. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Henry, can you allow the hon. Member to talk!  

Hon. Henry! I am on my feet! Okay, please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: So, of course, we welcome the decision to increase the salary by Rs600 
because  we,  ourselves,  we  are  in  favour  of  reducing  the  Gini  gap.  The  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development mentioned it and it is a fact, and it is a very disturbing 
fact according to the household budget survey of 2012 and I quote - 

“Income inequality increased between 2006/07 and 2012. The share of total income 
going to the 20% of households at the lower end of the income range decreased from 
6.1% in 2006/07 to 5.4% in 2012. On the other hand, the share of the upper 20% of 
households  increased  from  45.6%  to  47.4%.  The  rise  in  income  inequality  is 
confirmed by an increase in the Gini coefficient from 0.388 in 2006/07 to 0.413 in 
2012.”  

So, we are very much aware that the income gap since 2006/2007 has been increasing. 
We are all aware that people are getting poorer, that there is not only absolute poverty, but 

 

44 

also relative poverty and we all in our Constituency have these poches  de pauvreté where 
people are struggling to make ends meet. So, that is why we welcome this increase of Rs600. 
But, at the same time, Madam Speaker, as a responsible Opposition we have to ask questions.  

We have to ask questions about the financing of this measure which inevitably will 
have  an  impact  on  the  economy  and  I  am  glad  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development mentioned that there will be no new taxes, but, again, I heard him 
say on the poor only. So, I don’t know if it means that some people other than the poor will 
have to fork out to pay for that increase in compensation.  

We  know  also  -  and  I  am  glad  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  mentioned  it  -  that  there  are  certain  small  and  medium  enterprises  that  are 
struggling and for whom an increase in the wage Bill has a significant impact on their cash 
flow especially  and probably on their long-term income and  we  expect on this side of the 
House  when  the  budget  will  come  for  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development to come and propose measure to counteract this increase in their salary Bill and 
measures to increase productivity, measures to increase competitiveness, measures to make 
the SME, which I agree totally with the hon. Minister, is and should be the backbone of our 
economy and should be the real engine of growth and engine for job creation. We also would 
like  to  know  what  are  the  measures  which  the  Government  intends  to  take  to  absorb  this 
excess liquidity.  

We know that the price - as the hon. Minister said we are lucky - of the petroleum 
products is going down, but also the price of basic commodities is going down in the world 
market. So, we hope and we expect that the increase in the wage Bill will not have undue 
inflationary pressure but, again, we hope to hear from the hon. Minister and the Governor of 
the Central Bank what monetary policies would be introduced to mop up any excess liquidity 
that  is  being  caused  by  the  increase  in  pension  and  increase  in  compensation.  So,  Madam 
Speaker,  as  we  said,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  we  welcome  the  decision  to  increase  the 
pension and to increase the wages by Rs600 and on this side of the House, we would wait for 
the  budget  in  order  to  assess  what  measures  the  Government  is  going  to  take  so  that  this 
increase doesn’t have a negative impact on our economy.  

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

(3.43 p.m.) 

 

45 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I feel it really funny when I hear some of the 
hon. Members from the other side of the House. I was told that they have adopted a policy of 
not looking behind, but looking forward. 

(Interruptions) 

And then, today, they are struggling to look behind.  It is very unfortunate.  Now, when they 
are on the other side, they are the greatest defenders of the poor, the workers and the have-
nots. They criticise the former Finance Ministers, but they don’t dare say a word about Mr 
Sithanen’s performance.  And what is surprising, they were supporting, they wanted to bring 
again Mr Sithanen … 

(Interruptions) 

…as the Minister of Finance of this country.  But, they may like it or not, we have come to 
redress the economy of this country, and we are going to do it. 

(Interruptions) 

I give you this assurance.  We have done it before in worst circumstances, in worst situations, 
and I am sure we have the commitment.  We believe in what we are doing.  And you see, 
God’s blessing is with us!  It has started raining, the reservoirs are getting filled! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  here.    We  have  gone  through  a  general  election,  we  have 
presented our programme, and if we were to fail, then these are the very people who would 
fall on us, who would criticise us!  But what are we doing today is fulfilling our mission, our 
promise, our commitment, and again they find it wrong; we should not do that.  They  are 
trying  to  say  that  we  have  declared  war  with  the  private  sector.    But  we  have  a  long 
experience of having worked together with the private sector from 1983 to 1995.  I was Prime 
Minister.  The private sector was very happy.  At times, the private sector also must believe, 
must  know  that  they  form  part  of  this  nation,  that  we  are  no  longer  living  in  the  days  of 
slavery or indentured labour. Today, we are living in a free Mauritius.  All citizens have got 
the right to have a certain standard of living, and what we are trying to do today is to see to it 
that the whole nation understands this and contributes to make it a reality. Therefore, Madam 
Speaker, my Government’s decision to grant a salary increase of Rs600 across the board to 
all workers is one of the two bold measures that we had promised and which we are taking - 
the  salary  compensation  and  the  pension  -,  which  already  indicate  that  this  Government’s 

 

46 

strong  commitment  to  further  consolidate  our  welfare  state  is  in  progress  and  we  are 
determined to help the most vulnerable groups of our society.  There is no getting away from 
that.  We are going to adhere to what we have promised. 

Let me remind hon. Members on the other side of the House, Madam Speaker, that 
this is a caring Government.  The fight against poverty is high on our agenda.  We shall leave 
no stone unturned to bridge gradually but surely, as much as possible, the gap between the 
rich and the poor.  What we are aiming at is to achieve, Madame Speaker, is to give some 
relief to those workers  who are seriously  affected by the  rise in the cost of living, that is, 
workers who are at the lowest rung of the ladder. 

Madam Speaker, one yardstick for measuring a country’s greatness is the way it treats 
its workforce and particularly the most vulnerable ones.  I strongly believe that employees are 
the  driving  force  behind  the  success  of  every  enterprise,  and  more  importantly  for  their 
invaluable contribution in the socio-economic development of our rainbow island.  Without 
workers, the private sector cannot exist and, of course, we know for the workers also to have 
a decent living, we have to rely on the private sector.  Therefore, it is a mutual thing, and 
each  side  must  live  up  to  its  responsibilities.    Hence,  workers  getting  a  reasonable  share 
through  a  fair  and  equitable  distribution  of  wealth  will  be  high  on  the  agenda  of  my 
Government. 

It  is  the  duty  of  any  civilised  society  to  ensure  that  its  members  enjoy  respect  and 
dignity and observance of their rights.  We should not forget that the level of development we 
have  attained  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  efforts  and  contribution  of  the 
workers of this country.  That is why I will say ‘long live the workers, long live the private 
sector, long live our nation.’ 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister! 

(3.51 p.m) 

Mr  Callichurn:  Madame  la  présidente,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  having  already 
replied  to  the  question  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to 
elaborate again on the issue raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

I thank all hon. Members who have intervened in the debate.  What the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister and the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development have said effectively 

 

47 

summarises  the  vision  and  the  mission  of  this  Government  to  protect  the  most  vulnerable 
group  of  the  working  population.    This  Government  has  at  heart  the  plight  of  the  most 
vulnerable and downtrodden of our society. 

I note with appreciation the positive stand of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and 
hon. Uteem on the decision of this Government.  Madam Speaker, I am pleased to note that 
the  Government’s  decision  to  grant  a  uniform  salary  increase  of  Rs600  to  all  workers  has 
been  well  received  in  various  quarters,  in  particular  the  trade  union  movement  which  has 
already conveyed its deep appreciation with the present measures announced. 

I am confident that in order to fulfil my duty as Minister with success, I can rely not 
only  on  the  support  of  all  stakeholders,  but  also  on  the  support  and  guidance  of  all  my 
colleagues, and in particular of our Prime Minister, the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

I thank you for your attention, and wish all hon. Members and the entire nation a Merry 

Christmas and a Happy New Year 2015. 

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill (No. IX of 2014) was considered and agreed 

to. 

On  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker  reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Additional Remuneration (2015) Bill (No. IX of 

2014) was read the third time and passed. 

END OF YEAR MESSAGE 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  before  moving  for  the  adjournment  of  the 
House, I wish to say a few words as the new Leader of the House since this is the first and the 
last sitting of the Assembly for the newly constituted Government for this year. 

 

48 

I  wish  to,  first  of  all,  congratulate  you,  Madam  Speaker,  upon  your  election  as 
Speaker and especially for being the first woman ever elected to serve in that capacity in the 
history of our Parliament. My congratulations are also extended to the Deputy Speaker and 
the Deputy Chairperson of Committees for their election. 

The first sitting of the newly constituted Assembly has been marked by the passing of 
the Additional Remuneration Bill to compensate the employees of the private sector. I wish 
to  thank  Members  for  their  participation  in  the  debate  and  I  wish  to  place  on  record  my 
appreciation  for  the  elegant  and  impartial  manner  in  which  you  have  presided  over  the 
conduct of the business of the Assembly immediately upon assuming the Speakership. 

My thanks are also extended to the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk and the Clerk Assistant, 
officers of the Library, all the staff of the National Assembly, the Serjeant-at-Arms and his 
officers,  for  their  support  and  collaboration  for  the  effective  discharge  of  Parliamentary 
duties. 

Madam Speaker, may I kindly request you, in my personal name and in that of the 
Members of the House, to present the season’s greetings to the President of the Republic and 
Mrs Purryag, and the Vice-President. 

I  convey  to  you,  Madam  Speaker,  to  Mr  Hanoomanjee  and  your  family,  our  best 

wishes for a Merry Christmas 2014 and a Happy New Year 2015. 

My best wishes are also extended to the hon. Leader of the Opposition and his family 

and to all hon. Members and their families. 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, I wish also to 
express the best wishes on the Opposition side to the President of the Republic, the Vice-
President, to you Madam Speaker, the Clerk and your staff, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Ministers, all the other Members of the Legislative Assembly and their families and to the 
country at large a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  wish  to  associate  myself  with  the  season’s 
greetings  as  expressed  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  and  Mrs  Purryag  and  to  the  Vice-
President of the Republic. I will, with great pleasure, convey the message to them. In my own 
name and on behalf of the staff of the National Assembly, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
and the hon. Leader of the Opposition for their kind words and good wishes. 

 

49 

I am pleased to extend my best wishes for a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year 
to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Lady Jugnauth, to the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, to the 
Vice-Prime Ministers, to the hon. Ministers, the hon. Leader of the Opposition and to all hon. 
Members and their families. 

I also wish to thank the Clerk, all the members of the staff of the National Assembly 
and to all the civil servants who have assisted in the work of Parliament and to their families. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 27 January 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 4.01 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 27 January 2015 

at 11.30 a.m.  

