 

1 

 

 

No. 04 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 24 FEBRUARY 2015 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

 

                                                           Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK 

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 04 of 2015 

 

                                       Sitting of 24 February 2015 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis, at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ICAC – FINANCIAL CRIME COMMISSION & BOARD MEMBERS 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Independent  Commission  against 
Corruption, he will – 

(a) 

state – 
(i) 

(ii) 

when legislation to set up a Financial Crime Commission and a revised 
and enhanced Independent Commission against Corruption model will 
be introduced, and 
the  date  and  time  the  two  members  thereof,  other  than  the  Director 
General, were appointed; 

obtain information as to the date and time on which the new Director General 
thereof made and subscribed to the prescribed oath in respect of the – 
(i) 

disclosure of assets and liabilities before the Master and Registrar of 
the Supreme Court, and 
oath of secrecy before the District Magistrate, and 

(b) 

(c) 

(ii) 
obtain from the Independent Commission against Corruption, information as 
to if the new Director General or Commission has stopped any ongoing  
investigation or prosecution. 

(d) 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like to reply to the PNQ together with 

PQ B/54 as both relate to ICAC. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)(i)  of  the  question,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  Government 

Programme 2015-2019 provides as follows, I quote – 

“Government (has a mandate for change and) will relentlessly fight fraud, corruption 
and financial crime.  To that effect, a Financial Crime Commission will be set up to 
act  as  an  apex  body  to  oversee  the  ICAC,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  the 
enforcement department of the Financial Services Commission. 

Government  will  (leave  no  stone  unturned 
to)  eradicate  fraud,  corruption, 
malpractices  and  irregularities  in  all  aspects  of  public  life  and  restore  our  national 
values.  To this end, a new Declaration of Assets Act for MPs and high-ranking public 

8 

 
officers  and  a  Financing  of  Political  Parties  Act  will  be  enacted.    A  new  Code  of 
Conduct will be introduced for all MPs and public officers.” 

In this context, the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms  and  the  Attorney  General  are  on  mission  at  present  in  London  for,  inter  alia, 
discussions  with  the  following  institutions  regarding  assistance  in  the  setting-up  of  the 
Financial Crime Commission - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Serious Fraud Office; 

Foreign and Commonwealth Office; 

Financial Conduct Authority, and 

National Crime Agency. 

The  Financial  Crime  Commission  will  be  set  up  as  an  umbrella  organisation  to 
oversee the operations of a revised and enhanced ICAC model, the FIU and Asset Recovery 
Unit,  the  enforcement  units  of  the  Financial  Services  Commission  and  the  Financial 
Reporting  Council  relating  to  securities,  insurance  and  financial  reporting  fraud  within  a 
newly set up Anti-Fraud Unit.  This will bring harmonisation in the structure for the fight 
against  financial  crime  in  Mauritius  and  will  ensure  better  coordination  amongst  existing 
institutions.    This  will  also  mitigate  the  risks  of  fraudsters  exploiting  loopholes  in  the 
functioning of institutions which may have led to the recent cases of Ponzi schemes where 
many innocent but gullible persons have lost their hard earned money. 

As  an  immediate  measure,  pending  the  setting-up  of  the  Financial  Crime 
Commission,  an  amendment  will  be  brought  to  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  and  the  Asset 
Recovery Unit will be merged with the Financial Intelligence Unit. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  present  composition  of  the  Board  of  the  Independent 

Commission against Corruption is as follows - 

Chairperson 

Members 

 

 

: 

: 

 

Mr Luchmyparsad Aujayeb  

Mr Narainkrishna Peerun, and 

Miss Shakilla Bibi Jhungeer 

The  appointments  of  the  previous  Board  members  were  terminated  under  section 
113(4) of the Constitution and after consultation with the Solicitor General. All the outgoing 
members have been paid compensation for loss of office in accordance with section 113(5) of 

 

9 

the Constitution and section 52 of the Employment Rights Act. They have also been paid all 
their benefits due and accrued. 

In regard to part (a) (ii) of the PNQ, the two other Board Members of the ICAC were 

appointed on 10 February 2015.  They assumed duty on 16 February 2015 in the morning. 

As regards part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that the new Director General 
has on, 28 January 2015, subscribed before the Master and Registrar of the Supreme Court to 
the oath in respect of the disclosure of his assets and liabilities as required under section 25 of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  new  Director 
General has already taken the oath of secrecy as required under section 81 of the Prevention 
of Corruption Act. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that – 

(i) 

the  Commission  which  is  the  sole  authority  vested  under  the  Prevention  of 
Corruption Act with the power to discontinue an investigation, was constituted 
on 16 February 2015.  No ongoing investigation has been discontinued by the 
Commission so far, and 

(ii) 

by  virtue  of  section  72  of  the  Constitution,  only  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions can discontinue a prosecution. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister quoted the Government 
Programme  but,  as  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  aware,  before  that,  in  the  Electoral 
Programme, what was put forward, what was promised was a Financial Crime Commission 
that  would  conduct  its  enquiries  and  that  englobera  différentes  institutions  existantes  dont 
l’ICAC, etc. Then, we move to the Government Programme which said - 

“A Financial Crime Commission …”  

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just quoted that paragraph.   

“… will be set up to act as an apex body”.  

And  then,  last  Tuesday,  here,  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms, hon. Bhadain, said that the Financial Crime Commission will be set up 
as an umbrella organisation to oversee the operations of a revised and enhanced ICAC model. 
I have tried to hear when will the two things be done.  When will the legislation to set up the 

 

10 

new institution and to replace ICAC by - to use the words of the hon. Minister - ‘a revised 
and enhanced ICAC model’ come? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we have already started working on it. They have been to 
London to get further information to help us in this context  and we will do our best to come 
as soon as possible. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, I am glad to hear that Government will come forward with the 
legislation as soon as possible. But, then, can I ask why the new Director General, under the 
present law, has been appointed for three years in the letter that he has received and which I 
received? I will move on to that later on. 

The Prime Minister: For the time being, we have been acting under the present law. 

Mr Bérenger: I take it that with the new legislation everything will be reviewed? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  do  not  know  what  there  will  be.  I  cannot  foresee 

beforehand! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  then,  at  least,  can  I  put  the  following  question?  The  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister will remember that the essential difference between the present Prevention of 
Corruption  Act  and  the  one  which  we  voted  in  2000-2005  was  the  existence  of  an 
Appointment Committee to appoint the Director General and the others and to remove them 
with  the  unanimous  vote  to  remove  them,  so  as  to  secure  security  of  tenure,  which  is  the 
essential part thereof. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the present law, 
which was rushed in after the 2005 general elections, will be replaced by a new, to use the 
words  again  of  the  Minister  concerned,  ‘a  revised  and  enhanced  ICAC  model’  like  in  the 
legislation which we voted in 2000–2005, there will be a guarantee of security of tenure of 
the Chairperson, the Director General and the other members? 

The Prime Minister: We will do everything that we feel is necessary. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware that when he 
made his speech last Tuesday, the hon. Minister included in the forthcoming Financial Crime 
Commission  not  only  ICAC,  FIU,  Asset  Recovery  Unit,  but  also  the  Financial  Reporting 
Council?  Is  he  aware  that  the  Financial  Reporting  Council  like,  for  example,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, is a regulatory body and not a crime combating agency? 

 
The Prime Minister: There is always some fine-tuning to be done, Madam Speaker. 

11 

Mr Bérenger: Fine-tuning is being done in London, I understand.  

(Interruptions) 

Therefore,  can  I  insist  that  the  way  that  they  are  appointed  and  that  they  are  removed, 
especially the way they will be removed, can I have that guarantee from the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister that we will have, at least, the same security of tenure as in our law in 2000–2005? 

The Prime Minister: We will do everything that will be in the best interest of this 

country. 

Mr Bérenger: In his speech last Tuesday again, the hon. Minister said, I am quoting, 

Madam Speaker, from the Hansard -  

 “As  an  immediate  measure  pending  the  setting-up  of  the  Financial  Crime 
Commission, an amendment will shortly be brought to the Asset Recovery Act and 
the Asset Recovery Unit will be removed …” 

Très élégant!  

 “… from the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and will be merged with 
the FIU (…)” 

How immediate will be immediate? Can we take it that this piece of legislation, which has 
been promised to be introduced as an immediate measure, will be very soon forthcoming? 
Can I know whether the DPP has been consulted about that removal of the Asset Recovery 
Unit from the DPP’s Office and, if yes, what his reaction has been? 

The Prime Minister: I cannot say whether the DPP has been consulted and so far as 

“immediate” is concerned, it is not most immediate, but it will be immediate. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move to the next part of my question.  As we know, Madam 
Speaker, the law provides for consultation between the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition before the appointment of the Director General is made. Is the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  I  received  the  letter  of  consultation,  supposedly  on  30 

 

12 

December 2014, in the afternoon, and the next day the Press reported that he had taken office 
on the same day, that is, on 30 December 2014? 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the letter for consultation was issued and then 
we proceeded with the appointment of the new Director of ICAC.  It was an urgent matter 
because the Members of Parliament had to do what we call the declaration of assets, and that 
was the last day. Therefore, because of the emergency, things went on very fast. 

Mr  Bérenger:  That  was  not  done  at  all!  But,  does  he  realise  that,  in  fact,  the 
appointment  is  irregular?  The  law  provides  that  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  must  be 
consulted before he is appointed! Now, I received a letter - I am not usually very slow - but, 
in  the  same  afternoon,  the  gentleman  concerned  took  office  supposedly  because  of 
declaration of assets requirement. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell me that he agrees with 
that and that the appointment was regular? 

The Prime Minister: We all know consultation means consultation! We had already 
made up our mind. Whatever would be the comments of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
Mr Aujayeb was going to be appointed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Well, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that if 
he had given me not even an afternoon - in other words he is saying: “we don’t consult, we 
decide  and  we  send  a  letter  like  that”  -  I  would  have  informed  him  that  I  object  to  the 
appointment  of  that  gentleman  and  I  would  have  given  him  in  confidence  why,  what 
information I have found since then, that in my view, disqualifies this gentleman from this 
job? Is he aware of that? 

The  Prime  Minister:  This  gentleman  took  office  on  the  next  day;  it  was  on  31 

December. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  was  reading;  so,  probably,  he  did  not 
catch  my  question.  My  question  is:  is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  had  I  been 
consulted, as the law requires, I would have advised against appointing him because I would 
have communicated in confidence information which shows that that gentleman is unfit to 
occupy that job? 

 

13 

The  Prime  Minister:  The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  could  have  phoned  me  and 

informed me. He didn’t do so. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  honestly,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been 
President of the Republic.  Usually, I react within two days whenever he consults me and the 
President. He  finds it decent that  I  received  a letter in the afternoon. The  gentleman prête 
serment in the same afternoon, he starts work, and he has just confirmed the next day.  I don’t 
even have time to react. I have to seek information.  I don’t agir à la légère.  Is he seriously 
telling us that that was in order? Vitesse de croisière n’a pas encore été atteinte, bureaucratic 
model, what have you ! 

The Prime Minister:  In the circumstances, we have no alternative. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, if I can move on to the other two members. We have 
now the Director General and the Chairperson whom I consider unfit to sit in that job. I am 
prepared to communicate to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the reasons I said that.  

Now,  if  we  can  move  to  the  two  other  appointments,  Madam  Speaker.    We  are 
supposed  to  instil  confidence  in  ICAC.  The  previous  Government  and  the  previous  Prime 
Minister changed the law and destroyed ICAC over the years. Now, supposedly, we want to 
instil confidence to show that the members are all independent. Is the Rt. hon.Prime Minister 
telling me, honestly, that it will instil confidence in the independence of ICAC and that the 
two other members are – 

 (i) 

(ii) 

a  senior  Police  officer  at  the  head  of  the  NIU  -  a  good  friend  of  mine  -  but  a 
Police officer to sit as an independent member for long years at the head of the 
NIU.  He can be given any other kind of job; he is a friend of mine, and 

a young lady to sit on ICAC with the supposedly an image of independence when 
that lady on 22 March 2014 was proudly presented by the hon. Minister Pravind 
Jugnauth - this is right - as an upcoming political recruit of the MSM. 

I am tabling that, of course. 

Is  this  kind  of  appointment  going  to  instil  confidence  in  the  population  in  this  new 

ICAC? 

 

14 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, we will judge these people after the action they 
will be taking in ICAC. We have, in this country, precedence where political people, people 
who have already been Ministers, people who have been in this House, been appointed in the 
Judiciary,  an  independent  Judiciary,  where  they  have  been  delivering,  doing  their  duties 
properly and we have had no reproach whatsoever. Why not in this case? 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, I move on to the last part of my question to give some 
time  to  my  colleagues  who  have  their  own  questions.  I  am  glad  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister,  at  least,  did  not  hide  like  the  former  Prime  Minister,  behind  the  Parliamentary 
Committee. The Parliamentary Committee has a wide ambit to monitor ICAC, open-ended, 
but the former Prime Minister and the member he appointed at the head of ICAC put on a 
very  restrictive,  prohibitive  interpretation  on  the  monitoring  of  ICAC  to  be  done  by  the 
Parliamentary Committee. I am glad that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister today has not adopted 
the same attitude. Can I know whether he has in mind the member who will instil confidence 
and will chair?  Because we walked out of that committee under the previous Government. It 
was  useless  and  a  waste  of  public  money  because  the  Chairperson  took  orders  from  the 
former Prime Minister to paralyse the Parliamentary Committee. Do we have a guarantee that 
this will be allowed to work this time and that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will choose the 
right person as Chairperson to let that Committee do its work? 

The Prime Minister: I have no one in mind so far, but we will certainly do what the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition is suggesting. This is really our aim; what we want to aim at. 

Mr Bérenger:  On the last part of my question again. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
aware that there have been several Press articles in which it was reported that the DPP being 
dissatisfied with the way ICAC was conducting one specific enquiry, called in the Director 
General, I quote –  

“… a convoqué le conseil légal de la commission to express his dissatisfaction with the 
way ICAC was conducting one given enquiry”. 

Now, we know that the DPP likes mise au point, communiqué and so on, but  there was none 
in that case. It was reported on several occasions, but there was no démenti, no mise au point, 
no communiqué.  Can we know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has looked into that and 
whether, in fact, the DPP expressed his dissatisfaction in that way? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this. 

 

15 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  last  part  of  my  question  was  whether  any  prosecution  or 
investigation has been or is being stopped by the new Director General or the Commission as 
a whole now that it is constituted.  Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is 
aware that two sitting Ministers in the present Government have been targeted by the former 
ICAC?  An enquiry was conducted on two now sitting Ministers, and ICAC, with the green 
light of the  DPP, was  going ahead  with prosecution. Can  I know from the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister whether he is aware of that and, if he is not, whether he will look into it? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  am  not  aware  of  this,  Madam  Speaker.  But,  if  there  is  any 

decision to prosecute, the DPP is free to do that. 

Mr  Uteem:  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  stated  that  the  Director  General  and  other 
members  of  the  Commission  were  dismissed  under  section  113  subsection  (4)  of  the 
Constitution. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, under the Prevention of Corruption 
Act, there is a special procedure under section 23 for revocation of the Director General by 
the Parliamentary Committee? Would he agree that by bypassing this statutory provision and 
going  under  the  Constitution,  the  Government  is  going  against  the  United  Nations 
Convention on Prevention of Corruption, which provides for security of tenure to people at 
the head of corruption investigating agencies? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  advised  that  everything  has  been  done 

according to our law. 

Mr Ganoo: I will pursue on the point which my hon. friend has just raised. Doesn’t the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that the state of our law, as it is today, including the provisions 
of  our  Constitution  which  have  been  used  for  the  termination  of  the  appointment  of  the 
previous Director General means that any Director General or high-ranking member of the 
ICAC is at the mercy of any freshly new elected Government? Does not the Rt. hon.  Prime 
Minister think that there is need to amend our law for further clarity, so that impartiality and 
the  independence  of  the  Director  General  of  the  ICAC  should  be  entrenched  by  further 
amending the law? 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  will  do  everything  that  is  necessary  in  the  interest  of  the 

country. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

16 

Mr Bérenger: As a last question, can I say the following?  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
and  you  Madam  Speaker  will  allow  me  to  say  that  the  new  ICAC  a  pris  un  très  mauvais 
départ, the worse possible.   Is he prepared to review the appointment of the new Director 
General,  to  go  through  the  proper  procedures  and  to  call  for  appel  de  candidatures,  as  is 
claimed nearly every day, to review the appointment of the new Director General and the two 
members, so as to instil the required confidence in the public or alternatively to introduce as 
soon  as  possible  legislation  to  set  up  the  Financial  Crime  Commission  and  to  set  up  the 
revised and enhanced ICAC model that has been promised; to do that, either to review their 
appointment or to come forward with the legislation as soon as possible? 

The Prime Minister: The second part I have already answered, we will do our best to 
come as soon as possible. Insofar as the first part is concerned, to me it looks like après la 
mort, la tisane. 

Madam Speaker: Last question to the hon. Leader of the Opposition!  

I will give the hon. Member some additional time. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated that the 
former Board was revoked on 26 December and we heard that it is only on 31 December that 
the Director General was appointed. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in those 
five days, who were in charge of those highly confidential materials, sitting in the offices of 
ICAC? 

The Prime Minister: Well, there were other people who were there; the confidential 

materials were in custody of those that were there. 

Madam Speaker: Any other question, Leader of the Opposition? Do you have any 

other question, Leader of the Opposition?  

(Interruptions) 

Leader of the Opposition, I am asking you whether you have a final question now, because 
we have got only two minutes left.  So, I am just asking you if you have or you don’t have. 

(Interruptions) 

 

17 

If you don’t have any, then time will be over in two minutes. Questions addressed to the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister! Hon. Uteem! 

ICAC- BOARD COMPOSITION 

(No.  B/54)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Independent 
Commission  Against  Corruption,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to the - 

(a) 

composition of the present Board thereof, and  

(b)  

procedure  followed  for  the  termination  of  office  of  the  members  of  the 
previous Board thereof. 

(Vide Reply to PNQ) 

NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - APPLICATIONS  

(No.  B/55)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the National Human Rights 
Commission, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
number  of  applications  received  for  an  inquiry  to  be  carried  out  as  to  whether  there  exist 
sufficient fresh and compelling evidence to refer the conviction to the Court of Appeal for 
review, since 2013 to date, indicating in each case the outcome thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  was 
amended  in  2013  by  introducing  section  4A,  so  as  to  allow  a  convicted  person  or  his 
representative  to  apply  to  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission  requesting  the  latter  to 
conduct an inquiry as to whether there exists sufficient fresh and compelling evidence to refer 
the case back to the Supreme Court for a review of the proceedings.  

I am informed by the National Human Rights Commission that two applications have 
been received since 2013 for inquiry to be carried out as provided under section 4A of the 
Protection of Human Rights Act. 

18 

 
Inquiry in the first case, received on 10 July 2014, is ongoing and same is expected to 
be completed by mid-2015. I refer the hon. Member to my reply to Parliamentary Question 
No. B/15 of the sitting of 10 February 2015. 

In regard to the second application dated 28 July 2014, the Commission is presently 
gathering  additional  information  regarding  the  conviction,  over  and  above  the  information 
provided by the convicted person. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to PQ No. B/15, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
stated  that  the  search  for  the  existence  of  fresh  and  compelling  evidence  is  a  complex 
exercise and that is why it is taking more than six months. May  I know from the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  whether  the  Government  intends  to  come  forward  with  amendment  to  the 
existing legislation to facilitate people who feel that they have been wrongfully convicted to 
ask for the reopening of their cases? 

The  Prime  Minister:  In  fact,  we  had  stated  in  our  party  programme  that  we  were 
going to bring amendments in order to facilitate this task. But, being given now that there has 
been already an amendment and the Commission is acting under it, we’ll wait for the result 
and see what happens. 

Mr Bérenger: Precisely on that point, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that when 
legislation was brought in this House by the former Government, former Prime Minister in 
2013, when the law was amended, I pleaded with the former Prime Minister - supplié - that, 
instead  of  only  fresh  and  compelling  evidence  –  the  law  is  the  law,  the  Commission  and 
subsequently the Court, if it reaches the Court, the Commission will have to go by the law. 
The law says unless there is fresh and compelling evidence the case will not be reopened, 
whereas  in  UK,  in  Australia,  in  New  Zealand  and  so  on,  if  exceptional  circumstances  are 
found,  there  is  latitude  for  the  Commission  to  reopen  the  case.  I  pleaded  with  the  former 
Prime Minister, j’ai supplié. - we should follow the example of UK, Australia, New Zealand 
and include ‘exceptional circumstances also’? I don’t know why the former Government, the 
former Prime Minister refused bluntly, and now, it is a tight jacket. Will the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister agree with me that there is need to look at that; what has been already introduced for 
years in the UK, Australia, New Zealand and so on should be introduced here?  

The Prime Minister: We don’t look behind, we look forward and we will consider 

that. 

19 

 
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, after the amendment was brought in 2013, as stated 
by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, there was an enquiry that started out at the National 
Human Rights Commission and it is only, as stated by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, during the 
last general election several Members of the now Government have stated that they would 
reopen the enquiry. This is what was stated, that they would reopen the enquiry, at several 
public meetings … 

Madam Speaker: Please, come with your question! 

Mr Mohamed: So, the question is: does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister intend to keep 
his promise of reopening the enquiry?  Because what is going on before the National Human 
Rights Commission is a hearing. Does he intend to keep his promise of reopening the enquiry 
that he made public during the last general election? 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  don’t  reopen  in  a  vacuum;  we  will  have  to  pass  the 

necessary law before acting. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, being given the time that it is taking the Human Rights 
Commission to complete a single enquiry, has there been any request from the Human Rights 
Commission for the increase in staff or logistics or financial assistance for them to speed up 
their enquiries? 

The Prime Minister: Not so far that I am aware of. 

Mr Bérenger: I am glad - if I heard correctly - I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
say  that  he  will  consider  amending  the  law  as  per  what  prevails  already  in  UK,  etc.  I 
understand  that,  apart  from  going  before  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission,  the 
families of the persons concerned are thinking or are going to the Privy Council à leurs frais, 
and I am sure lot of us would help. Can I know from the hon. Prime Minister if assistance is 
sought  from  those  families,  if  they  go  ahead  with  assistance  before  coming  to  help  them 
before the Privy Council, not to pay for this or that but to help them to get the Privy Council 
to hear that case as soon as possible? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  can’t  answer  to  this  question  unless  we  study  this 

situation deeply and see what can be done. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

20 

PRIME MINISTER (FORMER) - OVERSEAS MISSIONS - DELEGATION 

(No. B/56) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  each  of  the  overseas 
missions undertaken by  the former Prime Minister, since July 2005 to December 2014, he 
will give a list thereof, indicating in each case, the - 

(a)    

countries visited;  

(b)  

composition  of  the  delegation,  including  the  names  of  the  accompanying 
journalists, if any;  

(c)    

duration thereof;  

(d)   

total amount of money spent in terms of -  

(i)  

air ticket;  

(ii)  

per diem, and  

(iii) 

other allowances, if any, and  

(e)    

name of the hotels in which he stayed. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  information  requested  for  is  being 

compiled and will be tabled in the National Assembly. 

HORSERACING - COMMISSION OF INQUIRY 

(No. B/57) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry set up to look 
into all the aspects of horseracing in Mauritius, he will state if it has now completed its works 
and submitted a report thereto and - 

(a) 

if so, indicate - 

(i) when, and  

(ii) the main recommendations thereof, and  

 
(b) 

21 

if not, will he, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
the - 

(i) reasons therefor, and  

(ii) cost incurred by the Commission for the inquiry. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Commission of Inquiry 
on  horseracing  has  already  completed  its  work  and  is  currently  finalising  its  report.  I  am 
further informed that the Commission will honour its commitment to submit its final report 
prior to the start of the 2015 horseracing season.   

In regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, a total sum of Rs4,790,673.98 representing air 

tickets, accommodation costs and part payment of fees, has been disbursed so far. 

An additional sum of around Rs3,008,348 will have to be disbursed on receipt of the 
final  report.    This  sum  represents  outstanding  fees  and  expenses  for  the  visit  of  two 
Commissioners to Hong Kong in connection with the inquiry. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that my Government is fully determined 
to fight the mafia that has brought horseracing in Mauritius into disrepute.  Once the final 
report of the Commission is submitted, appropriate action will be initiated. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  is  Government  envisaging  making  public  an 

interim report before the final report is obtained? 

The Prime Minister: In any case, I am not aware of any interim report. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Prime Minister aware - because I am a bit taken aback by 
his last answer - that there is already an interim report and is he telling the House that he has 
not been made aware of that interim report that already exists? 

The Prime Minister:  I  have been told that an interim report was forwarded to the 

former Prime Minister. What he has done with it, I don’t know.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: The former Prime Minister used to tell us at length in the House that 
he had called the Commissioners and told them to be ruthless, to be tough on anybody and 

 

22 

not  to  spare  anybody.    Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  the  new  Prime 
Minister met the Commissioners and asked them to behave in the same manner? 

The Prime Minister: I have not met anybody so far. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  one  of  the  main  problems  we  have  witnessed 
concerning the mafia operating at the Champ de Mars is the way the GRA was operating. 
Can the hon. Prime Minister give the assurance to the House and to the country that while 
choosing the person to be at the head of GRA, at least, we have somebody who will not be 
linked directly or indirectly with the Mauritius Turf Club? 

The Prime Minister: We will do our best. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since we understand that there is an 

interim report somewhere in the office of the former Prime Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

In the safe!  Can we request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to have a fresh look in the safe and 
make public that report, if ever there is an interim report? 

The Prime Minister: I have neither the key nor the code! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

PRIME MINISTER (FORMER) - RESIDENCE - SEARCHES 

(No. B/58) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, following the searches carried out at the 
residence of the former Prime Minister, respectively at Desforges Street, in Port Louis, and at 
Riverwalk, in Vacoas, from Friday 06 to Sunday 08 February 2015, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police -  

(a) 

a list of the exhibits secured thereat, indicating in each case, the quantum of 
money seized, and  

23 

information as to the charges that have been lodged against him as at to date. 

 
(b) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that the inquiry into the case involving the former 
Prime Minister is ongoing, and at this stage, it would not be appropriate to disclose material 
facts or any other information related to the inquiry, as this may cause prejudice to its proper 
unfolding. 

 As for part (b) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply to the 
Private  Notice  Question  on  Tuesday  10  February  2015,  wherein  I  stated  that  provisional 
charges  of  “Conspiracy”  and  “Money  Laundering”  were  lodged  against  the  former  Prime 
Minister on 07 February 2015.  He appeared before the Bail and Remand Court on the same 
day and was granted bail on the same day subject to the condition that he furnishes a surety of 
Rs200,000  and  enters  a  recognizance  of  Rs1  m.  under  each  charge.    He  was  released  on 
parole on that same day pending his appearance before the District Courts of Upper Plaines 
Wilhems and Rivière du Rempart for the fulfilment of the conditions of his bail. 

He  appeared  before  the  District  Courts  of  Upper  Plaines  Wilhems  and  Rivière  du 

Rempart on Monday 09 February 2015, and furnished the required sureties. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Prime Minister confirm whether during 
the search at Riverwalk, a sum of Rs110 m. and a sum of 10 m. in foreign currency have been 
found in the luggage and in the safe? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have not asked for the details. I don’t know. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  state  how  many  sex 
stimulant tablets were found in the safe and whether these tablets had been registered with the 
Pharmacy Board? 

 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, I cannot answer this question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed! 

 
MAURITIUS POLICE FORCE - PERMUTATIONS, DEMOTIONS & 

24 

PROMOTIONS 

(No. B/59) Mr S. Mohamed(First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Police Force, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, a list of the 
officers thereof who have, since 10 December 2014 to date, been subject to - 

(a) 

permutations;  

(b)  

demotions, and 

(c)  

promotions 

indicating, in each case, the reasons therefor. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, it is 
presumed that by the word “permutations”, the hon. Member is referring to transfer/posting 
of Police officers within the Force.  

I am accordingly informed by the Commissioner of Police that, from 10 December 
2014 to 19 February 2015, 781 Police officers of all ranks have been transferred within the 
Divisions,  Branches,  Units  and  Stations  of  the  Police  Force.    It  is  the  prerogative  of  the 
Commissioner of Police to conduct this exercise, taking into consideration the best interest 
and exigencies of the service as well as to ensure quality service delivery by the Police.   

The  list  of  transfers  in  the  Police  Force  is  published  in  the  Police  Routine  Orders 
which  is  meant  for  internal  circulation.    Besides,  the  hon.  Member  would  recall  that  such 
information were not being divulged to the House in the past on the ground that the posting 
of officers is considered to be of a sensitive nature and relates to the security of the country. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  also  informed  by  the 

Commissioner of Police that since 10 December 2014, no Police officer has been demoted.   

However, in the context of filling of vacancies in specialised units, officers who have 
been assigned higher duties may be considered for promotion in a substantive capacity after 
having  satisfactorily  completed  a  minimum  period  of  six  months’  assignment  in  their 
respective post. 

 

25 

In the event they are transferred to other Divisions/Branches/Units of the Force during 

that period, their assignment of duties lapses. 

From 10 December 2014 to 20 February 2015, 21 Police officers posted to the Very 
Important  Persons  Security  Unit  and  one  officer  posted  to  the  Fingerprints  Section  of  the 
Central Criminal Investigation Department which are specialised units of the Force, and who 
were  assigned  higher  duties  on  05  October  2014,  were  posted  out 
to  other 
Divisions/Branches/Units of the Force.  As they had not completed a minimum period of six 
months at these specialised Units, their assignment of higher duties lapsed when they were 
reverted to their former ranks. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  further  informed  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  that  promotion  in  the  Police  Force  falls  under  the  purview  of  the 
Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  and  is  governed  by  Regulations  14  and  19  of  the 
DFSC Regulations and Police Standing Order No 16. 

From 10 December 2014 to 20 February 2015, one Assistant Commissioner of Police 
has been promoted to the rank of Deputy Commissioner of Police and three Inspectors to the 
rank of Chief Inspectors of Police in a substantive capacity.  Thirty-one Police officers, all 
ranks inclusive, have been assigned higher duties when they were posted to the VIPSU.  In 
addition, one Superintendent of Police has been assigned duties as Director General of the 
National Security Service. 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell us whether it is 
also  within  the  prerogative  or  prerogatives  of  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  demote,  for 
whatever reason, people who were responsible for the security of the former Prime Minister 
and Ministers and to promote those who are now responsible for the security of the actual 
Prime Minister and Ministers?   Is this also within the prerogative of the Commissioner of 
Police? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  know  anybody  who  has  been  demoted,  but  the  hon. 
Member should know better than I do what in his Government the former Prime Minister was 
doing. 

(Interruptions) 

 

26 

Mr Mohamed: I had understood that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that he does not 
look in the rétroviseur, but looks forward.  Can he tell us when he will start looking forward? 

 (Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I look eye to eye to the hon. Member! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Since the question relates to changes that have taken place or are taking 
place  since  the  last  general  elections  and  we  are  informed,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  that  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  has  already  left  on  leave  prior  to  retirement  -  the  Constitution 
provides  that  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  appoints  the  Commissioner  of 
Police after consulting the hon. Rt. Prime Minister - can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  has  already  been  consulted  by  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  in 
relation to the next Commissioner of Police?  

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  have  not  yet  been  consulted.    I  know  that  the  present 
Commissioner of Police is retiring and the next in seniority, if I understand rightly, is going 
to act. 

Madam Speaker: One last question! 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that the former Prime Minister took 
several years, we asked so many PQs regarding the promotion in the Police Force, and these 
promotions have been given only to some of his petits copains? 

The Prime Minister: I thought the question was aimed at … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has to answer to this question! 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we all know the past.  In fact, so far as transfers 
and all that are concerned, after the general election of 2005, many more transfers took place. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

 

27 

VACOAS POLICE STATION – ROAD ACCIDENT - 09 JANUARY 2015 

(No. B/60) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if, on 09 January 2015, a case was 
reported at the Vacoas Police Station regarding vehicle bearing registration number 6271 0ct 
08 owned by the Tourism Authority and, if so, indicate – 

who was driving the vehicle at the material time and in which capacity, and  
the outcome of the inquiry carried out thereinto. 

(a) 
(b) 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  on  09  January  2015,  in  the  morning,  a  road  accident  was  reported  at  Vacoas  Police 
Station.  The accident involved a van owned by the Tourism Authority.  It was driven by one 
Mr L.M.S.A, a Manager of the Authority to whom the vehicle was allocated. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Prime Minister aware that according to information, this van 
in question was driven by someone who was a former employee of the Tourism Authority 
and only reinstated in his position as employer of Tourism Authority after the accident?   

(Interruptions) 

As far as backdated is concerned, I don’t know who did it, but it is not us! 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! No cross-talking! Allow the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  The information that I have is that he was already employed and 

in that capacity he was driving that van. 

Mr Mohamed: Would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, therefore, table in this House the 

letter of appointment of that person since we want a clarification as regards this issue? 

The Prime Minister:  We will do that in due course. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

28 

PARASTATAL BODIES - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/61) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in the light of the announced policy of 
Government to proceed by way of interview for recruitment in the parastatal bodies and other 
institutions wherein the State is a majority shareholder, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the parastatal bodies and other institutions falling under the aegis of his Ministry, 
information as to the vacancies existing thereat which will be advertised and those which will 
not, indicating the reasons therefor. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  my  office,  there  is  only  one 
statutory body, namely the National Adoption Council and one Government-owned company, 
namely, the Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Co Ltd, falling under its aegis. 

The  National  Adoption  Council  is  administered  by  a  Board  and  is  fully  serviced  by 

public officers. 

Regarding the Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Co Ltd there is at present no vacancy at 

CEO level. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

CRIMINAL CASES - SUSPECTS – SURETY  

(No.  B/62)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to money deposited as surety 
by  suspects  in  criminal  cases,  he  will  state  if  he  has  been  made  aware  that  same  are  not 
refunded within reasonable delays once the cases are over and, if so, will he, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain information as to – 

the reasons therefor, and 
if remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

(a) 
(b) 
 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Master and Registrar of 
the  Supreme  Court  that  once  a  criminal  case  is  disposed  of  by  the  Court,  procedures  are 
initiated to refund the money deposited as security by a surety. 

 

29 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am further informed that, there can be delays in 

the refund process due to the following reasons- 

(i) 

(ii) 

the surety does not come to the Court for the refund; 

the surety fails to notify the Court of changes in his address or his telephone 
number; 

(iii) 

the surety fails to furnish accurate information regarding the Court case; 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

the  Registrar-General’s  Office  needs  a  reasonable  time  to  process  the 
registration of documents; 

the Attorney General’s Office has to submit a taxed bill of costs, and  

the Certificates of Character are awaited in cases where the convicted parties 
have  been  conditionally  discharged  and  required  to  be  of  good  behaviour 
during the period specified by the Court. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the Master and Registrar is presently working on 
updated procedures and guidelines to be implemented as from March 2015 in order to avoid 
delays for the refund in the future. 

Mr Baloomoody: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that there are many people out 
there who are waiting – not months, not weeks – for years to get their money refunded and 
this  is  being  delayed  because  there  is  no  staff  in  the  Court  and  very  often  the  ink  on  the 
receipt has faded away, there is no evidence, and they can’t get back their money?  It is a 
small ticket, smaller than the ticket bis. 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this situation. I can only say what I have been 

told by the Master and Registrar. 

RIVIÈRE DU REMPART POLICE STATION – MR A. K. R. – DEATH 

(No. B/63) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart)asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the death of Mr A. K. R. whilst in Police 
custody at the Rivière du Rempart Police Station, on 30 July 2011, he will, for the benefit of 
the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  in  relation  to  the  said  Police  Station, 
information as to the number of officers who – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

30 

were  on  duty  thereat  during  that  night,  indicating  the  name  of  the  Chief 
Inspector of Police who was on duty thereat at the material time, and 
have been subject of transfers following this incident, indicating in each case, 
the  
(i) 
(ii) 

date of transfer, and 
reasons therefor. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply 
to  the  Private  Notice  Question  of  10  February  2015,  wherein  I  stated  that  following  fresh 
information obtained, the Police have reopened the enquiry on the death of Mr A.K.R. on 30 
July 2011 in Police custody at Rivière du Rempart Police Station. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  following  the 
death of Mr A.K.R., Police Officers who were on duty that night have been transferred with 
effect from 30 July 2011.   

As the enquiry is ongoing, it would not be appropriate to give the name of the Chief 

Inspector of Police who was on duty at the Station on 30 July 2011. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that, in cases of suspected death 
in Police custody, it is an established practice to transfer personnel working at the material 
time of the death in order to avoid all risks of tampering with evidence and witnesses, which 
practice is in line with the instructions of the National Human Rights Commission. 

Mr Rutnah: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister state whether, during the course of the 
enquiry, investigative authorities or those who  are in charge of scientific and/or biological 
evidence or the photographic department of the Police have secured or taken any photographs 
of the corpse of Mr A. K. R. hanging? 

The Prime Minister: Hanging, certainly not, because he was lying on the ground as 

far as I know.  But I have not been given any such information. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question B/98 in regard to St. Louis Power Station Project addressed to the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will now be replied by the Vice-Prime 
Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities.  Questions  addressed  to  Ministers!  Hon. 
Quirin! 

 

 
MAURITIUS FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION - MR D. S - RECRUITMENT 

31 

(No.  B/68)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Mr D. S., he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Football Association, information as to the terms and 
conditions of his recruitment. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Football 
Association  that  the  services  of  Mr  Didier  Six  have  been  enlisted  by  the  MFA  and  the 
Professional Football League on a seven months contract basis as from 16 January 2015 to 
act as General Manager, National Technical Director and national coach of Club M and will 
be renewed for a further period of two years. 

I am further informed by the MFA that he has been paid the sum of 35,000 euros at 
the  time  of  signature  of  the  contract.  During  the  seven  months’  period  he  will  be  paid  a 
monthly  salary  of  10,000  euros.  That  amount  also  includes  the  salary  of  his  assistant,  Mr 
Alain Happe who will also be in charge of the female football team. Mr Didier Six will also 
be provided with accommodation and transport facilities. 

Furthermore,  Mr  Didier  Six  will  regularly  communicate  with  the  press  on  progress 

made by our national team. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, l’honorable ministre peut-il nous dire quelle est la 
participation de son ministère concernant les dépenses qui seront effectuées par rapport au 
recrutement  de  M.  Didier  Six  comme  entraîneur  national  et  comme  Directeur  Technique 
National ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  contribution  of  my  Ministry  for  the  seven  months  period 

contract is Rs2.1 m. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, avant que M. Six ne soit engagé par le ministère 
des Sports, la MFA, la ligue professionnelle, l’honorable ministre peut-il nous dire où a-t-il 
exercé comme entraîneur national et pendant quelle periode? Et aussi où a-t-il exercé comme 
Directeur Technique National et encore une fois durant quelle periode ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  from  November  2011  till  January  2014,  Mr 
Didier Six was l’entraîneur national de l’équipe nationale du Togo and he brought the same 
team to the Quarter-Finals of the CAN. 

 
Mr  Quirin:  Dois-je  déduire,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  M.  Six  n’a  jamais  été 

32 

Directeur Technique National dans un autre pays ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  Mr  Didier  Six  has  the  qualification  to  be  the 

DTN. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  je  peux  venir  avec  une  autre  question 

supplémentaire par rapport à cette même question ? 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

REUNION ISLAND - INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES – TRAINING 

PROGRAMME 

(No.  B/69)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the 9th  Indian Ocean  Island 
Games  which  will  be  held  in  Réunion  Island  in  August  2015,  he  will  state  the  proposed 
training programme in Mauritius and abroad, in respect of each sports discipline participating 
therein,  indicating  the  budget  allocated  by  his  Ministry  and  the  Club  Maurice  Company 
respectively thereto. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  training  in  sports  is  an  ongoing  process. 
However, with regard to specific training in view of the 9th Indian Ocean Island Games, I am 
tabling  a  Training  Programme  of  all  the  14  sports  disciplines  and  the  four  handisports 
disciplines. 

Moreover, each discipline, including handisports, has been granted the possibility to 
organise at least two local training camps and one international training camp. The training 
camps to be organised are still being finalised by the respective sports federations. 

Matters  will  be  expedited  once  the  budget  2015  will  be  approved  by  the  National 
Assembly. An amount of Rs2.5 m. has already been made available by Club Maurice to some 
10 sports federations pending receipt of further contribution from other sponsors. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  I  took  office,  I  have  visited  numerous  sports  infrastructures 
and attended many sports activities with a view to evaluating the environment in which our 
athletes are training and performing. I must say that some sites need renovation while others 
are adequate. 

33 

 
I can assure the House that I will leave no stone unturned to ensure that our athletes 
are training in optimum conditions not only for the coming Jeux des Iles, but also for all other 
competitions. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, aux jeux de 2011, Maurice avait récolté, je pense, 
37 médailles d’or. Peut-on savoir par rapport aux prochains jeux qui auront lieu en août de 
cette année, quels sont les objectifs que lui-même et son ministère se sont fixés en termes de 
médailles d’or? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Malheureusement, Madame la présidente, je n’ai pas de boule de 

cristal et je ne peux pas répondre. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir si chaque sélection nationale a en 

ce moment un entraîneur national et nous indiquer les noms ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madame  la  présidente,  for  badminton  we  have  a  coach  coming 
from Malaysia, basketball is Mr Cornich, football M. Didier Six, Judo M. Velici, swimming 
Mr Philippe, tennis c’est Mr Oyoo plus two coaches et weighlifting, M. Constantin. The other 
sports federations are working on the other coaches. 

Mr  Quirin:  Une  question,  Madame  la  présidente.  Peut-on  savoir  de  l’honorable 
ministre quelle est la totalité de la somme qui a été récoltée jusqu’ici par le Club Maurice 
Company pour la préparation des différentes sélections? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I have just replied to that in the first question. Rs2.5 m. has been 

made available to the sports federations by Club Maurice. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem has a question. 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Minister whether 
his  Ministry  proposes  to  give  financial  reward  to  people  who  will  bring  back  medals  for 
Mauritius? 

Mr Sawmynaden: It has always been a normal practice. It will be done in the same 

way. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea. 

 

 

 

34 

PLAINE VERTE & ROCHE BOIS - DISTRIBUTION METHADONE 

CENTRES 

(No. B/70) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Distribution Methadone Centres found in the Plaine Verte and Roche Bois regions, he will 
state if consideration will be given for the relocation thereof and, if so, when, giving details 
thereof. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, as the 
hon.  Member  is  aware,  methadone  was  being  dispensed  to  around  575  beneficiaries  in  a 
caravan  in  the  vicinity  of  Dr.  Idrice  Goomany  Centre  at  Plaine  Verte  and  to  some  325 
beneficiaries at Route Abattoir, Roche Bois. This was resulting in overcrowding and loitering 
at these two dispensing sites. Similarly, in the other regions methadone was being dispensed 
to  an  average  of  500  beneficiaries  in  each  site.  This  again  was  leading  to  loitering, 
overcrowding and there were numerous representations from the public about this antisocial 
behaviour.  Moreover,  dispensing  of  methadone  was  being  effected  from  6  a.m.  to  noon  at 
certain sites. As this Government is committed to address problems relating to the methadone 
programme, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life has already taken several important 
measures.  These  include  a  decentralisation  process,  which,  as  far  as  possible,  reduces  the 
number of beneficiaries at any one site. The decentralisation process started in the region of 
Beau Bassin on a trial basis. The number of sites was increased from 2 to 8 with an average 
of 75 beneficiaries per site and the dispensing time was rescheduled so as to reduce it from 6 
hours to 2 hours starting from 6 a.m. to 8 a.m. The decentralisation process is focused on 
control mechanism as well as a component relating to rehabilitation. As the decentralisation 
process  in  Rose  Hill  and  Beau  Bassin  were  successfully  implemented,  it  was  decided  to 
extend the process throughout the island. 

In  this  respect,  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  had 
consultations on 30 January 2015 with the stakeholders concerned, including representatives 
of NGOs and members of the Press to finalise new locations for dispensing of methadone in 
the region of Port Louis. All Members of the National Assembly of Constituency Nos. 1, 2, 3 
and  4  were  invited  to  the  meeting.  Unfortunately,  those  from  the  other  side  of  the  House, 
including the hon. Member, did not turn up. 

35 

 
Madam  Speaker,  as  from  14  February  2015,  all  dispensing  sites  in  Mauritius, 
including those at Plaine Verte and Roche Bois have been decentralised. More than half of 
the number of beneficiaries from Plaine Verte… 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  …  have  been  redirected  to  new  sites  at  Plaine  Verte  Police 
Station,  Cité  La  Cure  Community  Health  Centre  and  Terre  Rouge  Police  Station.  The 
methadone  clients  are  at  present  getting  their  dose  at  a  centre  which  is  closest  to  their 
declared place of residence. 

As regards Roche Bois Dispensing Site, some beneficiaries have been redirected to 
new sites at Cité La Cure Community Health Centre and Baie du Tombeau, Terre Rouge and 
Abercrombie Police Stations. 

An evaluation and monitoring team from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 
has  visited  all  the  dispensing  sites,  including  those  at  Plaine  Verte  and  Roche  Bois  for 
assessment. This is a better control on the distribution of methadone with beneficiaries having 
now  to  present  their  identity  card  as  well  as  a  ‘carte  d’accès’.  Besides,  with  the  hours  of 
distribution being renewed to 6 a.m. to 8 a.m. and most of the dispensing sites being in the 
compound of Police stations, the overall impact is positive. 

However,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  will  keep  monitoring  the 

situation in Port Louis and other areas. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  in  his  reply  stated  that  the 
Members of Parliament from the Opposition side were invited to a Press conference. Do you 
find  it  normal  for  Members  of  Parliament  from  the  Opposition  side  to  come  in  a  Press 
conference  of  the  Minister  and  that  we  should  have  known  what  has  happened  to  the 
relocation of Plaine Verte and Roche Bois methadone Centres? Therefore, can I ask the hon. 
Minister - because I did not hear from his reply - whether the Roche Bois Methadone Centre 
has been relocated or will be relocated? 

MrSawmynaden: I don’t have an answer to this question but, as it is mentioned here, 

the Members of Constituency Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 were invited to a meeting. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

 

36 

TRUST FUND FOR SPECIALIZED MEDICAL CARE – EXECUTIVE 

DIRECTOR 

(No.  B/71)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of  Life whether, in regard to the Trust  Fund  for 
Specialized  Medical  Care  (Cardiac  Centre  at  Pamplemousses),  he  will  state  if  the  post  of 
Executive Director thereof has been filled and, if so, indicate - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

when; 

the  name  of  the  incumbent,  giving  details  of  his  terms  and  conditions  of 
employment; 

if the post was advertised and, if so, when and, if not, why not, and 

if the prior approval of the Board thereof was sought and obtained and, if so, 
when. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, with 
regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I would like to inform the House that as a result of 
the termination of the employment on 31 December 2014 of the former Executive Director, 
Mr  D.  Poinoosawmy,  a  vacancy  arose.  The  approval  of  Government  was  obtained  on  30 
January 2015 for the constitution of the Board and the appointment of Ms Vijaya Kumaree 
Sumputh,  a  Barrister,  holding  LLB  and  postgraduate  qualifications  as  the  new  Executive 
Director of the Cardiac Centre. The Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 
which has been consulted, has conveyed approval to employ her on terms and conditions in 
line with the recommendations of the PRB Report. 

With regard to part (c) of the Question, similar to the case of the former Director, the 
post  was  not  advertised,  but  the  approval  of  Government  was  obtained  for  appointing  the 
Executive Director of the Cardiac Centre. 

With regard to part (d) of the Question, after obtaining Government’s approval, the 
Cardiac Centre was informed of the appointment of the new Executive Director. At the last 
Board Meeting of the Trust Fund for Specialized Medical Care held on 13 February 2015, the 
Board gave its approval for the appointment. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister - we can understand why Minister 

Gayan is not here - since he gave us the diplomas and so on of ‘madame là’ … 

(Interruptions) 

 

37 

Is he aware that, on 01 August 2006, the issue relating to that ‘madame là’ was raised here, 
and Minister X. L. Duval replied? Then, she was appointed - same lady - Director of Tourism 
Authority, travelled all over the world on missions which had nothing to do with, supposedly, 
her appointment… 

Madam Speaker: Come with your question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: If I cannot introduce my question, I will not put the question! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition…. 

Mr Bérenger: Shame! 

Madam Speaker: I do not want… 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t want anybody to usurp the rights of the Speaker! 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, yes, you are protecting him! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I will repeat, hon. Leader of the Opposition, I don’t want anybody 

to usurp the rights of the Speaker! You may, please, reply hon. Minister. 

Please reply, hon. Minister. 

Mr Bérenger: Shame! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You do not have the right to usurp… 

Mr Bérenger: You are usurping our rights…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  I  am  really  sorry,  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  Are  you 

challenging…. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: You are asking me, I tell you! 

Madam Speaker: Are you challenging the rights of the Speaker? 

 

38 

(Interruptions) 

Are you challenging the rights of the Speaker? 

Mr Bérenger: I am saying that I should be given a minimum decent time to put my 
question! This has always been so until now when Minister Gayan is in question and is not 
here! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I think I have given you sufficient 
time to explain and to ask your question. But I will repeat once more. I will not allow any 
Member  of  this  House  to  usurp  the  rights  of  the  Speaker!  Hon.  Minister,  you  may  please 
reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: It is my supplementary question! 

Madam Speaker: You may please proceed! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can we know from the substantive Minister - it is unfortunate that the 
Minister is not here - when he says that Government has given its approval, do we understand 
it is Cabinet decision? Because we have gone through the Cabinet decision and we have not 
seen anywhere that the appointment was mentioned officially. 

I am asking! You are not the Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  I  think  Government  is  Government.  The 

Government has made the decision! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the hon. Minister tell us, since we 
are talking here about an Executive Director of the Specialised Medical Care (Cardiac Centre 
at Pamplemousses) and, at one point, that same person was appointed as Head of the MTPA, 
has the common denominator - that is what I wanted to know - hon. Minister Gayan? 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan, last question on this issue! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order, please! Hon. Jhugroo! 

39 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, could you please proceed with your question? 

(Interruptions) 

Please sit down! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please proceed with your question! 

Mr Bhagwan: Since we have heard many times, even the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
stated that this new Government will stop the politics of petit copain and petite copine, can, at 
least, the hon. Minister state to the nation it is a clear case of politique de petite copine? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  I  think  I  have  already  answered  the  question.  The  person  is 

qualified and this been through Government. 

Madam Speaker: Next question hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

This question has sufficiently been canvassed! Next question, please! 

Mr Bhagwan: One last question! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, his question has sufficiently been canvassed.  Next 

question, please! 

MONT ROCHES – VERGER BISSAMBAR – SEWERATE PROJECT 

(No.  B/72)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Sewerage  Project  at  Verger  Bissambar,  Mont  Roches,  in  Beau  Bassin,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Waste Water Management Authority, information as to 
the – 

(a) 

date of 

(i) 

(ii) 

launch of the tender; 

award of the contract; 

(iii) 

signature of the contract, and 

40 

(iv)  

handing over of the site therefor 

name of the contractor therefor; 

contract value thereof; 

expected start and completion dates thereof, and 

number of housing units to be connected. 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  my  information  from  the  Wastewater  Management 
Authority is that – 

 (i) 

(ii) 

the tender was launched on 22 July 2014; 

The contract was awarded on 11 November … 

(Interruptions) 

I shall resume when there is some order. 

Madam Speaker: Any Supplementary questions, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I am waiting! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, when you stop talking. 

The contract was …. 

Madam Speaker, either I talk or he talks. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not going to talk if people are going to talk. 

(i) 

(ii) 

the tender Sewage Project was launched on 22 July 2014; 

the contract was awarded on 11 November 2014, one month prior to general 
elections  to  Onix  Co.  Ltd  for  the  sum  of  Rs63,885,437.70  m.  inclusive  of 
VAT; 

(iii) 

the contract document has not according to my information yet been signed; 

(iv) 

 the site was handed over to the contractor on09 January 2015; 

 
(v) 

41 

the project start date is 01 December 2014 and the expected completion date is 
31 May 2016,and 

(vi) 

207 houses will be connected under this project. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I have one supplementary question, Madam Speaker. Can we know 
from  the  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  the  contractor  with  the  Wastewater  Management 
Authority has had a meeting with the inhabitants, at least, to inform them of the progress of 
work? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I precisely asked that supplementary information and I was told 
that there had been a meeting on 20 January 2014 with the inhabitants to inform them of the 
implementation of the project. I am insisting that such meeting be done.  It’s time there will 
be such a project. This morning, I was told that a second meeting is scheduled for Saturday, 
28 February 2015. 

Can I add, if that is of interest to you, that wastewater overflowing on the road near 
the Mont Roches Training School and religious institutions is being regularly pumped. I am 
giving this information in the light of what I said with regard to Cité Marcel Gabon in Albion. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  could  request  the 
Wastewater Management Authority to give a hotline? We all know that in such type of very 
delicate works in front of people’s premises there are problems which arise when they are 
digging.  Can  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority,  at  least,  give  a  hotline  or  an  officer 
responsible to which they can address - even to the MPs of the constituency - the problem 
whenever such problem arises at any period of time? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I shall convey that. 

Madam Speaker: Any other questions? Hon. Uteem! 

STC – BETAMAX SHIPPING LTD - PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 

(No.  B/73)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to the contract for the transport of petroleum products by Betamax Shipping Ltd., he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State Trading Corporation, information as 
to the – 

(a) 

total amount paid by the Corporation to date in respect thereof, and 

 
(b) 

42 

reasons for the termination thereof, indicating the financial implications to the 
Corporation as a result thereof. 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the State Trading Corporation that 
USD  145.7  m.  has  been  paid  by  the  Corporation  to  Betamax  Ltd  for  the  transportation  of 
petroleum products for the period ranging from August 2010 to January 2015. 

I wish to point out here that prior to the arrival of Red Eagle, a 10-month contract was 
in  operation  between  the  STC  and  Betamax  Ltd  under  which  the  latter  was  required  to 
provide separate tankers for the transportation of White and Black Oils. Those vessels were 
sourced on the market as and when required. 

The  amount  paid  under  that  contract  was  USD  20,459,726  for  the  importation  of 
855,985 tons of Petroleum Products. The average freight paid by STC for those vessels was 
USD 23.90 per ton. That was deemed to be fair market rate and was not questioned. 

As  from  the  date  of  arrival  of  the  Red  Eagle,  that  is,  in  May  2011,  a  new  15-year 
contract came into operation. This is the one which has been the subject of concern. Under 
this  contract,  the  Red  Eagle  carried  both  White  and  Black  Oils.  The  Red  Eagle  could, 
however, carry only 925,000 to 970,000 tons of the annual requirements of STC, which is 1.1 
to 1.2 million tons. The balance had to be transported by other tankers provided by Betamax 
Ltd but for which the STC was invoiced freight charges on same terms as for Red Eagle. 

Under  this  contract,  STC  had  paid  USD  125,244,128,  to  Betamax  Ltd  for  the 
importation  of  4,067,703  tons  of  Petroleum  Products.  The  average  freight  was,  therefore, 
USD 30.79 per ton. 

It will be of interest to note that with the arrival of Red Eagle, the cost of freight per 
ton to STC rose from USD 23.90 to USD 31.32 in its very first year of operation and to USD 
31.61 in the second year. 

For  the  information  of  Members  and  to  clarify  this  issue  of  freight  paid,  I  have 
decided, Madam Speaker, to table a paper on payments effected to Betamax Ltd under this 
Contract of Affreightment. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  in  December  2014, 
Government set up an Inter-Ministerial Committee to review the process that led to the award 
of the Contract of Affreightment (COA) of petroleum products between STC and Betamax 
Ltd, which was signed in November 2009. In the first instance, it was decided to renegotiate 

 

43 

the COA with Betamax Ltd, more specifically, freight rates, demurrage fees, the “escalation” 
clause, port dues and bunker consumption. Betamax Ltd did not express any willingness for 
renegotiation. Instead, they insisted that they had made the country save Rs500 m. to date and 
would make the country save another Rs1 billion in future. Subsequently, after examining the 
facts and circumstances and legal advice obtained, it was found that the solicitation/invitation 
to  bid,  award  and  signing  of  the  contract  were  in  breach  of  Section  14  of  the  Public 
Procurement Act and, therefore, unlawful. 

At this stage Madam Speaker, it is premature to determine the financial implications, 

if any at all, to the STC. 

However, I must point out that STC is definitely making savings by having recourse 
to other tankers for the transport of petroleum products. For the first shipment of white oil, 
STC has paid an all-inclusive freight at the rate of some USD 26.57 per ton for a spot charter, 
as compared to USD 32.25 per ton paid to Betamax Ltd for the last spot tanker Great Manta. 
Regarding fuel oil, the average freight rate for the first spot chartered tanker will be about 
USD 28 per ton, as compared to USD 35.15 per ton paid to Betamax Ltd for the last spot 
tanker that was named Great Manta. 

Regarding fuel oil, the average freight rate for the first spot chartered tanker will be 
about USD 28 per ton as compared to USD 35.15 per ton paid to Betamax Ltd for the last 
spot tanker Roy Maersk. 

For the second shipment of white oil, STC had more time and thus launched a request 
for quotation and obtained an even better price  of about USD 20 to USD 21 per ton. The 
price is within the range indicated by STC’s consultants as being those currently obtainable 
on the market. 

A similar exercise is being carried out by the STC for a second spot charter for fuel 

oil. 

In the next three weeks, STC will launch an international tender for a standard and 
unbiased COA to cover the remaining period of our contract with MRPL, that is, up to July 
2016. 

Madam  Speaker:  Does  the  hon.  Minister  have  a  long  statement  to  make  or  is  he 

nearly finishing? 

Mr Gungah: I have nearly finished. 

 
Madam Speaker: Because otherwise you may circulate your reply. 

44 

Mr  Gungah:  I  have  nearly  finished.  For  such  a  COA  lasting  for  some  15  to  16 

months, it is expected that the savings to be made by the STC will be even more important. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  on  30  January  2015, 
Government also decided that the case be referred to the Police. I am advised that an enquiry 
has been instituted into the matter by the Central Criminal Investigation Division (CCID). 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  I  hope  you  will  allow  me  to  quote  from  Hansard 
because what the hon. Minister just told this House is completely opposite to what was stated 
by hon. Soodhun when he was then Minister of Industry and Commerce. We asked the same 
question about whether procedures were followed under the Public Procurement Act, and this 
is what the hon. Minister stated following a PNQ of 10 August 2010 - 

“We, in this country, have a lot of businessmen, many cousins, cousines, they never 
invested Rs2 billion. It is the first time in Mauritius that a Mauritian is going to invest 
and we already have a contract. Mr Speaker, Sir, the contract was awarded after STC 
was exempted from the  Public Procurement Act and,  I think, as  a lawyer, the hon. 
Member should know.” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, don’t use unparliamentary words! 

Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Minister why is it that when the MSM was in 
power they defended the contract bec et ongles and said that the procedures were followed, 
and now the hon. Minister is saying that this was not properly done? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  would  agree  that  it  was  hon. 
Soodhun, who was at that time Minister of  Industry and Commerce, who asked a forensic 
enquiry to be conducted in the Betamax. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  have  one  question,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  said  that 
legal advice was obtained as regards the breach of the Public Procurement legislation. Could 
he, first of all, tell us from whom was this advice obtained and when, and could he table that 
legal advice? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  being  given  that  the  case  has  been  referred  to  the 
Police,  I  prefer  not  to  venture  into  tabling  any  document  right  now  in  order  not  to  cause 
prejudice to any party. 

45 

 
Mr Uteem: Following up on my learned friend’s question, can the hon. Minister tell 
the House who was the legal adviser who gave that advice?  Because answering to a PQ on 
24 May 2011, the hon. Minister Soodhun, in an answer to a question put by me, stated that - 

‘In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the  advice of  the SLO was that the  agreement is 
legally in order.” 

So, I want to know whether it is the same SLO that is now changing … 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I don’t have the names with me right now, but I can 

give that reply to the hon. Member later on. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker,  I listened to the answer of the hon. Minister earlier 
that an amount of USD 145.7 m., which amounts to Rs4.4 billion, paid to Betamax Ltd.  So, 
can he confirm whether payment has been effected even when the vessel was out of service? 

Mr Gungah: Yes, Madam Speaker, I confirm. 

Mr Mohamed: I have a question, a very simple one. Can the hon. Minister tell us 
whether it is the SLO that gave advice or another private party who was given a contract to 
give that advice? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I repeat that being given the case has been referred to 

the Police, I won’t reply to it. 

Madam  Speaker:  I  have  to  inform  the  hon.  Members  that  PQs  No.  B/98  and  No. 

B/99 have been withdrawn. 

At 1.04 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.25 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

MAURITIAN ECONOMY - EURO DEPRECIATION 

(No.  B/74)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
depreciation of the Euro, he will state - 

(a) 

if any study has been carried out to assess the impact thereof on the Mauritian 
economy, and 

(b) 

the remedial actions he proposes to take in relation thereto. 

46 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the 
Bank  of  Mauritius,  in  line  with  its  mandate,  closely  monitors  developments  on  the 
international  currency  market  and  the  evolution  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  against 
major  currencies.  I  am  informed  that  its  staff  regularly  conducts  internal  reviews  on  the 
effects  of  fluctuation  in  the  exchange  rate  on  our  economy,  our  competitiveness  and  the 
balance of payment. 

Mauritius sells some Rs25 billion worth of goods to the Eurozone market, including 
sugar,  textiles  and  clothing,  and  seafood,  which  represents  35  per  cent  of  total  exports  of 
goods. On the services side some 55 per cent of tourism earnings are in euro due to a high 
concentration of arrivals from the Eurozone countries. The ICT/BPO sector is also heavily 
reliant on the European market. 

The depreciation of the euro against the rupee implies that the rupee value of our euro 
earnings will fall. This generally leads to a fall in revenue for exporters and operators which 
impacts  on  their  profits  during  the  year.  However,  exporters  of  goods  and  services  see 
currency  fluctuations  as  a  risk  that  they  have  to  manage.  They  can  do  so  through  various 
financial instruments available for hedging, diversification of markets in terms of currency 
and building contingencies during times when the exchange rate is favourable or in periods of 
positive shocks. 

As the House is aware, the current depreciation of the euro against the rupee is not 
due to a general appreciation of the rupee on the domestic market. It is due to a weakening of 
the euro on international markets combined with a strengthening of the US Dollar. On the 
cross rate the euro, which was standing at 1.37 one year back, has moved down to 1.14. 

The adverse impact of the depreciation of the Euro on enterprises may either be partly 
offset  by  the  appreciation  of  the  US  Dollar  or  can  even  be  reinforced  in  some  cases.  For 
example, enterprises that are receiving payment in Euro and have to pay for import in dollars 
will be doubly hit by the situation on the market. 

The depreciation of the euro would also generally have a favourable impact on cost of 
imported goods paid in  euro, which  represents some 20 per  cent of our  total imports. The 
bulk of our imports, is 1 million US dollar, the bulk of our imports which represent some 70 
per cent of operations and US dollar is also appreciating. 

Government  revenue  would  also  be  affected  by  the  fall  in  the  value  of  the  euro  as 

taxes levied at importation are based on the rupee value of the goods. 

 
In  this  case  as  well  because  the  euro  is  depreciating  along  with  an  appreciation  of 

47 

dollar, the net impact will be mitigated. 

The same assessment can be applied to the management of our debt. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the Bank of Mauritius has already held working 
sessions  with  banks,  through  the  Banking  Committee,  and  with  economic  operators, 
particularly  MEXA  and  AHRIM.  I  understand  that  the  bank  will  continue  to  have  an  on-
going dialogue with the main players of the economy on that issue. 

Likewise,  in  the  context  of  a  preparation  of  the  Budget,  I  am  having  consultative 
meetings  with  the  hosts  of  the  economic  operators,  including  SMEs.  We  will  certainly 
discuss possible measures that can be taken to help exporters both of goods and services to 
mitigate this adverse effect. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the former Governor of the Central Bank had a policy of 
intervening in the market to support the rupee to fight inflation. Being given that inflation is 
under control and being given the double impact – doubly hit, as the hon. Minister rightly 
pointed out - has the hon. Minister held consultation with the Governor of the Central Bank 
to coordinate action to mitigate any double currency impact by intervening or not intervening 
in the market to support the currency? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  That  is  a  good  question.  The  point  is  that  we  have  been 
fighting for years on the concept of strong rupee, weak rupee, which is for the best for the 
economy. I feel that the rupee should be at the rate of exchange it should be, depending on 
the internal strength of the economy and also vis-à-vis our trading partners with whom we are 
trading. Those two factors normally determine the exchange rate. So, the question of a strong 
rupee or a weak rupee does not arise. We tend to speak of a competitive rupee, which means 
a rupee like this normally goes down, floats down. We are following very closely. 

The Bank of Mauritius and I are meeting regularly to look into the whole question of 
exchange rate. There is no doubt that we are moving in a period of very high volatility in 
exchange rate. It was on the US dollar a few years back and today it is on the Euro. Probably, 
the  private  sector  will  have  to  learn  to  deal  with  volatility  in  exchange  rates  in  its  own 
dealing, which implies taking measures that can correct measuring balances in exchange rate. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Minister whether, to limit the 
impact  of  the  appreciating  dollar  and  depreciating  euro,  Government-owned  enterprises, 

 

48 

State-owned  enterprises,  including  Air  Mauritius,  State  Trading  Corporation,  are  going  to 
hedge the currency risk? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  but  we  have  to  understand  that  we  don’t  control  the 
cross rates, dollar to euro cross rates; we don’t control it. It is international and is based on 
world  movements.  On  the  other  side,  do  we  have  at  local  level  means  of  fiddling  with 
exchange rate?  We don’t have it. We don’t have it, and we naturally are encouraging the 
major uses of currencies like the State Trading Corporation, Air Mauritius to look into ways 
and means of protecting themselves again higher fluctuations in exchange rate. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  changes  are  being 
envisaged to the composition of the Monetary Policy Committee and its terms of reference so 
that they should consider not just interest rates matters but also foreign currency issues? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, the Monetary Policy Committee is mainly a committee 
that decides on interest rate and it is a funny situation because we have been trying to copy 
the  major  markets  and  instituting  their  committees  which  look  after  its  exchange  rate, 
forgetting that we are not New York, we are not London, we are not Tokyo in the sense that 
any minor fluctuation in exchange rate can determine growth and investment trend. So, I have 
strong  reservation  on  a  Monetary  Committee  that  will  just  look  into  controlling  inflation 
when we know in Mauritius, since Independence, the average rate of inflation has been very 
high; 6 to 7%. It is inbuilt in the system and there is not much we can do. Even now, at this 
situation, at a time the rate of interest is close to zero in most major economies, we are still 
with an inflation rate which is above 3% because it is inbuilt in the system. Therefore, I am 
not  convinced  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  can  and  should  limit  its  long  hours  of 
work just to know whether modulation in the rate of interest will determine investment trend 
in the country. 

The second question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition as to whether we should 
extend  the  powers  of  this  Committee  to  look  also  in  the  exchange  rate  is  something  that 
cannot be considered because it is the sub-Monetary Policy Committee that looks into interest 
rate. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 
SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - AIRWAY COFFEE LTD. – TENDERS 

49 

(No. B/75) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  occupation  of  spaces  by  Airway  Coffee  Ltd.  at  the  old  and  new 
terminals respectively of the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd.  and  Airport  Terminal 
Operations Ltd., information as to when tenders were launched therefor, indicating the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

mode thereof; 

criteria laid down therefor; 

name of the bidders therefor, and 

if Airway Coffee Ltd. met all the criteria of the tender. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission I shall reply to 

PQs B/75 and B/76 together, as they relate to the same subject. 

I am informed by the Officer-in-Charge of Airports of Mauritius Ltd (AML) that a 
first public tender exercise for Food and Beverage Operations in the old Passenger Terminal 
at  the  SSR  International  Airport  was  launched  by  AML  on  27  May  2009  through  an 
advertisement in the local press. The closing date was fixed for Monday 22 June 2009. 

Six bids were received and evaluated and these were from - 

•  Tropical Times 
•  Sunworld Co. Ltd 
•  Sen & Ken Ltd 
•  Airway Coffee Co. Ltd 
•  Mungroo & Sons Co. Ltd 
•  Sanremo 

Tropical  Times  scored  the  highest  marks  in  all  the  options.  Surprisingly,  Madam 

Speaker, the process was annulled. 

A new tender exercise for Food and Beverages Operations was subsequently launched 
by  AML  on  24  December  2009,  therefore  a  few  days  later  and  the  closing  date  was  29 
January 2010. The Tender Notice was published in the local press. Bids were called by AML 

 

50 

for  Option  1,  which  was  for  the  Airside  Departing  Passengers,  and  Option  2  for  Landside 
Well-Wishers Hall, Landside Welcomers Hall and for Lounge Management. 

Seven bidders submitted their offer at the closing date on 29 January 2010. These are 

- 

(i) 

 Tropical Times Ltd; 

(ii)   Airway Coffee Ltd; 

(iii)   Flic-en- Flac Management Services Ltd; 

(iv)   Mungroo & Sons Co Ltd; 

(v)   Kissaten Co. Ltd; 

(vi)   Sen & Ken Ltd; and 

(vii) Island Famous Brands Ltd. 

The  bids  were  opened  on  the  same  day  at  AML  Boardroom  by  the  AML  Tender 

Committee in the presence of two bidders. 

The  Evaluation  Committee  met  on  11  March  to  analyse  the  bids  and  submit  an 
Evaluation  Report.  The  tenders,  as  the  hon.  Member  asked,  were  evaluated  under  the 
following criteria - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

demonstrated understanding of AML Ltd. requirements; 

proposed concession fee and monthly minimum guarantee for AML; 

competence and relevant experience; 

range of food and beverages offered; 

details of person(s) to be involved in the project; 

demonstrated ability to provide rapid response to urgent requirements. 

In  addition,  to  these  requirements  in  the  press  advertisement,  it  was  stated  that  all 

bidders should be well established and have at least 5 years’ experience. 

The Committee submitted its Report on 29 March 2010, wherein it recommended the 
award  of  the  tender  for  Option  1  to  Airway  Coffee  Co.  Ltd  although  the  company  was 
registered  only  in  March  2009  and  had  no  direct  experience  in  catering.  Instead,  Airway 
Coffee submitted a copy of the Technical Services Agreement with a well-known restaurant. 

 
The Committee also recommended the award of the tender for Option 2 to Tropical 

51 

Times. 

The Board of AML approved the Bid Evaluation Report on 01 April 2010. Madam 
Speaker, consequently, on 05 April 2010 Airway Coffee Ltd was allocated the contract for 
Option 1. The Concession Agreement was signed on 03 June. The Agreement was based on a 
monthly  concession  fee  of  28%  of  its  turnover  to  be  paid  to  AML,  subject  to  a  minimum 
guarantee  fee  of  Rs1  m.  In  addition,  Airway  Coffee  had  to  submit  a  concession  security 
deposit of Rs3 m. 

Madam Speaker, the Concession Security Deposit was never paid, in spite of several 
reminders  and  nevertheless,  the  agreement  with  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  was  renewed  for  the 
period  January  2013  to  31  March  2013,  and  the  minimum  guarantee  fee  was  reviewed  to 
Rs1.1 m. + VAT for the Airside Departure and Rs66,000 + VAT for the Well-wishers outlet, 
and  the  lounge  management  remained  the  same,  at  Rs151.00  for  adult  and  Rs66.00  for 
children. For State Lounge it is Rs66.00 per person. 

Moreover,  Madam  Speaker,  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  was  allocated  the  management  of 
lounges in March 2011 as the contract of Tropical Times Ltd, which was the operator at that 
time, was cancelled, it is claimed, due to poor and unsatisfactory service. 

In  April  2011,  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  was  also  allocated  the  contract  for  Food  and 

Beverages in the Well-wishers’ Hall following the departure of Tropical Times Ltd. 

From  April  2013  to  September  2013,  the  agreement  was  renewed  on  a  month-to-

month basis. 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that the Board of AML decided that the existing 
concessionaires  and  tenants  operating  at  the  old  Passenger  Terminal  would  be  transferred 
automatically to the new Passenger Terminal. Consequently, there was no tender exercise for 
the award of commercial spaces at the new Passenger Terminal. 

Madam Speaker, although,  at that time, Airway Coffee had outstanding claims and 
had not paid the concession security deposit, AML gave a favourable recommendation on the 
performance of Airway Coffee. 

On  17  December  2012,  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  signed  a  Concession  Agreement  with 
ATOL,  the  operator  of  the  new  terminal  and,  thereafter  started  operation  at  the  New 

 

52 

Passenger Terminal. The new Concession Agreement was signed for the operation of three 
retailed restaurant outlets. The new concession fees were as follows – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

28% of gross revenues for the international departure. 
21% of gross revenues for domestic departure. 
21% of gross revenues for the public restaurant at level 2. 
The minimum guarantee fee payable to ATOL was Rs3,130,000. monthly. 
A  monthly  payment  of  Rs87,000  for  air  conditioning  and  maintenance  of 
common equipment. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  ATOL  that  the  above  rates  were 
reviewed  on  23  July  2014,  it  is  claimed  to  be  in  view  of  the  investment  for  provision  of 
modern catering facilities by Airway Coffee. These are now as follows – 

• 
• 
• 

For the international departure from 28% reviewed downwards to 26%; 
For domestic departure and public restaurants from 21% to 19%, and 
The monthly guarantee fee from Rs3,130,000 to Rs3 m. for six months peak 
period and to Rs2.8 m. for the six months off peak period. 

Madam Speaker, the amounts owed including interest/penalties by Airway Coffee to 

AML and ATOL on an aged basis are as follows – 

 

Year  
2011  
2012  
2013  
2014  
2015  
Interest*  
Penalty*  
Total  

 

AML (Rs m.)  
7.6  
7.4  
13.8  
22.4  
-  
8.3  
-  
30.7  

ATOL (Rs m.)  
-  
-  
11.6  
22.0  
26.0  
-  
2.2  
28.2  

The grand total, Madam Speaker, is Rs58.9 m. 

I am informed that AML has sent reminders for the amounts due in 2011, 2012 and 

2013 on several occasions. 

 However,  after  the  General  Elections,  a  final  reminder  was  sent  by  AML  on  15 

December 2014 to recover the total amount due otherwise legal action would be initiated. 

53 

 
I am informed that ATOL, on its part, held several meetings with the management of 
Airway Coffee Ltd in July, October and November 2014 requesting payments as per contract, 
and reminders were also sent. 

Madam Speaker, on 12 January 2015, the advice of the Solicitor General was sought 
with  regard  to  legal  action  to  be  taken  against  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  for  the  amounts  due  to 
AML and ATOL. 

Following  legal  advice  received  on  27  January  2015,  both  AML  and  ATOL  have 
initiated  winding  up  proceedings  against  Airway  Coffee  Ltd.  Two  notices  “Statutory 
Demands” have been served on 14 February 2015 by the Attorney-at-Law of both AML and 
ATOL to recover the amount due pursuant to Section 180 of the Insolvency Act. 

Airway Coffee Ltd has up to 02 March 2015 to apply to the Bankruptcy Division of 
the Supreme Court for the Statutory Demand to be set aside and 15 March 2015 to settle the 
amount  claimed.  If  no  such  application  is  lodged,  then  AML  and  ATOL  shall  within  one 
month as from 15 March 2015, they have one month to proceed with the filing of a petition 
for the winding up of Airway Coffee Ltd. 

Madam Speaker, in line with Government Programme 2015-2019 to review the entire 
process  of  tendering,  procurement  and  contract  allocation,  to  increase  competition, 
transparency and accountability, the contract for the provision of Food and Beverages will be 
publicly advertised and more than one provider will be selected. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister inform the House 
whether the evaluation of the bids for the second tender was carried out at the PMO instead 
of Airports of Mauritius Ltd. office? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I do not have the information, Madam Speaker. I just 
know that it was opened at the AML boardroom in Port Louis. I gave that information in the 
former reply. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  who  were  the 
Chairperson  and  members  of  the  Evaluation  Committee  which  recommended  that  the 
contract be awarded to Airway Coffee? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The Evaluation Committee, Madam Speaker, consisted 
of Mrs Fong Weng, Permanent Secretary at PMO, who was the Chairperson; Mr Ringadoo, 

 

54 

Mr  Serge  Petit,  Chief  Executive,  AML;  Mr  Seenarain,  General  Manager,  Constance 
Academy, and Mr Teha, Commercial Officer, AML; he was the Secretary. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Are  you  aware  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  that  ATOL,  a  private 
company,  does  not  even  have  an  Internal  Audit  Department  to  ensure  transparency  and 
prevent malpractices? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am not aware. I know AML has one. I will check for 

ATOL. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  from  what  I  understand  from  the  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, there were two tender exercises. May we know why the first tender exercise was 
cancelled and whether there were new requirements in the second tender exercise? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The tender was virtually identical on both occasions. I 
did not check the final tender document, but, as far as I know, they were identical. The reason 
which I don’t find very plausible was that they wanted to have more bidders. In fact, they 
had, I think, six bidders at the first time - virtually the same bidders - but, obviously, when 
you  open  the  tender,  everybody  knows  what  the  prices  are  and  if  you  do  it  again  a  few 
months later, then the whole game is absurd. 

Mr Bérenger: Being given that legal action has already been taken for winding up of 
Airway Coffee, can I know what arrangements are being made so that in no circumstances - 
winding up, not winding up, pending new tenders being issued and so on - shall we end up 
with no catering offered to incoming and outgoing tourists? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: No coffee, you mean? 

(Interruptions) 

We will make arrangements so that there is no break in the service. 

Mr Jhugroo: How come, that despite Airway Coffee had a debt of Rs25 m., it was 
given a red carpet to move to ATOL, a private company which is not governed by PoCA and 
Public Procurement Act? 

The Deputy Prime  Minister: Madam Speaker, this is obviously a question how it 
was given green light whilst not having paid the concession, even the concession deposit of 
Rs3 m.  But I intend, in fact, Madam Speaker, to send the file to the Ministry of Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms so that they can have a look and take 
whatever action is required. 

 
SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – AIRWAY COFFEE LTD – AMOUNT 

55 

OWED 

(No. B/76) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  occupation  of  spaces  by  Airway  Coffee  Ltd.  at  the  old  and  new 
terminals respectively of the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd.  and  Airport  Terminal 
Operations  Ltd.,  information  as  to  the  amount  of  money  it  owes  thereto  in  each  case, 
indicating – 

(a)  

since when, and 

 (b)  

if measures have been taken for the recovery thereof and, if so, give details 
thereof and, if not, why not. 

(Vide Reply to PQ No. B/75) 

BAGATELLE DAM PROJECT - CONTRACT 

(No. B/77) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Bagatelle Dam Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Water Resources 
Unit, information as to – 

(a) 

who took the decision to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

change the scope of works, and 

suspend the works, indicating the; 

(iii)  

value of the variation order issued in respect thereof, and 

(iv)  

the percentage increase it represents to the initial cost of the project; 

the construction cost of the new project thereof, and 

if the main contract falls outside the purview of the Public Procurement Act. 

(b) 

(c) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): My reply may be read in conjunction with the answers given to PNQ of 12 
April  2011,  PQ  A/216  of  28  June  2011,  PQ  B/186  of  03  April  2013,  PQ  B/967  of  17 
December 2013 and more especially PQ 1B/54. 

56 

 
In June 2012, Coyne et Bellier of France in association with Servansingh Jadav and 
Partners, recommended a change in the design of the spillway of the dam and in the type of 
foundation.  This  was  because  additional  tests  had  revealed  that  the  soil  could  not 
accommodate the original design. 

The answer to part (a) (i) of the question is that it was the Ministry which changed the 
scope of works, after obtaining the views of the Consultant together with the views of the 
geotechnical expert from the University of Mauritius, amongst others. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (ii),  the  Ministry  and  the  Water  Resources  Unit  instructed  the 
suspension of the works as from 27 July 2012. This suspension was lifted on 27 December 
2013 on the advice of the Consultant. 

Following the procurement exercise for the cut-off wall, a Variation Order was issued 
to the Contractor for the sum of Rs1.7 billion (exclusive of VAT), representing 58% increase 
of the initial cost after seeking Government approval in October 2013. 

With regard to part (b), the revised cost of the project is estimated at Rs4.9 billion 

(excluding VAT). 

With regard to the last part of the question, the then Government obtained funding to 
the tune of RMB 580 m. for the Bagatelle Dam Project from the Government of the People’s 
Republic of China through EXIM Bank (China) . One of the funding conditions was that the 
works should be undertaken by a contractor from that country. I am informed that the then 
Government  requested  the  Chinese  authority  to  submit  the  names  of,  at  least,  three 
contractors that would be invited to submit bids in accordance with the Public Procurement 
Act. 

However, the Chinese authorities maintained that they would submit the name of only 
one contractor and designated China International Water & Electric Corporation (CWE) to 
proceed with bid negotiations. 

The State Law Office considered that this funding was from a donor organisation to 
which section 3(3) of the Public Procurement Act applies. This section provides that the rule 
of a donor organisation prevails over our rules of procurement. It is a moot point whether the 
People’s Republic of China was a donor organisation. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

57 

 
Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to confirm 
whether at the time the tender was launched for the construction of the cut-off wall there was 
no estimate made on the cost of construction of that cut-off wall? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I have it, I have read it somewhere, but it is difficult for me to 
find it outright. The construction of a cut-off wall was estimated at Rs1.7 billion exclusive of 
VAT, that is, what I read in a paper which I have in front of me. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  What  I  want  to  confirm  with  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is 
whether it is true that at the time the tenders were launched no estimate of that cut-off wall 
was available. 

Mr Collendavelloo: The time the initial tender was launched? 

Mr Lesjongard: No. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  The  time  the  tender  for  the  cut-off  wall.  Probably  so!  What  I 
read is that the construction of the cut-off wall, commonly known as COW, not envisaged 
initially, would amount to Rs1.7 billion exclusive of VAT. Whether that estimate had been 
done prior to tender or  at the time of tender or  afterwards,  I don’t know.  I would have to 
check all that. 

Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister another question related to 
COW, that is the cut-off wall? Is it right to say that even a tender was launched, the works 
were allocated by way of a variation order? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I think it was allocated by way of a variation order, but then, I 

would have to check again. 

Mr Lesjongard: It is there in the Audit Report. My question now is why was a tender 

launched and then afterwards the works were allocated by way of a variation order? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  That  is  Labour  Party  Government,  what  can  I  tell  the  hon. 
Member! That was the practice under that Government. They do contracts, they do tenders 
and then they do variations! 

(Interruptions) 

What can we do? This dam is costing about Rs1.5 billion more. The hon. Member was with 
them; he should ask them. 

Madam Speaker: A last question on this issue! 

 

Order, please! 

58 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lesjongard: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Please proceed, hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am doing my job, okay. 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lesjongard: My question is in relation to the use of taxpayers’ money. I am paid 
for that.   Okay? Whether the hon. Vice-Prime  Minister is a new Minister, he has to reply 
when I am asking a question. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, please address the Chair! 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  aware  that  -  because  he  stated  a 
figure of Rs4.9 billion for the total cost of the project - in the Audit Report the figure stated is 
Rs5.4 billion for the total cost of the project? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I know. That is what the contractor is claiming, but we do not 
agree with that at  all.  I  know the  figure of 5.4  has been bandied  about, but  I stick to 4.9, 
which is the figure that I have on file. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Being  given  that  works  have  been  suspended  at  the  request  of  the 
Mauritian side, can I know from the hon. Minister what is being paid to the contractor in the 
meantime and whether since the last general elections the Government of Mauritius has taken 
up the whole issue with the Government of China? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, let me answer the first part first.  I have taken this issue 
personally with the ambassador of the PROC. I have been on site with him, I have visited the 
site together with my technicians. 

I take that very seriously, although I do not know much about COWs and all these 
technical matters. I stand guided by my technical officers. I am putting the pressure that I can. 
The issue being that we will get this dam completed as fast as possible. 

59 

 
With regard to suspension of the works, what  I saw on site is that the  works were 
ongoing. In fact, my information is that although the works were suspended in July 2012, this 
suspension  was  lifted  on  27  December  2013.  The  works  are  ongoing.  They  are  being 
monitored. Insofar as the works themselves are concerned, my technicians tell me that they 
are satisfactory. The question is the question of finance and what are these additional claims. 
I must add that with regard to the consultants, there is now a dispute resolution process which 
has been engaged by Government to claim ultimately through an arbitration process damages 
from  the  consultants.  According  to  us,  it  is  because  of  the  consultants  that  all  this  has 
happened. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

BAGATELLE DAM PROJECT - CONSULTANCY FIRM  

(No. B/78) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Bagatelle Dam Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Water Resources 
Unit, information as to the name of the consultancy firm responsible for the detailed design 
thereof, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

the cost of the consultancy fees thereof, and 

when the contract thereof was terminated, indicating the reasons therefor. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed that – 

(a) 

(b) 

The contract was awarded to Messrs Coyne et Bellier (France) in association 
with  Servansingh  Jadav  and  Partners,  for  the  sum  of  Rs147  m.  (excluding 
VAT)  following  a  procurement  exercise  carried  out  by 
the  Central 
Procurement Board. 

On 13 January  2014, the Ministry terminated the Consultant’s contract  with 
effect  from  15  February  2014.  The  Ministry  has  entered  into  a  dispute 
resolution process with regard to financial prejudice caused as a result of gross 
negligence on the part of the Consultant. 

A new Consultant Artelia Ltd was appointed as from February 2014. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  stated  that  the  contract  was 

terminated on gross negligence. Can he elaborate on that? 

60 

 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  I  am  no  longer  a  lawyer,  but  from  what  I  know  is  that 
these  consultants  failed  to  do  the  adequate  job  technical  works  and  that  led  them  to 
recommend a particular design to the foundation and to the wall. 

As the work started, it was found that the basalt under the water could not stand that 
dam  and  the  design  had  to  change,  and  that  led  to  an  increase  in  cost.  That  is  what 
Government  is  claiming.  Under  the  contract,  Coyne  et  Bellier  would  be  liable  to  all  the 
damages if you can prove faute lourde. If you cannot prove faute lourde, then the limitation is 
capped to a certain amount. That is the whole issue. 

In  addition,  Coyne  et  Bellier  is  claiming  now  from  Government.  Now  that  we  are 
putting  a  claim,  they  are  putting  a  cross  claim,  of  course,  some  Rs238  m.,  against 
Government. 

The matter is not yet before the arbitrator. The matter is now under amicable dispute 
solution. The French party has now seemingly refused any amicable settlement because we, 
on the Government side, had asked an extension of time. This matter is being sorted out by 
the State Law Office. I don’t think there will be big problems before we reach the arbitrator. 

Let me add that the arbitration is to be held in Mauritius under the rules of the MCCI 

– LCIA, which is probably the only good thing in this contract. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister confirm that further to the suspension 
of the works because of the design changes, nevertheless the consultant did give notice of 
additional claims and the Ministry paid an amount of about Rs130 m. to the consultant? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not aware of this. I would not be able to say outright. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  one  question.  Was  the  decision  to  sue  for 

gross negligence was already taken by the previous Government? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The previous Government. 

Mr Bérenger: By the previous Government. I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister say 
that on the French side they are refusing an amicable settlement. Then my question would be: 
Does that mean that the claim of gross negligence will not be that easy to prove? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is a legal matter. I do not know whether it is going to be 
easy or not. What has happened, to make it crystal clear, is that after we took over, the State 
Law  Office  asked  for  an  extension  of  time  awaiting  instructions  from  the  new  authorities. 
The French side grew upset about it and they wrote a letter saying that they were not going to 

 

61 

accept any delays  and they did not want to enter into the amicable dispute resolution. We 
have explained the situation to them and we are still willing to undertake the amicable dispute 
settlement or else we will go to arbitration. In any case … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No mobile phones inside, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: … before the arbitration starts, there will be amicable settlement 

discussions, of course. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  the  case  of  the  roads,  now  the  RDA  is  taken  to  task  by  the  new 
Minister.  Is the Minister satisfied that the Water Resources Unit and the Government side 
played fully its role in that matter? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I would not wish to pass judgment, Madam Speaker. Let me say 
that I, personally, am not very happy at that stage of things. But before I pass any judgment, 
let me reflect calmly over that situation, which is a complicated matter. 

PAILLES & POINTE-AUX-SABLES - SEWERAGE NETWORK PROJECT 

(No. B/79) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
sewerage network project in the region of Terasson and in the nearby region of Pointe aux 
Sables,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  regarding  the  region  of  Pailles  and  the  vicinity 
thereof, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

the reasons why the project is being delayed, and 

if due consideration will be given to ensure the implementation thereof in the 
near future. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): The Wastewater Management Authority informed me that with regard to 
the region of Terasson and the nearby region of Pointe aux Sables - which this hon. Member 
knows  very  well  -  it  has  carried  out  a  detailed  feasibility  study  for  implementing  a  sewer 
network in the following regions - 

Terasson - 700 households 

Verger Mangue - 75 households 

Pointe aux Sables - 1,400 households 

 
Petit Verger and Kensington Place - 650 households 

62 

The  estimated  cost  of  the  project  is  Rs2.4  billon.  The  Wastewater  Management 
Authority is considering the implementation of the project, in phases, starting with Terasson, 
which is most vulnerable. The cost of the works at Terasson is around Rs320 m. 

With regard to the region of Pailles, I am informed by the Wastewater Management 
Authority  that  bids  have  been  invited  for  Phase  1  of  the  project  which  includes  the 
construction of 4 kms trunk sewer and a pumping station. The closing date is 25 February 
2015. 

Of course, if the hon. Member so wishes, I will gladly accompany him all over his 

constituency to visit all the places that he considers necessary. 

Mr Barbier: I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for his answer. May I know from 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister - concerning the regions of Pointe aux Sables and Terasson - 
whether  he  can  give  some  precise  information  about  the  date  the  project  will  start  it  and 
whether preliminary works have been completed. I mean the drawings, surveys and all that. If 
not, when can we expect it to be completed? When tender can be launched? And when can 
we expect the works to physically start on the site? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  have  no  answer  for  the  moment,  Madam  Speaker  but,  of 
course, if my hon. colleague is so minded I would welcome him in my office at any time that 
is convenient to him in order to fully discuss the matter. 

Mr Barbier: I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and I … 

Mr Collendavelloo: Without giving any bait, of course. 

Mr Barbier: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether … 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Barbier,  do  you  have  one  additional  question  on  the  same 

issue? 

Mr Barbier: Ok, B/80! 

PAILLES - FOOTBALL PITCH 

(No. B/80) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the football pitch situated near the 
Police Station at Pailles, he will state if consideration will be given for same to be vested with 
the Municipal Council of Port Louis with regard to the maintenance thereof. 

63 

 
Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the football pitch referred to and 
situated near the Police station at Pailles is not a football ground as per established standard. 
The  plot  of  State  land  on  which  stands  this  playing  field  whereat  teenagers  of  this  region 
practice football is only 150 sq ft x 80 sq ft and was formerly being used for illegal dumping 
of waste. My Ministry had therefore in  year 2009 cleaned this site and converted it into a 
playing field for the benefit of the youngsters of that region. 

I  am  further  advised  that  there  already  exists  two  football  playgrounds  at 

Morcellement Raffray and St. Louis Street, Pailles. 

However, I am making the necessary arrangement to hand over this playing field to 

the City Council of Port Louis for maintenance purpose, as requested by the hon. Member. 

Mr  Barbier:  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister.  May  I  know  whether  we  already  have 
engaged some procedures for the handing over of this football pitch at Pointe-aux-Sables to 
the Municipal Council? 

Dr. Husnoo: As I have mentioned, my Ministry is making the arrangement. 

Mr Barbier: Can we know by when? 

Dr. Husnoo: It is going to take a few weeks or months I think; we should do it. There 

should be no many major problem; we are going to do it as soon as we can. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister say that the football ground 
will be handed over to the Municipal Council of Port Louis and this concerns several football 
grounds. Would the hon. Minister ensure that when these football pitches are vested in the 
municipal council that appropriate funding is also given to the municipal council to maintain 
and operate these football fields? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes. I know this problem.  We have discussed it already with the Lord 

Mayor and the Chief Executive.  I am going to look into it. 

TURKEY REARING PROJECT 

(No. B/81) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the Turkey Rearing 
Project, he will state if the experimental phase thereof is now complete and, if so, indicate if 
turkey chicks will be made available to farmers who are interested therein and, if so, when. 

64 

 
Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  in  the  context  of  the  Turkey 
Rearing  Project,  a  first  batch  of  514-day  old  turkey  chicks  of  reproductive  breed  Orlopp 
Bronze  was imported from France in October 2013 for reproduction purpose  and eventual 
distribution to interested farmers. 

The Animal Production Unit of my Ministry has experimented on the adaptability of 
the  imported  turkeys  to  local  conditions  and  has  investigated  parameters  such  as  fertility, 
hatchability, growth rate and feed conversion efficiency which are of paramount importance 
in  turkey  production.  The  tests  have  shown  that  the  turkeys  were  well  acclimated  to  local 
conditions. 

However, one of the main constraints identified was the low fertility rate which has 
not allowed the desired results to be achieved. Turkey reproduction is facilitated by artificial 
insemination, a technique which the staff of the Animal Production Unit has not acquired yet. 
The  expertise  of  the  Chinese  experts  working  at  Albion  under  the  Chinese  Agricultural 
Technical Cooperation Programme has been sought to impart the necessary training to the 
staff. 

I am advised that the turkeys imported in October 2012 have been distributed to some 
50 farmers in June 2014. Pending the capacity-building programme and the resumption of the 
Turkey  Reproduction  Project,  turkeys  of  commercial  breed  are  being  imported  and  sold 
directly  to  farmers.  A  first  batch  of  1,000  turkey  chicks  has  accordingly  been  imported  in 
September 2014. A second batch is planned for May 2015. 

Mr  Barbier:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  concerning  those  chicks  which  have 
already  being  distributed,  whether  the  Ministry  has  had  an  assessment  of  the  progress 
achieved so far by the farmers to know whether all the aspects of this rearing business are 
being looked into and whether any adjustment needed is being sought? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, in fact, assessments and monitoring are being made. 
Those farmers that are in that kind of breeding are backyard farmers doing artisanal breeding. 
So, what we are planning to do is, given that the demand for turkey meat is on the high side, 
we are thinking of revamping or increasing that industry. We are looking at ways and means 
to get more farmers into the breeding of turkeys so that we could increase more and more 
people to produce locally the turkey meat. 

Mr Barbier: As the hon. Minister may be aware, there are so many types of species 
of  turkeys  which  can  be  developed  because  there  is  a  high  demand  on  the  international 

 

65 

market.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  the  possibility  of  having  help  from  our  friend 
countries, which  can help us in having the  right varieties, to be able to  have this business 
developed  on  a  commercial  basis,  as  it  can  be  very  important  source  of  income  for  the 
country? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker, in fact, we are contemplating to look for partners 
from  overseas  to  assist  our  local  people  here  to  get  more  acquainted  with  that  type  of 
breeding, so that we could get into more commercial breeding of turkey. 

HALAL & VEGETARIAN FOOD - REGULATIONS 

(No.  B/82)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to halal and 
vegetarian  food,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  pertaining  to  the  regulations  in  relation 
thereto  which  had  been  finalized  by  his  Ministry  and  the  State  Law  Office,  following  the 
working sessions held with the other relevant stakeholders, last year. 

The  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  (Mr  Y.  Sawmynaden):  Madam  Speaker, 
discussions and consultations have reached an advance stage in relation to the introduction of 
relevant  and  appropriate  provisions  pertaining  to  Halal  and  Vegetarian  Food  in  the 
Regulations under the Food Act. 

The main provisions in this respect pertain to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

definition of Halal and Vegetarian Food; 

setting  up  of  relevant  Certification  Bodies  with  appropriate  powers, 
and 

(ii) 

labelling requirements. 

There are still certain issues that remain to be addressed. These include - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

enforcement aspects; 
the Authority/Body to be assigned responsibility for enforcement, and 
the establishment of a Certification Body for Vegetarian Food. 

Further consultations are, therefore, under way with relevant stakeholders. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  as  you  would  recall,  you  yourself  were  then 
Minister of Health had started this project and I only wish that it could come to conclusion as 
soon as possible. Could the hon. Minister inform us who are the stakeholders and whether 

 

66 

those  stakeholders  have  been  informed  of  the  forthcoming  meetings,  and  when  will  those 
meetings be held? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  I  know  the  State  Law  Office  and  the  Regional  Public  Health 
Superintendent,  the  members  of  the  Ministry  itself,  but  I  don’t  have  the  other  information 
about who are the stakeholders exactly. 

Mr Mohamed: Since this is - we will all agree - not an issue on which politics or 
anything  should  be  done,  could  the  hon.  Minister,  even  though  he  is  not  the  substantive 
Minister,  consider  the  possibility  of  asking  for  help  from  all  members  who  would  like  to 
contribute for this matter to come to conclusion as soon as possible? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will pass on the message to my colleague Minister. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this 
Committee that is looking into the labelling of food will also cover imported food?  Because 
a lot of food has labels and, therefore, we need to have agreements with other countries that 
before they put halal or vegetarian label it should comply with Mauritian law. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  I think that these are certain issues that remain to be addressed 

like the authority body to be assigned responsibility for enforcement. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

EX-CHA & CITÉ EDC HOUSES – SALE 

(No.  B/83)  Mr  A.  Ganoo(First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)asked  the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the ex-CHA and 
Cité EDC houses, including those located in Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the number thereof sold to the 
occupiers thereof, as at to date, indicating the - 

(a) 

(b) 

location thereof, and 

number  of  owners  thereof  who  have  not  received  their  respective  title 
respective title deed as at to date, indicating the reasons therefor in each case. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  177  ex-CHA  housing  estates  consisting  of 
19,442 housing units spread in 145 different localities throughout the island. All the housing 

 

67 

units have by now been sold to their owners. This exercise started in 1985 and was completed 
in 1993. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to point out, however, that out of these ex-CHA owners, there 
are 188 who have not finalised their deed of sale yet. In the vast majority of these cases, the 
owners of the housing units have not turned up to submit the relevant documents to allow for 
the drawing up of the title deed. In a few cases, the legal heirs of the deceased beneficiaries 
have not agreed among themselves about the succession, and in a few other cases, the present 
owners are not residing in their houses which are being occupied by a third party. In the face 
of what is obtainable, my Ministry is setting up a structured administrative mechanism along 
with appropriate legal action to have these 188 cases regularised at the earliest. Obviously, 
the cases in Constituency No. 14 will also be dealt with. 

Madam Speaker, the list of the 188 cases will be laid in the Library of the National 

Assembly. 

For Constituency No. 14, which is of direct interest to the hon. Member, there are 23 
cases for which deed of sale has not been finalised. Out of the 23 cases, six have succession 
problems,  in  16  cases,  documents  are  missing  and  in  one  case  the  housing  unit  is  being 
occupied by a third party. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed, next question! 

LRT SYSTEM PROJECT – CONSULTANCY SERVICES 

(No. B/84) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the  Light  Rail  Transit  System  Project,  he  will  state  the  amount  of  money  successive 
Governments  have  spent  in  relation  thereto  in  terms  of  recruitment  of  consultants  and 
consultancy services since the implementation thereof in Mauritius has been envisaged. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to the Light Rail Transit System, a number 
of consultancy services have been carried out. The first study, in fact, dates back as far as 
1991. Most of the studies were carried out in relation to the transport system in general, with 
the Light Rail Transit System as an option. 

I am informed that the first payment was, in fact, effected in 1993. The information 

requested is, therefore, being compiled and will be tabled in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Any supplementary, hon. Mahomed? 

68 

 
Mr Mahomed: May I ask the hon. Minister to table figures that have been carried out 
on consultancy services not specifically meant for the light rail transit, but all those which 
came to the conclusion that the light rail transit will be the best option for the Republic? 

Mr Bodha: As the hon. Member is aware, Madam Speaker, there have been many 
surveys and studies and, in fact, between 2005 and 2010, the preferred option by the then 
Minister was the bus way.  It was only in 2010, when there was a change in Government, that 
the  whole  issue  of  the  light  rail  came  again.    Between  2010  and  since  then,  the  preferred 
option has been the light rail.  But there have been a number of consultancy services. The last 
one  is  the  consultancy  services  which  were  requested  from  Singapore  and  you  had  two 
stages:  one  was  consultancy  services  for  the  implementation  of  the  Action  Plan  and  the 
second one was the consultancy services for securing the transaction management services. 

I  will  compile  all  the  information  and  it  will  be  laid  on  the  Table  of  the  National 

Assembly in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Pending  us  having  the  information,  including  the  latest  consultant  - 
and  this  Singapore  enterprise  is  a  Government  body,  is  appointed  by  the  Government  of 
Singapore - pending us having the amount of money they have been paid, can I know, now 
that  Government  has  decided  to  put  the  project  on  hold  for  the  time  being,  what 
communication there has been with the Singapore authorities? Have there been exchanges of 
correspondences and meetings? Have they been informed that the project is put on hold, and 
what  arrangement  -  termination  contract  or  what  have  you  -  has  been  arrived  at  with  the 
consultants? 

Mr Bodha: Nothing of the sort has been done so far. What has happened so far is that 
the  Singaporean  company  has,  in  fact,  delivered  on  the  transaction  management  of  the 
project, and Government is going to take a decision in the days to come and we will contact 
the Singaporean company in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Hon.Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: May I ask the hon. Minister whether the project has been temporarily 

shelved, completely abandoned? 

Mr Bodha: It has been shelved. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

69 

 
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since we are pleased to learn that the 
first level consultant work on this matter of light rail was in 1991, which was an excellent 
idea and still is today, and so many successive governments have spent so much money on 
this whole consultancy for the project of light rail - and hon. Pravind Jugnauth, I remember, 
was right when he came in 2010 and tried to push for the whole idea of light railway - could 
we  not,  therefore,  find  out  how  much  money  has  been  really  spent  by  the  Republic  and 
whether it is worthwhile not to delay its remaining on the shelf? Lesser the time it remains on 
the shelf, maybe we will not be faced with another situation where the  whole project cost 
eventually will be another increase that will be more of a problem for us to face if ever we 
want to implement it. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is right.  We have to take a decision 
and we have taken the decision. Hon. Pravind Jugnauth was, in fact, very in favour; we all 
were in favour for the light rail project.  I think the estimated cost was Rs15 billion, and last 
time the hon. Minister, my predecessor, came to present this project, it was Rs25 billion. So, 
this is what I am saying. In fact, we have taken a decision and then we will come back with a 
list of all the expenses. You will have an idea of how much money has been spent since 1991. 
In fact, in 1995, when the hon. Prime Minister lost in December 1995, the project cost Rs4 
billion. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mahomed! 

LRT SYSTEM PROJECT - LAND ACQUISITION 

(No. B/85) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the  implementation  of  the  Light  Rail  Transit  System  Project,  he  will  state  if  the  land 
acquisition exercise therefor has been completed and, if so, indicate the - 

(a) 

(b) 

number of houses concerned therewith, and 

cost thereof. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  been  informed  that  in  connection  with  the 
implementation of the Light Rail Transit System, 92 plots of land have been earmarked for 
acquisition  along  the  corridor  between  Curepipe  and  Port  Louis.  Procedures  for  land 
acquisition have already been completed at the level of the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
and as at today, 88 portions of land have already been acquired by Government. 

70 

 
As  regards  the  remaining  four  plots,  the  matter  is  sub  judice,  as  the  owners  have 
challenged the legality of the compulsory acquisition. Out of the 92 plots of lands surveyed, 
only 27 houses are concerned with regard to that project. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  has 
informed that owners of the lands have not yet been compensated as evaluation procedures 
are still underway. 

However, as the House is aware and as is mentioned in the Government Programme, 
Government  has  decided  for  economic  reasons  not  to  proceed  with  the  Light  Rail  Transit 
System.  In  the  present  situation,  a  technical  committee  is  studying  the  various  options  as 
regards  to  a  mass  transit  transport  system  in  the  context  of  a  decongestion  programme,  in 
view of a new economic and physical development plan. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  thank  you.  Thank  you,  hon.  Minister.  What 

will become of these plots of land that are affected by this project? 

Mr Bodha: This is a very important question, Madam Speaker. We are considering 
different options.  The alignment is there; the lands have already been acquired and could be 
put to good use in the Decongestion Programme. 

Mr  Mahomed:  I  have  an  additional  question,  Madam  Speaker.  Is  there  any 
construction currently ongoing on the land that is strategically reserved for the ex-Railway, 
Light Rail Transit now, meant for something else? 

Mr  Bodha:  I  am  not  aware.  The  information  I  have  is  that  we  have  27  residences 
among that 92 plots.  But whether there are any new constructions, I don’t think I am aware. I 
think my colleague, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, is monitoring the situation closely. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can I know from the hon. Minister if however we have to pay for the 

acquired land, how much it will cost the Government? 

Mr Bodha: The evaluation process is on. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

71 

 
Mr Mahomed: One last question, Madam Speaker. What I meant just now is land on 
the  ex-Railway  track  behind  the  Quatre  Bornes  Market.  Is  there  a  parking  currently  being 
constructed over there? 

Mr Bodha: Well, now that the hon. Member has provided the information, I think we 
will contact the hon. Minister for Local Government who will monitor the situation with the 
Municipality of Quatre Bornes. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

SIGNAL MOUNTAIN - HEALTH TRACK - SOLAR STREET LIGHTING 

SYSTEM 

(No. B/86) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the project for the installation of the Solar Street 
Lighting System along the Health Track on the Signal Mountain approved for funding by the 
Maurice Ile Durable Fund, he will state where matters stand, indicating the time frame for the 
commissioning thereof. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, the specifications for the Solar Street Lighting System 
for  installation  along  the  Health  Track  on  the  Signal  Mountain  have  been  finalised.  My 
Ministry  is  now  consulting  the  Municipality  of  Port  Louis  regarding  modalities  for  the 
implementation of the project. A time frame  can only be established  after the consultation 
process. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, I have an additional question. Is the original scope 

of work, meaning lampposts to be fixed along the whole Health Track being maintained? 

Mr Dayal: Everything has been done. Once the process of consultation is finalised, 

we have funding and everything, the project will be on. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhuboo! 

CHEMIN GRENIER - MARKET FAIR PROJECT 

(No. B/87) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Chemin Grenier Market Fair Project, 
he will state if the construction thereof is being envisaged. 

72 

 
Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  District  Council  of  Savanne 
has, taking into consideration that the existing market fair at Chemin Grenier is in a bad state, 
decided that a new market fair be constructed for the benefit of the inhabitants of that region. 

In that context, a plot of private land to the extent of 2 arpents 67 perches has been 
identified and procedures have already been initiated by the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
for its acquisition. Given that the owner of three contiguous plot of land, Mr Jabar Boodhoo 
Meah is not agreeable to the sale of these portions of land, compulsory acquisition procedures 
have been initiated by the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

The project is being considered positively by my Ministry. Once it is approved by the 
Project Plan Committee, we will contact the Ministry of Finance regarding the availability of 
fund. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Minister indicate a time frame in relation 

to the land acquisition by Government? 

Dr. Husnoo: I think the time frame would depend on the Ministry of Housing, not on 

the Ministry of Local Government. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Will the hon. Minister give an urgent attention to that matter since both 

the public and the sellers are penalised by the lack of poor infrastructure? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, if I may say so, Madam Speaker contacted me about this project 
some time ago and we are working on this project. We have been working on this project and 
once, as I said, we get the land, we are going to get the project approved by the Project Plan 
Committee and then we will get it going. 

Madam Speaker: Let’s say that it is not in order to make reference to the Speaker in 

any question, but we allow the hon. Minister. 

Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  -  pending  the  acquisition  of  the  land  and  the 
construction of the new Market Fair - see to it that the operators at the Fair are allowed by the 
authorities to operate in the meantime without any harassment? 

 
Dr. Husnoo: Yes. We will look into that and make sure that everybody will be able to 

73 

work. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

MOTORCYCLE RACING –TRACK 

(No. B/88) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to motorcycle racing, 
he will state if consideration will be given for the setting up of a dedicated track therefor with 
a view to preventing the organization of illegal motorcycle racing on public roads and, if so, 
when and, if not, why not. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, as the hon. Member is aware there is presently 
no  dedicated  circuit  for  motorcycle  racing  in  Mauritius.  Consequently,  with  a  view  to 
preventing the organisation of illegal motorcycle racing on public roads, the facilities at the 
parking  ground  of  Anjalay  Stadium  at  Belle  Vue  have  been  made  available  freely  to 
motorcycle racers. 

All motorcycling organisations availing themselves of the facilities have to make their 

own arrangements to improve safety during racing and carting on the parking space. 

The  Mauritius  Motorsport  Federation  which  caters  for  both  motorcycling  and  auto 
rally  sports  also  organises  motorsport  races  in  other  locations  like  La  Nicolière,  le  Mont 
Blanc,  the  Chamarel  Road  and  Plaine  Champagne.  Before  any  rally  is  organised,  the 
appropriate authorisation and clearances are sought from the different authorities like Police, 
Fire  Services,  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  National  Emergency  Centre  and  the  Beach 
Authority and the Local Authorities, among others. 

Madam Speaker, all these arrangements have been made pending the setting up of a 
dedicated  track  which  is  not  only  a  very  costly  project  but  the  health,  safety  and 
environmental aspects will also have to be considered. Once an appropriate plot of land will 
be identified to accommodate a circuit, necessary provisions will be made for the project to 
be implemented. Meanwhile, I am proposing the request of the Commissioner of Police and 
the  National  Transport  Authority  to  enforce  existing  Legislation  concerning  the  required 
standard and norms of motorcycles used for racing. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

74 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: I understand from the reply of the hon. Minister that actually the 
Government is not contemplating to go forward with such a track, but one of the numerous 
reasons of fatal accidents on our roads is that there are so many illegal motorcycles racing 
among the youths. Will the hon. Minister consider a study on the matter and, accordingly, can 
he react on the findings of the study and then try to rethink about whether we will have a 
track or not? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As I have mentioned, once the appropriate plot will be identified, 
my  Ministry  will  make  provision  to  go  ahead.  But  regarding  motorcycle  racing,  we  will 
request the Commissioner Police to see to it because motorcycles used for racing and those 
used  on  the  roads  are  two  completely  different  machines.  That  is  why  they  are  very 
dangerous. The technical team of my Ministry is looking into the matter, and once everything 
will be finalised we will go ahead with the project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  maybe  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  aware,  but  the 
technical team of his Ministry has been looking into this matter for many years. Now, they 
are still looking into it. 

The technical team is the technical team! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am not talking about the hon. Minister; I am talking about the technical team.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  am  not  talking  about  the  hon.  Minister;  I  am  talking  about  the 
technical team. There is a big difference. That is why I started by saying: ‘maybe he is not 
aware’, and it is not him that I blame. What I would like to say here is the following: would 
the hon. Minister look into, first of all, all the illegal racings that are going on at La Passerelle 
area, Roche Bois, in Constituency No. 3, where both types of motorcycles are used; racing as 
well as normal motor bikes every night where you have spectators siting on both sides of the 
highway and watching and we have food sellers selling food and accompanying those who 
are watching? 

75 

 
Taking  that  into  account  and  because  of  that  there  were  25  acres  of  land  that  his 
predecessor had stated in this august Assembly  had already been found  and a racing track 
would be built thereon. That is why, I understand, the hon. Member, Ameer Meea, has come 
up with this question. It is because his Ministry has already found 25 acres and there was a 
commitment to come up with a proper racing track. Could he, therefore, follow suit with this 
commitment that his Ministry had made and his technicians had helped to come up with? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Regarding  the  first  question,  that  is  why  I  have  requested  the 
Commissioner of Police and the National Transport Authority to enforce the law. As regards 
the  25  acres  of  land,  it  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  my  Ministry.  We  have  looked  into  the 
matter; there is no file regarding this plot of land. 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  already  there  are  certain  tracks 
being used, namely in the stadium in Rivière du Rempart. Being given that most motorcycle 
accidents in racing happen due to bad design, may I know from the hon. Minister whether 
people from his Ministry do look at the design before giving any authorisation for any legal 
motorcycle racing to be carried out in Mauritius? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  I  think  this  up  to  the  federation  and  they  need  to  get  all  the 

clearances before doing any motorcycle racing. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just stated that the plot of 
25 acres of land is not  yet there.  Therefore, can  I ask the hon. Minister if he will make a 
formal  request  to  his  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  so  that  any  land  be 
identified for this project? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I am already looking into the matter, and please rest assured that I 

have already identified a site and will come up with a proposal shortly. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

BUS SERVICE – VELORE & NICOLAY ROADS 

(No. B/89) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in 
regard to the bus routes No. 70 and 77 plying towards the Immigration Square, Port Louis, he 
will state if he is aware that the buses along these routes do not pass along the Velore and 

 

76 

Nicolay Roads, thereby causing hardships to passengers who have to alight thereat and, if so, 
indicate if – 

 (a) 

(b) 

the remedial measures that will be taken in relation thereto, and 

consideration will be given for the setting up of a bus stop along the Mariamen 
Temple Street, near the Sunnassee Building. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  according  to  authorised  itineraries,  bus  route  No.  70 
which starts from Cité La Cure Traffic Centre and bus route No. 77 which starts from Terre 
Rouge Police Station, should both transit through Noor-E-Islam Road, previously known as 
Nicolay Road, on their way to Immigration Square. 

As  regards  Velore  Road,  which  is  a  link  between  Military  Road  and  Noor-E-Islam 
Road, it has been removed from both routes and itineraries since several years now, because 
of the difficulty for vehicles to exit at the junction. Buses instead proceed up to the junction 
of Military Road and Noor-E-Islam Road, where it is safer for vehicles to exit at the junction 
because of the presence of traffic lights. 

I am informed that complaints have been received to the effect that buses owned by 
individual  operators  along  both  routes,  regularly  fail  to  follow  the  authorised  itinerary  on 
reaching  Quay  ‘D’  roundabout.  They  instead  move  along  the  motorway,  thus  bypassing 
Military Road and Noor-E-Islam and Mariamen Temple Roads. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  four 
contraventions  have  been  established,  because  the  NTA  is  monitoring  the  situation  in  that 
region  and  regular  checks  are  being  carried  out  to  ensure  strict  compliance  with  the 
conditions  attached  to  the  Road  Service  Licences.  Disciplinary  action  will  henceforth  be 
taken against both the bus crew and the bus owner in the event of repeated offences. 

However,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  National  Transport  Authority 
along with the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit will carry out a survey soon, to 
explore the possibility of siting a bus stop along the Mariamen Temple Road. 

I am also open to any suggestion of the hon. Member. 

BUSINESS PARKS OF MAURITIUS LTD. – MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE – 

REPORT 

(No.  B/90)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 

 

77 

Business Parks of Mauritius Ltd., he will state if consideration will be given for thesetting up 
of a full-fledged inquiry into the management thereof, since the appointment of Mr D. N. as 
Chief Executive Officer thereof and, if so – 

(a) 

(b) 

table copy of the report of the Ministerial Committee presided by the former 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  in  relation  thereto,  especially  concerning 
allocation of land at Ebene, Rose Hill, and 

consider taking immediate measures regarding the prevailing chaotic situation 
and the degradation caused to the environment by parking and hawkers at the 
Ebene Cyber City. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, in line with the commitment of this Government to 
eradicate  corruption,  nepotism  and  malpractices,  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional Reforms will be requested to carry out a full-fledged inquiry 
into the management of the Business Parks of Mauritius Ltd., from June 2007 to December 
2014, the period during which Mr D. N. was Executive Chairman. The terms of reference, 
thereof, are being drafted. 

As requested by the hon. Member, I am tabling a copy of the report of the Ministerial 

Committee presided by the ex-Minister of Public Infrastructure in relation thereto. 

Madam Speaker, in respect to part (b) of the question, I agree with the hon. Member 
that a chaotic situation still prevails at Ebène Cybercity with respect to illegal parking and 
hawkers which BPML has not been able to sort out until now. 

The  proposed  multi-storey  parking  tower  has  not  yet  been  finalised  and,  in  the 
meantime, as an interim measure, temporary parking for some 1,030 cars has been allowed 
on selected plots. I am also informed that the 40 buildings or so that have been completed so 
far, have parking slots which can accommodate some 3,600 vehicles in total. In addition, I 
am  told  that  double-yellow  lines  have  also  been  painted  on  all  the  main  arteries  of  the 
Cybercity and the Police are exercising control over illegal parking. 

The problem of hawkers is still pending and is as problematic as before. 

I  have,  therefore,  requested  BPML  to  review  both  issues  and  to  come  up  with 
sustainable solutions, and I propose, of course, to follow up closely on the problems raised by 
the hon. Member. 

78 

 
Mr Bérenger: Madam  Speaker, why are we wasting so much time to appoint new 
people there? We must have new people in charge of BPML and I am sure they will have 
right ideas in terms of food courts and so on.  I cannot understand.  It is not difficult to solve 
those problems. 

Mr Jugnauth: We are in the course of appointing the people to constitute the Board. 

We will do so very soon. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Would  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  to  us  whether  in  the  terms  of 
reference for the inquiry - le Gooljaury Tower, the way the land was given, misappropriating 
of  leisure,  land  space,  cela  a  été  réservé  pour  l’environnement  -  the  whole  issue  of  that 
project also would be included into the inquiry which would be conducted? 

Mr Jugnauth: Of course, the Ministry of Good Governance, I mean the inquiry will 
look  into  that  aspect  also.  We  will  look  into  the  report,  the  findings  of  the  Ministerial 
Committee at that time which, unfortunately, concluded that there were a lot of shortcomings 
and it remained just like that and no action was taken. So, they will have to look as far back 
as the conclusion of that report also. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for tabling this report, which is a very, very 
good  act  on  his  part.  With  regard  to  immediate  measures  that  could  be  taken  to  stop  the 
chaotic situation, could the hon. Minister consider the possibility of ensuring that there are 
pavements that are free from any obstruction that would permit people to walk from offices 
to restaurants and to stop them from walking on the streets?  Because road accidents could 
really  occur  at  any  minute,  as  we  are  speaking  now.  And  this  would  be,  maybe,  only  a 
suggestion and I wish you could really take it into account. 

Mr Jugnauth: Of course, Madam Speaker, we have to review the infrastructure that 
prevails  there  and  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  pedestrians  also  need  to  have  a  place 
which is safe for them to move from one place to the other. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I also make a request to the Minister? The Ebene area appears to 
be found in a no man’s land.  It is supposedly to be under the responsibility of the Moka-
District  Council,  which  is  far  away.    Neither  the  Municipality  of  Quatre  Bornes  nor  Beau 
Bassin/Rose Hill has any jurisdiction on the area. The hon. Minister would see by himself 
comment cet endroit est mal entretenu. Can I appeal to the hon. Minister at least to liaise or 
give directives to our Ministers responsible and the Minister of Local Government to have a 
common meeting so that this area can be cleaned, at least, every day? 

 
Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  I  believe  that  it  falls  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the 

79 

Quatre Bornes Municipal Council. 

No, not Moka. It is Quatre Bornes 

(Interruptions) 

MBC – AUDIT EXERCISE 

(No.  B/91)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the results of the audit exercise carried out by Mr R. J., former Director of 
Audit, on the management thereof by Mr D. C., former Director General thereof, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

the names and grades of the officers who have recently been laid off/made to 
retire and the reasons thereof; 

the  status  of  the  overdrafts  and  accumulated  loans  due  to  Government  and 
private institutions, and 

(c) 

when a full-fledged Board will be constituted as per the MBC Act. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  management  of  MBC  by  the 
former  Director  General,  I  am  informed  that  the  audit  exercise,  being  carried  out  by  the 
former Director of Audit, is still underway and will be completed shortly. 

As regards part (a) of the question, I am tabling the information requested. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, the status of the overdrafts 
and accumulated loans due to Government and private institutions amounts to Rs818 m. The 
breakdown is as follows – 

Overdraft - 

(a)  MPCB, Rs208.4 m.; 

(b) 

SBM, Rs6.6 m. 

With regard to loans – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

SBM, Rs110 m. 

Government of Mauritius, Rs53 m. 

People’s Republic of China, Rs440 m. making a total of Rs818 m. 

80 

 
Madam Speaker, after receipt of the report of the enquiry with reference to Finance, 
the management of the MBC will be in a better position to review expenses and revenue to 
make the institution more effective. The Corporation, I am informed, has already embarked 
on a cost reduction exercise and comparative figures show, at least, some improvement over 
the  past  performance.  For  example,  MBC  has  made  a  saving  of  Rs1,986,125  since  30 
December 2014 to end January 2015, that is, over a period of one month. And I believe that if 
we take that figure over a period of twelve months it, will make around Rs24 m. This gives us 
an indication of, in fact, the mismanagement of funds under the previous management. 

As regards part (c) of the question, the constitution of the Board is under process. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  auditors  of  the 
former  Director  of  Audit  will  also  enquire  into  the  purchase  of  equipment,  specialised 
cameras purchased, and which were being used on only specific occasions and the cost of the 
equipment? 

Mr Jugnauth: I believe it also includes the acquisition of equipment. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I also make a request to the hon. Minister to ask the auditors to 
enquire into the subcontracting of works by the MBC to specialised agencies where even civil 
servants  and  advisors  have  been  involved;  whether  this  aspect  will  be  taken  into 
consideration? 

MrJugnauth: Of course, I also think that they will be looking into that, but if any 
Member has any information he can, of course, communicate to me directly and I will pass 
on to … 

…hon. Members from both sides! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister what is the latest concerning the enquiry of 
the very rapid amount of emoluments given, taking pension by the former Director General 
when he just fled from the MBC/TV? 

Mr Jugnauth: I can confirm that this is part of that enquiry. In fact, this is the first 
part of that enquiry and, at this stage, of course, I cannot say anything until the conclusion 
comes to my knowledge. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, a last question! 

81 

Mr Bhagwan: Can we know exactly the amount pocketed by the Director General? 

Mr Jugnauth: Unfortunately, I don’t have this amount now. I remember there was a 

question.  Unfortunately, it was not reached, but it must have gone written.  So… 

(Interruptions) 

But, of course, I undertake to give the figures. 

Madam Speaker: You have a question, hon. Jhugroo? 

Mr  Jhugroo:  On  MBC  yes,  only  one  small  question.  Can  I  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister  who  took  the  decision  at  the  MBC  to  pay  the  former  Director  General,  I  think 
around Rs5 m.? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  if  I  can  recall,  there  was  one  clause  in  his  contract  called  a 
‘Clause  de  conscience’,  whereby  he  decided  that  he  could  no  longer  remain  as  Director 
General and then I suppose that he must have written to the Board - but I am just speaking 
from memory. I know that the information was relayed to the Prime Minister’s Office, and 
from what I recall I believe the former Secretary of Cabinet dealt with it.  But I do not want 
to  mislead  Parliament.  If  the  hon.  Member  will  come  with  a  substantive  question,  I  will 
provide all the information. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: From what the hon. Minister has just said, from what I understand, he 
is  saying  that  the  former  Director  General  used  and  abused  a  clause  of  the  management 
contract, ‘Clause de conscience’. Can the hon. Minister tell us when, what year, that ‘Clause 
de  conscience’  was  introduced  in  the  management  contract  of  the  Director  General  -  the 
former, a long time before him?  In what year was that clause introduced in that management 
contract? 

Mr Jugnauth: I have to check because I don’t have the information. I can provide… 

The question is addressed to me. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question B/95 has 

82 

been withdrawn. Time is over! 

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(4.10 p.m.) 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS – MOTION OF THANKS 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the following motion of the hon. Second 

Member for Grand River North West & Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 

following terms - 

"We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, beg leave to 
offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of Mauritius for the Speech which he has 
addressed  to  us  on  the  occasion  of  the  Opening  of  the  First  Session  of the  Sixth  National 
Assembly." 

Question again proposed. 

Mr T. Henry  (Fourth  Member for Mahebourg &  Plaine Magnien):  Madame la 
présidente, permettez-moi tout d’abord de vous féliciter en tant que présidente de la nouvelle 
Assemblée nationale, plutôt deux fois qu’une, puisque vous êtes aussi la première femme à 
occuper de telles fonctions. Mes félicitations vont également à votre vice-président. 

Je voudrais aussi saisir l’occasion pour féliciter notre Leader of the House, le Premier 
ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, qui a su vaillamment amener l’Alliance Lepep à une victoire 
cinglante et sans appel aux élections législatives de décembre 2014, ainsi que mon Leader, le 
Premier ministre adjoint, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, pour la confiance qu’il a placée en 
moi car, Madame la présidente, c’est mon deuxième mandat. 

83 

 
Pour la deuxième fois consécutive, je suis reconduit au Parlement pour représenter la 
circonscription  numéro  12,  Mahebourg/Plaine  Magnien,  et  je  voudrais  remercier  ces 
mandants  de  m’avoir  renouvelé  leur  confiance  après  une  campagne  rude,  et  même  dans 
certains cas, malsaine. 

Cette  victoire,  faut-il  rappeler,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  la  victoire  de  toute  l’île 
Maurice.  Une  victoire  contre  le  complot  de  deux  soi-disant  grands  partis  qui  voulaient 
bafouer la démocratie ; une victoire sur la corruption et le mensonge. C’est aussi une victoire 
des idées nouvelles contre la pensée unique, une victoire de la modernité sur l’immobilisme, 
car L’alliance Lepep a su comprendre les attentes du peuple. C’est pourquoi il y a eu une telle 
adhésion à notre programme. 

Faut-il  rappeler  que  dans  les  jours  qui  ont  suivi  les  élections,  dès  la  formation  du 

gouvernement, nous avons immédiatement pris des mesures importantes, telles que – 

• 
• 
• 

l’augmentation de la pension de vieillesse ; 
le gel des sentences sur les permis de conduire ; 
la reprise des terrains à bail accaparés par les petits copains ; 

C’est  cela  un  gouvernement  responsable,  c’est  cela  une  alliance  qui  tient  ses 

promesses, Madame la présidente. Et ça ne fait que commencer ! 

Dans  le  programme  électoral  nous  avions  mis  en  avant  certaines  idées  phares,  car 
nous sommes conscients des enjeux qui attendent l’île Maurice aux plans économique, social 
et environnemental. 

Nous  retrouvons  aujourd’hui  dans  le  discours-programme  les  mêmes  idées  phares. 
J’aimerais m’appesantir sur quelques-unes de ces mesures que nous allons introduire. Tout 
d’abord, le soutien aux plus vulnérables. Il s’agira de mieux canaliser les aides. 

J’aimerais ici soutenir un point qui touche beaucoup de personnes dans l’impossibilité 
d’acquérir une maison. Pour être éligible à l’acquisition d’une maison NHDC, il faut avoir un 
salaire ne dépassant pas les R 10,000. Mais le coût de la vie à Maurice n’est plus le même 
qu’il y a 10 ans, Madame la présidente. 

Je  demanderai  donc  au  vice-Premier  ministre,  ministre  des  Terres  et  du  Logement, 
mon  ami  l’honorable  Soodhun,  de  bien  vouloir  revoir  ce  barème  à  la  hausse,  car  cela 
soulagerait  tous  nos  compatriotes  qui  ne  touchent  pas  suffisamment  pour  joindre  les  deux 
bouts mais qui ne sont pas éligibles aux aides sociales. 

 
Le logement est en effet un élément capital pour le développement et le bien-être de 

84 

ce pays et il est au centre de la politique gouvernementale. 

Avec  le  projet  de  plus  de  10,000  maisons  sociales,  que  nous  accueillons  avec 
beaucoup  d’enthousiasme,  c’est  un  pas  supplémentaire  qui  va  être  franchi  pour  soulager 
toutes ces familles qui sont dans le besoin et qui veulent assurer leur avenir. 

J’aimerais ici attirer l’attention du vice-Premier ministre sur la nécessité de régulariser 
la situation des habitants des cités CHA qui ne sont pas encore propriétaires de leurs biens, 
notamment  à  Cité  La  Chaux,  Cité  Balance  et  Camp  Carole  pour  ne  citer  que  quelques 
exemples. Mais nous savons tous que dans chaque circonscription, il y a ce genre de situation 
problématique. 

Par ailleurs, Madame la présidente, il est important que la NEF soit restructurée. Le 
Deputy Prime Minister qui a fondé le ministère de l’Intégration sociale, dont dépend la NEF, 
avait jeté les bases de la lutte contre la pauvreté, mais malheureusement le travail énorme 
qu’il a abattu n’a pas été suivi. 

Aujourd’hui,  il  est  temps  de  mettre  en  place  un  mécanisme  qui  permettra  de  lutter 
contre  la  pauvreté  de  façon  durable,  et  la  volonté  de  ce  gouvernement  est  là,  Madame  la 
présidente.  C’est  un  combat  qui  doit impliquer  tout  un  chacun  aussi  bien  de  ce  côté  de  la 
Chambre que de l’autre côté, afin d’éradiquer ce fléau qui mine notre société. 

Maintenant,  j’aimerais  aborder  la  question  épineuse  de  la  restructuration  de  nos 
institutions. C’est une réforme importante et délicate, mais si elle est bien menée, va redonner 
confiance aux Mauriciens dans leurs institutions et dans le service public. 

Nous  avions  un  problème  de  confiance  du  public  envers  nos  institutions.  Ce 
gouvernement, Madame la présidente, prend le taureau par les cornes et donne un signal fort 
à toute la nation, car nous voulons redonner espoir à tout un peuple mais aussi redonner leurs 
lettres de noblesse à nos institutions. 

Il s’agit surtout de faciliter l’interaction entre la population et les services publics en 
établissant,  par  exemple,  de  nouveaux  horaires  ou  des  horaires  plus  étendus  dans  certains 
services, car nous savons tous combien les démarches administratives sont lourdes aux heures 
d’ouverture habituelle. 

Il faudra engager une réflexion sur les modalités à appliquer, mais nous pourrions déjà 
penser à étendre le principe du shift system qui existe déjà, par exemple, dans les hôpitaux, à 

 

85 

d’autres  services.  Car  notre  objectif  prioritaire  est  de  satisfaire  le  public,  mais  aussi 
d’accompagner de façon efficace la relance de l’économie de notre pays. 

Avec  un  service  public  performant,  c’est  la  population  qui  est  satisfaite  et  c’est 
l’économie  qui  tourne  à  plein  régime,  car  la  relance  économique  est  la  priorité  de  ce 
gouvernement. 

Et  comme  le  dit  si  bien  le  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  toute  relance  économique  doit 
passer par une redynamisation de l’industrie touristique, car le tourisme est le pilier de notre 
économie. 

Tout cela passe par une restructuration de la MTPA et de la TA et par une nouvelle 

vision pour notre industrie touristique basée sur – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

une sécurité renforcée ; 
un contrôle de qualité strict et une hausse dans la qualité de nos produits ; 
un moratoire sur la construction de nouvelles chambres ; 
une meilleure connectivité aérienne, et 
une présence plus assidue sur les marchés traditionnels. 

Je n’ai aucun doute que le Deputy Prime Minister, avec le charisme qui le caractérise 
et les résultats qu’il a obtenus dans le passé, sera à la hauteur des ambitions affichées dans ce 
secteur, Madame la présidente. 

Le  programme  gouvernemental  est  très  étoffé  et  contient  de  nombreuses  mesures 
toutes aussi importantes les unes que les autres. Mais il y a un secteur qui mérite toute notre 
attention, parce qu’il a trait à l’avenir de nos enfants ; c’est l’éducation. 

Nos  enfants  méritent  un  meilleur  système  éducatif  qui  ne  les  broie  pas  lorsqu’ils 
sortent à peine de l’enfance ; qui ne les forcent pas à se jeter, si jeunes, dans une compétition 
féroce  qui  a  pour  nom  la  CPE.  C’est  pourquoi  l’introduction  du  9-year  schooling  est  une 
nécessité absolue. 

Elle  permettra  de  renvoyer  l’examen  à  plus  tard,  à  un  âge  où  les  enfants  sont  plus 
mûrs.  Et  j’ajouterai  que  pour  faire  de  nos  enfants  des  adultes  équilibrés  et  éduqués  nous 
devons aussi renforcer notre système universitaire. Il y a trop d’universités qui ne sont pas au 
niveau ou qui sont carrément ‘marrons’, si je peux me permettre cette expression. 

86 

 
Les parents investissent des fortunes dans une formation qui, au bout du compte, est 
sanctionnée  par  un  diplôme  bidon.  Et  ce  gouvernement  va  tout  mettre  en  œuvre  pour  que 
l’avenir de nos jeunes soit entre de bonnes mains. 

Madame la présidente, permettez-moi de terminer en rappelant à la Chambre que ce 

gouvernement a un travail gigantesque qui l’attend. 

Mais avec l’esprit d’équipe et la volonté qui nous animent tous, je n’ai aucun doute 

que nous réussirons dans notre tâche. 

Hélas, certaines personnes au sein de cette auguste Assemblée osent mettre tout notre 
programme gouvernemental en doute, parce qu’ils ont rêvé, un bref moment, de se mettre à 
notre place, à travers des calculs arithmétiques, en faisant intervenir l’alchimie. 

Mais le rêve s’est transformé en cauchemar, avec une défaite sans appel aux dernières 
législatives. Car aujourd’hui, c’est une collation de l’Alliance Lepep qui tient la barre de ce 
pays et non des alchimistes qui pensaient pouvoir jouer avec la Constitution de la République 
de Maurice. Donc, je n’ai aucun doute que ce pays est entre de bonnes mains, que l’équipe 
qui  dirige  actuellement  ce  pays  va  vers  un  avenir  plus  que  brillant,  on  va  dire,  que  notre 
bateau  sera  à  bon  port  et  que  même  dans  le  futur  la  même  équipe  sera  au  pouvoir  aux 
prochaines élections. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

(4.23 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker on your 
election  to  the  Chair,  and  I  am  sure  we  can  rely  on  your  guidance  and  expertise  for  the 
smooth  running  of  the  affairs  of  this  House.  I  seize  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  hon. 
Members of both sides of the House on their election. 

Madam Speaker, I take immense pride and pleasure to stand here as a Member of the 
National  Assembly  duly  elected  by  the  people  of  Constituency  No.  3  for  the  second  time 
consecutively  and  I  wish  to  express  to  them  my  sincere  gratitude  and  pledge  to  represent 
them with conviction and loyalty. I want to reassure them that I will leave no stone unturned 
to live up to their expectation. May I also express my thanks and gratitude to my leader, hon. 
Paul Bérenger, who is the hon. Leader of the Opposition and Leader of Mouvement Militant 

 

87 

Mauricien,  for  the  trust  placed  in  me  and  also  my  thanks  and  gratitude  to  my  parents, 
relatives and friends. 

It is my sincere belief that the MMM, despite what opponents may say, remains the 
torchbearer of national unity. It has always fought for social justice, consolidated democracy, 
combatted  communalism  and  offered  equal  opportunity  to  any  Mauritian  who  aspires  to 
become Prime Minister. It is not surprising that it is the only big party for not having been 
beaten by a resounding and eloquent 60-0 pisso. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  come  on  the  discours-programme.  Madame  la 
présidente,  je  dois  concéder  que  c’est  un  programme  gouvernemental  ficelé  ayant  pour 
objectif de faire perdurer, de prolonger le feel-good atmosphère qui prévaut depuis plus d’un 
mois dans le pays. Si c’est bon pour l’ensemble de la population qu’il  y ait les conditions 
nécessaires  pour  qu’elle  reprenne  goût  à  la  vie  avec  moins  d’anxiété,  d’inquiétude  et  de 
tourmente qui caractérisaient notre quotidien dans un passé récent, il n’en demeure pas moins 
que  les  attentes  parmi  les  gens  sont  nombreuses,  comme  c’est  toujours  le  cas  après  une 
campagne  électorale  marquée  par  des  promesses.  Il  faut  être  prudent  et  mesuré  et  ne  pas 
pousser le bouchon trop loin en termes de largesse, car, en temps et lieu, les gens ne vont pas 
tarder à s’interroger sur les stratégies économiques que compte utiliser ce gouvernement pour 
trouver les ressources financières requises pour traduire la réalité de toutes ses promesses. Il 
est vrai qu’un programme est un programme, une ébauche, un plan pour l’avenir et n’a rien 
de semblable à un budget. Donc, nous attendons voir ce que nous réservera le budget qui sera 
présenté dans quelques jours, en termes d’explications détaillées et chiffrées pour soutenir les 
mesures annoncées dans ce programme. 

Outre  le  transport  gratuit  pour  les  étudiants  et  les  personnes  âgées,  on  a  eu  une 
augmentation  substantielle  des  prestations  sociales  payées  en  décembre  sans  prévision 
budgétaire  préalable.  Avec  le  phénomène  de  vieillissement  de  la  population,  la  dotation 
budgétaire sous ce chapitre s’amplifiera crescendo au fil des années et ce sera aux générations 
futures de fournir les efforts nécessaires pour assurer ces pensions dans la durée. 

Il y a eu une augmentation salariale de R 600 à tous les travailleurs et fonctionnaires. 
C’était bien, car c’était leur dû. Mais cela n’exclut pas le fait qu’il faut trouver de l’argent 
même si on s’emploie à éliminer les gaspillages qui ont marqué l’ancien régime. On arrivera 
difficilement à la somme nécessaire sans recourir à la taxe. Un salaire minimal est aussi à 
l’agenda de ce gouvernement pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle. Là aussi, si l’intention 

 

88 

est louable, il faut être vigilant et prudent,  afin que cela ne serve pas de prétexte pour des 
licenciements massifs et d’autres abus. 

Plus loin, dans le discours, on a lu que les subsides aux frais d’examen du SC et du 
HSC seront étendus à tous les étudiants. Cela s’applique-t-il pour les private candidates et 
pour ceux ayant échoué une fois ou deux fois ? Quand on pense qu’il y a des parents qui sont 
riches qui en ont les moyens et ils peuvent eux-mêmes s’encourir les frais, on est tenté de 
dire :  est-ce  que  ce  n’est  pas  un  vote  catching  devise  qui  va  nous  coûter  cher?  Il  y  a  des 
largesses qu’on doit absolument éviter. Quand on ajoute les prestations sociales, les pensions, 
les compensations salariales, les repas chauds, les subsides aux frais d’examen, cela avoisine 
des milliards de roupies. De quoi se demander s’il n’y aura pas des taxes déguisées qui vont 
être introduites dans le prochain budget. 

Au niveau de la santé, on constate un effort pour rendre les services hospitaliers plus 
proches.  Je  me  permettrai  toutefois  de  suggérer  la  mise  sur  pied  d’un  comité  spécial 
comprenant des représentants du ministère des Finances, de la Sécurité sociale, de la Santé, 
des Affaires étrangères pour accélérer les démarches pour les patients qui ne peuvent pas être 
opérés à Maurice. J’en parle, parce que j’ai eu plusieurs cas dans ma circonscription, et je 
peux  vous  dire  que  c’est  un  vrai  calvaire  pour  une  famille  d’entamer  des  démarches  pour 
envoyer  un  de  ses  membres  dans  un  hôpital  en  Inde  ou  ailleurs.  J’espère  que  l’honorable 
ministre - je crois qu’il est là - prendra bonne note de cette proposition. 

Maintenant, Madame la présidente, la problématique des marchands ambulants a été 
aussi mentionnée dans le discours-programme, et ce problème nous concerne tous. Plusieurs 
formules ont été essayées au cours des deux dernières décennies, mais une solution durable 
n’a  jamais  été  trouvée.  J’apprécierais  si  l’honorable  ministre  pouvait  venir  avec  un  plan 
d’envergure  pour  solutionner  cet  épineux  problème.  Et  là,  comment  ne  pas  oublier  le 
‘Hawkers Palace’ ! Ce projet a été torpillé par fanatisme politique, et aujourd’hui ce bâtiment 
aurait servi à abriter bon nombre de marchands ambulants ; pas la totalité, mais quand même 
une  bonne  partie.  Le  problème  de  marchands  ambulants  reste  entier.  C’est  vraiment  un 
drame, et récemment on a entendu le ministre de tutelle proposer le duty free aux marchands 
ambulants pour leurs véhicules. J’aurais aimé savoir comment ça va se faire dans la pratique ; 
quelles vont être les conditions nécessaires pour que les marchands ambulants obtiennent une 
voiture ou un van duty free ? Peut-être le ministre concerné va nous donner plus de détails 
durant son discours. 

89 

 
Madame la présidente, laissez-moi dire quelques mots par rapport aux jeux de hasard, 
le gambling. Madame la présidente, les Mauriciens sont bercés par le rêve et se tournent de 
plus en plus vers les jeux de hasard. Ce sont des millions de roupies qui changent de main. Il 
y a quelques veinards, mais il y a aussi des milliers de perdants. A-t-on mené une enquête 
approfondie  pour  déterminer  son  impact  sur  la  vie  des  Mauriciens ?  Aucune  étude  sur 
l’impact social n’a été faite sur ce que cela aura sur notre société, et aujourd’hui on paie les 
frais de cette irresponsabilité. 

Madame la présidente, aucune société ne peut se payer le luxe de voir des pères de 
famille tomber dans le cercle infernal du gambling. Quand les parents qui sont censés être des 
role models cèdent à la tentation, c’est très grave. C’est le fondement de la cellule familiale 
qui est menacé. Qui a intérêt à ce que les Mauriciens deviennent des ‘zougadères’? Figurons-
nous si toute l’île Maurice devient un grand casino avec tout le monde s’affairant autour des 
tables de jeux ! Pourrons-nous compter sur une optimisation de nos ressources humaines pour 
relever les multiples défis qui se profilent à l’horizon ? Qu’on se ressaisisse, et que le bon 
sens prévaut ! Qu’on décourage le gambling! 

Ce n’est pas une façon de démocratiser l’économie. J’ai entendu dire récemment que 
le ministre des Finances est en train de revoir toute la question en ce qui concerne les jeux de 
hasard, et j’accueille cela favorablement. 

Et parallèlement, il  est aussi mentionné dans le  discours-programme par rapport  au 
fléau de la drogue. La toxicomanie persiste, et là-dessus j’aurais aimé dire que la drogue, ce 
fléau, doit être placée au-dessus de la mêlée politique ; ça doit être above party politics. La 
drogue  est  un  fléau  qui  n’est  pas  sujet  à  une  politique  partisane.  Nos  travailleurs  sociaux 
engagés  semblent  prêcher  dans  le  désert ;  pire  que  l’indifférence  il  y  a  même  de  la 
complaisance.  Le  mouvement  antidrogue  mène  une  croisade  et  bénéficie  de  très  peu  de 
soutien digne de ce nom de l’État. Après presque 30 ans, il est plus que nécessaire d’instituer 
une commission d’enquête. La dernière en date était la Commission Rault qui était en juillet 
1986, et j’accueille favorablement la mise sur pied d’une nouvelle commission d’enquête sur 
la drogue. Mais là encore on attend la mise sur pied de cette commission d’enquête. Qui va la 
présider ? Qui seront ses assesseurs ? Quels seront les terms of reference? Mais l’initiative est 
louable. 

Et  aussi,  dans  le  discours-programme,  mention  est  faite  par  rapport  à  Agaléga. 
Agaléga,  comme  vous  le  savez,  est  rattaché  à  la  circonscription  No.  3,  dans  ma 

 

90 

circonscription. Beaucoup de projets ont été annoncés ces dernières dix années, mais dans le 
réel, concrètement, rien n’a été fait. J’ai eu l’occasion de visiter Agaléga en compagnie de 
l’honorable Mohamed, et je peux vous dire que les conditions de vie des gens qui vivent à 
Agaléga  sont  vraiment  inadmissibles.  Je  suis  vraiment  navré  de  constater  qu’année  après 
année,  beaucoup  de  projets  ont  été  annoncés,  et  comme  je  vous  l’ai  dit,  rien  n’a  été  fait. 
L’ancien ministre des Administrations régionales, le nouvel adhérent au PMSD, était passé 
maître  dans  l’art  des  effets  d’annonce,  allant  même  jusqu’à  être  ridicule.  On  se  souvient 
même de son dernier passage à Agaléga et de la bourde qu’il a commise là-bas, mais tout ça 
c’est le passé. J’espère vraiment que tous ces projets qui ont été annoncés dans le discours- 
programme vont être réalisés pour le bien-être des gens d’Agaléga. 

L’ouverture d’une ambassade en Arabie Saoudite - que moi-même j’ai pu soulever à 
travers  des  questions  parlementaires  pendant  ces  cinq  dernières  années  ici  au  Parlement  - 
aussi  figure  dans  le  discours-programme.  On  attend  cela  avec  impatience,  et  je  crois  que 
l’honorable Soodhun en a parlé dans son discours. 

Madam Speaker, Government also announced the decentralisation of Port Louis. Let 
me say a few words on this issue. Port Louis is a microsome with all ethnics represented. 
While the city is invaded by skyscrapers shooting up, the surrounding suburb constitutes a 
belt with numerous pockets of poverty. This double standard development which has been 
going  on  is  causing  suffocation  and  asphyxia  in  this  vital  region  where  we  still  have  a 
centralised system. For Government to venture in a decentralised capital, Port Louis, that is, 
where we have the Parliament, the Supreme Court, all the major Government offices that, 
according to the new project, will move out of the capital, Government should come forward 
with a project of providing the inhabitants of the capital opportunities to continue their trade 
and business in order to earn a decent living. Actually, the capital is falling prey to social 
evils with theft and prostitution becoming current features. So, we better think well before 
just embarking on a project that will have this side effect in the long run. 

Madam Speaker, let me also say a few words on the Public Accounts Committee of 
which  I  was  a  Member  during  the  last  mandate.  The  mandate  and  practices  of  the  Public 
Accounts Committee vary considerably from legislature to legislature in different countries 
since  each  one  operates  within  a  different  political  context  and  faces  issues  unique  to  the 
legislature it serves. However, there is a shared and increased understanding across both the 
Commonwealth and the Southern African Development Countries as to the key features of a 
Public Accounts Committee in order to ensure its effectiveness. 

91 

 
I believe that the mode of functioning of the PAC be revamped into a forward-looking 
dimension  since  the  ultimate  purpose  of  both  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  and  of  the 
National Audit Office is to encourage improvements in efficiency and effectiveness in the use 
of public money, which is essential in fostering effective governance. I will not dwell further 
on this issue as time will not permit, but we have all the recommendations of the last Public 
Accounts Committee report, and I also remember that last time the Deputy Prime Minister 
was the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, he also pleaded for a revamping of the 
Public Accounts Committee with more powers. 

Madam Speaker, on paragraph 263 of the Government Programme, mention is being 
made to monitor political funding and abuse of power.  Since c’est d’actualité, I would like to 
say a few words in relation to political funding, which is a cost to democracy. In order to 
carry  out  their  core  activities,  political  parties  need  appropriate  funding.  This  relationship 
between money and politics, however, is controversial and much of the debate on the role of 
money  is  concerned  with  the  improper  influence  of  money  on  the  democratic  political 
process and with the illegitimate personal enrichment of some politicians. While the shady 
aspects of finance and politics should not be ignored, the relevance of money extends beyond 
illegitimate  sources  that  flow  into  coffers  and  pockets  of  some  politicians.  The  scope  of 
political finance has a wider relevance in the context of the functioning of democracy and 
should thus be seen as a broader than merely involving illicit transactions. More generally, 
political  activities  involve  expenses  which  should  be  seen  as  a  necessary  and  unavoidable 
cost of democracy because money is one of the most essential resources for political parties 
which  are  the  principal  protagonists  of  modern  democracy.  It  plays  a  critical  role  in  the 
democratic process and, in order to function properly, political parties need to maintain their 
party  organisations,  to  employ  party  personnel,  to  conduct  election  campaigns  and  to 
communicate  with  the  electorate  at  large.    In  order  to  carry  out  these  and  other  necessary 
functions,  appropriate  financial  resources  need  to  be  made  available  to  political  parties 
because  of  the  potentially  distorting  effect  money  may  have  on  the  democratic  process.  
However, it is important that the role of money in politics be properly regulated by public 
law. 

The recent events linked to political financing have demonstrated that this issue must 
be addressed as a matter of urgency in order to prevent the loss of citizens’ interest in the 
political life and in order to maintain and increase the confidence of citizens in the political 

 

92 

system, and a proper legal framework and rules governing the financing of political parties 
and electoral campaigns must be adopted. 

The conditions in which political parties exercise their activities have changed over 
recent decades and nowadays they need substantial financial resources to gain visibility and 
obtain political support for their ideas. Therefore, I consider that the regulation mechanism 
must  take  these  realities  into  account  and  empower  political  parties  to  obtain  sufficient 
resources  to  carry  out  their  task.  However,  this  has  to  be  accompanied  by  a  robust  legal 
framework. Most contemporary European states have taken substantial legislative action in 
recent  years  to  regulate  the  practice  of  party  financing.    Often,  public  legislation  has 
developed  in  connection  with  or  as  a  reaction  to  corruption,  scandals  or  other  improper 
influence on political decisions through financial means. 

Madam Speaker, since our legislative system is based on the Westminster model, it 
would be beneficial and advisable that we draw experience from the reforms that have taken 
place  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  fact  that  a  classical,  liberal  and  non-interventionist 
democracy such as the United Kingdom, where political finance has traditionally been to a 
large extent unregulated, has recently adopted a far more legalistic and regulatory approach to 
the  issue  can  be  seen  as  exemplary  to  this  development.  This,  as  I  said,  forms  part  of  the 
Government  Programme,  but  it  should  come  rather  sooner  than  later,  that  is,  the  piece  of 
legislation, so that it can be debated extensively in the House for the well-being of our system 
and our democracy. 

Before I conclude, Madam Speaker, let me say a few words on the post of the Prime 
Minister.  It  is  not  given  to  anybody  to  be  Prime  Minister  of  a  country.  It  is  eminently  a 
question of destiny.  I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is fully aware of the chance he has 
to write history and that he will spare no effort to leave his footprints in the stand of time for 
the coming generation to appreciate.  In his quest of a modern society, I am convinced that he 
will show the political will with acumen needed to bring forward amendments in the electoral 
system  dans  un  esprit  d’ouverture  et  de  fair  play,  et  dans  d’autres  domaines  tels  que  le 
découpage des circonscriptions. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: It is time to break for tea for half an hour. 

At 4.43 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.20 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Benydin! 

93 

Mr T. Benydin (First Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, permit me, at this very first instance, to compliment and congratulate Mrs Hanoomanjee - 
she is not here - on her election as Speaker of the National Assembly and yourself, one of the 
youngest  Members  of  Parliament,  as  Deputy  Speaker.  It  is  indeed  a  pride  for  the  young 
people of Mauritius. The election of Mrs Hanoomanjee as Speaker is a major breakthrough 
for the promotion of gender equality.  I recall that she was also the first Chairperson of the 
Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  and  in  that  capacity  she  was  very  instrumental  in  bringing 
together, under one umbrella, three Government Departments, namely Customs, Income Tax 
and VAT Department, to better harmonise revenue collection in our country. 

I am equally grateful and thankful to the Mouvement Liberater and to the leaders of 
l’Alliance Lepep, especially to Sir Anerood Jugnauth, for sponsoring me, a representative of 
workers  and  a  career  trade  unionist,  to  stand  as  candidate  in  Constituency  No.  15  and  to 
facilitate  my  election  as  a  Member  of  the  National  Assembly.  My  election,  therefore, 
confirms  the  proximity  and  closeness  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  with  the  working  class  of  the 
Republic of Mauritius. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, during the electoral campaign, while the so-called alliance 
“modernity  and  unity”  was  busy  minimising  the  crowds  that  were  gathered  at  Vacoas 
respectively  on  12  October  and  07  December  2014  by  narrowing  the  space  with  the 
complicity  of  the  MBC/TV,  it  is  glorifying  to  note  that,  in  their  wisdom,  the  people  of 
Mauritius were busy preparing for a silent revolution and proved the “Navin-Paul Alliance” 
wrong in their mathematical calculations. 

I. 40 + 40 – I would like to repeat, because I like this very much – did not equate 80% 

(but 47), and 

II. The supporters of l’Alliance Lepep were four to five times greater in numbers than 

those present at Quatre Bornes and Port Louis. 

Unlike the arrogant spirituous and Macarena culture (Blue Label type) of Navin, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth showed humility throughout the campaign and triumphed in view of his 
high spiritual values mixed with exemplary moral principles and cultural values, which our 
Mauritian citizens feel very proud for this great leader. Hail to thee, Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
and to the leaders of l’Alliance Lepep! 

94 

 
The adversaries of l’Alliance Lepep were indeed ill-inspired in that all the time during 
the campaign they sang and echoed loudly “Allez Navin” meaning “go away Navin – Navin 
hatao”, whereas our supporters and electors were better inspired and sang the praises of Sir 
Anerood  by  saying  “SAJ  pe  vini”  and  Nu  fine  vini,  and  Navin  fine  tombe  dans  carreau 
cannes, and his alliance kissed the dust and suffered a crushing defeat. 

Mr Deputy Speaker,  achieving meaningful change by empowering the people for  a 
better livelihood is the commitment of this Government. In line and in consonance with the 
declared  objectives  of  the  United  Nations  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs),  the 
Government Programme (2015-2019) spells clearly the willingness to eradicate poverty via a 
Marshall Plan to improve standards of living of the population by, inter alia, the following 
measures – 

(1)  

(2)  

(3)  

(4)  

(5)  

(6)  

(7)  

(8)  

(9)  

increase of pensions and social aids to Rs5,000; 

alleviating  people’s  burden  by  eliminating  VAT  on  a  number  of  food 
products; 

100% subsidy to students for SC and HSC examinations; 

special support to the elderly and physically handicapped persons; 

payment of a uniform rate of salary compensation (Rs600) to all workers; 

the introduction of a Minimum Wage Bill; 

improved health care systems and quality health services (e.g. second Cardiac 
Surgery Centre and Vascular Surgery Unit, etc.); 

a  better  system  to  democratise  the  economy,  with  the  setting-up  of  a  New 
SME Bank; 

creation  of  new  jobs  (15,000  annually)  and  the  extension  of  the  Youth 
Employment Programme (YEP) to a period of two years; 

(10) 

improvement  of  Social  Housing  Schemes  (10,000  over  the  period  of  five 
years); 

(11) 

 equal opportunities to one and all; 

(12) 

iIntroduction  of  laws  to  protect  children  and  women  against  domestic 
violence; 

 
(13) 

95 

 protection of the environment and addressing issues related to climate change, 
and 

(14) 

 reinforcement of security and law & order in the country. 

The Government Programme clearly underpins the promotion of common values of 
respect for human rights, fundamental freedom, peace, democracy, good governance, gender 
equality,  the  rule  of  law,  solidarity  and  social  justice,  environment  protection,  sustainable 
development and pro-poor economic growth. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  November  2012,  the  Government  of  Mauritius  signed 
with the social partners and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) a Memorandum of 
Understanding on the Decent Work Country Programme for 2012-2014. The programme is 
still  in  progress.  The  priorities  of  the  Decent  Work  Agenda  were  highlighted  towards  the 
creation of Decent and Productive Employment with Social Protection and Elimination of all 
Forms of Discrimination at Work. As somebody coming from the rank of trade unions, I am 
pleased that our Government will come forward with a Minimum Wage Bill for the workers 
at the lower rungs of the ladder, unlike the previous Government which only contracted an 
ILO expert to make a study on the minimum salary and nothing concrete has been realised. 

It  also  goes  without  saying  that  the  National  Remuneration  Board  has  become  an 
obsolete  body  and  should  be  revamped.  Remuneration  Orders  (ROs)  in  many  sectors  are 
more  than  15  years  old  and  have  not  been  revised.  Instead,  there  should  be  another  more 
effective  national  pay  organism  for  workers  who  are  not  covered  by  the  Pay  Research 
Bureau. As such, salaries and conditions of work should be reviewed every three years to put 
all workers on the same level playing field. 

I also commend the report published recently on “Income Inequality in Mauritius” by 
the National Economic  and Social Council and  would like to refer to the public statement 
made by the Commissioner Mahmood Cheeroo, which I quote – 

« La politique salariale est la principale cause de l’inégalité sociale. » 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Commission  for  Conciliation  and  Mediation  (CCM) 
should  be  transformed  into  a  Commission  for  Arbitration  instead  because  many  of  its 
recommendations  have  remained  ineffective.  The  intrinsic  values  of  decent  work  should 
prevail in all circumstances and at all times. The two labour laws, the Employment Relations 
Act and the Employment Rights Act, need profound amendments and changes in that they do 
not  effectively  provide  safety  nets  and  protection  against  unfair  dismissal  and  a  range  of 

 

96 

issues  pertaining  to  working  conditions,  namely  excessive  hours  of  work,  severance 
allowance, portable pensions, stress at work, bullying and harassment at the workplace, just 
to enumerate a few shortcomings in these labour laws. 

Social  dialogue  and  the  consultative  machinery  have  to  be  improved.  The  National 
Tripartite  Forum  set  up  administratively  in  year  2010  to  act  as  a  mechanism  for  the 
promotion  of  social  dialogue  to  address  issues  such  as  salary  compensation,  occupational 
safety and health, employment creation, labour and industrial relations, and skills and training 
have been a non-starter under the previous Government. I am confident that the new Minister 
of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training will take up the challenge and will 
undertake all efforts to revive all bodies concerned with industrial relations and to make them 
function,  particularly  the  National  Tripartite  Forum  which  should  function  within  a  legal 
framework to allow workers to work in dignity and safety. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the objective of a decent work policy should be geared at 
promoting  secure  jobs  with  career  prospect  and  a  particular  focus  to  support  the 
implementation  of  a  national  Plan  of  Action  for  youth  employment.  There  is  at  present 
discussions and talks going on in various quarters on whether the retirement age should not 
be revisited to facilitate job creation and to allow young people to enter the labour market. 
Also, it is imperative that a survey be conducted with regard to the number of people working 
in the informal sector and to find out whether they benefit from social protection schemes and 
conditions of work which are related to decent work. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  paragraph  251  of  the  Government  Programme  underlines 
that  the  public  sector  will  be  reorganised  and  reformed  to  make  it  more  productive, 
transparent,  accountable  and  customer  friendly.  In  this  context,  a  number  of  fundamental 
reforms should be undertaken at the earliest and these reforms could be facilitated with the 
declared policy of Government to go forward with the introduction of a Public Service Bill, 
which  undoubtedly  will  set  parameters  with  a  clear-cut  policy  defining  responsibilities  of 
Public Officers, Ministers and relevant bodies under the various Ministries. 

It is also a matter of concern that the Civil Service College, which was supposed to 
come  into  operation  years  ago,  has  not  yet  taken  off.  All  efforts  should,  therefore,  be 
undertaken  to  ensure  its  smooth  running  and  gear  it  at  promoting  a  world  class  Public 
Service. 

97 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Public  Service  Commission  also  needs  a  complete 
overhauling both in its composition and mission. The Commissioners should come not only 
from the ranks of retired Public Officers but should also include professionals experienced in 
the field of modern management and public administration. Vacancies in the public service 
should  be  filled  without  delay.  Procedures  for  prescriptions  and  approval  of  schemes  of 
service  should  be  simplified  to  allow  new  and  vacant  positions  to  be  filled  without  long 
administrative constraints. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, those who think that the destination will be difficult to be 
reached  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  with  our  faith,  hard  work  and  sacrifice, 
l’Alliance  Lepep  can  move  mountains.  To  repeat  the  words  of  one  of  my  great  friend,  an 
international  trade  unionist,  who  rightly  said  before  leaving  this  world  that  “seuls  les 
optimistes survivront.”  In l’Alliance Lepep, we are all optimistic and we believe in the future 
of this country, and we believe in the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

On this note, I would like to thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gungah! 

(5.40 p.m.) 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  at  the  very  outset  I  would  like  to  congratulate  you  for  your 
nomination  as  Deputy  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly.  I  also  seize  the  opportunity  to 
congratulate  Madam  Speaker  for  her  nomination;  a  nomination  which  creates  a  historical 
milestone by having a first lady at that position. 

It is my duty to place on record my gratitude to the electorate of my constituency for 
having  elected  me  and  my  two  fellow  candidates,  hon.  Rughoobur  and  hon.  Fowdar,  to 
represent them for the next five years in the National Assembly. 

In  the  same  breath,  I  thank  the  population  for  having  voted  in  favour  of  l’Alliance 
Lepep led by Sir Anerood Jugnauth; a vote which proves to many people that in politics 40% 
+ 40% is not equal to 80% and still not to a “60 Zero” and that the so-called chemistry which 
certain people were talking about was more a myth than a reality. 

In  the  aftermath  of  the  last  general  elections  and  with  the  presentation  of  the 
Government Programme 2015–2019, a new chapter has been opened in the socio-economic 
life of the country, where people can legitimately see the upcoming of an era of prosperity 

 

98 

and  social  justice  and  harmony.  A  decade  long  of  poor  leadership,  creating  bitter 
disappointment among the people of the country is now over. 

This Government, under the leadership and the vision of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, has 

braced itself to work for the people and with the people. 

History will bear testimony that in the need of the hour, the citizens of this country 
have elected Sir Anerood Jugnauth as their leader to halt the degradation which the nation 
was suffering from. We are now rekindling the people’s confidence in governance, reignite 
the economic engines and steer the country on a positive growth path. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  cette  victoire  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  a  été  construite  sur  des 
bases  solides,  avec  des  hommes  et  des  femmes  convaincus  dans  leur  combat.  L’histoire 
retiendra  la  sincérité,  le  langage  de  vérité  tenu  depuis  aout  2011  par  le  Leader  du  MSM, 
Pravind Jugnauth. 

Malgré la répression et la politique ‘dominère’, alors que certains agissaient comme 
des  membres  de  la  gestapo  pour  faire  peur  aux  opposants  politiques,  Pravind  Jugnauth  a 
dénoncé  la  politique  de  copinage,  le  favoritisme  accordé  à  certains  proches  du  pouvoir  au 
détriment  de  la  population.  Malgré  tous  ces  obstacles  et  actes  de  répression,  la  vérité  a 
triomphé.  Pravind Jugnauth n’a jamais tergiversé. Aujourd’hui l’histoire lui donne raison. 

The people have clearly demonstrated their maturity in choosing the team to govern 
Mauritius for the next five years. They have freed the country from the shackles of ineptitude 
and indolence. For us, the countdown has already started. 

However, the road to cleanse the country of all the ills of the previous Government 
and  to  put  the  country  back  on  a  pathway  of  socio-economic  progress  will  no  doubt  be 
arduous and fraught with multi-faceted challenges. But the population can rest assured that no 
hurdle will be insurmontable, so strong is our determination and perseverance. 

This  Government  Programme  has  been  inspired  by  the  philosophy  of  the  Prime 
Minister  who  strongly  believes  in  good  governance,  the  promotion  of  law  and  order,  a 
corrupt-free society and equitable distribution of wealth, where the fruits of progress trickle 
down to one and all. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Government  Programme  has  embedded  a  socio-
economic trajectory to combat unemployment, to empower our citizens, including our youths, 
to attract investment and create new pillars of growth, to foster social inclusion, to protect the 

 

99 

most disadvantaged and the elderly, to enhance social services and improve delivery of social 
goods, to promote law and order, to foster an eco-friendly course of economic development, 
among others. 

The themes which  I have just enumerated are clearly indicative of the Government 
commitment to implement the appropriate measures for the economy to be powered with new 
vitality, resilience and dynamism and to pave the way for improvement in the quality of life 
so that every citizen can aspire for brighter days ahead. 

The team spirit and synergy that prevailed during the last election campaign will no 
doubt  epitomise  the  increasing  public  interest  in  the  socio-economic  development  of  our 
country, the foundations of which have now been laid in our Government Programme 2015-
2019. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Mauritius  is  not  a  nation  that  stands  alone.  We  shall  be 
affected one way or another by the changes around us. We cannot be a bystander to these 
developments. We must endeavour to influence the evolving situation in a manner that would 
ensure our national interest and enhance our national goals and objectives. With this in mind, 
I envisage that our industrial, commercial/trading and consumer protection agenda will stand 
on the following main tenets. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the industry sector will have to play a determinant role in 
shaping a new economic configuration. Le secteur peut générer beaucoup d’emplois, et nous 
devons tout mettre en œuvre pour combattre le chômage. Les mesures annoncées dans notre 
programme vont permettre de donner un nouveau dynamisme au secteur de l’industrie. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Government Programme provides an array of measures 
to  bring  back  the  industry  sector  on  a  new  growth  path.  Indeed,  the  performance  of  the 
industry sector during recent years has been rather modest. As an export-oriented economy, 
increasing exports to higher levels is vital to sustaining economic development. 

In recent years, exports have been growing on a low and erratic trend which is not 
conducive for the country to tread on a high-growth path. We will, therefore, have to revisit 
the export promotion framework so that activities are implemented in a coherent, holistic and 
targeted  approach.    In  fact,  an  Export  Development  Plan  will  be  designed  to  expand  the 
export frontiers and our footprints in the region with a more greater variety of products. 

The  Government  Programme  also  emphasises  an  Africa  Export  Strategy.  Africa  is 
asserting itself as a new economic force where we can undoubtedly leverage on rising level 

 

100 

of income. The middle class is increasing and the implementation of economic liberalisation 
policies will surely help us in our goals. 

I will also mention the development of a fashion industry. In this modern age, fashion 
is  underpinning  the  development  of  many  key  economic  sectors  and  is  pivotal  to  be 
competitive in all market segments. In Mauritius, it is vital to provide the necessary support 
to the industry sector to produce fashionable, trendy, branded and high-value products that 
are saleable in both the regional and the global market place. 

Here, the Fashion and Design Institute will have a critical role to play to endow our 
designers,  through  academic  and  professional  training,  with  capabilities  to  produce 
innovative  and  differentiated  products  that  can  competitively  make  the  difference  in  the 
market. 

M. le président, notre secteur manufacturier a été à la base de notre premier miracle 
économique.  Malgré  toutes  les  difficultés  du  marché,  je  suis  sûr  que  ce  secteur  a  un  bel 
avenir.  La  mondialisation  a  permis  l’ouverture  d’autres  marchés,  et  Maurice  doit  savoir 
profiter  de  cela.  Je  suis  confiant  que  ces  mesures  annoncées  dans  le  programme 
gouvernemental vont permettre un nouveau positionnement de ce secteur, à un niveau plus 
avancé  dans  le  monde,  et  ainsi  apporter  sa  contribution  dans  le  développement  socio-
économique de notre pays. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  new  pillars  for  economic  growth  shall  be  developed  to 
exploit fully and judiciously the competitive positioning of our nation in this region of the 
world. With over two million square kilometres of maritime territory, Mauritius must project 
itself as a regional hub and in a leading role in the maritime sector. 

Le  trafic  maritime  dans  l’océan  Indien  grandit  énormément.  Cela  suite  à  une 
croissance  dans  le  commerce  entre  les  pays  émergents  de  l’Afrique  et  l’Asie.  Notre  pays 
devrait en tirer le plus de bénéfices. 

Furthermore, an increasing number of shipping lines prefer to call past the Cape of 
Good Hope because of high charges in the Suez Canal, and the piracy zone imposes a high 
premium. It is estimated that the volume of the bunkering business in the region is of one 
million metric tons, and Mauritius currently captures only 30% of the market. The potential 
to expand is here. 

101 

 
By  capitalising  on  our  superior  business  potential  and  its  strategic  geographical 
position at the crossroads of Africa and Asia, our country is well placed to develop into a 
premier regional petroleum hub. 

The elaboration of a strategic approach is auspicious for positioning Mauritius as a 
regional hub in petroleum trading, thereby establishing a strong new pillar in the economy 
that would service the  region,  reinforce the position of the country as an air and maritime 
hub, and generate a variety of activities related to provision of goods and services to boost the 
economy. 

The  petroleum  storage  capacity  is  called  upon  to  keep  pace  with  the  anticipated 
development,  the  more  so  as  the  country  does  not  have  the  necessary  infrastructure  to 
maintain any strategic stock of its own. 

M.  le  président,  avec  la  mise  à  terme  du  contrat  de  Betamax,  le  gouvernement  a 
démontré  son  engagement  à  promouvoir  la  bonne  gouvernance  et  éliminer  les  pratiques 
déloyales.  La  State  Trading  Corporation  prend  actuellement 
les  mesures  afin 
d’approvisionner le pays en produits pétroliers. Ce matin j’avais affirmé que nous payerons le 
fret  à  un  prix  beaucoup  plus  bas  que  celui  que  nous  avons  payé  à  Betamax  et  le  pays  en 
sortira gagnant. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, advancement in information and communication technology, 
globalisation  and  trade  liberalisation  have  resulted  in  evolution  of  a  more  complex  and 
challenging business environment. 

Today, consumers are constantly being faced with a bewildering array of goods and 
services in the market.  Consumers must be equipped with an elevated level of consumerism 
knowledge,  information  and  skills.  Mauritian  consumers  need  to  be  kept  in  touch  with 
development in the market, enabling them to act and decide effectively. 

However,  without  the  Government’s  intervention  to  protect  consumers  through 
adequate legislation and enforcement, the aim of creating empowered consumers will not be 
realised. We believe that the promulgation and effective enforcement of consumer protection 
policies  and  legislation  will  promote  the  protection  of  the  basic  rights  of  individuals  as 
consumers. 

The Consumer Protection Act was enacted in 1991, while the Fair Trading Act was 
enacted in 1979. Both these pieces of legislation have stood the test of time. It needs to be 
overhauled. It is sad to note that the Consumer Protection Bill, which was introduced in this 

 

102 

August assembly in 2014, did not proceed beyond first reading stage, for the reason we all 
know. The interest of consumers of this country was relegated because of priorities given to 
personal interest. 

In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we shall look at the socio-economic interest of our 
citizens  through  the  enactment  of  the  new  Consumer  Protection  Bill  –  a  concept  we 
advocated throughout our electoral campaign. We are going to fulfil our promises. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  trade  facilitation  and  ease  of  doing  business  are  the 
cornerstone of economic development and growth. Economic cooperation with our traditional 
and  main  trading  partners  has  proved  its  usefulness  in  promoting  and  enhancing  trade. 
Exploring  new  markets  will  continue  to  be  our  main  target  in  our  trade  and  commercial 
endeavour.  We  must  seize  the  diplomatic  and  economic  high  ground  to  expand  our 
commercial ties with others and play a leading role in Africa affairs. 

This  Government  is  hardly  in  power  for  two  months  that  the  UK  Trade  and 
Investment Office is considering setting up an office in Mauritius. This shows the credibility 
and potential of Mauritius and this Government commitment that it means business. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, promoting investment, both domestic and foreign, will also 
play  a  crucial  role  in  the  employment  creation  process.  Private  sector  investment  as  a 
percentage of GDP has stagnated over the years and has been more geared towards real estate 
development and commercial complexes. 

Mauritius,  on  this  trend,  will  never  achieve  its  goal  to  be  a  high-income  country. 
Shifting to higher production possibility curve is the only way. Leveraging on the ingenuity 
and entrepreneurial flair of our people constitutes the most viable option. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the provision of Rs10 billion for SME development and the 
setting  up  of  a  new  SME  bank,  which  are  spelt  out  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-
2019, are concrete measures which constitute a historic milestone to open new windows of 
opportunities  for  our  people,  to  promote  an  entrepreneurial  society  and  to  boost  economic 
progress. 

However,  attracting  FDI  will  be  a  critical  stepping-stone  to  foster  development  of 
skill,  technology  and  knowledge-intensive  activities.  New  support  measures,  provision  of 
new  infrastructure  such  as  a  techno  park  and  improvement  in  the  investment  climate  will 
certainly create the propitious environment to attract FDI in key emerging sectors which have 
been identified in the Government Programme. 

103 

 
My  Ministry  will  work  hand  in  hand  with  all  related  institutions  and  agencies  in 
further streamlining trade procedures, accelerating trade facilitation and improving the ease 
of doing business in the country. We will coordinate efforts at all levels for a concerted action 
to ensure that trade occurs in the best possible way with the least cost and time to the benefit 
of one and all. My Ministry will ensure that non-tariff measures enforced in the country are 
only  the  reasons  of  strategy,  security,  sensitivity,  environment,  and  do  not  become 
unnecessary barriers to trade. 

In  the  same  vein,  my  Ministry  will  sustain  its  effort  in  reinforcing  the  image  of 
Mauritius  as  an  ideal  location  to  carry  out  trading  activities.  We  will  fully  assist  in  the 
national effort in the implementation of the Single Window Project in the overall context of 
trade facilitation in the country. 

We will follow up with line Ministries for the early renewal of the Africa Growth and 
Opportunity Act (AGOA) for export to the US market, for undisrupted market access, and 
will  continue  to  keep  a  constant  watch  on  the  evolving  world  trade  scenario  to  prevent 
hazardous  and  contaminated  items  from  entering  our  territory  with  efficient  trade  control 
measures  and  documents.  On  the  issue  of  trade  and  environment,  we  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with all those concerned to ensure that pollution free trade is taking place in the 
country. 

M. le président, le développement d’un pays moderne serait un vain mot si on n’a pas 
un  mode  de  production  “eco-friendly.”  Depuis  plusieurs  années, 
les  organisations 
internationales  tirent  la  sonnette  d’alarme  sur  l’effet  de  la  production  industrielle  sur 
l’environnement. 

Many countries worldwide have embarked or have gone a long way in promoting a 
safe, clean and carbon-free economy that matches with imperatives of resource efficiency and 
a better quality of life. 

This Government pledges to place environmental protection in a cornerstone of our 
socio-economic  development  process.  The  Government  Programme  provides  a  holistic 
approach to restore the image of Mauritius as a green, clean and safe island, through strategic 
measures,  including  the  production  of  renewable  energy,  the  introduction  of  a  Climate 
Change  Bill,  better  management  of  our  beaches,  adoption  of  policies  for  water  and  waste 
management and the development of a modernised infrastructure. These key measures will 

 

104 

certainly provide more effectiveness to the concept of Maurice Ile Durable as well as pave 
the way for Mauritius to regain its status as a Paradise Island. 

An  Eco  Label  certification  for  the  manufacturing  and  service  sectors  will  be 
developed.  Forthcoming  regulations  on  Energy  Efficiency  Labelling  will  lead  to  use  of 
energy  efficient  electrical  appliances.  The  quality  of  building  materials  will  be  closely 
monitored  and  relevant  legislations  will  be  harmonised,  while  Inspection  and  Testing 
Schemes will be implemented. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Legal  Metrology  Services  is  responsible  for  the 

administration of the Legal Metrology Act 1985. 

Legal Metrology plays a vital role in consumer protection and in the technical support 
to  industry  since  it  ensures  that  weighing  and  measuring  instruments  used  in  trade  and 
industry  are  accurate  and  traceable  to  international  standards.  In  order  to  ensure  that 
instruments are used properly, inspections are carried out by officers of the Legal Metrology 
Division at markets, market fairs, shops, super/hypermarkets and filling stations. Pre-packed 
goods are verified to ensure compliance with net contents and labelling the Legal Metrology 
Act.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  control  of  instruments  used  in  trade  and  the  control  of  pre-
packaged commodities are done according to international standards. 

To ensure more effective consumer protection, Government will review the scope of 
legal metrology for better control of instruments used in health sector and road safety. Liquid 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) dispenser for motor vehicles, medical measuring instruments like blood 
pressure, breath analyzers and speed radar will be controlled under the Legal Metrology Act. 

More emphasis will be laid on the control of imported pre-packed commodities (both 
foodstuffs  and  non-foodstuffs)  concerning  labelling  requirements  and  accuracy  of  net 
contents to ensure that consumers get correct information and the quantity declared on the 
package.  Furthermore,  this  will  provide  fairness  to  our  local  manufacturers  and  packers. 
Awareness programmes in the field of legal metrology will also be enhanced. 

Over the past years, the public at large has been hardly hit by unprecedented increases 
in prices. A number of families have had to curtail their expenditure in view of the exorbitant 
prices of a number of products. In this perspective, Government’s policy to eliminate VAT on 
a number of products is most welcomed as this is likely to have a significant positive impact 
on the purchasing power of consumers. 

105 

 
To further promote and protect the rights and interest of the consumer, Government 
will set up a National Price Consultative Council with a view to providing  a safety net to 
consumers against unreasonable price increase of basic commodities. 

The  function  and  operation  of  the  Consumer  Affairs  Unit  (CAU)  will  be  revisited 
with  a  new  consumer  protection  regime  with  more  emphasis  on  consumer  education, 
consumer  advocacy  and  consumer  welfare  as  well  as  the  empowerment  of  Consumer 
Protection Associations. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Government  is  condemned  to  perform  and  succeed 
because  we  cannot  let  go  the  hopes  and  aspirations  that  the  whole  Mauritian  society  has 
placed  on  us.  Nous  n’avons  pas  le  droit  à  l’erreur.  There  should  be  five  fundamental 
principles that should guide us all the time in our action and conduct as a Government: 

First, this is a pro-people Government. We have been elected by the people, for the 
people, and it is with the people that we shall forge ahead in the best interest of one and all. 
On this side of the House, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we do not have kings – one for the south, 
one for the east and even one “the king of all kings”.  On this side of the House we are but the 
humble servants of our people. 

Second,  we  should  invariably  remain  guided  by  values  of  good  governance, 

meritocracy, accountability and transparency. We should lead by example. 

Third, we should wage a relentless war against wastage at all level. Extravagant and 

unnecessary expenditure should be curtailed. 

Fourth,  we  have  one  clear  and  consistent  leader  with  common  vision,  goals  and 

objectives. 

Fifth,  a  Government  that  is  result  oriented.  Action  speaks  louder  than  words.  We 
should aim at excellence and ensure that the Government Programme is implemented within 
the time frame. 

M. le président, ce programme va nous aider à nous tourner résolument vers un avenir 
plus serein et surtout plus confortable pour nos citoyens. Nous allons laisser derrière nous un 
passé douloureux, marqué par des évènements sur lesquels je ne voudrai pas élaborer ici. On 
doit plutôt porter un regard plus optimiste et serein sur l’avenir. D’ailleurs, les efforts déjà 
entamés contre la fraude et la  corruption est un  pas qui ouvre une  fenêtre sur un nouveau 
paysage de notre pays. Aussi, les mesures du programme gouvernemental vont apporter un 

 

106 

nouveau souffle pour un nouvel essor économique. En fait, ce programme, nous l’avons vu, 
comporte les ingrédients essentiels afin que notre pays puisse relever les défis auxquels nous 
sommes confrontés et permettre un meilleur avenir pour le peuple et des générations à venir. 
C’était  la  promesse  de  ce  gouvernement,  et  maintenant  nous  sommes  attelés  à  réaliser  le 
deuxième miracle économique. 

M. le président, laissez-moi terminer en faisant référence à Confucius. Je cite - 

“In a country well-governed, poverty is something to be ashamed of.  In a country 
badly governed, wealth is something to be ashamed of.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this quote sheds light on what the future will be from what 

the past has been. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

(6.11 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  you  on  your  appointment  as  Deputy 
Speaker of the National Assembly, the most important and honourable post, which I know 
you will hold with dignity and impartiality, and I wish you well. I would like also to extend 
my congratulations to the newly appointed Government. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it has been a tradition in this Assembly for new Members of 
the new Government to criticise the decisions of the former one and for the Opposition to 
question the decisions of the newly elected Members. I intend to fulfil my duties as Member 
of this honourable House positively, constructively, focusing on the future, not on the past. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am proud of our diversity. It is our biggest strength. In a 
world so divided by religious and ethnic conflicts, we must realise how easy it is to turn this 
strength into hatred and division. My father is Hindu, my mother is French and my father-in-
law  is  Muslim.  I  see  my  three  sons  as  Mauritians.  This  mixed  heritage  truly  makes  it  my 
greatest asset in this globalised village we are now living in. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, should we participate in a policy of cynicism and division or 
one of unity and hope? Too much effort and time is spent on what divides us, as opposed to 
what should unite us.  Too much effort on mistakes made, as opposed to the achievements we 
can all be proud of.  Too much effort focused on the past and not enough on the future. 

107 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all recognise the contribution of the indentured labourers 
and  slaves  who  built  our  agrarian  economy,  but  we  must  also  recognise  the  efforts  of  the 
French and the English who colonised Île de France, of the Muslim and Chinese traders and 
shopkeepers who favoured commerce, not forgetting the Franco-Mauritian community who 
developed the sugar industry and set the path for textile and hospitality sectors. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am a member, a proud member of the Labour Party, a party 
that has included great Mauritians such as Emmanuel Anquetil, Renganaden Seeneevasen, Sir 
Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam,  Sir  Abdool  Razack  Mohamed,  Pandit  Sahadeo,  Sir  Satcam 
Boolell  and  many  other  illustrious  women  and  men,  too  many  to  mention.  I  have  to 
acknowledge  the  huge  contribution  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  and  Sir  Gaëtan 
Duval  as  well  as  hon.  Paul  Bérenger,  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  the  former  Prime 
Minister, Dr. Ramgoolam, and many other political leaders from all parties. It is due to their 
combined efforts, intelligence, vision and personal sacrifice that we are here today. 

For a small island without natural resources, we have already  exceeded  the wildest 
dreams  of  our  forefathers,  for  today  Mauritius  is  looked  upon  by  most  of  the  world  as  a 
success story. 

The World Bank and the IMF regularly make reference to the ‘Mauritian Miracle’ and 
I  personally  never  get  bored  of  hearing  of  our  standing  and  recognition  by  global 
organisations. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, however all is not perfect. We are only 11th in Africa for 
press freedom, 8th in Africa for international property rights and 117th in the world for dealing 
with construction permits. 

So, while we have made significant progress, we cannot rest on our laurels, and we 
must strive even harder to continue to develop our nation and lead it to a better and a brighter 
future. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  to  plan,  think  long  term,  and  implement  without 

fault the following: the building of our national identity and culture. 

M. le président, j’avais adressé  à l’honorable Premier  ministre une question sur les 
associations  socio-culturelles.  Je  n’ai  pas  eu  le  soin  de  pouvoir  développer  le  fond  de  ma 
pensée.  Loin  de  moi  d’essayer  de  l’embarrasser,  mais  plutôt  de  toucher  à  un  point 
fondamental de notre pays. La culture est le ciment d’une nation ; cette culture, notre culture 
est multiple. Elle est riche. Elle est variée. C’est ce qui fait notre force. 

108 

 
Cependant, nous sommes toujours rattrapés par de vieux réflexes.  Certains, sous le 
couvert de la culture, s’invitent dans des débats tels que la politique énergétique de ce pays, 
sur les nominations étatiques, sur l’orientation économique de notre république, et j’en passe. 

Il  faut  que  cela  évolue,  d’où  ma  question  à  l’honorable  Premier  ministre,  en 
m’inspirant du Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act of Singapore. Je rejoins l’honorable 
Leader de l’opposition sur ce point. Ce n’est pas tant la non-prise de parole qui fait mal, mais 
bien les propos qui sont tenus. À Singapour, si vous êtes un homme religieux, vous devez 
parler sur le sujet pour lequel vous êtes mandaté. Si vous avez envie de  vous inviter dans 
d’autres débats, vous devez le faire à titre personnel. Ce n’est peut-être pas la priorité de ce 
gouvernement fraîchement élu, mais j’espère qu’une législation adaptée sera adoptée lors de 
cette mandature car, M. le président, nous avons des identités multiples : franco-mauricienne, 
indo-mauricienne, sino-mauricienne, créole-mauricienne, et j’en passe. Ces identités souvent 
distinctes  et  parfois  mélangées  forment  la  grande  nation  mauricienne.  Notre  rôle  est  de  la 
faire évoluer et grandir. 

M.  le  président,  je  voudrais  partager  avec  vous  maintenant  mon  analyse  rapide  du 
discours-programme. Tout d’abord, je suis content de savoir que la responsabilité de gérer 
notre économie se retrouve désormais dans les mains de celui qui a beaucoup contribué au 
décollage économique de ce pays dans les années 80 et qui mesure la tâche qui lui incombe, 
qui est celle de projeter notre économie vers celle de pays à hauts revenus. 

Pour y arriver, nous avons besoin de 7% à 8 % de croissance continue pendant les 10 
prochaines  années  pour  espérer  doubler  nos  revenues.  Se  contenter  de  3  %  reviendrait  à 
hypothéquer et sacrifier toute une génération. 

J’ai  parcouru  attentivement  le  discours-programme  ;  il  y  a  certes  une  vision,  de 
bonnes intentions, mais entre une intention et une action existe un long chemin. Il faut une 
stratégie, il faut l’implémenter, et il faut par-dessus tout une équipe solide. J’ai été à la tête 
moi-même  d’une  entreprise  qui  a  des  intérêts  dans  l’immobilier,  dans  l’hôtellerie,  dans 
l’agro-alimentaire et je siège par ailleurs sur le conseil d’administration d’un des plus gros 
conglomérats de l’île, et à ce titre j’ai pu constater les choses suivantes. 

M.  le  président,  depuis  l’indépendance,  le  secteur  privé  n’a  fait  que  reproduire  des 
modèles  génériques.  Dans  le  secteur  du  textile,  nous  fabriquons  plus  ou  moins  les  mêmes 
produits depuis 30 ans. Dans les hôtels, on y dort dans les mêmes lits, on y mange la même 
nourriture.  Nos  banques  vendent  les  mêmes  services.  Les  services  financiers  font  de 

 

109 

l’administration  sans  valeur  ajoutée  alors  que  l’on  devrait  se  focaliser  sur  du  wealth 
management, du private banking, du private equity avec l’Afrique. Nos centres commerciaux 
proposent les mêmes magasins. Les IRS développent les mêmes maisons. 

M.  le  président,  n’est-il pas  temps  de  transformer  cet  état  d’esprit  et  d’attirer  enfin 
l’innovation et la créativité ? Savez-vous que Maurice est parmi les leaders mondiaux de la 
production  des  cathéters,  les  stents  pour  le  cœur ?  Nous  produisons  des  pièces  d’avions 
sophistiquées pour Airbus actuellement. 

Nous devons développer notre attractivité et nos compétences et attirer cent fois plus 
d’entreprises innovantes, et ce dans tous les secteurs de notre économie ; de l’agriculture au 
textile,  des  services  financiers  à  l’hôtellerie.  Et  pour  cela,  l’État  doit  apporter  sa  pierre  à 
l’édifice.  Formation, 
les  entrepreneurs 
performants ont besoin d’un Etat performant. 

infrastructure,  accompagnement  administratif, 

Il existe, M. le président, une pléthore de jeunes entrepreneurs en Europe et en Asie 
qui lorgnent du côté du continent africain, et qui souhaitent, pour des raisons fiscales et de 
qualité  de  vie,  s’expatrier.  Il  faut  être  capable  de  capter  cette  migration,  et  parallèlement 
encourager une nouvelle génération d’entrepreneurs mauriciens - les José Poncini de demain, 
les Sir Edouard Lim Fat de demain, les Fakhru Currimjee de demain. 

M. le président, par rapport à notre industrie touristique, nous sommes à la croisée des 
chemins. C’est maintenant ou jamais ; il nous faut réinventer notre destination. J’attends avec 
impatience les assises du tourisme, comme proposé par le ministre de tutelle, ainsi que son 
schéma directeur, et nous aurons l’occasion d’en débattre ultérieurement. 

Concernant  le  secteur  immobilier,  il  faut  que  nous  apprenions  à  nous  ouvrir  vers 
l’extérieur.  Nous,  Mauriciens,  avons  un  rapport  particulier  aux  étrangers.  Nous  avons  pu 
attirer  quelques  familles  sud-africaines,  françaises  dans  deux  grandes  agglomérations, 
notamment Grand’ Baie et Tamarin, et tout de suite on a commencé à parler d’invasion. 

Ces nouveaux migrants louent des maisons, emploient du personnel, investissent dans 
l’économie nationale et régionale et apportent des nouvelles idées. À titre de comparaison, il 
y a à Dubaï deux millions d’étrangers et dix millions de touristes. 

M.  le  président,  il  est  impératif  que  nous  ayons  une  politique  d’ouverture,  certes 

contrôlée, mais il est primordial de savoir s’ouvrir. 

110 

 
Le développement et la création de richesse que j’appelle de tous mes vœux doit avoir 
pour objectif sous-jacent une meilleure qualité de vie à tous les citoyens de notre République. 
Un dicton vous dit la chose suivante- 

‘Quand on est capitaliste à 60 ans c’est qu’on n’a pas de cœur. Quand on est et on 
reste communiste à 60 ans c’est qu’on n’a pas de cerveau.’ 

Grâce au développement économique, la lutte contre les inégalités doit être le cheval 
de bataille. Nous devons partir en croisade contre la pauvreté, redonner à notre population de 
l’habitat digne, planifié autour d’un vrai service urbain et de parc arboré, du développement 
où il fait bon vivre, et créer de la richesse pour tous. 

M.  le  président,  le  nouveau  régime  a  fait  de  la  lutte  contre  ce  cancer  qui  est  la 
corruption  sa  priorité.  Elle  aura  mon  soutien  indéfectible  tant  que  cela  restera  du  domaine 
d’actions concrètes. Notre République doit être exemplaire dans la conduite de ses affaires. 

M.  le  président,  nous  serons  une  opposition  vigilante,  incisive  quand  il  le  faut  et 
surtout constructive, et testerons la réelle volonté de ce gouvernement de venir avec une vraie 
réforme  électorale,  une  profonde  transformation  des  administrations  régionales,  un  plan 
d’aménagement  de  notre  territoire  pour  les  25  prochaines  années,  une  législation  sur  le 
financement des partis politiques, une politique cohérente sur notre mix énergétique qui doit 
faire la part belle aux énergies renouvelables. 

M. le président, pour conclure, apprenons à apprivoiser nos craintes et nos peurs. La 
peur empêche d’entreprendre, la peur empêche d’avancer, de se projeter, et il faut avoir le 
courage  de  dire  à  nos  concitoyens  la  vérité.  M.  le  président,  je  suis  devant  vous  fier ;  fier 
d’avoir l’occasion de servir mon pays, de contribuer à son développement, car la politique 
c’est l’art de rendre l’impossible possible. 

Merci. 

(6.24 p.m.) 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, congratulations to Madam Speaker, 
on  her  appointment  by  this  Government  that  ‘walk  the  talk’,  to  preside  over  this  august 
National  Assembly.  I  equally  congratulate  the  Deputy  Speaker,  the  symbol  of  the  new 
generation of young politicians. 

111 

 
Allow  me  to  congratulate  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  Prime  Minister  and 
Leader  of  the  House,  for  moulding  this  Government  Programme  to  achieve  meaningful 
change in all spheres that touch the Mauritian society. Paragraph 6 of the Programme says, I 
quote – 

“Government’s  objective  is  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  truly  forward  looking, 
environmentally  sustainable,  economically  vibrant  and  innovative  country  with 
modern infrastructure, global connectivity, high skills and technology.” 

Today,  I  am  standing  in  this  august  Assembly  with  the  vox  populi  vox  dei  of  the 
electorates of Constituency No. 9, Flacq-Bon Accueil. I am morally and emotionally grateful 
to them for giving me an opportunity to serve our motherland in the highest interest of each 
and every one in our Republic. I pray the Almighty to give me the courage and wisdom to 
serve  the  nation,  through  my  constituency,  to  the  best  of  my  ability  on  the  trust  bestowed 
upon me. 

I have to thank the people of Mauritius for choosing a ‘Government of the People, By 
the  People,  and  For  the  People’.  With  us,  democracy  and  the  existing  peace  and  harmony 
among our people will never be threatened within the framework of un Etat de droit. 

This august House will remain the House of the people, certainly not the House of a 

few privileged ones with their own agenda, overriding the needs of the people. 

The wish of our people is to have justice, social harmony, feel safe and secure, peace 
and prosperity. This has triggered our reasons to offer our competence and leadership to serve 
our motherland and its people, to relieve them from injustices and sufferings in all its form, 
and to feel secure and safe. 

It  is  the  call  of  our  history  to  gather  all  the  competences  that  were  set  aside  and 
wanted  to  contribute  for  a  better  Mauritius,  to  have  space  to  evolve,  to  bring  their 
contribution for the welfare and better future for its people. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government has already understood the wishes of the 

people and will bring changes according to the needs of the people for a better Mauritius. 

As the Government of the people, we have the political will, competence and blessing 
to  fulfil  our  mandate  in  the  interest  of  the  nation.  Nation  building  and  the  welfare  of  its 
people will be the priority of this Government. 

112 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the need of the day and the wish of the people is to have a 
performing,  caring  and  stable  Government  where  honour  and  dignity  of  each  Mauritian  is 
protected. 

Peace  and  harmony  will  have  its  place.  Victims  of  injustice,  sufferings  and 

favouritism will be assisted and heard.  Democratic norms will be preserved. 

Government House won’t be converted into a business house and be the property of a 
privileged  few.    Our  institutions  will  be  protected  from  mafia  infiltration.    Feel  safe  and 
secure  factor  and  re-engineered  human  factor  should  be  the  pillar  of  any  development. 
Certainly, creation of wealth and sharing of wealth, employment and capacity building will 
be our focus. 

No  doubt  good  governance  and  creation  of  trust  between  the  Government  and  the 

people will be the driving force for success and progress of our Motherland. 

The greatest challenge of the day is to transform expectation and dreams of the people 

into realities.  Having the trust and blessing of the people, we will succeed as a team. 

The  environmental  aspect  of  the  meaningful  changes  that  have  already  started  is 
incorporated  in  12  more  chapters  that  have  been  drafted  in  the  face  of  a  state  of 
environmental degradation that has never been seen in our entire national history. 

Whereas  the  previous  Government  recorded  numerous  deaths  and  desolation  more 
than once in the wake of heavy floods and other bad weather conditions, the new regime led 
by Sir Anerood Jugnauth has already successfully faced extreme weather conditions created 
by meteorological disturbances like superstorm Bansi and huge waves that exceeded 50 feet 
in  height  in  some  areas  of  our  Republic.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  no  loss  of  life,  and 
damage to property has remained manageable - and this is exactly what we call ‘meaningful 
change’. However, we have to admit, as Nelson Mandela has stated, I quote – 

“We have not taken the final step of our journey, but the first step on a longer and 
even difficult road.” 

The  wave  of  change  that  brought  this  Government  to  an  overwhelming  victory  in 
December  2014  is  still  vibrant,  and  it  is  now  our  collective  responsibility  to  sustain  this 
dynamism  while  concurrently  creating  the  opportunities  for  a  better,  prosperous  and  more 
equitable and all inclusive Mauritius. 

113 

 
The  country  was  heading  into  a  dangerous  decline  towards  a  gloomy  future.  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, our Prime Minister now, had to resign as the President of the Republic to 
sauve nou pays and led l’Alliance Lepep to victory. This Government came at an opportune 
time,  and  our  Government  Programme  will  halt  this  decline  and  gear  our  country  towards 
prosperity.  Our  objectives  are  clear.  We  want  a  better  future  for  ourselves  and  the  future 
generations. In fact, we want a sustainable Mauritius where fairness, equity and transparency 
prevail.  The few recent measures already taken clearly indicate the path we are heading in 
the national interest. We want Mauritius, which has been choking for the last ten years, to 
breathe  anew  and  adopt  changes  that  will  be  quick  but  sustainable,  more  precisely  in  the 
wake of climate change and other emerging challenges. The beneficiaries of this change will 
be the population of the Republic of Mauritius without any distinction. 

For  the  past  ten  years,  while  the  previous  Government  had  been  publicising  for  a 

Maurice Ile Durable, it was, in fact, the contrary that was happening. 

Never  in  history  have  we  witnessed  unsustainable  development  to  such  an  extent 
where  our  national  heritage  and  environmental  assets  were  plundered,  massacred  and 
dilapidated. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  far  as  environment  is  concerned,  there  have  been 

numerous abuses and malpractices. 

Allow me to mention just a few of them - 

• 

• 

• 

unwarranted development on our environmentally sensitive areas, ESAs and 
sensitive coastal areas; 
Our  State  lands  were  distributed  to  petits  copains  for  speculation  and  ill-
defined projects. Nous avons vu un festival de la terre. 
Even our public beaches were not spared.  I do not need to remind the House 
what  happened  at  Trou-aux-Biches  and  Mon  Choisy;  not  to  forget  what 
happened at Riambel. You all know the story! Fortunately, we have reacted 
quickly to put an end to such abusive accaparement of our patrimoine, which 
belongs to the whole nation. 

I  am  putting  an  end  to  projects  that  have  negative  impact  on  environment  like 
construction of hotels on barachois and wetlands and development of residential complexes 
on steep slopes. 

114 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government Programme has been crafted in such a way 
so as to respond to the needs of the country and aspirations of the people whilst ensuring the 
judicious and sustainable use of our natural assets. 

Furthermore, our people-centred programme is rooted in key guiding principles like 
law  and  order,  good  governance,  discipline,  transparency  and  accountability.  Above  all,  it 
instils a sense of much needed direction for meaningful change. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow me at this point to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
for  his  trust  in  conferring  upon  me  the  responsibility  of  the  Environment  and  Sustainable 
Development, Solid Waste, Beach and Disaster Management portfolio. I will now take the 
opportunity to address the House on the mandates entrusted to me. 

Coming  to  environment  proper,  allow  me  to  highlight  that  this  Government  has 
chartered a new line of action for a cleaner, greener and safer Mauritius. We cannot afford to 
legate  an  environment  which  is  devoid  of  its  critical  ecosystem  services  to  the  future 
generations. This is precisely why environmental sustainability is the fil conducteur of this 
Government Programme. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, at this point, I would like to remind the House that it is none 
other  than  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  himself,  who  had  brought 
environment to the forefront in our country in 1991 by creating the Ministry of Environment 
and the required legislative framework to ensure sustainable development. 

It  is,  therefore,  with  great  pleasure  that  I  commend  the  revival  of  the  National 
Environmental Commission under the chair of the Prime Minister himself who has not only a 
vision but also the wisdom to lead our nation. The objective of this Commission, which is to 
give directives to foster environmental sustainability, will finally be met. The House will note 
that this Commission never met for the last 10 years. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to make our legislative framework more robust and effective 
to  cope  with  emerging  challenges  like  climate  change,  amongst  others,  my  Ministry  will 
amend the Environment Protection Act. The law will be made stricter to enhance the existing 
enforcement compliance and monitoring mechanisms. This law will also foster stewardship. 
The existing provisions will indeed be consolidated for better environmental protection and 
management,  promotion  and  mainstreaming  both  sustainable  development  and  climate 
change with the participation of all stakeholders. 

Through these amendments – 

 

• 

• 

115 

enforcing  agencies  such  as  local  authorities  and  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life will be further empowered to allow them to prosecute under 
the Environment Protection Act; 
the Environmental Impact Assessment mechanism will be strengthened to take 
care  of  climate  change  concerns  and  eco-friendly  practices  such  as  waste 
minimisation, reuse, recycling, composting, energy efficiency and renewable 
energy,  green  building  practices  as  well  as  water  conservation  and 
management.  The  Ministry  of  environment  will  opt  for  a  dedicated  eco-
friendly building which will be a showcase for Mauritius. It is heartening to 
note that the first eco-commercial building will be inaugurated shortly in my 
constituency  in  Flacq,  where  the  promoters  are  even  contemplating  of 
providing  electricity  to  the  Central  Electricity  Board  as  a  patriotic  gesture, 
which I commend. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have to highlight when the Police de l’Environnement was 
set  up  on  01  December  2000,  there  were  only  12  staff  and  four  vehicles.  During  my 
Ministership,  the  Police  de  l’Environnement  -  this  is  only  three  months  -  which  plays  an 
important role for the enforcement of environmental laws, has recently been strengthened to a 
total of 44. I say again, 44! Furthermore, eight vehicles have been provided to the Police de 
l’Environnement for its activities, which is adequate and in good running condition, s’il vous 
plaît! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  too  long  monitoring  has  been  l’enfant  pauvre  of 
environmental  management.  Measures  will  be  taken  to  provide  capacity  building  and 
equipment to redress this gap. The National Environmental Laboratory will be provided with 
modern  equipment  to  enable  better  monitoring  of  the  state  of  the  environment.  This  will 
support timely policy decision making, so that the population enjoys a better quality of air 
and water.  In this spirit, my Ministry will shortly commission two state-of-the-art equipment, 
one to be placed at the Meteorological Services at Vacoas and the other one at the Islamic 
College, to monitor the quality of air we breathe to initiate remedial measures as and when 
required.  We  will  also  increase  the  capacity  of  the  National  Environmental  Laboratory  to 
cater for preparedness against chemical disasters. 

116 

 
As far as our lakes and reservoirs are concerned, these will be monitored routinely to 
check against harmful algae and bacteria, thereby ensuring healthy living. New mechanism 
will be introduced to ensure compliance with international standards and legal frameworks 
with regard to water usage. With respect to landslides prone areas, the hardening of targets is 
envisaged to be reinforced with new types of buildings conceived in vulnerable areas. 

Let me now address climate change. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know that climate change poses a serious threat to 
Small  Island  Developing  States  like  Mauritius.  Firm  actions  will  be  taken  to  reduce  our 
vulnerability and increase our resilience to the impacts of climate change. These include – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

a forthcoming Climate Change  Bill whose main thrust is to make Mauritius 
climate change resilient and adopt a low-carbon development pathway in line 
with the overarching objectives of developing a green economy. This Bill is 
the  first  of  its  kind  for  Mauritius  and  amongst  the  Small  Island  Developing 
States; 
the development of a 2050 Pathway Carbon Calculator for Mauritius. This will 
help  us  to  model  our  greenhouse  gas  emissions  for  a  low  emission  and 
sustainable development pathway; 
the  formulation  of  a  Low  Carbon  Development  Strategy  and  Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) to integrate and mainstream climate 
change  mitigation  in  the  institutional  framework  and  into  core  development 
plans, policy and strategies for Mauritius; 
the  setting  up  of  an  Early  Warning  System  for  incoming  surges  such  that 
coastal  communities  in  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  of  at  least  three  hours 
warning of possible incoming surges to eradicate safely; 
construction  of  a  refuge  centre  at  Quatre  Soeurs  to  protect  the  local 
communities in low lying areas, vulnerable to flooding due to high tides, storm 
surges and other calamities; 
in the same spirit, pollution maps for greenhouse and other noxious emission 
gases will be generated for the purpose. 

In view of the recent recommendations of the IPCC (International Panel on Climate 
Change), it is envisaged that Mauritius aligns itself with the recommendation to phase out 
crude oil by the end of this century, which means the whole concept of Maurice Ile Durable 

 

117 

will have to be reviewed to meet the challenge of climate change and global warming in our 
global  quest  not  to  be  trapped  irreversibly.  In  line  with  my  Ministry’s  propositions,  at 
ministerial  level  we  are  proposing  an  acceleration  towards  the  use  of  renewable  energy 
technologies. In this spirit, the innovation technology of Japan will have to be probed into 
through bilateral cooperation along with further developments in solar and wind/wave energy 
penetration. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is a well-known fact that our coastal zone is a prime asset 
for our country for its inherent and monetary values. Unfortunately, this key resource is under 
instance pressures from conflicting sea and land-based activities such as tourism, fisheries, 
construction, and sewage disposal amongst others. The damaging impacts of these activities 
that  range  from  beach  erosion,  poor  lagoon  water  quality  and  coral  degradation  will  be 
addressed in a holistic manner. We will come up with targeted coastal conservation plans that 
will  address  the  specificities  of  these  eroded  and  vulnerable  sites.  We  will  create  more 
beaches.  I  repeat,  we  will  create  more  beaches  for  the  public  and  restore  those  that  are 
damaged. 

I am seriously envisaging the creation of a specialised team of Engineers Squadron at 
the SMF with the support and blessing of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the rehabilitation of 
our beaches. Our beaches will be upgraded with provision of the state-of-the-art facilities to 
meet international norms such as Blue Flag/Green Globe. 

Coming to sustainable consumption and production, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow 

me to quote Albert Einstein who rightly pointed out, and I quote –  

“We shall require a substantially new manner of thinking if mankind is to survive”. 

And to add to this dictum, that of Mahatma Gandhi, I quote – 

“The world has enough for everyone's need, but not enough for everyone's greed.” 

Thus,  we  are  all  aware,  our  resources  are  limited,  and  transitioning  to  more 
sustainable patterns of consumption and production and behavioural change are the crucial 
paradigm shift that will support our efforts towards better resource use. Towards this end, our 
national  actions  will  be  anchored  in  the  10-year  Framework  of  Programmes  (10  YFP) 
developed  by  the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme.  This  is  a  global  framework  of 
actions  to  support  countries  to  accelerate  the  shift  towards  sustainable  consumption  and 
production. 

 
We  will  learn  to  make  good  use  of  our  available  resources  and  do  away  from 

118 

excessive mode of consumption with the following measures – 

• 

• 
• 

• 

guidelines on sustainable lifestyle will be prepared to promote sustainable and 
environment-friendly  behaviours  for  the  Government,  business  sectors  and 
public at large; 
the capacity and skills of all stakeholders will be enhanced; 
new technologies in key economic sectors will be adopted to promote cleaner 
and more efficient production, and 
creation of green jobs will be encouraged. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no cost-benefit analysis exercise will be able to value our 
unique  and  scarce  environmental  resources  other  than  self-realisation.  A  responsible  and 
environment-conscious  population  with  green  attitudes,  smart  choices  and  a  sustainable 
lifestyle will support Government’s efforts in making Mauritius a cleaner, greener and safer 
country. We will build a nation of environment champions by – 

• 
• 
• 

reinforcing environmental education and awareness at all levels; 
encouraging a multiplier effect to ensure maximum outreach, and 
targeting  our  youth  and  children,  as  they  are  our  hopes  and  the  decision-
makers of tomorrow, and we are making them participate in the national tree 
planting campaign. 

I  now  come  to  greening  of  our  physical  environment.  The  ambition  of  this 
Government is to maintain a healthy environment for a healthy population.  In this context, 
we  have  already  launched  a  multi-faceted  environmentally  friendly  project  in  Flacq  for  a 
stretch of about 7 kms; all the 20 constituencies will have similar projects. 

At national level, we are launching an “Embellir Maurice Programme”. Moreover, 
we  will  intensify  cleaning  campaigns,  greening  and  refurbishment  of  strategic  spots  to 
maintain  a  healthy  living  environment  for  our  citizens.  To  restore  the  pristine  state  of  our 
environment,  not  only  trees  will  be  planted  and  green  spaces  created,  but  I  also  intend  to 
create endemic gardens in public areas to inculcate respect for our biodiversity. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  House  will  have  noted  that  to  achieve  sustainable 
outcomes in our environmental protection and management, we intend to use a mix of policy 
instruments, namely regulatory economic and education. 

119 

 
To this end, we have firmly anchored all our policies and strategies in the different 
regional and international commitments taken by Mauritius and will accordingly incorporate 
the relevant recommendations to the following – 

• 
• 
• 

• 

2012 Rio + 20 Conference on Sustainable Development; 
the 2014 Third International SIDS Conference (SAMOA Pathway); 
all  the  Multilateral  Environmental  Agreements  that  have  been  signed  by 
Mauritius  such  as  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change and Montreal Protocol, and 
all regional protocols. 

I will now talk on solid waste management, which is another important issue of my 
Ministry.  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that  the  waste  management  function  has  been 
limited so far to collection, transportation and disposal in a landfill. Presently, 420,000 tonnes 
of solid waste is being generated annually, out of which 280,000 tonnes of organic matter. 
Rs1.2  billion  are  being  spent  by  the  Government  for  the  collection,  transport  on  disposal. 
With this business as usual scenario, we will soon require other landfill of bigger capacity 
and a 25% increase in our budgetary provision by 2020.  But “are nou non”.  There will not 
be  another  landfill  site  like  Mare  Chicose.  Even  all  the  waste  of  the  landfill  site  at  Mare 
Chicose will be recycled in the future and this with no cost to the Government. 

Time has come for us to move to a cyclic society where resources being disposed are 
permanently ploughed back for reuse and recycling. To achieve this meaningful change, we 
will start now with concrete actions. I am envisaging the reduction, reuse and recycling of 
solid  waste  in  a  tangible  manner  where  behavioural  changes  at  all  levels  are  a  necessity, 
bringing a new era for a new economic pillar emanating from solid waste whilst protecting 
our environment and registering considerable savings of taxpayers’ money. 

We  have  already  triggered  the  mechanism  for  the  recycling  of  used  tyres  through 
pyrolysis. I should draw the attention of the House that, out of 5,000 tonnes of tyres imported 
per year, only 500 tonnes go to the landfill site of Mare Chicose and the remaining is littered 
around the country. With this project, there would be total recycling of used tyres and none 
would go even to the landfill site. 

We are also attending to the other aspects of solid waste.  These include – 

• 

waste segregation at source; 

 

• 

• 

120 

transforming  all  our  transfer  stations  into  resource  recovery  centres  in  a 
phased manner through the provision of sorting infrastructure for the recovery 
of the resources currently loss; 
presently, the private sector is producing some 30,000 tonnes of organic waste 
to  compost.  My  Ministry  is  opting  for  100%  composting  of  green  waste  at 
Government  level  to  support  the  community  of  planters  for  eco-friendly 
fertilisation of vegetables and cane plantation. Presently, the cost of one lorry 
load  of  compost  is  about  Rs5,000  and  Government  will  be  providing  some 
15,000 tonnes of compost free of charge to promote a paradigm shift in the use 
of  organic  fertilizer,  and  at  the  same  time  reducing  the  excessive  use  of 
nitrates  in  agricultural  food  production  and  protecting  our  underground  and 
surface water resources and our coastal regions from nitrate pollution. 

Furthermore, sound management of waste to ensure cleanliness is yet another matter 
which  should  deeply  affects  our  civic  pride  and  community  spirit  and,  undeniably,  our 
economy. In this context, a Cleanliness Index Monitoring Scheme in collaboration with local 
authorities will be developed. This will assist local authorities to assess the extent of littering 
and also to monitor progress achieved. 

As  regards  hazardous  waste  management,  it  is  not  economically  viable  to  set  up 
treatment/disposable systems for this type of waste as the quantities generated are too low. To 
this effect, my Ministry is considering the exportation of these wastes when optimum amount 
is available for cost-effectiveness. 

Rodrigues has a success story for the hardening of targets and has already said “no to 

plastic carry bags”. A strategy will be announced for Mauritius as well. 

I have made contact with numerous friendly countries to support us, including USA, 
UK, India, Australia, France and the Netherlands amongst others for the development of a 
sound solid waste strategy and management. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  now  move  to  beach  management.  Since  my  taking 

office, I have made a ‘constat de visu’ and I have noted with concern the following – 

• 

50%  of  our  public  beaches  do  not  have  the  basic  amenities  such  as  toilet 
facilities. C’est ça la modernité! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Of the old regime! 

121 

• 
• 

• 

• 

There is inadequate security and safety on the beaches. 
there is a problem of easy access to our beaches or in some cases access is 
being denied to beach users. In this spirit, 66 additional accesses to beaches 
have been identified to be created. 
presence of stray dogs on beaches, which are nuisance to both Mauritians and 
tourists; 
encroachment of our beaches by ‘transat’ and other commercial activities. 

This Government will take various measures to make our beaches more attractive and 

safer for beach users. The following will be implemented – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

preparation of a Beach Management Plan to ensure an integrated approach in 
the management of beaches; 
enhancement  of  surveillance  and  enforcement  on  public  beaches  will  be 
undertaken  with  the  support  of  qualified  life  savers  from  the  Police  Force, 
Police de l’Environnement and the National Coast Guard.  In this context, it is 
to  be  noted  that  Vigilance  Towers  and  hotlines  have  already  been  set  up  at 
some highly frequented public beaches in the first instance. More beaches will 
be identified in keeping with the scheme; 
review  of  the  legal  and  institutional  framework  of  the  Beach  Authority  to 
respond  more  effectively  to  the  new  challenges  and  opportunities  facing 
development on public beaches; 
removal of all obstacles and obstructions on the public beaches so as to allow 
a free access at all times to beach users; 
implementation of a programme to keep our beaches free from stray dogs, and 
rehabilitation  of  all  our  erosion  prone  beaches  will  be  tackled  in  an 
environmentally  sustainable  and  friendly  manner.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
nation will have more public beaches than before. 

Allow me now to touch on a very sensitive issue, which is the safety of our citizens in 

times of disasters. 

Past events as well as future threats demonstrate the need for a multi-hazard approach 
to disaster management in the Republic of Mauritius. We have taken commitment towards a 

 

122 

comprehensive, proactive and integrated approach to risk management, including prevention, 
preparedness, mitigation, response and recovery for the safety of our people. 

We  must  be  part  of  the  solution,  and  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and 
Management  Centre  gives  us  both  the  opportunity  and  the  means  to  target  disaster 
management at all levels; from the highest levels of Government to grassroots communities. 

To ensure our robust future for our country and families, the National Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Management Centre will be given a new orientation and will seek to achieve 
sustainable and resilient disaster management through - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

appropriate  institutional,  legal  and  implementation  mechanisms.  In  this 
context, a legal framework will be developed and a National Policy, Strategic 
Framework and Action Plan for disaster risk management in the country will 
be prepared and implemented; 

informed, scientific, multi-hazard risk reduction approaches mainstreamed in 
development and reconstruction based on national priorities; 

integration  of  disaster  risk  management  into  all  Government  development 
programmes, so as to promote internal service resilience within Government; 

participatory,  multi-agency,  multi-stakeholder  engagement  in  line  with 
national and international standards for effective disaster relief and response. 
Thus,  the  Centre  will  implement  disaster  risk  reduction  and  management 
programmes 
through  community  participation  and  public  awareness 
campaigns,  as  well  as  integrating  key  messaging  into  our  schools’  curricula 
and school safety planning. 

The following specific actions will be taken – 

• 

• 

• 

a comprehensive risk and vulnerability mapping exercise for Mauritius and the 
Outer Islands will be carried out; 
plans  for  disaster  preparedness,  mitigation,  prevention,  relief,  rehabilitation 
and  reconstruction  activities  will  be  develop  in  consultation  with  all 
stakeholder;. 
the Centre will also take the lead to establish a unified and coordinated multi-
hazard  national  early  warning  and  an  emergency  alert  system  to  provide 
accurate and timely advice to the general public and key stakeholders, 

 

• 

123 

an automated flood monitoring system in flood prone areas, rivers and canals 
integrated with the Doopler Weather Radar will be developed and operated to 
give  timely  warning  and  alert  to  the  first  responders  and  the  general  public 
against hydro-meteorological events. 

Wildfires,  in  themselves,  are  source  of  serious  ecological  disasters  and  disasters  in 
terms of man and material resources.  In this spirit, new mechanism will be devised to control 
arson and unchecked burning sugarcane fields. 

I am also looking forward to the outcome of the third world conference on Disaster 
Risk  Reduction,  which will  be  held  in  Sendai, Japan,  in  March  2015, to  further  guide  our 
actions on this disaster. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in conclusion, I wish to inform the House that through my 
visit to Reunion Island and my participation in the Delhi Sustainable Development Summit in 
India  recently  and  my  meeting  with  the  president  of  the  CRM  and  former  Minister  of 
Environment  of  Madagascar,  General  Rabotoarison  Charles  Sylvain,  whose  nephew,  Mr 
Behoharimisa Ralavo, is le Ministre de L’Environnement, de l’Ecologie, des Fôrets et de la 
Mer, I have established the indispensable networks for collaborative efforts at both regional 
and international levels. 

I  will  end  my  intervention  by  stating  that  the  2015-2019  Government  Programme 
clearly  reflects  the  proactiveness  of  this  Government  to  translate  intentions  into  concrete 
actions. Environmental protection and sustainable development should be realised at national 
and community level, at micro and macro level. 

We will invite the private sector through the inclusion of the CSR guidelines from the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development for environmental projects, the civil society 
and  the  public  at  large  to  help  us  transform  Mauritius  into  an  environmentally  sustainable 
Republic. 

With the guidance of a legendary, experienced, action-oriented, man of wisdom and 
words, the Leader of the House, our respected Prime Minister, we will achieve our goal, no 
doubt! 

Thank you. 

(7.01 p.m.) 

124 

 
Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central):  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  will  start  by  thanking,  first  of  all,  the 
Almighty for having bestowed its blessings upon me, this girl from a village known as ‘The 
Vale’. I have the deep honour and privilege to address this House for my maiden speech. I 
stand here as the first woman ever to be elected in Constituency No. 2, Port Louis South and 
Port Louis Central, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

I intend to address this House on a few aspects of the meaningful change that people 
of this country have voted for on 10 December 2014 by giving a large majority to l’Alliance 
Lepep at the last general elections. May I, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, congratulate you for your 
election.  As such, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, you are the so much required breath of fresh air 
that has come to this House. I congratulate you. 

May I also, in the same breath, congratulate Madam Speaker. I seize the opportunity 
to congratulate Madam Speaker, first, for having been elected as Speaker of this House, and I 
congratulate  her,  secondly,  for  having  been  elected  as  the  first  ever  woman  to  Chair  this 
House. It is a pity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that more women have not been elected to this 
House as so earnestly hoped for by one and all. I seize this opportunity, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, to condemn the shameful attacks made over women candidates during the last electoral 
campaign as well and especially against the family of hon. Pravind Jugnauth. L’Alliance de 
l’Unité et de la Modernité has really deigned to stoop so low, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, so as 
to attack Members of his family.  Shame! 

(Interruptions) 

I  will  not  dwell  too  long  on  this  aspect  of  such  bassesse,  yet  there  is  one  aspect  of  the 
electoral campaign that I must and I have to turn to, Mr Deputy Speaker. 

Je  manquerai  mon  devoir  envers  les  femmes  de  notre  pays  si  je  ne  dénonce  pas 
l’attitude masochiste de quelques-uns de nos adversaires politiques en ce qui concerne leurs 
attitudes  surtout  lorsqu’ils  ont  attaqué  et  porté  atteinte  à  la  vie  privée  de  certaines  de  nos 
candidates. 

(Interruptions) 

I tarry here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to think about hon. Mrs D. Boygah, again I refer 
to the family of hon. Pravind Jugnauth, and myself.  In such conditions, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, how can we expect women to wholeheartedly throw themselves into politics and less so 
to be elected to this House? How can we call upon our upcoming women female generation 

 

125 

to  get  involved  in  active  politics?  Aussi  longtemps  qu’on  n’aura  pas  un  vrai  changement 
d’attitude en ce qui concerne la gente féminine, si la présente attitude persiste, je dis bien si la 
présente  attitude  persiste,  on  ne  pourra  jamais  atteindre  notre  objectif  de  30%  de  femmes 
élues  dans  le  Parlement.  And  I  ask  this  House  to  take  note.  Notwithstanding,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, such adverse conditions in which the last campaign was held, I will seize this 
occasion to thank my electorate for their full support and trust in me. Even in the teeth of 
targeted personal attacks against me personally as a woman candidate, against my close ones, 
yet, mes mandants ont quasiment refusé de tomber dans la bassesse qu’un certain candidat 
de  l’Alliance,  soi-disant,  de  l’Unité  et  de  la  Modernité  voulait  les  entraîner.  Je  salue  la 
maturité et la sagesse de l’électorat du No. 2. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  now  move  on  to  the  meaningful  change  that  our 
Government  is  about  to  bring.  And  meaningful  change  it  will  bring.  It  is  clear  that 
meaningful change will not happen overnight. This meaningful change is a whole process in 
itself, starting with a change in the mindset of those governing and the change in the mindset 
of the stakeholders involved. Going through our five-year programme 2015-2019, it is clear 
that it is hailing le second miracle économique. This is very much possible and this is very 
much  achievable.  De  par  les  actions  prises  en  créant  des  ministères  tels  que  la  Bonne 
gouvernance,  Technologie,  Communication,  Innovation  et  Economie  océanique,  tout  cela 
démontre  que  les  bases  pour  ce  deuxième  miracle  économique  ont  été  jetées,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. 

During the past nine years, the Mauritian society has seen disintegration in its values 
to such an extent that corruption has become encrusted within our system. Today, when we 
look back over the last decade, we take stock of the fact that many billions of rupees have 
been flippantly injected  into projects that today  are cracking apart, literally  cracking apart, 
such as the Bagatelle Dam, such as the Route Verdun-Terre Rouge, such as the Sorèze and 
many more, and we now realise that les intérêts de la nation sont passés après les intérêts 
personnels de certaines personnes; that was the former Government. 

We  have  all  indeed  witnessed  how  democracy  has  been  trampled  upon,  stampeded 
upon. Parliament was being constantly adjourned, let us recall, and extended. Ils ont tout fait 
pour garder le Parlement clos. Parliament, which is the pinnacle of democracy, était devenu 
un  objet  dans  la  main  de  certains.  Even  attempts  have  been  made  to  slaughter  our 
Constitution and come up with a second Constitution designed to suit the needs of some and 
give  immunity  to  some,  and  now  we  can  see  why,  but  finally  the  will  of  the  people  has 

 

126 

prevailed and le peuple has shown that real power has always and will always remain with 
the people. Our country, I say with pride, is now free from such tyranny. 

The first step of this Government, which I hail loud and clear, under the leadership of 
hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth ,whom the whole nation has unconditionally accepted as being the 
one and the only person who will be able to bring about this much-needed change, this much-
needed  turn  of  the  wheel,  bringing  about  economic  and  social  change  that  this  country 
realises,  shows  that  indeed,  yes,  we  can  do  it.  The  former  Government  did  not  govern;  it 
reigned on the back of the people. 

Let  us  pause  here  to  ask  ourselves,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  has  happened. 
These institutions meant to act as watchdogs were all prevented to act. They were, in fact, 
converted  into  mere  instruments  and  even  puppets,  I  will  say,  to  play  to  the  tune  of  a 
privileged few and to favour a privileged few. They made a mockery of good governance. 
The setting up of a Ministry of Good Governance, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is a vivid answer 
and is a testimony to this Government’s will to put order where necessary. Good governance 
implies  that  this  Government  is  not  only  putting  under  scrutiny  the  actions,  decisions  and 
steps taken by the former Government under scrutiny, it is also and most strikingly ensuring 
that its own very actions and all the actions of its different Ministries will be scrutinised, and 
that, we have to salute. We pause to ask ourselves how we will achieve that. We will achieve 
this in a transparent manner, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in an accountable manner, where each 
and everybody involved will have to put their respective decision in the perspective of good 
governance,  within  the  framework  of  good  governance  and  assume  full  responsibility  at 
every level of their actions and of their involvement. It will not be a case of ‘pas moi, li sa ; 
pas moi sa, contracteur sa ; pas moi sa, l’autre sa!’ 

(Interruptions) 

We  have  all  lengthily  heard  from  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  hon.  Bhadain,  expatiate  upon  how  he  intends  to 
translate good governance into reality over the next five years to come. So, I will not go into 
these  details.  We  even  have  a  whole  chapter,  Chapter  4  of  the  Government  Programme, 
dedicated to good governance. 

As I have just mentioned, in order to achieve this long term holistic programme of 
redressement  de  notre  économie,  we  must  embark  upon  a  process  of  rethinking  and  re-
engineering of our whole system, that is, innovate. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, economic change 

 

127 

will not happen into a vacuum.  Changing the human mindset is in itself a long and judicious 
exercise. We have to adapt each and every one to a rapidly evolving environment, be it in 
technological development, be it in financial or be it in economic strategies. 

Today, when the whole world has become a global village, ICT development is and 
will  inevitably  become  the  backbone  of  our  future  success.  In  the  year  2000,  under  the 
leadership of our Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, we have created a cybercity 
out of a sugar cane field and this, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has been through vision and a very 
forward-looking mindset. And what happened for the next 10 years?  Status quo has instilled, 
stagnation  settled  in.  Today,  through  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  our 
Government  once  has  come  back  shows  its  determination  to  give  a  new  boost  to  the  ICT 
sector. 

For instance, in keeping with our evolving technological environment and the risks 
linked  thereto,  Government  will  set  up  the  appropriate  ecosystem  and  comprehensively 
secure  ICT  infrastructure  to  protect  Mauritius  from  internal  and  external  cyber  threats  and 
attacks and this through our National Cyber Security Strategy. 

Another example of this endeavour of our Government is commitment to develop this 
sector, and to promote this economic miracle the price of telecommunication services will be 
made more affordable. We have heard this in the past, but this time it is for real and it will be 
translated  into  reality,  and  this,  rest  assured,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  will  not  be  at  the 
expense of quality and service. This, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will increase accessibility to 
the  general  public  and  especially  to  the  business  world  which  is  most  important  for  such 
economic progress and miracle to happen. 

When  we  turn  to  look  at  the  different  and  numerous  measures  proposed  in  our 
Government Programme, it is clear that the end result will be a boost to attract new investors, 
thus  creating  new  opportunities  for  our  younger  generation.  I  bear  testimony  to  this,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Shortly  after  the  general  elections,  we  have  been  contacted  by 
youngsters, young professionals from overseas, Mauritian professionals who have expressed 
their interest to come back to Mauritius. It is the voice of our youngsters from overseas and 
they are saying that Mauritius is now requiring us, needing us, calling us, and we are here to 
come  back  to  serve  our  country,  and  that  has  been  achieved  through  the  vision  of  this 
Government, through the vision of our hon. Rt. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

128 

 
Let us remind this House, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what has been formerly qualified 
as a white elephant, l’éléphant blanc, has, in fact, created some 25,000 employment. This has 
been a panacea to unemployment during that period and has created so many posts and helps 
so many livelihoods. We must salute that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation, under the guidance of 
hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth,  will,  no  doubt,  have  a  major  contribution  to  our  relance 
économique. I have had the privilege, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to work under the leadership 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth, and I am more than convinced through the years having worked with 
him that his dynamic approach, coupled with his critical and analytical mind, will give him 
an edge in bringing about the innovation that we are all striving for and we are all hoping for. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in order to conclude I must say that much has been said by 
few  in  this  House,  and  outside  this  House,  that  our  Government  Programme  which  is  the 
translation into words and actions of the electoral manifesto of l’Alliance Lepep, that such 
programme  constitutes  mere  words  and  will  remain  unimplemented.  We  have  heard  this 
today in this House. We have heard this over the weeks that Parliament has sat in this House 
itself, but quite the contrary, let me assure you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Indeed, the action of 
this Government is a firm negation of what, so far, has been the criticism of our programme. 
We are a Government that means business, and we rely as the Government on an Opposition 
that  will  put  the  interests  of  this  country  first  and  foremost  and  put  petty  politics  aside. 
Constructive criticism is what has been modelled from our Westminsterien model. We hope 
that  this  survives  in  this  House  for  the  benefit  of  our  country,  for  the  better  good  of  our 
country and our nation. 

When I say the action of this Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I refer to the rapid 
implementation of the Government promise to increase old age pension to Rs5,000. I refer to 
the extension of 100% subsidy on the SC and HSC exams fees for all students. I refer to the 
electoral promise to open an Embassy in Saudi Arabia. This is very much, as we have heard 
the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  Showkutally  Soodhun  say  that  such  is  on  the  Government 
agenda and will become a reality. I refer, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to the promise to have a 
commission d’enquête on drugs, to redress the Police Force to give it its former glory. I refer 
to the question of law and order. I also refer to the implementation of major decision such as 
the resiliation of the notorious Betamax deal which we have had; the Ministry has had the 
guts to resile. I also refer to the setting up of enquiries into the festival de la terre and many 
other enquiries to come. 

129 

 
This Government again, I repeat, is a Government which means business. It is not a 
Government  of  mere  words.  As  it  has  been  said,  parole  donnée  has  been  always  parole 
sacrée. This has always been the motto of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, our Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
and this will remain the motto throughout this mandate and all future mandates to come. As 
we all know, saki nou dire, nous faire. Let it be noted. 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Abbas Mamode! 

(7.17 p.m.) 

Mr  M.  S.  Abbas  Mamode  (Fourth  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East):  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  giving  me  way  in  this  august 
Assembly. First of all, let me congratulate Madam Speaker for being the first lady ever to be 
the  Chairperson  of  this  Assembly  and,  at  the  same  time,  congratulate  you,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, hon. Adrien Duval, to be the  youngest we ever had. I am confident  you will 
preside over this Assembly with all fairness and equity. Bonne chance à vous deux! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like also to congratulate all hon. Members for their 
election. Let us not forget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the people of Mauritius, people of our 
great country, ce peuple admirable, who have taken the right decision in choosing the right 
Government. They deserve our gratitude and our congratulation. 

At the last December general elections, precisely on 10 December 2014, a historical 
date for all of us present here, we got two main political blocks facing the electorate. While 
our  opponents’  main  concern  was  to  have  a  second  Republic,  our  main  concern  was  le 
deuxième miracle économique. Our only concern was our people, to improve their standard 
of life. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, during last year, in this very Assembly, while things 
were going from bad to worse in this country, their main concern was not the country but 
their interest in cooling off and on, on and off, off and on. We had an Opposition qui avait 
démissionné de toutes ses responsabilités, qui était devenue  complice du gouvernement du 
jour.  In  fact,  they  were  so  keen  to  koz  kozer  that  very  often  there  was  no  parliamentary 
session. 

Ceci dit, M. le président, c’est du passé. Let us face the future. Joignons nos efforts 
pour jeter les bases d’un présent plus confortable, et avec un brillant avenir pour nos enfants. 

130 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the President Address has left a feel-good factor prevailing 
over  the  country.  Même  les  honorables  membres  de  l’opposition  sont  d’accord  là-dessus. 
This  is  due  to  the  seriousness  of  the  new  Government  in  tackling  urgent  problems  and 
starting to fulfil its electoral manifesto. Even though we are just two months in office, we 
have spread happiness for the most respected members of our society. The increase in old age 
pension and other social aids is a reality today. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it always pays to work, the more so for those who want to 
work hard and are rewarded. It is stated in the Government Programme that Government will 
introduce  a  Chambre  des  Métiers  Bill  to  give  due  recognition  to  the  various  professions, 
including  the  registration  of  people  in  the  different  trades,  setting  standards  for  training 
facilities and qualification in each trade.  So, we have brought measures to help people to set 
up their own business.  Nous voulons un peuple entrepreneur et non pas un peuple assisté. 
Nous encourageons la débrouillardise.  A new SME bank will be set up… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Sorry  to  interrupt  you,  hon.  Member,  Madam  Speaker  will 

now take the Chair. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

Mr Abbas Mamode: Madam Speaker, I am so delighted, in my maiden speech, to 

address both the Deputy Speaker and Madam Speaker. 

So, a new SME bank will be set up and Rs10 billion earmarked by Government to 

support the development of this sector over the next years. 

Concerning  democracy,  Government  will  adopt  a  consultative  approach  in  matters 
relating  to  the  Constitution  in  the  interest  of  the  public.  Government  will  also  amend  the 
Local Government Act to consolidate democracy. This is of particular interest to me. Une 
affaire de cœur et de nostalgie. I myself have been a Municipal Councillor for 18 consecutive 
years and I have been Lord Mayor of the City of Port Louis. 

I am, therefore, fully aware of the constraints for a Municipal Councillor to perform 
his  duty.  There  is  much  to  be  done  at  the  level  of  local  authorities  for  the  community  to 
benefit.  We  want  to  promote  better  participation  for  the  management  of  the  community 
through a‘gestion participative’. 

As  you  are  surely  aware,  Madam  Speaker,  needs  vary  according  to  regions  and 

specificities of the inhabitants. 

131 

 
There is a need for a new Local Government Act which caters for the aspirations of 
all  members  of  the  community,  which  allows  for  a  mere  dynamic  environment  wherein 
councillors and employees feel motivated to give the best of services to the local community. 
Hopefully,  this  will  be  taken  into  consideration  with  the  new  Local  Government  Act  in 
preparation by the committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval. 

Surely, this committee will come out with a very appropriate and democratic policy 
paper  giving  necessary  powers  to  Municipal  Councillors  to  administer  their  local  area 
according to the specificities and needs with which they are fully aware. 

Even though, the Ministry will still have a droit de regard on major policy matters. I 
would like to make a solemn appeal to all hon.  Members of this Assembly to support my 
request that the City Council of Port Louis be considered on a different level, an institution 
with a historical background, being given that it administers the capital city. The capital city 
is for all of us, and we have to be proud of it, to work for its international recognition. 

Concerning  the  National  Development  Unit,  which  is  now  under  the  aegis  of  the 
Prime Minister’s Office, it will be provided with resources and means so that expectations are 
fully met. 

The  Citizens  Advice  Bureau  will  be  restructured  so  as  to  act  as  interface  and 

facilitator between Government and the public. 

This Government cares also for people in Agalega and other outer islands. Agalega 
will  be  equipped  with  appropriate  amenities  so  as  to  make  life  better  and  improve  the 
standard of living for its inhabitants. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  only  reason  we  are  doing  all  this  is  because  we  have  a  clear 

mandate, a mandate with carte blanche given by our wise population. 

People’s expectations are high on this Government, and there is a perception that the 
priority  sectors  of  development  have  not  yet  kick-started.  However,  you  will  surely  agree 
with me, Madam Speaker, that the state of affairs prevailing in our institutions are such that 
prior  ‘cleaning’  is  indispensable  to  clear  away  all  existing  mess.  This  is  why  in  this 
Government we have a full-fledged Ministry for Good Governance. 

The people of Mauritius has put their trust in l’Alliance Lepep, and we will prove that 

we are worth of their trust. 

132 

 
Madam Speaker, this Government with all the capable leaders, namely the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Showkutally  Soodhun,  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon. 
Collendavelloo,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  Minister  of  Finance,  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth, 
Minister of Information and Technology and all other Ministers, will put their heads together 
in the interest of the nation. We are compelled to succeed in our endeavour as we have in this 
Government three brilliant hon. Members during the period they were in post as Minister of 
Finance. I am pleased to name here, Madam Speaker, hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, hon. 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval.    The  latter  was  even  rewarded  on  several 
occasions by international institutions. Sir … 

(Interruptions) 

Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  has  undoubtedly  the  full  ability  and  willingness  at  heart  to 
bring together all forces to innovate and move forward with the strong support of his Deputy 
Prime Minister and Vice-Prime Ministers and all Members of the Government. 

Why not from the Opposition also for the sake of the Republic, for the sake of the 
people, of this nation! Madam Speaker, I make an appeal to my friends of the Opposition to 
make constructive criticisms for the sake of this country and the interest of the population,  et 
comme dirait le Leader de l’opposition, dans ‘l’intérêt supérieur’ du pays. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  country  is  grateful  to  hon.  Anerood  Jugnauth  under  whose 

leadership the country had its ‘premier miracle économique’. 

I am proud to say that the PMSD was partie prenante de ce miracle économique. At 

that moment in time, the PMSD was in alliance with the MSM party. 

Zot zalou, nou comprend ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, Sir Anerood Jugnauth is the right man in the right place to face the 

challenges and to bring redress where need be. 

Madame Speaker: Hon. Henry! 

Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Abbas Mamode: Nou comprend zot zalou. 

133 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Abbas Mamode: May I resume, Madam Speaker? 

I sincerely…. 

Let me finish, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I sincerely thank all the leaders of l’Alliance Lepep for having put their trust in me to 
stand as candidate in the election; special thanks go to hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, Deputy Prime 
Minister. 

To all the people who stood by me and believe in l’Alliance Lepep, I will prove that 

they were right to trust me. 

Long live Mauritius for a better future! 

May the Almighty bestow his blessings on this country! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

(7.32 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  Leopold  (Second  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, before I come with my maiden speech, I would like to draw the attention of 
the House to the catastrophic situation which took place  yesterday at Port Mathurin filling 
station. 

Thanks to God that the incident occurred when all five tank takers on the filing station 
were empty. If only one of them had contained petrol, an explosion would have taken place, 
thereby destroyed everything in a one-kilometre radius. Important structures like the Court of 
Rodrigues, the central power station, the Police Headquarters and the port would have been at 
risk,  with  the  Mauritius  Trochetia  currently  anchored,  and  all  major  decision-making 
institutions of Rodrigues would have been destroyed. 

134 

 
It makes us once again reflect upon the urgency to develop the port of Port Mathurin 
as per the Port Master Plan. During the visit of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development recently in Rodrigues, we had highlighted this issue with him and in the Port 
Master Plan as far as fuel depot is concerned so as to make Port Mathurin safer. There is a 
provision to set up a petroleum island in Rodrigues. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  rise  tonight  humble  by  the  responsibility  placed  in  me  by  the 
people of Rodrigues but, first and foremost, allow me to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, 
for your elevation to your high office. May I also join the chorus of congratulations that has 
echoed around this Chamber to congratulate all the hon. Members of this House for having 
been elected by their respective electorates. 

I am very honoured indeed to enter this Chamber as representative of the OPR Party 
(Organisation  du  Peuple  de  Rodrigues)  for  the  electorates  of  the  autonomous  island  of 
Rodrigues. I would like to sincerely thank the electors of the autonomous island of Rodrigues 
for showing confidence in my ability to represent their interests here in this House. I succeed 
one  of  the  greatest  members  and  campaigners  I  believe  this  House  has  known,  the  first 
Rodriguan  who  got  elected  in  1982  and  served  his  constituency  as  Minister  of  Rodrigues 
under the name of Mr Louis Serge Clair. He is the leader of the OPR Party through which 
both  hon.  François  and  I  are  proudly  representing  the  interests  of  our  island  here,  in  the 
decisive House. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, allow me to remind this august House that on 20 November 2001, 
when Members of the National Assembly voted the Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act, a law 
which is also rooted in the Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius is laid as the foundation 
stone  of  an  autonomous  island  of  Rodrigues  where  powers  are  devolved  from  the  central 
Government to the people of the island.  It is an achievement which came, Madam Speaker, 
after  25  years  of  tough  negotiations  and  explanations;  25  years  of  fight  grounded  on  the 
concept of devolution of power for better governance and appropriate development. This is a 
fight  which  actually  started  in  1976  with  the  birth  of  the  OPR  Party.  We  were  eventually 
granted autonomy in 2001. 

On 12 October of this year, we are going to celebrate the 13th anniversary since the 
first Regional Assembly was set up after an election.  Over 12 years and so of autonomy in 
Rodrigues, the local authorities have been striving to improve life in the island. Numerous 

 

135 

hindrances have come along the way and many have been overcome. Before I come to the 
expectation of the people of Rodrigues, allow me, Madam Speaker, to highlight issues that 
successive regional Governments have met in regard to the implementation of the Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly Act. 

Perhaps,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Members  in  this  august  Assembly  are  not 
extensively  familiar  with  the  provisions  of  the  RRA  Act  2001,  and  I  ask  for  your  kind 
permission, Madam Speaker, to bring to the attention of the House some provisions of the 
said Act on which the Rodriguan people are looking forward to positive changes. This RRA 
Act is modelled on the concept of the devolution of powers enjoyed by Trinidad and Tobago 
and a case study of same ordered by the Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, at the head of 
the MSM/MMM party alliance after the success at the 2000 elections. 

One of the first issues that was uncovered in this Act is the proportional allocation of 
seats. Proportional representation as part of the system for the return of Members is a good 
system in as much as it ensures the maintenance of democracy in the legislative process and 
also an opposition is essential in keeping check on any government anywhere in the world for 
that matter. The Regional Assembly is normally made up of 18 Members of whom 12 are 
local Members elected at the first-past-the-post basis and six are island regions elected on a 
proportional basis. 

Madam  Speaker,  six  out  of  18  Members  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  are 
island region members, all of whom are returned through the Electoral Commission. When 
we look at Tobago, Madam Speaker, as per the new Tobago House of Assembly Act 2011, 
12 Members are elected on that first-past-the-post, four Members are appointed on the advice 
of the Chief Secretary, two on the advice of the Minority Leader and two are independently 
appointed  by  the  President.  These  dispositions,  Madam  Speaker,  under  the  new  Tobago 
House of Assembly Act, in my own appreciation, ensure that the regional Government is able 
to work in a stable condition and not under the constant threat of overthrow because of a too 
small ruling majority. I insist on the fact that the proportional representation (PR) is good as 
long as it protects the majority wish of the first-past-the-post. 

Also,  Madam,  throughout  the  world,  countries  which  have  adopted  the  PR  system 
also have the legal provision that prevents people from being elected on party list being des 
transfuges. The RRA Act must be equipped with similar provisions so that the island region 
members can only retain membership of the House as long as they represent the same party. 

 

136 

Our  people,  irrespective  of  their  appurtenance  partisane  resent  this  party  hopping  process 
which has taken place, especially with the island region members of the RRA which for them 
is all but simply disrespectful of the voters’ wish. 

Madam  Speaker,  les  affaires  de  Rodrigues  sont  sous  la  supervision  directe  du 
président du Conseil exécutif, soit le Chef commissaire. Rodrigues faisant partie intégrante 
de la République de Maurice, les affaires de Rodrigues doivent être représentées et défendues 
sur une base continuelle à sa juste valeur. Therefore, I humbly make an appeal to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister and Minister for Rodrigues to honour on a most consistent basis the provision 
of section 39(3) of the RRA Act 2001 which states, and I quote – 

“The  Chief  Commissioner  shall,  if  invited  by  the  Prime  Minister  so  to  do,  attend 
meetings of the Cabinet in order that he may - 

(a) 

(b) 

apprise Cabinet of decisions taken by the Regional Assembly in the exercise 
of its powers under this Act; 

represent the interest of Rodrigues in any matter having or likely to have an 
adverse effect on Rodrigues.” 

The Chief Commissioner has the responsibility to keep the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

informed on the matters of Rodrigues and also continually protect our inhabitants’ interest. 

Late Robert Ahnee, who drafted the RRA Act, often regretted that provision of 39(3) 
had been so often overlooked. The people of Rodrigues are once again looking at the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, Madam Speaker. Indeed, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 
was the very leader of this House and over the then Government when decision was reached 
to  grant  Rodrigues  Island  its  autonomous  status.  The  people  of  Rodrigues  irrespective  of 
political  affiliations  have  not  forgotten  his  great  gesture  and  determination  for  that  respect 
and are ever so grateful for the trust that he, along with hon. Paul Raymond Bérenger, has 
demonstrated for them. The people of Rodrigues believe in the seriousness and interest from 
this newly installed Government and trust that central Government and regional Government 
will maintain a mutually respective and fully collaborative relationship for the better good of 
one and all in the island. So, in as much as goes our gratefulness for this great constitutionally 
recognised  and  protected  tool,  12  years  plus  of  application  have  highlighted  shortcomings 
that must be seen too without undue delay. 

Madam Speaker, the elections are now behind us, my constituency voted for change 
and  my  constituency  is  on  the  lookout  for  that  change.  I  say  to  you  and  the  people  of 

 

137 

Rodrigues Island, yes, we will have a bright future ahead, and I feel immensely proud and 
privileged  of  the  trust  bestowed  into  me  by  my  people  in  ensuring  that  this  central 
Government steers positive plans to build a strong and prosperous economy for the island of 
Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the people in my electorate and the number 
one issue that has been raised with me is the need to create jobs, especially for the young and 
those  who  have  completed  tertiary  education  and  professional  training.  At  present,  my 
constituency has an unemployment rate well above the national average. I will be working 
everyday to address the issue of unemployment, to provide jobseekers with the all leading 
information required in order to build the working careers, be it on an employment or self-
employment basis. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  has  indeed  been  music  to  my  ears  to  hear  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance at an early meeting of the sixth National Assembly boldly marking the necessity for 
the Mauritian economy to veer into small and medium entrepreneurship. Rodrigues is a great 
place to invest and grow a small business. This is why the Rodrigues Regional Government 
in its 2015 Budget has focused its attention on finding ways to drive young people to become 
entrepreneurs. 

The 2015 Budget of Rodrigues Regional Government provides for the  set-up of an 
appropriate environment and various opportunities for the growth of small and medium-sized 
businesses. Among some of the measures devised, the RRA has worked at ways to reduce as 
far  as  possible  red  tape,  the  difficulties  that  new  entrepreneurs  encountered  which  is  the 
element for discouragement. In this same line, the Commissioner responsible for Industrial 
Development and Cooperative and her staff have also set up a venture capital fund to back 
lenders, so as to help them have appropriate fund from commercial banks. 

Madam Speaker, it is in my contention that in this job creation endeavour, the central 
Government  should  consider  reducing  red  tape,  reviewing  relevant  tax  schemes,  providing 
support to small and medium-sized businesses et enclencher les grands défis infrastructurels 
de l’île Rodrigues, notamment l’agrandissement du port, l’agrandissement de l’aéroport et la 
connection de Rodrigues aux câbles optiques. 

Rodriguans are determined to succeed. This determination must be sustained by bold 
decisions aimed at economic growth. Challenges are numerous for the Republic of Mauritius. 
The economy needs a reboot and Rodrigues must not be overseen in the key process, and in 

 

138 

turn, we will be able to contribute to the economic success of the Republic of Mauritius and 
be  part  du  deuxième  miracle  économique  de  la  République  de  Maurice.  Possibilities  from 
Rodrigues to contribute are there, especially with port matters and port development. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to seize this opportunity to draw to the attention of the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister and also to the hon. Minister of Shipping of the urgency of matters as 
regards the port of Port Mathurin and of the precarious situation allowed to prevail as regards 
the  replacement  of  MV  Mauritius  Pride.  Indeed,  over  a  year  has  elapsed  since  the  MV 
Mauritius Pride stopped serving Rodrigues. We have been waiting for the replacement, but 
not  seeing  anything  coming  in  that  regard,  with  strain  being  put  on  Mauritius  Trochetia, 
which  is  due  for  maintenance  check  for  at  least  a  month  very  shortly,  the  Rodriguan 
population is very concerned. 

Rodrigues is an asset to the Republic of Mauritius and as an integral part of the State 
of  Mauritius,  Rodrigues  needs  what  it  deserves,  that  is,  adequate  support  from  the  central 
Government, so as to build solid economic base. We have the capacity to do so. Rodrigues is 
capable of generating money so as to inject in the economy of the Republic of Mauritius. Let 
us not allow, Madam Speaker, prejudices masquerading as instinct to determine how it acts or 
the  decision  that  we  make,  and  let  us  find  ways  to  speak  with  goodwill  and  respect. 
Polarisation separate people from ideas; therefore, it does not help us to find solution to the 
challenges that we face. In grappling with our most thorny problems, let us deliberately and 
resolutely maintain optimism that a solution can be found.  Let us not unthinkingly impute 
malicious  intent  to  those  with  whom  we  disagree.  Let  us  display  generosity  of  spirit  and 
sincerity. Let us not encourage cynicism. 

Accepting the proposition that every party is the same, and that no one in the public 
life will trust us as politicians if we lead by powerlessness and in turn to disenfranchisement 
for the people that we represent in this house. The Republic of Mauritius should continue to 
be a courageous nation as it has relentlessly proved in the past. We can move towards the 
future where our Constitution derives its authority from the will of the people. 

Our  pathway  to  future  prosperity  is  built  on  the  foundation  of  education  and 
vocational training. Education is a public good that enriches our whole society and that is a 
concept that the OPR Party understood. 

Madam Speaker, I come from a very poor family and I was the first in my family to 
go  to  university  for  professional  training.  Both  my  parents  were  hard-working.  They  did 

 

139 

everything  they  could  to  make  sure  that  all  their  children  had  every  possible  educational 
opportunity;  an  opportunity  that  they  did  not  have.  They  taught  me  and  gave  me  the 
opportunity to see first-hand what hard work looks like. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  us  be  a  nation  that  actively  seeks  the  contribution  to  global 
prosperity, peace and equality. Inequality divides people and deprive us of shared experience. 
Great inequality leads us to unrest, to resentment, to distrust and to violence. Equality helps 
to promote national unity. We should be a unified nation that takes pride in its multi-ethnicity 
and its multi-culturalism. The Republic of Mauritius should be a compassionate nation. We 
must open our hearts to give help when there is poverty, sickness  and powerlessness. The 
OPR  party  stands  for  building  prosperity  and  we  believe  that  the  Republic  of  Mauritius 
should  be  a  prosperous  nation.  We  want  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  to  be  able  to  take 
advantage of most opportunity that comes across. 

My  presence  in  this  House,  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  result  of  collective  efforts. 
Therefore,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  leader,  Serge  Clair,  l’équipe  de  l’OPR  avec  tous  les 
commissaires, all the volunteers who worked so hard to ensure that those two seats in the 
National Assembly remain with OPR Party. 

I will end my speech with the words of Terry Pratchett, to make us remember that our 
purpose here is to work for the betterment of the people that we represent. She says, I quote – 

“Always remember that the crowd that applauds your coronation is the same crowd 
that will applaud your beheading.” 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to address this House. 

Mr Baboo: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Seeruttun rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

ADJOURNMENT 

adjourn to Thursday 26 February 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

140 

Hon. Members, I wish to inform Members that provision has been made for dinner. 

At  7.52  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Thursday  26  February 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

SUPREME COURT – UNDELIVERED JUDGMENTS 

(No. B/64) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Supreme Court, he will, for the benefit 
of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Master  and  Registrar,  information  as  to  the  number  of 
judgments pending thereat in respect of cases which have been heard – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

ten years ago; 

five years ago, and 

three years ago respectively. 

Reply:  Government  is  committed  to  bring  reforms  to  the  Judiciary  to  expedite 
determination  of  Court  cases  and  improve  the  services  given  to  the  public  by  our  Court 
system. 

Delays  in  judicial  proceedings  may  amount  to  a  denial  of  justice  and  undermine 
confidence in the Judiciary, and jurisdictions such as Guyana have gone as far as providing 
for statutory time limits for Judges to give their decisions. In New Zealand, the High Court 
and the Supreme Court deliver most of their judgments (over 90%) within six months. This is 
done  administratively  by  the  Courts,  which  publish  the  time  within  which  they  expect  to 
deliver judgments and also publish the time taken by Courts to deliver judgments. 

As  far  back  as  2006,  Lord  Mackay  recommended  that  Judges  and  Magistrates  be 
encouraged to do better case management and that directions may have to be issued by the 
Supreme  Court  for  that  purpose.  Further,  Judges  are  enjoined  by  paragraph  6.5  of  the 
“Guidelines for Judicial Conduct”, to “perform all judicial duties, including the delivery of 
reserved decisions, efficiently, fairly and within a reasonable time.” 

With regard to the question of the hon. Member, I am informed that the Chief Justice 
regularly asks the hon. Judges of the Supreme Court to provide him with a list of undelivered 

 

141 

judgments. I am also informed that the last exercise which was effected at the beginning of 
this year shows that there are only six cases in which judgment has been reserved. Five of 
these cases are awaiting judgment for four years and one for three years. 

JUDICIARY- JUDICIAL COMPLAINTS COMMISSION & VIDEO CAMERA 

RECORDING 

(No. B/65) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the judiciary, in order to keep a check and 
balance on judicial conduct, he will state if Government proposes to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

set up a Judicial Complaints Commission; 

introduce video camera recording of all court proceedings, and 

amend  section  74(1)  of  the  District  and  Intermediate  Court  (Criminal 
Jurisdiction) Act 1888 to make it mandatory  for all court proceedings to be 
recorded by technological or other scientific means. 

Reply:  The  Judiciary,  as  one  of  the  three  arms  of  Government,  is  impartial  and 
independent. The principle of separation of powers is enshrined in our Constitution in order 
to  ensure  that  Judicial  Officers  discharge  their  duties  independently  and  without  fear  or 
favour. Our system is similar to that of the United Kingdom inasmuch as we are governed by 
Guidelines for Judicial Conduct which are based on the Bangalore Principles. 

I am informed by the Office of the Master and Registrar that presently, all complaints 
concerning Judicial Officers are directed to the Office of the Master and Registrar and to the 
Office of the Honourable Chief Justice, and that such complaints are properly investigated by 
the Master and Registrar, by the Deputy Master and Registrar, or by a Judge nominated by 
the  Honourable  Chief  Justice  who  is  then  apprised  of  the  outcome  of  any  investigation. 
Should the Honourable Chief Justice consider that the complaint is founded, the matter may 
be  referred  to  the  Judicial  and  Legal  Service  Commission  for  necessary  action  or  for  any 
other action deemed fit in the circumstances. 

Honourable Members may wish to note that several jurisdictions have now provided 
for  an  independent  mechanism  to  look  into  complaints  against  holders  of  judicial  office. 
Thus, in the UK, the Judicial Conduct Investigations Office (JCIO) (formerly the Office for 
Judicial Complaints) supports the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice in their joint 

 

142 

responsibility for judicial discipline. It seeks to ensure that all judicial disciplinary issues are 
dealt  with  consistently,  fairly  and  efficiently.  In  New  Zealand,  the  Judicial  Conduct 
Commissioner and Judicial Conduct Panel Act 2004 provides a way for people to complain 
about the conduct of a Judge and to have those complaints assessed. An independent Judicial 
Commissioner  receives  complaints,  conducts  preliminary  investigations  and  decides  what 
further actions, if any, are to be taken. 

Consultations will be held with the Chief Justice to determine whether, with a view to 
providing  a  better  delivery  of  service,  an  independent  body  should  be  set  up,  by  law  or 
administratively,  to  look  into  complaints  made  against  the  Judiciary  and  advise  the  Chief 
Justice on action to be taken. 

With regard to parts (b) and (c), hon. Members will be aware that judicial officers are 
already  bound  by  the  Guidelines  for  Judicial  Conduct,  made  in  2002,  which  establish 
standards of ethical conduct for Judges. It is considered that complaints against the Judiciary 
may be adequately and satisfactorily dealt with by such independent mechanism as may be 
set up, after consultation with the Chief Justice. The number and nature of complaints against 
the Judiciary  are not such as would justify the  video recording of  all court proceedings in 
Mauritius for the purpose of keeping a “check” on judicial conduct. The Court record should 
and does speak for itself. It is the view of this Government that it is for the Chief Justice, and 
not for the executive to ensure that all judicial officers adhere by the Guidelines for Judicial 
Conduct. 

Having said this, there are obvious advantages to having Court proceedings recorded 
simultaneously  and  transcribed  diligently.  Government  will  extend  its  assistance  to  the 
Judiciary in enhancing the digital recording system for the benefit of the public at large as 
well as our Court system. 

CAMP CAROL, GRAND’ BAIE & PEREYBERE - DRAINS 

(No. B/66) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  flood  prone  areas,  he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Development Unit, information as 
to if, in collaboration with Greek experts, it had commissioned a report in relation thereto in 
2013 and, if so, indicate – 

 
(a) 

143 

if Camp Carol, Grand Bay and Pereybere were among the regions identified 
for the carrying out of urgent drain and related infrastructure works, and 

(b) 

the urgent remedial measures that are being taken in relation thereto, if any. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  an  international  tender  was  launched  for  Consultancy 
Services  for  Land  Drainage  and  Watershed  Management  Study  in  November  2010  by  the 
NDU.  The  contract  was  awarded  on  29  January  2013  to  the  consortium  Z  &  AP 
Antonaropoulous & Associates S.A in association with Desai & Associates. 

The Terms of Reference for the consultancy services, funded by the World Bank, was 
confined to specific parts of Mauritius defined in relation to major drainage basins. The study 
focused on major catchments which are highly vulnerable to floods/where severe flooding are 
experienced across Mauritius. 

In reply to Part (a) of the question, I am informed that Camp Carol, Grand’ Baie and 

Pereybere were, inter alia, part of the study. 

In respect to part (b) of the question, I am further informed that the preliminary design 
reports submitted by the Consultant to the NDU in April 2014, highlight that in the region of 
Grand’ Baie, there are a number of wetlands which have started disappearing with the advent 
of development. Moreover, the lack of stringent controls by the Authorities in ensuring that 
the  wet  lands  are  preserved  has  further  aggravated  the  drainage  of  storm  water.  The  rapid 
development has also encroached on the few natural watercourses that existed, thus leaving 
the  surface  storm  water  to  find  its  way  through  built  up  areas  and  causing  flooding  and 
ponding during and after the downpour. 

As for Camp Carol, the main reasons for flooding are attributed to, inter alia – 

(i)  

(ii)  

(iii) 

low lying areas where the surface water has no outlet to discharge; 

inexistence of storm water network in many places or the inadequacy of the 
existing network to carry the flows; 

obstruction 
developments/constructions, and 

the 

in 

storm  water 

network 

due 

to 

overlying 

(iv) 

 backfilling of wetlands. 

144 

 
As  regards  Pereybere,  the  main  issue  highlighted  in  the  report  is  the  disposal  of 
surface  water  run-off  from  storm  events  due  to  lack  of  properly  designed  storm  water 
channels and roadside drains in many places. 

The  solutions  proposed  by  the  Consultants  for  Camp  Carol,  Grand’  Baie  and 
Pereybere  are,  inter  alia,  the  construction  of  a  storm  water  network,  a  main  cut-off  drain 
canal in the perimeter of the area where flooding problems have been identified and a road 
reprofiling in Pereybere. 

In  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  all  other  authorities 

concerned, appropriate remedial action will be taken. 

ABERCROMBIE – POLICE DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/67) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of a new and modern Divisional Headquarters at Abercrombie, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police – 

(a) 

(b) 

a list of the offices that will be housed therein, and 

information as to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

if the present occupiers of the existing Police Quarters at Abercrombie 
will have been vacated and, if not, why not, and 

where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed  construction,  indicating  the 
expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  project  for  the 
construction of a new and modern Divisional Headquarters at Abercrombie is planned for the 
Financial Year 2016. The plot of land where the Police Quarters at Abercrombie is presently 
located has been identified and earmarked for this project. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, the proposed building to be constructed will cater 
for  usual  requirements  for  a  typical  District  Headquarters.  It  will  comprise  offices  for 
administration,  public  and  emergency  services  as  well  as  offices  for  specialised  units  and 
other associated facilities. 

The following offices will be included, just to mention a few main ones – 

 

145 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Police Station to cover the Abercrombie region; 
Passport and Immigration sub-office; 
Family Protection Unit; 
Brigade des Mineurs; 
Emergency Response Unit; 
Police du Tourisme; 
Divisional Traffic Police; 
Police de l’Environnement; 
Divisional Support Unit; 
Crime Investigation Division; 
Prosecution Unit; 
Anti-Drug and Smuggling Unit; 
Revenue Clerk/Cashier. 

In regard to part (b) (i) of the question, presently two Police Quarters are occupied by 
serving  members  of  the  Police  Force.  The  latter  have  been  requested  to  vacate  the  said 
quarters  since  13  December  2013,  with  the  option  for  reallocation  of  quarters  in  other 
regions. The occupants have requested for permission to allow them to continue occupying 
these quarters while they make necessary arrangements to move to a permanent dwelling of 
their  own.  However,  they  will  have  to  vacate  these  quarters  before  the  start  of  demolition 
works of the existing structures. 

With respect to part (b) (ii) of the question, the Architectural Section of the Ministry 
of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport is presently working on the structural design of 
the  proposed  building.  Construction  works  are  expected  to  start  in  March  2016  and  to  be 
completed by April 2017. 

SOLID WASTE SOLID SCAVENGING SERVICES - PROCUREMENT 

(No. B/92) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the procurement of solid waste solid 
scavenging  services  for  villages  SWM1,  including  carting  away  of  post  cyclonic  waste  – 
CPB56/13 and solid waste solid scavenging services for villages SWM2, including carting 
away of post cyclonic waste – CPB57/13, he will state the - 

(a) 

number of potential bids received, and 

 
(b) 

names of the - 

146 

(i) 

(ii) 

determined substantial responsive bidders, and 

bidder  to  whom  the  contract  was  awarded,  indicating  the  basis  on 
which the bid was determined. 

Reply:  I  am  advised  that  the  tender  for  the  contracts  “Solid  Waste  Scavenging 
Services  for  Villages  SWM  1,  including  carting  away  of  Post  Cyclonic  Waste”  – 
CPB/56/2013 and the contract for “Solid Waste Scavenging Services for Villages SWM 2, 
including  carting  away  of  Post  Cyclonic  Waste”  –  CPB/57/2013,  were  launched  on  07 
January 2014. The bids were received and opened at the Central Procurement Board (CPB) 
on 18 February 2014 (for SWM 2) and on 19 February 2014 (for SWM 1) respectively. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, four bids were received for the SWM 1 contract 

(CPB56/13) and three bids were received for SWM 2 contract (CPB57/13). 

In regard to part (b) (i) and (b) (ii) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the 
whole evaluation exercise was carried out by the Central Procurement Board. The names of 
the substantially responsive bidders are as follows - 

For SWM 1 
Maxiclean Co. Ltd 
Atics Ltd 
CRSE Ltée 

For SWM 2 
Maxiclean Co. Ltd 
Atics Ltd 
 

After evaluation of the bids, the Central Procurement Board approved the award of 

contract as follows - 

SWM 1 
[CPB/56/13] 

SWM 2 
[CPB57/13] 

Lot 1 (Mahebourg) 
Lot 2 (Trou d’Eau Douce coastal village) 
Lot 3 (Flacq Village) 
Lot  1  (All  coastal  village  from  Anse  la  Raie  to 
road  linking  Chemin  Vingt  Pieds  to  Grand  Bay 
Police Station) 
Lot  2  (All  coastal  village  from  Le  Goulet  to  the 
road  linking  Chemin  Vingt  Pieds  to  Grand  Bay 
Police Station) 

Atics Ltd 
CRSE Ltée 
Maxiclean Co. Ltd 
Maxiclean Co. Ltd 

Maxiclean Co. Ltd 

147 

 
On 16 April 2014, my  Ministry issued letters of notification of award to the above 
successful bidders. However, on 21 April 2014, one aggrieved bidder filed a challenge to the 
Ministry.  Subsequently,  the  aggrieved  bidder  made  an  application  for  review  before  the 
Independent  Review  Panel.  The  case  is  currently  before  the  Supreme  Court  and  came  for 
mention on 23 February 2015. 

Since  the  matter  is  sub  judice,  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  provide  any  further 

information at this point in time. 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/93) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to his Ministry, he will 
state the number of officers recruited therefor, since January 2014 to date category-wise and 
grade-wise, indicating if the recruitment procedures were strictly complied with and, if not, 
indicate the remedial measures that will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: The information regarding the first part of the question is being compiled and 

will be placed in the Library of the National Assembly as soon as the exercise is completed. 

With  regard  to  the  second  part  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  all  recruitment 
procedures  in  line  with  the  PSC  Regulations  and  other  prevailing  Regulations,  including 
those under delegated power by the PSC, were complied with. 

ANSE LA RAIE - YOUTH TRAINING CENTRE - RENOVATION WORKS 

(No. B/94) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Youth Training Centre at 
Anse  La  Raie,  he  will  state  if  renovation  works  will  be  carried  out  thereat,  indicating  if 
consideration will be given for the acquisition of additional land in the vicinity thereof for the 
- 

(a) 

(b) 

extension of parking facilities thereat, and 

conversion thereof into a modern Youth Residential Training Centre with all 
the required amenities. 

Reply:  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  upgrading  of  the  dormitories  at  the  Youth 

Training Centre at Anse La Raie are ongoing. 

148 

 
Furthermore,  a  request  has  been  made  to  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for 
additional State land to the extent of around 13 acres, adjacent to the Training Centre, to be 
vested in my Ministry for the setting up of a modern residential Youth and Sports Training 
Centre as announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019. 

The centre will be provided with all modern amenities as well as the required parking 

facilities. 

The House may wish to know that a plot of land to the extent of 1 acre 9 perches was 
excised from the existing 8 acres and 20 perches to be given to one of the “petit copains” of 
the outgoing Government in the context of the “State land saga”. This excised plot of land 
would have given direct access to the beach to Tirupa Tourism Enterprises Ltd represented by 
one Mr L. N. who forms part of the clic de “petits copains”, in the context of his Four-Star 
luxury hotel project for which he had already benefited 11 acres and 85 perches of State land. 
The project has up to now not materialised. Hence, the request for the plot of land allocated 
to  Tirupa  Tourism  Enterprises  Ltd  to  be  vested  in  my  Ministry  for  the  construction  of  a 
modern Youth and Sports Training Centre with all the required amenities. 

SAINT BRANDON ARCHIPELAGO - WRECKSHIP FV KHA YANG 

(No. B/95) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the wreck ship FV Kha Yang, presently grounded on the shores of the 
Saint Brandon Archipelago, he will state - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the ecological consequences of the oil spill and irreversible damages caused to 
the reef barrier resulting thereof; 

the  measures  taken,  if  any,  for  the  removal  thereof  and  the  timeframe  set 
therefor; 

if it held the required authorization to fish around the Archipelago, and 

if Government will consider introducing legislation to protect this last pristine 
piece of the Mauritian territory. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

 

149 

QUATRE BORNES – SEWERAGE PROJECT 

(No.  B/96)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Plaine Wilhems Sewerage Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Waste Water Management Authority, information as to the expected completion dates of the 
works in relation to Quatre Bornes, indicating as at to date, the number of – 

(a) 

(b) 

roads resurfaced, and 

drains reinstated. 

Reply:  The  Plaines  Wilhems  Sewerage  project  comprises  two  projects  which 
encompass Quatre Bornes. Lot 2 covering regions of Central Quatre Bornes, Belle Rose, and 
Sodnac was substantially completed in September 2014. 

Lot 1 A covers Stanley, Trefles and Hugnin as well as La Source, Palma and Bassin. 

Works started in May 2010. 

Under Lot 2, 99.4 kms of streets and 1.5 kms of drains were reinstated. Under Lot 1 

A, 38 kms of roads and 50 metres of drains have been reinstated. 

POINTE DES LASCARS - HIGH-END LUXURY HOTEL 

(No.  B/97)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether he will state if his Ministry is in presence of an application for the construction of a 
seven star hotel in Pointe des Lascars and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

name of the promoter thereof; 

proposed room capacity thereof, and 

estimated cost thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Board  of  Investment  that  a  proposal  for  the 
implementation of an Integrated Resort Scheme (IRS), which includes the construction of a 
high-end luxury hotel at Pointe des Lascars, has been received. 

With regard to parts (a), (b) and (c) of the question, I am informed by the Board of 

Investment that - 

 

150 

(i) 

(ii) 

the Promoter of the IRS project is Blue Sky Real Estate Domaine de 
l’Hermitage Ltd, and 
the proposed room capacity of the hotel is 100 at an estimated cost of 
Rs4.1 billion. 

I am further informed as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

so far, a letter of approval for an IRS Certificate has been issued to the 
promoter; 
the hotel is planned to be on the market in 2018 and will be operated 
by the Jumeirah International LLC of Dubai, and 
although preliminary consultations have been held at the level of my 
Ministry,  no  formal  application  in  respect  of  the  hotel  has  yet  been 
received. 

CEB - ST LOUIS POWER STATION PROJECT – APPEAL 

(No.  B/98)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Redevelopment of the St Louis Power Station Project for the Design, Supply, Installation and 
Commissioning of 4 x 15 MW Diesel Generating Set, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Independent Review Panel, information as to if it is in presence of an appeal 
from  the  Burmeister  &  Wain  Scandinavian  Contractors  and,  if  so,  if  the  appeal  has  been 
entertained, giving details thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

CEB - ST LOUIS POWER STATION PROJECT - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/99)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Redevelopment of the St Louis Power Station Project for the Design, Supply, 
Installation and Commissioning of 4 x 15 MW Diesel Generating Set, he will, for the benefit 
of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  information  as  to  if  it  had  been 
instructed to start negotiations with Burmeister & Wain Scandinavian Contractors, albeit their 
bid had been rejected by the Central Procurement Board for non-compliance, indicating the 
number of contracts the CEB has awarded thereto over the past ten years, indicating in each 
case – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

151 

the contract value thereof 

the local partner thereof, and 

if they had manufactured the equipment supplied. 

(Withdrawn) 

BEAU BASIN - ORANGE MOBILE NETWORK - COVERAGE 

(No.  B/100)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Orange Mobile Network, he will state if he is aware of the very bad coverage thereof in Beau 
Bassin, mainly in Chebel, Maingard, Barkly and Mont Roches and, if so, indicate if remedial 
measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: I have requested Mauritius Telecom and the ICT Authority to look into the 
issue of mobile network coverage in the region of Beau Bassin and to come up with remedial 
measures to address same. 

CANOT - FOOTBALL GROUND - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/101)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 
football ground at Canot, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply: I am informed by the District Council of Black River that from information 
gathered from Medine S.E. Ltd, a portion of land has been vested into Government by the 
latter, under the 800 arpents Land Release Scheme, for the construction of a football ground 
at Canot along the Albion Approach Road. 

I am further informed that since the District Council is facing financial difficulties, I 
am examining, along with my colleagues, an appropriate mechanism for the financing of the 
project. 

