 

 

1 

 

 

No. 22 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 16 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

MOTION 

BILL (Public)  
ANNOUNCEMENT  

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 22 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 16 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 10.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.Soodhun)  rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL (NO. III OF 2015)  

&  

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL (NO. IV OF 2015) 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

Vote 7-1 Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation was called. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 61, item 22180 - Overseas 
Travel (Mission and Capacity Building).  Can the hon. Minister inform us from the amount 
earmarked for the coming six months, how much has been spent up to now on overseas travel 
and separately, capacity building?  I will take three in one, just for the hon. Minister not to 
come back again.  On item 26313.025 - Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA).   

The Chairperson: Can I just interrupt the hon. Member! Does the hon. Minister want 

to have one by one or get two or three questions at a time? 

Mr Jugnauth:  It’s okay, we can have! 

Mr Bhagwan: On the  IBA, can the hon. Minister inform us whether, in the amount 
Rs8.5 m. earmarked, there is compensation paid to the former people working at the IBA, 

 

8 

Director  and  so  on  and  whether  the  new  Board  has  been  constituted?   On  the  same  page, 
under  item  26313.054  -  National  Computer  Board,  is  there  a  new  Board  and  has 
compensation  been  paid  out  of  the  amount  we  are  being  asked  to  vote  for  the  previous 
Chairperson, Director or Board Members and is the Board operational? The hon. Minister can 
later on circulate the composition of the Board even for IBA and NCB. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Chairperson,  for  IBA  the  Board  is  in  the  process  of  being 
constituted.  In fact, if I am not mistaken, according to law there is need to have consultation 
with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. I believe that consultation has been done, so then the 
Board will be constituted. 

(Interruptions) 

Probably, I will receive the information. 

(Interruptions) 

For  the  National  Computer  Board,  again  the  Board  is  in  the  process  of  being  constituted. 
Now,  whether  there  has  been  any  compensation  paid,  I’ll  get  the  information.    No 
compensation paid to Mr S. who, in fact, passed away.  For IBA, no amount has been paid 
also.    For  overseas  travel,  the  increase  is  due  to  the  Data  Protection  Office  joining  my 
Ministry.   

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  61,  item  26313.136  - 
International Institute of Technology Research Academy.  Last year, for the whole year, there 
was  an  amount  of  Rs3.5  m.  and  for  the  coming  year,  for  the  six  months  is  budgeted  an 
amount of Rs11 m. May I know why there is such an increase in this amount? 

Mr Jugnauth: It is for recruitment of faculty staff and operation expenses. I understand 
that  a  number  of  people  have  been  recruited  or  are  in  the  process  of  being  recruited  to 
constitute the IIT.  I can give you the number for faculty staff - 8 are being recruited in March 
2015; the number of administrative staff, not yet recruited but who will be recruited for the 
year, will be 22; and I can circulate a list of other posts and their corresponding budget also. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

 

9 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  the  same  page  61,  item  28323  - 
Transfers to Non Financial Public Corporation.  There was an amount of Rs15 m. paid to 
MBC and now nothing is budgeted.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether there is any 
transfer to MBC on other items or the Government is not going to fund MBC anymore? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, previously the MBC fell under the Prime Minister’s office. Now, 
with this Government there has been a change. I have the responsibility now of the MBC. As 
you know, there is a restructuration of the MBC that is going on, that is why we have not 
provided  any  amount  now.  But,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  we  will  see  about  the  financial 
situation and Government will have to decide accordingly. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    On  page  63,  under  Mauritius  National  Identity  Card,  item  21110  - 
Personal Emoluments, Rs11 m.  Can I take it upon this item to ask the hon. Minister where 
matters stand concerning the issue of the New Identity Card project?  How much, in fact, has 
been spent, up to now, locally and the amount paid to foreign operators? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, where matters stand: the  project will be reviewed pending the 
judgement that is being awaited before the Supreme Court. We have already undertaken to 
destroy the databank with regard to the fingerprints and the biometric photograph. So, that 
undertaking by Government will be fully respected, but again because there are a number of 
issues  that  have  been  raised  before  the  Court  including  very  fundamental  constitutional 
matters, we are still waiting. Probably the House will note also that this case has already been 
pleaded since last year and, as we all know, the Supreme Court had given priority to this case. 
In fact, all the other cases had been postponed. It was heard on consecutive days. I understand 
also that priority was given for the Court to be given adequate time to deliver a judgement, 
but the House will appreciate that, up to now, we have not had any judgement also. As per 
the  contract  of  Rs1.1  billion,  there  is  Rs8.99  m.  that  is  still  outstanding.  I  understand  that 
there was a note with regard to money that has to be withheld.  I suppose that, in due course, 
if everything is according to the contract, that amount will have to be paid.   

The Chairperson:  Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo:  On page 63, Capital Expenditure, under Upgrading of ICT Infrastructure.  
With regard to the fibre optic cable between Rodrigues and Mauritius, is the fibre optic cable 
investment included in that Rs1.9 billion provisions? 

 

10 

Mr Jugnauth: Sorry! Can the hon. Member repeat the question? 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Can the hon. Member repeat the question for the hon. Minister? 

Mr Jhuboo: I have got the answer. It’s alright! 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Chairperson, I would come back to page 61, the MBC/TV – 
Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  us  whether  the  inquiry 
which  was  on-going  on  the  malpractices  under  the  previous  administration  has  been 
completed? There was a financial inquiry which was underway regarding the administration 
of the previous Director-General.  Can we know whether his Ministry or the relevant people 
have been able to find ways and means to retrieve the amount paid to Mr Callikan - there was 
a question on that – and whether, up to now, the hon. Minister can report progress on that? 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Chairperson, I have, of course, some information with regard 
to the inquiry that is underway, but I have not had as yet the final report. I know it is nearing 
completion, but from memory I can say that an amount which has been paid to the former 
Director-General, from that amount he was requested to refund an  amount.  I  cannot recall 
how much money, but which he did, in fact, refund. So, we are looking also into the issue of 
how  he  was  being  paid  that  amount  whereby  he  used  one  clause  of  the  contract  to  avail 
himself of that compensation.  Of course, that will have also to be looked into by the State 
Law Office so that we are properly advised on the legal issue. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  I refer to page 62, Capital Expenditure, item 31132.401 e-Government 
Projects.  Year  in  year  out,  we  are  asked  to  vote  a  substantial  amount  of  money  for  e-
Government  Projects,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  departments  of  the 
Government which now have fully functional e-Government Projects? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  I  do  not  have  the  list  of  the  departments,  but  if  I  can  get  the 

information now I will, of course, answer. I can circulate the list. 

Mr Ameer Meea: I have a last question. Concerning the identity cards, item 31132, 
can I ask the hon. Minister whether the delay for anyone to get the new identity card would 
be extended, de facto, until the case is being cleared by the Court? 

 

11 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I must say it is a very embarrassing situation, because we have 
just extended the period to, I think, end of June of this year. Well, I hope that is enough time 
for the Supreme Court to deliver judgment. We will see. 

Vote  7-1  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Rs434,000,000) 

(January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 7-1 Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  149,  the  Mauritius  National  Identity  Card,  under  item  21110 
Personal Emoluments, there is a new budgetary amount of Rs22 m. May  I know from the 
hon.  Minister  whether  provision  is  made  in  this  Rs22  m.  to  the  staff  that  is  going  to  also 
interact with the public when they come to apply for the identity card or whether this is going 
to be subcontracted, as it has been under the previous Government? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Chairperson,  this  is  not  really  a  new  item,  because  it  was 
formerly under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office. This amount caters for the payment 
of  salaries  to  officers  who  are  posted  at  the  Registration  Centres  and  the  cost  for  all  the 
officers working in the Investigation Unit, MNIS IT Unit and CPD.  There are approximately, 
I understand, 50 officers and, of course, that also includes the service that is being given to 
the public with regard to anybody who wishes to have any query, can, of course, attend the 
office for such queries. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  My  question  is  a  follow-up  of  what  hon.  Ameer  Meea  has  just 
mentioned about extension. The reason for delay in obtaining identity cards sometimes is also 
due to mismatch in names. People’s names are incorrect and this is a delay, I believe not your 
Ministry, but at the Civil Status Office. Can matters be expedited, because by the end of June, 
I believe there will still be a lot of outstanding cases? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Fist  of  all,  Madam  Chairperson,  a  question  must  relate  to  an  item. 
Never mind! But still I am aware of few cases which the hon. Member has mentioned, but it 
will depend on each case where the problem lies. With regard to the mismatch in the names, I 
understand that there are some legal implications, because sometimes the name of the card 
holder did not even match with the birth certificate of that person. I cannot give a general 
answer, because it will depend on the case of that person. Although I do not have the number 

 

12 

of cases concerned, I believe there are few cases. So far, it does not cause any problem to a 
card holder, because the former card is still valid until such time that Government decides 
otherwise. 

The  Chairperson:  I  take  this  opportunity  to  appeal  to  hon.  Members  not  to  ask 
questions  of  a  general  nature,  but  to  relate  it  to  a  specific  vote  item,  please.  Hon.  Ameer 
Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 145, item 28, there are two items 28212.026 ICT Training 
Scheme Rs50 m. and 28215.007 National Innovation Programme Rs125 m., which seems to 
be new items to this Budget. May I ask the hon. Minister some details on these two budgetary 
items? 

Mr Jugnauth: Concerning the ICT Training Scheme, it is provision that is made for 
appropriate ICT Training to unemployed graduates in the ICT and related fields to create a 
pool of work ready for workforce. I must add here that the ICT Academy that was set up, in 
fact, did not deliver. So, we have to review the whole system and the objective is since we 
have  a  number  of  qualified  people  on  the  market  and  at  the  same  time  the  enterprises  are 
requiring a number of workforce, but there is a mismatch, because they are not fit in for that 
particular job. We are looking into it. If we can give some kind of additional training to those 
people so that – even at the end of the day they would not probably be readily employable – 
they  will  have  to  then  undergo  some  other  training  depending  on  which  enterprise  is 
recruiting them. There was another question… 

The Chairperson: The National Innovation Programme. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  For  the  National  Innovation  Programme,  this  is  new.  It  has  been 
announced  in  the  Budget  and  the  objective  is  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  high  income 
country through innovation. There are specific schemes that will be designed for supporting 
innovators with creative ideas in ICT and also non-ICT sectors. The programme will be run 
by the MRC in collaboration with the private sector. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Yes, Madam Chairperson, thank  you.  It is in relation to the very same 
item that has just been raised by hon. Ameer Meea regarding the ICT Training Scheme and 
the National Innovation Programme. With respect to the ICT Training Scheme, may I know 
from the hon. Minister whether the amount of Rs50 m. would be given to outsiders to provide 

 

13 

the training or there will be people from his Ministry recruited to deliver this training? Under 
the  National  Innovation Programme  whether  at  this  stage  he  can  let  us  know  whether  the 
amount disbursed will be in terms of grants, loans or what are the type of facilities he has in 
mind? 

Mr P. Jugnauth: Yes, if I can give additional information, the target is to train some 

1000 to 1500 unemployed through a remise à niveau and the programme will include – 

•  a core module for language, French and English; 

• 

 specific core modules for knowledge process outsourcing, accounting, legal 
and otherwise; 

•  specific certification modules, Oracle, Microsoft, Cisco and so on, and 

•  generic modules for non-IT science graduates. 

As for the training, as I said, they may join the ICT Skills Development Programme 
for placement in different companies. I understand under the ISDP 50 percent of the salary is 
taken care by the company and 50 percent by the Programme for a given period of time. Of 
course,  we  will  use  the  existing  training  institutions  and  we  will  also  review  the  ICT 
Academy.  So,  decision  is  not  really  yet  taken.  We  are  working  towards  that  training 
programme, but we intend to tap both the resources from the private sector and the public 
sector. 

I am also told with regard to the innovation programme, there are going to be grants 

and not loans. 

Mr Bhagwan: Regarding the identity card, Madam Chairperson, on page 149 on the 
Mauritius  National  Identity  Card,  I  will  take  it  on  Personal  Emoluments,  can  the  hon. 
Minister inform the House that pending whatever will be happening as to the outcome of the 
Court issue, whether his Ministry or Government will be carrying out an inquiry into all the 
subcontracts which had  been awarded? There have been  a lot of magouilles, even the  guy 
who  was  responsible  -  I  won’t  mention  names  –  one  Mr  R.  whether  he  is  still  around  or 
whether  he  has  resigned  and  how  much  compensation  he  has  been  given?  Here,  in 
Parliament, we have, on several occasions, asked questions on the different agencies which 
had been hired for the issue of the National Identity Card project. Will the Minister, at least, 

 

14 

give the House the guarantee that an inquiry will be conducted in parallel and not waiting for 
whatever will happen with the Court’s judgment? 

The Chairperson: Again, this is of a general nature. 

Mr P. Jugnauth: Yes, I will answer, Madam Chairperson. I believe that not only with 
regard to that person who was in charge of this project, I believe the whole project itself, how 
it started when we all know that there was a tender procedure.  It was nearing selection of one 
successful tenderer and then, the former Government decided to cancel the whole process and 
go for a G2G with Singapore. I don’t need to go into all that, but I believe that we will have 
to, at least, gather all the information and from there on, we will see what other steps we can 
take. 

The hon. Member has mentioned one Mr R. - again, if there is any specific case that 
we believe can be established, we will refer the matter to the Ministry of Good Governance 
and probably ask them to inquire into it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My question pertains to page 145 
item 26313.042 - Mauritius Research Council and it is more specifically about the scheme 
launched by the Council last year, I believe, the Collaborative Research and Innovative Grant 
Scheme. How many applications were successfully processed during the  year  and whether 
the provision for the forthcoming years will still comprise of that scheme? 

Mr P. Jugnauth: I understand that there have been 38 applications and 5 have been 

successfully processed. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 147, item number 22120 
– Fees .033, Licence Fees for Microsoft Office, as far as I can recall, there was a serious issue 
with Microsoft in the recent past. There was a big amount of Rs250 m. that was involved and 
this  was  criticised  by  the  Director  of  Audit  and  it  was  being  handled  by  the  previous 
Financial Secretary. Therefore, under this issue, can I ask the hon. Minister if matters have 
been sorted out and also, whether now Government is in line with the rules and regulations of 
Microsoft Office? 

 

15 

Mr P. Jugnauth: This is provision, in fact, for the purchase of about 620 licences for 
laptops because again it is as a consequence of the non-renewal of the Microsoft Enterprise 
Agreement  which  particularly  was  subject  of  great  controversy.  But,  I  have  a  lot  of 
information about this - I do not think that the hon. Member wants me to read all about it, but 
it is in line with the stand that we have taken in the past. It is not yet sorted out, but we have 
not renewed the agreement, that is for one. 

Secondly, we have to be in line with the legal obligation when we use a number of the 
software and that is why there are 620 licences. But, nothing comparable to what happened 
before. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  At page147, there is item 22030.007 – 
Rental of Lines for Network System (a) GINS Rental (SKyGovNet, GFN, GOC Internet) and 
(b)  SchoolNet  II.    Then,  we  have  the  same  item  under  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31132  – 
Intangible  Fixed  Assets.      May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  with  respect  to  (a)  GINS 
Rental, what this relates to? Second, with respect to (b) SchoolNet II, which I understand is 
putting Wi-Fi in secondary schools, what was the criteria used to identify and prioritise which 
schools get the Wi-Fi? 

Mr  P.  Jugnauth:  With  regard  to  the  GINS  and  the  GOC  Internet  line  rental,  the 
increase is due to the line capacity at Government online centre and broadband connectivity 
from SHDSL to fibre optics for Ministries and Departments.  With regard to SchoolNet II, 
this is rental of telecommunication lines in secondary schools.  But I understand there is an 
issue.  The SchoolNet project - provision that was made - has not yet started because there has 
been  a  challenge  at  the  IRP.    As  regards  which  schools,  I  understand  it  must  be  for  all 
schools.  It is for all Government Secondary Schools plus all Government Aided Secondary 
Schools.  We are talking about 163 schools in all.  But it will have to cover all schools. 

Vote 7-1 Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Rs1,294,800,000) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports was called. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, on page 66, item 22900.939 - Indian Ocean Island 
Games (IOIG), there is a sum of Rs30 m. budgeted.  I would like to know if this sum has 

 

16 

already  been  disbursed  and  allocated  to  the  sports  federations  and,  if  yes,  can  the  hon. 
Minister give the sum allocated to each sports discipline? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, there is a provision of Rs30 m. which has been made 
until June 2015.  I can circulate the details of the amount for the hon. Member.  Otherwise, 
we will have to go through it. 

Mr Quirin: Can I know whether this sum has already been disbursed in full? 

Mr Sawmynaden: No, actually, the sum has not been disbursed in full, but it is being 

paid for – 

•  air tickets; 
•  nutrition;  
insurance; 
• 
•  water filters;  
•  massage fees, and 
the coach fees, etc. 
• 

Mr Quirin: What about the training of athletes? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The coach fees are included. 

Mr Quirin: The hon. Minister is going to circulate the list. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Yes, I am going to circulate it. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, I have one more question.  On the same page 66, 
item  26313.045  –  Mauritius  Sports  Council.    I  would  like  to  know  if  the  new  Board  has 
already  been  appointed.    If  yes,  can  the  hon.  Minister  state  the  composition  of  the  Board, 
please? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Chairperson, the new Board has been constituted and the 

new Chairman is Mrs Sarah Rawat-Currimjee.  The members are – 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Mr  Michel Eddy Chang Kye; 
Mr Mouhammad Adjmal Peerbocus;  
Mr Anand Kumar Sukhraj; 
Mrs Bela Saddul, who is a representative of the Ministry of Education; 

 

17 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

Mr Lindsay Kunthasami; 
Mr Rajen Moothoocurpen; 
Mr Mohammad Shah Mehmeel Salamat;  
Mr Seewanand Tannoo;  
Mrs V. Boodhun, who is a representative of the Ministry of Youth and 
Sports;  
Mr Daniel Gerard Beeharry, the Chairperson of the CNFS, and 
Mr Y. Oree, the new Managing Secretary. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Chairperson, on page 66, item 28211.056 -Professionalisation of 
Football, there is a budgeted amount of Rs10 m.  So, may  I know from the hon. Minister 
what  is  the  role  of  the  Government  in  the  professionalisation  of  football?    We  are  paying 
Rs10 m.  What is Government’s involvement in that project? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  the  Mauritius  Professional  Football  League  has  spent 
more than Rs40 m. and the Government is only assisting with Rs10 m.  This is only to give 
them the boost to go further until they can cruise on their own. 

Mr  Quirin:  On  the  same  page  66,  item  26313.094  -Trust  Fund  for  Excellence  in 
Sports.  Maybe, it’s the same question as the previous one on MSC.  Has the new Chairman 
been appointed for the Trust Fund for Excellence in Sports? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we are in consultation, and the new Chairman as well as 

the Board members will be appointed soon. 

Mr  Uteem:  Let  me  come  back  again  to  this  question  of  Professionalisation  of 
Football,  item  28211.056.    The  hon.  Minister  has  just  mentioned  that  the  Government  is 
contributing Rs10 m.  So, may I know whether the Government will have any representative 
on the Board or will there be any monitoring?  How are we going to know what this sum of 
Rs10 m. is used for? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Definitely, my Ministry will look into it, so that money is used à 
bon escient.  Inclusive we have the part payment of the DTN, the Football Féminin and the 
Top Up Premier League.  So, everything will be monitored by my Ministry. 

Mr Quirin:  I have one more question, Madam Chairperson.  On the same page 66, 
item 28211.056 - Support to Football Clubs, can the hon. Minister state if the sum earmarked 

 

18 

here - Rs8.5 m. - has already been allocated to the clubs?  Can we know the names of the 
clubs and the sum allocated to each? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we have ten teams in the Premier League, eight teams in 
the First Division, eight teams in the Second Division, and 12 teams in the Regional Clubs.  
But the money has not yet been voted. 

Mr  Quirin:  On  the  same  page  66,  Madam  Chairperson,  Professionalisation  of 
Football, a sum of Rs10 m. is budgeted for the first six months of this year.  Can the hon. 
Minister tell us how this sum is going to be spent?  Is it going to be disbursed to the Ligue 
Professionnel ? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  I think I have already answered to that.  The money will be given 

to the MFA, and the MFA is going to redistribute the funds. 

Mr  Quirin:    On  page  67,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31113.006  –  Multi  Sports 
Complex  at  La  Source,  Quatre  Bornes.    I  would  like  to  know  the  name  of  the  contractor, 
please. 

Mr Sawmynaden: The name of the contractor – with no surprise – is Super Builders 

Co. Ltd. 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports (Rs253,300,000) (January-June 2015) was, on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  155,  Madam  Chairperson,  item  28212.015  Transfers  to 
Households, Allowances to High Level Athletes.  We are being asked to vote an amount of 
Rs5  m.  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  these  allowances  to  our  high-level 
athletes have been increased, and will be increased as and when they perform and give results 
to the nation, and whether the Ministry will be considering also any possibility for these high-
level  athletes  to  have  the  best  insurance  cover?  Whether,  insurance  cover  also  will  be 
included during their training? 

 

19 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, the amount budgeted is still the same as last year, but 
anyway we are going to revise, in due course, depending on the performance of athletes or 
increase number of athletes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Thank  you.  Still  on  page  155,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31113.406  - 
Upgrading of Sports Infrastructure with regard to (c) Lighting of Training Ground, there is a 
provision of Rs15 m. over the next three years.  Can the hon. Minister circulate the list of the 
projects that have been identified? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will circulate the list of the projects once it is being compiled. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My question pertains to page 157, 
item 31112 - Youth Centres, more specifically youth complexes. I am not too sure whether 
there  is  a  difference  between  the  two,  but  hearsay  is  that  access  to  youth  complexes  will 
henceforth be payable. I just want to find out from the hon. Minister whether this is a fact or 
not. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  At  the  moment,  there  are  no  fees  being  charged.  It  is  going  to 
remain the same, but we are going to review the hours to make it more flexible so that young 
people can use it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  157,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31112.407  -Upgrading  of 
Youth Centres. Mention is made about Anse La Raie, Bel Ombre, Flic-en-Flac, etc.  Can I 
just make a request to the hon. Minister to have a site visit at the Trèfles Youth Centre, the 
Barkly  Youth Centre  and the Mont Roches Youth Centre which  are of  an urgent need  for 
renovation works as they have been left over the past years - I won’t say for political reasons?  
These centres are very popular and in need of urgent renovation works.  So I would like to 
know  whether  funds,  apart  from  those  mentioned  for  those  youth  centres,  have  been 
earmarked in a general vote for the renovation of other youth centres. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  we  have  earmarked  these  three  youth  centres  because 
they are in a really pitiful state or nearly closed down; I am visiting all the  youth centres. 

 

20 

These  renovation  works  are  normal  procedures.    We  are  going  to  definitely  renovate  and 
review the whole procedure of the youth centres. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 155, item 31113.406 - 
Upgrading of Sports Infrastructure.  May I ask the hon. Minister if he is aware of the very 
bad state of the turf of Mamade Elahee Stadium and if this is budgeted to completely redo the 
turf as there are so many small rocks and pellets on the soil of the turf, and whether this is 
budgeted for next year? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  As  far  as  I  know,  the  Mamade  Elahee  Stadium  is  a  synthetic 

ground. 

(Interruptions) 

Actually, I have been informed that it is being vested to the District Council. So, the other 
one, we are going to have a look at it. 

(Interruptions) 

Municipal Council, then! 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank  you, Madam Chairperson. On page 157, item 31112.007 - Non-
Residential Buildings, Construction of Youth Centres, (a) Harris Street Youth Centre.  I see 
there is no amount budgeted for this year because, I understand, that construction has been 
completed. May I know from the hon. Minister whether like Mamade Elahee Stadium, this 
Harris  Youth  Centre  also  will  be  vested  in  the  Municipal  Council,  and  whether  any 
provisions have been made for the maintenance, lighting and payment of the gatekeeper? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, the project has been completed but, so far, we have not 
determined really how we are going to operate it.  But, definitely, if we have to vest it in the 
Municipal Council, we will; it will be less burden for us. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madam  Chairperson,  at  page  155,  under  Capital  Expenditure,  item 
31113.406 (c) Lighting of training grounds as well as (d) Fencing and waterproofing. A sum 

 

21 

of Rs10 m. has been earmarked for both. Can we know if the training grounds have already 
been identified concerning this project? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  waterproofing  works  have  been  identified  and  we  have  the 
Rivière du Rempart Youth Centre, the Malherbe Youth Centre, Badminton Centre at Rose 
Hill,  the  Serge  Alfred  Swimming  Pool,  Goodlands  Youth  Centre,  Brisée  Verdière  Youth 
Centre,  Anjalay  Stadium,  New  George  V  Stadium,  Phoenix  Gymnasium  and  Germain 
Comarmond Stadium.   

And for the fencing works, we have Pointe Jérôme Youth Centre, Mahebourg Youth 
Centre, Grand Baie Sailing Centre, Auguste Volaire Stadium and Centre Technique National 
François-Blaquart and the Rose Hill MSC ground as well. 

The project consists of provision of lighting facilities on football ground, basketball 
ground and volleyball ground of this Ministry, for example, the Centre Technique National 
François-Blaquart and the Rose Hill Stadium, amongst others. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 155, item 28212.015 Transfers 
to Households, Allowances to High Level Athletes, may I know from the hon. Minister the 
amount  budgeted  to  boxers,  in  particular,  boxers  who  have  won  medals  in  the 
Commonwealth Games? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  boxers  inside  are  Ludovic  Bactora,  John  Colin,  Colin 
Ricardo, Jean-Luc Rosalba, Hurpersad Yannish, Cédric Olivier, Kennedy St. Pierre, Merven 
Clair, Donovan Gerie, Amène Marcus, Vadamootoo Jordy, Nampoongah Michael, Laverdure 
Olivier, Danilo Gaspard. For example, Kennedy St. Pierre is perceiving Rs26,000 per month 
as well as Colin Ricardo. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 155, Madam Chairperson, item 26313.045 -Mauritius Sports 
Council, can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the Mauritius Sports Council is now 
allowing the holding of concerts in Rose Hill Sports Complex? Recently, there has been a 
concert, I would like to know whether the Ministry has been made aware of damages caused 
to that very important sports ground in Rose Hill, une ancienne Magistrature, which is used 
for  training  purposes  and  in  which  massive  investments  were  made.  I  would  like  to  know 

 

22 

whether artists can, henceforth, make use of this ground and whether there is a new policy 
regarding fees which are being collected from artists. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Actually, the Mauritius Sports Council has got a new Board now.  I 

will have to see with them and I will circulate the answer to the hon. Member. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:    On  page  155,  item  26313.045  Mauritius  Sports  Council,  can  the  hon. 
Minister inform us if there is any salary or allocation paid to the Chairman and members of 
the Board of the MSC?  

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Yes,  there  is  an  amount  being  paid.  According  to  PRB,  the 

Chairman, I think, is perceiving Rs26,000 per month. 

Board members, if I can recall, is Rs850. 

(Interruptions) 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports (Rs550,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Vote 9-1 Public Infrastructure was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On page 71, under item 22120.008 Fees 
to Consultants (Geotechnical Expert for Port Louis Ring Road Lot 1), there is an amount of 
Rs1.8 m. budgeted.  In respect to this Ring Road, may I know from the hon. Minister where 
do matters stand as far as the claim that the Government may have against the contractor or 
consultant or whoever is responsible for the mess of the Ring Road? 

Mr Bodha:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As regards the Fees, they are fees for 
geotechnical experts, pavement engineer and consultancy fees.  In fact, what has happened is 
that  we  were  still  within  the  one-year  liability  period.  So,  the  consortium,  which  built  the 
Ring Road Phase I, has accepted to do the consultancy for the repair works and to carry out 
the  repair  works  and  they  have,  in  fact,  chosen  a  consultant  to  do  so.  We,  from  the 
Government side - just to check whether the design and remedial works were appropriate - 

 

23 

requested a consultancy firm to come to Mauritius and to carry out the consultancy just to 
check whether the design and the remedial works were adequate. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    On  page  72,  under  item  31113.003,  (g)  Upgrading  of  Hugnin  Road 
(Study), we are being asked to vote Rs4.5 m.  Can the hon. Minister give us some indication 
where we have reached with this project? Upgrading of Hugnin Road (Study)!   

Secondly,  I  would  like  to  talk  on  item  31113.403  Road  Maintenance  and 
Rehabilitation.  For the six months, we are being asked to vote Rs210 m. I won’t go into the 
past. The hon. Minister knows it; certain constituencies were left apart.  The main road from 
St  Jean  to  Coromandel  is  completely  rushed.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House 
whether St Jean Road to Port Louis and also the main road from Mont Roches to St Martin 
cemetery are included for maintenance? 

Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Chairperson,  as  regards  the  upgrading  of  Hugnin  Road,  it’s  a 
study.  A study aims to recommend the best possible solution to reduce traffic congestion on 
existing roads, reduce traffic accidents and enhance road safety to an extent of 5.2 km from 
Hugnin Road, from its junction with A1 to the junction with Boundary Road.  Provision will 
be required for payment of consultancy fees. 

The Chairperson:  From St Jean to Coromandel! Road maintenance and rehabilitation! 

Mr Bodha: Well, the project consists of the maintenance  and rehabilitation of roads 
network falling under the responsibility of the RDA, that is, namely what we call the M, A 
and B roads.  I think there was a specific question as regards Mont Roches to St Martin. 

Maintenance!  So, I don’t have the list here.  I think I can be provided with same. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    On  page  71,  concerning  item  22120.008  Fees  to  Consultants 
(Geotechnical Expert for Port Louis Ring Road Lot 1), the hon. Minister has mentioned that 
Government  will  look  into  the  real  issue  as  to  whether  the  consultant  employed  by  the 
contractor is doing the job.  May I inform the hon. Minister that Arab Consulting took all the 
responsibility before and now we see ourselves with Rs1.8 m. just to check what they are 

 

24 

doing? So, it was a waste of money before and are we not wasting money again if we employ 
contractors and consultants and then we have another consultant to check on what contract 
we have already signed with them? 

Mr  Bodha:    It  is  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure.  In  fact,  Arab  Consulting  was  the 
consultancy firm which advised for the design and was supposed to supervise the works and 
the road collapsed.  When Arab Consulting came with another solution, I think that it was 
important for us to see to it that the remedial works were the proper works. Now, later we 
have to see how we can have a case against the Arab Consulting and those who designed the 
road and who did the works. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  My  question  pertains  to  page  71, 
item 31410.407 Rehabilitation Works for Landslide Management, for which a sum of Rs8 m. 
has been provided for the period January to June 2015. My question is as follows: since the 
actual rehabilitation will be done by the Ministry, whether Rs8 m. are sufficient because after 
the recent downpour in the region of Port Louis, my own estimate of this far exceeds Rs8 m. 
and they all warrant in urgent intervention? 

The  Chairperson:    Page  71  item  31410.407  Rehabilitation  Works  for  Landslide 

Management! 

Mr  Bodha:    Landslide  management,  in  fact,  I  don’t  have  any  specific  answer  here.  
That is what I was saying.  This has been done in collaboration with JICA which is the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency and the budget they have requested, in fact, is Rs8 m. and 
the provision required by Civil Engineering Division is about the Remote Monitoring System 
in Chitrakoot, Vallée Pitot, Quatre Soeurs and La Butte, and for some other remedial works.  
Rs8 m! 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 75, item 26313.129 Mauritius Land Transport Authority.   

The Chairperson: Which page is the hon. Member referring to? 

Mr Bodha:  We are still with Public Infrastructure. 

The Chairperson: Can we pass on to hon. Dr. Sorefan in the meantime? 

 

25 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 72, item 31 Acquisition of Non Financial Assets, 31113.003 (f) 
Rehabilitation of Hillcrest Avenue, Quatre Bornes, regarding Capital Expenditure, can I ask 
the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  amount  includes  landscaping,  if  not,  who  is  doing  the 
landscaping  and  whether  tenders  were  launched  for  landscaping  or  is  it  in  the  contract  of 
Gamma Civic? 

Mr Bodha: Regarding Hillcest Avenue, the project consists of the upgrading of 1.15 
kilometres of road starting from roundabout motorway. The road will be equipped with street 
lighting and necessary road infratructure. The objective of this project is to provide a link of 
high standards for traffic within the Sodnac and Quatre Bornes region with good horizontal 
and  vertical  geometry.  The  project  intends  to  significantly  reduce  traffic.  As  regards  the 
landscaping, I do not have much. So, I would have to have some specific answer from my 
officers. Yes, landscaping will be included. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  72,  item  26  Grants,  item  26313.079  Road  Development 
Authority. So, there is a budgetary amount of Rs59 m. May I know from the hon. Minister 
where matters stand as far as the enquiry conducted by the RDA is concerned with regard to 
the Terre Rouge-Verdun Project. 

Mr Bodha: It is a specific question or a general one!  Well, as regards the enquiry by 

the Disciplinary Committee concerning two engineers, it is scheduled for 21 April. 

Vote 9-1 Public Infrastructure (Rs655,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 75, item 26313.129 Mauritius Land Transport Authority. We 
are being asked to vote  Rs3.5 m. Can the hon.  Minister inform the  House whether  all the 
relevant  sections  of  the  Land  Transport  Authority  Act,  which  was  passed  here,  have  been 
proclaimed and whether all the posts have been filled as per this Act? 

Mr Bodha: The grant is to meet recurrent costs. As regards the law, the answer is no, it 

has not been proclaimed. 

(Interruptions) 

 

26 

No, not proclaimed! What I have been told is that all sections have been proclaimed except 
the merging of the RDA, the NTA and the TMRSU. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 75, item 31122.999 Other  Machinery and Equipment  (Traffic 
Heads, Traffic Signs & Reflectorised Traffic Signs, and Speed Cameras), may I know from 
the hon. Minister whether tenders have already been launched for these traffic signs, because 
in the past, there were issues with the allocation of contracts which went all the way to IRP? 

Mr Bodha: Traffic Signs! 

(Interruptions) 

There are the speed cameras and the traffic signs. As regards speed cameras, the contract has 
been allotted, some of the cameras have been installed and there are six which have not yet 
been delivered. The last consignment was supposed to be done in December and as they have 
not  been  delivered,  there  is  a  breach  of  contract.  The  six  which  have  been  the  last 
consignment and which have not been delivered, will now be cancelled. 

As regards the other cameras, we are going to relocate some of them, we are going to 

see to it that they adapt to the new configuration with the new road system. 

As  regards  the  signal  equipment,  so  far  it  applies  for  the  contract  for  supplies, 
installation of speed cameras. We have had no contract, as far as I know, for traffic signal 
equipment. So, this Budget of Rs35 m. was for the speed cameras. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 74, item 22030 Rent, I see that there has been an increase of 
four times the rent. May we know whether it is a new building and the surface area and why 
has it gone from Rs911,000 to Rs3.7 m.? 

Mr  Bodha:  It  is  provision  to  meet  the  cost  of  rent  of  the  12th  floor,  Air  Mauritius 
building, parking slots attached to the Ministry and rental of facilities for events up to June 
2015. Well, from what  I understand, the Ministry  was in Government House and we have 
moved now to the Air Mauritius building. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 76, item 25 Subsidies –Free Travel Scheme both to the public 
and private enterprises. I see it is exactly the same amount as the previous year, divided by 

 

27 

half. So, is there any change in the method of allocation for these subsidies or are we doing 
the same thing as we did last year? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, I explained to the House here that, in fact, there is 
no accountability. It is just based on a figure, on a presumed percentage of students travelling 
and  the  elderly  travelling.  Now,  we  have  put  up  a  system  where  we  will  have  an 
accountability  as  to  the  number  of  people  who  are  travelling  as  regards  the  students,  the 
number of buses and the number of students on a daily basis. We are starting the sytem next 
week. The other issue is: we still do not know how many people travel every day. So, we 
have to come in the second stage and I think we will have to do that in the months to come. It 
is  to  have  a  system  where  we  have  a  swipe  card  where  we  know  exactly  the  number  of 
students who travel by the dedicated buses and the number of students who travel with the 
national system. As regards the elderly, to know the number of elderly people travelling on a 
daily basis, in fact, so far, the authority has just been a paying agent; that’s a mathematical 
conclusion. There is no contract between the NTA and any of the service providers. We just 
have an MoU which dates back to 2006. So, now, we are going to have a contract with each 
service provider and an accountability system so that we know who travels, and who travels 
on which bus. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 76, on the same item, the hon. Minister has just mentioned no 
contracts.  We  were  surprised  when  he  talked  on  the  Budget  Speech  that  there  were  no 
contracts since the implementation of this project. Now that the Government is in power as 
from December, is a contract still going on for these people to gather juicy money without 
doing the job? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, what we are going to do as from next week is: we 
will have a specific contract between the NTA and each service provider and that contract 
will specify what are the obligations and responsibilities of each service provider and, at the 
same time, we will see to it that the NTA has a record, on a daily basis, of the names of the 
drivers, the names of the conductors and the number of students travelling from which school 
to which destination. 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport (Rs840,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 9-1 Public Infrastructure was called. 

 

28 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I refer the hon. Minister to page 
168, item 31113.003 Construction of Grade Separated Junction on M1 at De Caen Street, 
Port Louis.  The project value for this particular project is Rs200 m. The hon. Minister will 
recall that we have already built a flyover with variations being paid and an extra cost to the 
tune of Rs160 m. in the past and I remember having put a question to the then Minister to 
know whether what we are building is supported by a feasibility study, that is, whether the 
whole Road Decongestion Programme is supported by a feasibility study. We have already 
spent Rs160 m. in the past to build a flyover at the Caudan Roundabout. Now, Government is 
telling us that we have  again to spend Rs200 m. for the construction of a  grade separated 
junction  on  the  M1  at  the  De  Caen  Street,  Port  Louis  which  is  not  far  from  the  Caudan 
Roundabout. May we know from the hon. Minister whether this project will eventually solve 
the traffic congestion problem at Caudan or is it another project that will give rise to a third 
combination of flyover and grade separated junction at that particular area? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, the issue has always been the congestion at Place 
d’Armes.  There  are  only  three  possibilities;  one  is  the  tunnel,  the  other  one  is  the  dream 
bridge and the third one would be the flyover across the Place d’Armes. I think, for a number 
of reasons people would not like to have a flyover just in front of Place d’Armes. So, the 
idea, in fact, is to see to it that we enter into Port Louis not at Place d’Armes but further up. 
This is the grade separated junction at De Caen and we will see to it that the traffic over a 
flyover will enter Port Louis at De Caen and join the John Kennedy Road and we are going to 
work on the whole region of Port Louis with the main arteries. We are thinking of Desforges 
Street and Royal Street being three lanes without parking. This will join the Ring Road Phase 
II, the tunnel and the Ring Road Phase III to connect at the grade separation of Mer Rouge 
connecting with all the traffic from the port area.  So, that is the idea, to see to it that there is 
a fluid traffic at Place d’Armes. All the cars going from the north to the south will not have to 
stop any more, they will go straight to the south and the cars entering Port Louis will enter 
Port Louis further up at the De Caen Street and no longer at Place d’Armes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  164,  under  item  21110 
Personal Emoluments, sub item General Worker, there is an increase from 176 employees as 
general workers to 652. May I know from the hon. Minister the number of general workers 
who  were  in  service  in  2014  which  after  the  elections  have  been  laid  off  and  whether  in 

 

29 

recruiting these new general workers priority would be given to those general workers who 
have been laid off by this new Government? 

Mr Bodha: Well, the laying off was a policy decision with regard to people who had 
been recruited just before the elections. In the case of the RDA for example, they assumed 
duty on 10 November when the National Assembly had been dissolved on 06 October and the 
Nomination Day was 24 November.  

The grade of general worker, in fact, is a departmental grade on the establishment of 
each  Ministry.  In  fact,  they  are  not  general  workers  who  are  going  to  be  allocated  to  the 
Ministry of Public infrastructure. The Ministry does the recruitment exercise with the PSC 
and  then  allots  the  general  workers  to  the  different  Ministries.  I  understand  that  there  is  a 
problem, that some of the workers have been laid off and what we are going to… 

(Interruptions) 

I  think  when  the  decision  was  taken  it  was  about  300.  As  regards  the  exercise  to  come, 
whether  they  will  be  given  priority,  I  think  that  they  can  apply  like  the  other  workers 
provided that they qualify - I think one of the first conditions is that they have been on the list 
of unemployed people at the Ministry of Employment and they have the unemployment card. 
I think that what we can do is to ask them to apply like the other candidates. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  167,  Madam,  I  will  take  it  upon  the  RDA.  We  are  being 
asked to vote Rs119 m. I have raised this issue of traffic congestion at the Vandermeersch 
Street near the Central Electricity Board and even coming from Ebène which is a nightmare 
to all the citizens of the country travelling to this area, especially sick people. Can I insist 
upon the hon. Minister - because I don’t rely on the officers of the RDA - to have a proper 
study carried out? We had been given a reply here with which we do not agree. It is too costly 
to  have  a  bypass  behind  the  Ebène  SSS.  So  the  new  project  which  would  start  near 
Coromandel to go on the motorway will take 5 to 10 years. We are having problems every 
day at this roundabout and even coming from Port Louis in the afternoon and in the morning. 
Will the hon. Minister see to it that, at least, a proper study be carried out? I have been there 
and there are possibilities. 

 

30 

Secondly, whether the hon. Minister can give instructions to the RDA to remove all 
these plastics that they have put at the Promenade Roland Armand which is the main jogging 
park  of  this  region  qui  est  très  fréquenté.  Since  four  weeks  the  RDA  has  put  their  plastic 
bindings at this promenade which is an eyesore and which is creating lots of confusion? 

Mr Bodha: First of all, Madam Chairperson, as regards decongestion programme, we 
are going to have the new scope of works in the weeks to come and Government will have to 
take  a  decision  as  regards  the  main  A1/M1  bridge  over  Sorèze  connecting  with  the 
motorway.  

As regards the  Vandermeersch issue, the junction, the hon. Member has mentioned 
this to me many times and I can assure him that nothing will be done to make him feel that 
we have not listened to his advice.  

I have, in fact, requested the RDA and the TMRSU to give a special attention to that.  
It is true that we have the Queen Elizabeth College, we have the bus station, so, we are going 
to move very cautiously. We will take the advice of the hon. Member as well as the other 
Members of the Constituency to see that we find the best solution.  It is a major problem.  I 
have been told that the by-pass behind the Queen Elizabeth College will cost a lot.  In fact, it 
is building a bridge which will join the le bout du monde … 

(Interruptions) 

Anyway, we will look into the matter.  We will be posted as regards the A1/M1 link road 
from Beau Bassin to Sorèze in the coming weeks. 

Yes, I will request the RDA to do that. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:    On  page  167,  item  31113  Capital  Expenditure  –  Acquisition  of  Non-
Financial Assets, there was an amount of Rs1 billion spent in 2014.  Next year, it will be 
Rs800 m. and Rs800 m. the following years.  May I know from the hon. Minister in regard to 
these  main  infrastructure  projects,  whether  it  will  be  totally  funded  by  Government?  Is 
Government going to do a private/public partnership or has this idea of having a company 
with the private sector to construct road been shelved? 

 

31 

Mr Bodha:  As regards the general decongestion programme, this will have an impact 

on all these projects, Madam Chairperson.  We are going to have as I have said –  

• 
• 
• 

the new scope of works;  
the budget;  
the mode of financing, and  

then we will see whether we are going for the PPP.  We know that, in the past, there was a 
model  which  was  proposed  by  Government.    I  think  nobody  agreed  on  this  that  the 
Government will take a  loan of Rs20 billion and give it to the private partner. So, we  are 
looking  at  the  new  scope  of  works,  the  new  budget  and  we  will  see  how  Government’s 
involvement could be taken into account. We are also taking into consideration some private 
partnership and some private investment. 

Mr Jhuboo:  On page 167, Capital Expenditure – item (n) Upgrading of access to 
Flic  en  Flac  (Study).  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  the  study  concerns 
only the access or is it a comprehensive study that will define whether we need a bypass to 
decongest Flic en Flac? 

Mr  Bodha:    I  have  it  here.  Madam  Chairperson,  the  assignment  consists  of  a 
feasibility study and detailed engineering design for the access to Flic en Flac. The alignment 
under study shall start at the existing Pierrefonds roundabout, follow the existing Palma road 
bypass, the village of Beaux Songes and deviate into a south-west direction with a junction at 
Geoffroy  and  thereafter  aiming  west  to  connect  to  the  existing  road  at  Manisa  Hotel.  The 
objectives of the study are – 

to provide a second access option;  
increase the access capacity; 

• 
• 
•  create  a  pedestrian  friendly  traffic  cum  zone  from  the  Flic  en  Flac/Wolmar 

area, and  

•  provision  for  a  proposed  alternative  design  or  traffic  flow  options  for  the 

staggered double T junction at Cascavelle.  

So, in fact, it is a very holistic approach of the area. 

Vote 9-1 Public Infrastructure (Rs1,647,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport was called. 

32 

Mr Lesjongard: I’ll get back again to the creation of that Mauritius Land Transport 
Authority.  It  is  on  page  175,  under  item  26  –  Grants,  sub-item  26313.129.  We  see  that 
provision is there for an estimate of Rs7.3 m. for 2015/2016 and we still have provision for 
the Traffic Management Road Safety Unit, the National Transport Authority and the RDA. 
Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  we  have  a  time  frame  for  the 
implementation of this Act, that is, the Mauritius Land Transport Authority Act and whether 
he can confirm where matters stand? Have we proclaimed the First and Second Schedule of 
the Act which deals with the declaration of assets of officers involved in those organisations, 
that is, the RDA, the National Transport Authority and the TMRSU? 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Members, I just wish to draw your attention to the fact that 

during the Committee of Supply, no questions are allowed on legislation. 

Mr Bodha:  Well, the question is whether the Mauritius  Land Transport Authority 
will be constituted in the manner it had been devised then. The answer is no. So, we are not 
coming with the huge authority which will be like an umbrella under which the TMRSU, the 
RDA and the NTA will work. That is why sections have not been proclaimed because we are 
not going for the merger. In fact, we have a small team which is now at the Mauritius Land 
Transport  Authority  which  was  working  on  the  LRT.  Now  that  the  LRT  project  has  been 
shelved,  this  Authority  will  not  see  the  day  as  the  big  umbrella  under  which  all  these 
organisations are going to operate. In fact, what is going to happen is that the Mauritius Land 
Transport Authority will remain as it is today. We are going to see to it that the Authority can 
be some sort of a think tank for the whole issue of land transport. 

Mr Lesjongard: We had in mind when we voted that legislation that officers in such 
Authority dealing with big contracts do declare their assets. I want to know whether this will 
hold good or we are not going into that direction? 

Mr Bodha:  We will not go into that direction. They will not deal with contracts at 

all. 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport (Rs1,690,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research was called. 

 

33 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Chairperson, can I take page 83?  Is it on that vote? 

The Chairperson: Yes. 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 83 – Grants to the MITD.  I do not need to recall the hon. 

Minister in what mess the MITD was … 

The Chairperson:  Which item? 

Mr Bhagwan:  Item 26313.027 – Mauritius Institute of Training and Development.  
Can the hon. Minister, at least, inform the House - before asking us to vote for nearly Rs237 
m. - whether the whole mess at the MITD has been cleared, whether a new set-up has been 
put in place, and whether there would be a full enquiry on all the issues which have been 
raised in Parliament where there has been a lot of injustice, corruption and pourriture? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  matter  is  being  taken  care  of  and,  in  fact,  full 
restructuring of the sector is envisaged.  We are trying to get support from certain experts, 
which will be provided to us from the embassies in Mauritius who are ready to help.  With 
the  help  of  consultants  and  experts,  we  are  going  to  restructure  the  whole  sector  and, 
obviously, care is being taken to look after the cases that have been brought to our notice. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madam  Chairperson,  page  80,  item  28212.004  -  Primary  School 
Supplementary Feeding Project.  Can the hon. Minister tell us if this project is actually being 
implemented?  Is it really the project concerning ‘repas chauds’ to schoolchildren? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The project ‘repas chauds’ is not being envisaged right 
now.  In fact, the school feeding programme refers to the school feeding programme at the 
ZEP schools and the offer of loaves of bread in all primary schools. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  80,  item  31,  Acquisition  of 
Non-Financial Assets, 31112.402 - Upgrading of Schools, (a) O. Beaugeard GS, I take note 
that there is absolutely no amount budgeted.  May I know from the hon. Minister why is it 
that no money is being budgeted for the reconstruction of Beaugeard GS? 

 

34 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  As  for  Beaugeard  Government  School,  the  renovation 
and  construction  works  have  been  carried  out.    Works  had  started  in  July  2013  and  the 
contract has terminated.  Yet, there is an injunction case before the Supreme Court.  Since the 
stay order in November 2013 from the Supreme Court, an amount of Rs15,000, on a daily 
basis,  comprising  of  watchmanship,  tools  and  equipment,  performance  security  insurance, 
etc., is being spent.  The State Law Office has, in November last, informed the Ministry that 
the contract may be terminated, and that’s why no provision is being made. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, can we know why the ‘repas chauds’ project is not 

being considered actually? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: No provision has been made in this budget and it will be 

done in the coming years.  It requires proper thinking before we launch on this project. 

Mr Quirin: May I know what is being offered to schoolchildren actually as food? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Apart  from  the  provision  of  loaves  to  primary  schools, 
which is funded by PTA, we have the provision of meals to pupils at the ZEP schools - bread, 
butter,  cheese,  fruit  and  water.  It  is  the  responsibility,  again,  of  the  PTA  to  appoint  the 
caterers. The sum spent is Rs76 m. for 2014, and the estimates for January to June 2015 is 
Rs42 m. 

Mr Uteem: At page 85, item 26313.088 - Tertiary Education Commission/Tertiary 
Education Institutions.  The grant for TEC is around Rs38 m. for this coming six months.  
May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  all  enquiries  relating  to  TEC  have  been 
completed or not, and what is the outcome therefor? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  There  are  some  enquiries  on  officers  working  at  TEC 

which is still on, which have not been completed yet. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    Page  80,  item  31,  sub-item 
31112.402 - Upgrading of Schools, (f) Primary Schools Renewal Project.  May I ask the hon. 
Minister whether Emmanuel Anquetil School, which is found in Roche Bois, is included in 
this list of ‘upgrading of schools’, as some of the classes are in a very bad state, especially the 
toilets for the kids there? 

 

35 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I will give you the information. 

The Chairperson: In the meantime maybe hon. Uteem can have his question. 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  84,  under  Recurrent 
Expenditure, item 28212.011 - State of Mauritius/Additional Scholarships, there is a pro rata 
reduction from Rs108 m. to Rs26 m.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether there is a 
reduction in the number of additional scholarships that are being given under this scheme? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: No. It’s only the timing when the payment is made.  The 

number of scholarships is the same. 

I  have  got  the  information  regarding  Emmanuel  Anquetil  Government  School.  We 
have a project for construction of new toilet blocks, demolition of the old toilet blocks and 
construction of eight WC cubicles for boys and eight for girls, two for the staff and one for 
disabled.  The project started in April 2013 and was completed in October 2013.   For the 
classes, no provision has been made in this budget. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  At page 84, under the sub-head 10-
107: Human Resource Development, I see that no provision has been made for the Human 
Resource Development Council.  So, do I take it that the recurrent budget for the HRDC will 
be taken from the levy grant system contributed by the private sector? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  One  of  the  functions  of  the  HRDC  is  to  manage  the 
National Training Fund.  Given that no Government grant has been allocated to HRDC, the 
Council has been financing its overall budget from the National Training Fund since 2009. 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Rs7,317,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research was called. 

The  Chairperson:  I  will  allow  only  one  question  because  I  had  already  put  the 

question.  The question had already been replied.  So, I will give you one question. 

(Interruptions) 

 

36 

Mr Uteem: On page 186, item 22120.025 Fees of which Fees to Oriental Language 
Teachers, every year, we are asked to vote an item of about Rs25 m. to Rs28 m. May I know 
from the hon. Minister how many Oriental Teachers are concerned and why are they not on 
establishment?  Why do we have to keep paying fees every year to them? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The Oriental Teachers that we are talking about are not 
those who are on establishment.  They are those working in the baitkas and small evening 
schools.    For  Hindi,  we  have  391  teachers;  Urdu  -  194;  Tamil  -  67;  Telegu  -  34;  Modern 
Chinese - 4; Marathi - 22; a total of 712 teachers and these are teachers working in evening 
schools, not in the primary schools. 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research (Rs14,725,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  87,  item  21110      Personal 
Emoluments  and,  on  page  88,  item  26313.095  -  Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care 
respectively.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  sum  that  we  are  going  to 
approve  include  payment  to  specialist  Doctors  doing  surgery,  for  example,  neurosurgery, 
cardiac surgery and gynaecological?   

Mr Gayan: I assume that the amount is for all the charges paid to all the Doctors and 

specialists. 

Dr. Sorefan:  No, what I mean, certain neurosurgeons or cardiac surgeons when they 
do one case, are they paid another fee for every case they do - that goes even for caesarean - 
and whether this amount is included in this Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, from what I understand, there is a specified number 
of operations which are carried out by the cardiac surgeons and, over and above that number, 
they are paid extra for the operations.  

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 

37 

Dr. Joomaye:  On page 88, item 22140.002 - C.T Scan and MRI Fees and Materials. I 
understand expenditures are paid to the private. Since several of our hospitals are equipped 
with C.T. Scan and MRI, I fail to understand why such an amount is being paid to the private. 
So, can the hon. Minister enlighten us? 

Mr Gayan:  I understand that in case of breakdown and patients needing planned C.T, 
Scan, then they have to be redirected to the clinics. I understand that in the last 8 to 10 years, 
patients needing emergency C.T Scan were sent mainly to City clinic and some were sent to 
Clinique du Nord, but it would appear that since the outcry most of the C.T. Scans are being 
performed at hospitals. If it is not available in one hospital they are sent to another hospital. 

Dr.  Joomaye:    On  page  88,  item  31112.003  (f)  New  ENT  Hospital  and  (j)  New 
Psychiatric Hospital respectively. I see that no amount has been budgeted for these two new 
hospitals that have been announced for construction.  Can the hon. Minister tell us whether 
this project will not be done soon? 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Chairperson,  we  are  still  awaiting  clearance  from  the  Prime 
Minister’s  Office  regarding  the  authorisation  to  construct  in  the  same  place  as  the  present 
ENT.  A reply is expected soon, and once this is obtained, then, of course, there will be all the 
preparation for the scope of work and the cost estimate.  

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Merci,  Madame  la  présidente.    On  page  90,  item  31  -  Capital 
Expenditure, out of an amount of almost half a billion rupees, can the hon. Minister confirm 
the amount that is being allocated for upgrading Dr. Yves Cantin Regional Hospital in Black 
River? 

The  Chairperson:    It  is  not  under  the  list  of  items.    There  is  no  Dr.  Yves  Cantin 

Regional Hospital in there. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, if the hon. Member is asking about whether there is any project for 

Dr. Yves Cantin  Regional Hospital in this Budget, no, there is not! 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

38 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Regarding  the  question  of  hon.  Dr. 
Joomaye for the ENT Hospital, this has been earmarked for 2015-2016; there is a huge sum 
voted that we are going to come with. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, my understanding is that the location of the ENT Hospital was being 
discussed and there were other plots that were being studied.  But finally, it was found that it 
is better to have it in the same place with a new building. So, this is why we are still awaiting 
clearance from the Prime Minister’s Office, but the money will be there. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: A la page 88, sous l’item 31112.  En ce qui concerne le Upgrading of 
Hospitals  dans  l’enceinte  de  l’hôpital  Victoria,  des  infrastructures  religieuses  y  étaient 
prévues  initialement  et  qui  ont  été  complètement  négligées  depuis.    Est-ce  qu’il  y  a  des 
dotations budgétaires  qui sont prévues pour la rénovation ou bien éventuellement pour être 
utilisées à titre de store, etc.? 

Mr Gayan : En ce qui concerne les structures religieuses, je ne crois pas qu’il y a eu 

des fonds qui ont été alloués pour ça.  

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 88, item 26313.095 Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care.   
We  are  being  asked  to  vote  Rs112  m.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  house  whether 
provision has been made for the upgrading of the yard of that specialised centre? I am sure 
you have been there; it is a mess outside.  For the reputation of the centre itself, there is an 
urgent need for the upgrading of the yard and the surroundings and, the more so, there are 
constructions around and this is causing an environment nuisance to the people attending this 
centre. 

Secondly, on the vote of Rs112 m., I would like to know whether funds have been spent 

recently for the refurbishment of offices of the new administration. 

Mr Gayan: Regarding the first question, Madam Chairperson, I understand that this 
amount includes the upgrading of the yard and the surrounding areas. I think it is an ongoing 
thing  that  all  offices  need  to  be  upgraded.  So,  I  believe  that  there  must  have  been  some 
upgrading. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

 

39 

Mr Uteem:  On the very  same item 26313.095  Trust Fund for Specialised Medical 
Care,  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  in  the  coming  6  months  any 
amount  has  been  budgeted  to  increase  the  number  of  cardiac  surgeons  operating  at  that 
centre. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  understand  that  ideally,  we  need  to  have  more 
cardiac surgeons, but there seems to be some structural difficulties and we are looking into 
that. I think we need to look for them locally and if we do not get them, then, of course, we’ll 
have to go overseas. But we are in the process of finding a third cardiac surgeon. We have 
two, right now. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On the same item, Madam Chairperson, I just want to put on record 
my appreciation, because this centre is a centre of excellence and has saved the lives of many 
Mauritians, including Members of Parliament here, irrespective of political differences. Can I 
make a request to the hon. Minister that, at least, this centre of excellence, which has been 
built by the DWC years back - I am not talking about the yard only, but the waiting room for 
the patients, who go for treatment also should be a more convenient place? I do not think that 
for such a specialised centre, money should be a problem. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Chairperson,  in  fact,  I  appreciate  the  remarks  of  the  hon. 
Member. There is a building which the former Minister Jeetah was putting up for a university 
or  I  do  not  know  what,  at  Pamplemousses.  In  fact,  we  are  in  the  process  of  finding  out 
whether  we  can  take  over  that  particular  building  for  the  Trust  Fund  and  also  for  other 
activities like the nursing school. This has been mentioned in the Budget, but we are trying to 
see if we can reorganise that particular building for that purpose. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  On  page  90,  under  item  22900.915  Multi  sectoral  Response  to 
HIV/AIDS  Programme,  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  why  this  Budget  has 
been decreased and whether he is satisfied with this fact. 

Mr Gayan: I’ll just check. I think, Madam Chairperson, this is for the 6 months, this 

is why this amount is there. 

(Interruptions) 

 

40 

Dr. Joomaye: For the 6 months coming, it is Rs12 m. and  for the previous year, it 

was Rs29 m. 

Mr  Gayan:  I  think  the  allocation  was  not  there;  the  basis  of  the  amount  actually 

spent. 

Vote  11-1  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Rs4,450,000,000)  (January-June 

2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  On  page  218  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31112.006  Construction  of 
Mediclinics, (e) Coromandel Mediclinic, there is a sum of Rs7 m. earmarked for this year. 
Can we know when will this project start and in how many years will it be completed, as I see 
here Rs25 m. for the coming years has been earmarked also? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Chairperson, the hon. Member will appreciate that I have also an 
interest in this, but I understand that the land has been identified and the process is on for the 
vesting of the land in the Ministry. So, I hope it goes very fast and I will see to it that it goes 
very fast. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  On  page  202,  under  item  22130.001  Studies  and  Preliminary  Project 
Preparation, an amount of Rs20,888 m. has been allocated. This amount has been allocated 
for studies and surveys only.  Can I know from the hon. Minister what will be the time frame 
for implementing these projects (a) to (f) - Institute of Women’s Health, Paediatric Hospital, 
New Warehouse, etc.? 

Mr Gayan: For some of these studies, I understand that there is still some work that 
has  to  be  done.  For  example,  there  are  feasibility  studies  for  the  projects  and  there  is  an 
amount of Rs20 m. which has been earmarked for study on NCDs and other agencies. For the 
Institute of Women’s Health, the contract has been awarded. For paediatric hospital, contract 
also has been awarded to a consultant. For the new warehouse, the contract has been awarded 
to another consultant and for the others, the studies are expected to start sometime this year. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

41 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  219,  item  22900.925  Rehabilitation 
Programme  for  Alcoholics  and  Drug  Addicts  by  NATReSA,  may  we  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister  whether  the  amount  earmarked  includes  security  guards  at  the  dispensing 
department in the hospital where recently we had drug addicts who broke in and had self-
treatment of methadone, by themselves; self-service? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I know that recently there was an incident at Dr. Jeetoo Hospital, but 
an inquiry is still on as to how this could have happened, because if the proper procedure had 
been followed, this would have been impossible. So, there must have been something that 
went wrong. With regard to the hospitals, there is security, there are the Police, but this is an 
exceptional circumstance. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  212,  item  22140  Medical  Supplies,  Drugs 
and Equipment, we are asked to vote a budget of around Rs595 m., may I know from the hon. 
Minister  what  measures  are  being  taken  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  shortage  of  medicines, 
because  we  have  just  seen,  for  example,  with  the  ‘disco  eyes’,  conjonctivite,  there  was  a 
shortage of medicines in the public hospitals? 

Mr Gayan: Let me say one thing, Madam Chairperson. In the hospitals, there was no 
shortage of any medication for conjunctivitis. There may have been in the private sector, but 
in the public sector there was none. We are regularly monitoring the stock of medication at 
the Central Supplies Division. In fact, I have impressed upon that particular department that 
we  should  monitor  on  a  regular  basis  so  that  we  never  run  out  of  stock.  It  may  happen 
exceptionally that some medication is not available but, as far as possible, I have impressed 
upon them not only not to be out of stock but also to ensure that we do not purchase lots of 
drugs  qui  deviennent  périmés.  Right  now  we  have  billions  of  rupees  of  medication  lying 
which have to be destroyed so that is also a waste which we are trying to control. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: At page 204 item 21 as far as Recurrent Expenditure is concerned, 
what I would like to know from the hon. Minister is something very simple - I have not seen 
it therein and forgive my ignorance - but does anyone of the people or individuals in charge 
of  hospitals  have  what  I  will  call  certifications  or  qualifications  or  training  in  the  field  of 
management  of  hospitals?  Do  any  of  them  have  that  particular  training,  that  particular 
qualification and, if not, what does the hon. Minister propose to do in order to give them that 

 

42 

particular managerial skill in terms of certification because managing a hospital or a health 
institution is different to being a doctor and is different to being someone qualified in health 
services? 

Mr Gayan: I understand that we have hospital administrators who are supposed to be 
trained  in  administration.  Madam  Chairperson,  I  understand  that  there  are  training 
programmes that they follow to get the expertise to run the hospitals. I must say that, when 
looking into the management of hospitals, someone came up with the idea to me saying that 
the best way to run a hospital is to get somebody who runs a hotel as the same services are 
provided. It is customer oriented. In fact, I have mentioned it to my officers and we are going 
to look into that. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 
Hon. Ameer Meea, are you ready with your question?  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  212,  item  22140  - 
Medical  Supplies,  Drugs  and  Equipment,  my  question  will  be  on  the  distribution  of 
methadone. I am taking it on item 22140.001 - Medicine, Drugs and Vaccines. Can I ask the 
hon. Minister if he can report progress to the House on the distribution of methadone? Since 
its inception up to now what has been the rate of success? How many drug addicts are taking 
it and what is his vision concerning the distribution of methadone? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Chairperson, I must say that I am not very happy with the 
rate of progress of people getting out of methadone. When I became Minister I looked into 
the issue and there was no control whatsoever on how methadone was being distributed to the 
clients  as  they  are  called.  And  then  we  decided  to  have  a  system  where  no  client  of 
methadone would get any methadone unless he came with his identity card plus another card 
which was distributed by the Ministry so that it is only on presentation of those two cards that 
a client can get his methadone. I must say that the numbers are in the thousands and, as at 
December  2014,  the  number  was  about  7000.  Since  we  have  decentralised  the  methadone 
distribution, I have also got on board a Doctor who is especially trained to wean drug addicts 
off. The programme has just started and I hope it is a success, but I must also say that the 
NGOs have to play their part as well in this process. I think it is ongoing, but, as I said, I 
cannot say any more than that right now. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 
Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam. On page 213, item 31112.003 regarding the New 
Cancer  Centre  -  Construction,  Supply,  Installation  and  Commissioning  of  Bunker  and 

 

43 

Equipment, I understand it is the radiotherapy equipment. I can see that for 2015/2016 only 
Rs15  m.  have  been  budgeted  and  planned  for  2016/2017  and  2017/2018  are  Rs50  m.  and 
Rs70 m. Does that mean that the new Cancer Centre will be fully operational and will give 
radio therapy services only in 3 to 4 years? 

Mr Gayan: That is not the intention of Government. The intention of Government is 
to have a new Cancer Treatment Centre operational at the earliest. But, as the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition mentioned yesterday and I have taken his concern on board.  With the linear 
accelerator  apparatus  that  we  need  to  make  it  fully  modern,  we  need  to  be  very  careful 
because it is a huge amount of money. There are only apparently three suppliers in the world 
for  this  equipment  and  we  are  having  a  wide  range  of  consultations.  I  have  also  had 
consultations with the IAEA in Vienna so that they also help us in the identification of the 
proper equipment for Mauritius. I am sure that the hon. Minister of Finance will provide the 
funds necessary so that it becomes operational at the earliest. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramful! 
Mr Ramful: On the same item, Madam Chairperson, we know that Government is 
spending  a  lot  of  money  sending  cancer  patients  abroad.  Do  I  take  it  that  this  sum  would 
cover the purchase of the latest equipment so that patients can get maximum cancer treatment 
over here in Mauritius? Can we have a list of the equipment that we intend to purchase? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I think, Madam Chairperson, there is a confusion. There are two 
things, one is the equipment for the cancer treatment and there is another item for overseas 
treatment of patients so we should not mix the two. Probably there will always be some cases 
that  we  will  not  be  able  to  treat  locally  and  they  will  have  to  be  treated  overseas.  This  is 
something over which we can have no control. The intention is that, as far as possible, all 
Mauritians suffering from cancer would be treated locally and, with this new equipment, I 
understand  it  is  very  modern,  it  is  a  state-of-the-art,  so  I  believe  that  we  will  have  the 
equipment but, the greatest problem also will be to train the people who will be able to use 
the equipment. This also is already ongoing. 

(Interruptions) 

It will be part of the package. Maybe I should assure everybody that for the equipment that 
we propose to purchase there will be a maintenance contract and we will ensure that, within 
48 hours, the supplier will have to come and repair by whatever means he can. We are trying 
to  get  the  best  possible  means  to  ensure  that  this  equipment  is  for  the  benefit  of  all 
Mauritians. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

 

44 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  213  item  31112.003  -  Non-
Residential  Buildings  Construction/Extension  of  which  (a)  New  Jeetoo  Hospital,  there  is  a 
budgeted amount of Rs35 m. May I know from this amount whether any amount is budgeted 
for  the  building  of  a  new  incineration  in  Dr.  Jeetoo  hospital?  There  was  a  parliamentary 
question  on  that  and,  if  not,  what  is  happening  with  the  project  of  having  a  central 
incineration for the waste which, we believe is toxic? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Chairperson, this incinerator at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital is 
causing  a  lot  of  nuisance.  I  have  looked  into  the  matter.  I  understand  that  the  best  way 
forward would be to have a separate incinerator for the  whole medical  waste  generated in 
hospitals,  but  not  on  the  premises  of  any  hospital.  A  study  will  have  to  be  carried  out 
regarding  this  particular  matter.  I  understand  that  last  year  a  delegation  went  to  Reunion 
Island to see how they manage their medical waste and I understand that they have a good 
system. Maybe we should have another look at it. But, another possibility would be that all 
medical  waste  is  disposed  of  in  as  safe  a  manner  as  possible  without  damaging  the 
environment. Right now, the problem at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital is because of the wastes 
which are from the dialysis, all the plastics, all the consumables are just put there and there is 
a lot of black smoke.  I understand that there is a system where this is shredded and made 
easier to be burnt. But we are looking into that. 

(Interruptions) 

No, it is a problem not only for Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, but for all the hospitals. We cannot 
just  send  them  to  Mare  Chicose.  They  have  to  be  disposed  of  in  a  different  way,  but  a 
decision must be taken as soon as possible. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  I  refer  to  page  220,  Recurrent  Expenditure,  item  21  Personal 
Emoluments. I see that the Ministry is embarking on recruiting more specialised nurses for 
the diabetes.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether that will be from promotion, that is 
nurses  from  hospitals  or  will  they  be  recruited  from  the  market  and  whether  we  have  set 
specialised nurses on the market? 

Mr Gayan: I don’t think there are nurses on the market as the hon. Member is saying. 
My understanding is that they will have to be trained. We are training nurses every year and 
some will be directed into diabetic treatment.  For the training of nurses, we have to train 
them in other fields as well like the new cancer treatment and other specialised areas. It is an 
ingoing process. 

 

45 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  will  come  very  briefly  on  the  new  cancer 
centre. May I know from the hon. Minister whether the planning that he has given the House, 
in terms of personnel, is in line with the purchase of equipment? Who are the personnel who 
should  be  trained  and  whether  the  Ministry  has  actually,  in  its  staffing  list,  a  proper 
Oncologist and how many Oncologists the Ministry has because from what I have heard there 
is only one for the country? Will the Government be sending our young Doctors for training 
abroad and whether there is a planning in connection with the opening of that hospital?  

Secondly, pending the opening of this centre, we all know that MPs have problems 
with  their  mandates.    There  are  lots  of  problems  at  Candos  Hospital  for  those  going  for 
treatment - male and female separate. We have been told, during the past years, that those 
attending  Victoria  Hospital  were  having  problems  in  terms  of  facilities  prior  to  their 
treatment, having to wait for ambulance and so on. Will the hon. Minister, at least, during the 
coming years, put sufficient funds so as the whole system could be reviewed and the whole 
section upgraded? 

Mr Gayan: I have said in this House, Madam Chairperson, that I am very concerned 
about the state of that particular unit at Victoria Hospital. This is why we are moving very 
fast to have the New Cancer Treatment Centre. Once we have that open, it is going to solve… 

 (Interruptions) 

Well, we will take whatever measures we can to address the concerns of the hon. Member. 
With  regard  to  Oncologists,  of  course,  I  have  also  said  that  we  need  to  have  capacity 
building. I understand that even the suppliers of the new equipment will give some training 
for our Doctors who will be called upon to work in that sector. 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Chairperson, on page 213, Capital Expenditure - 26, I see 
the  figures  for  2015/2016  is  Rs587,100,000,  then  it  goes  to  Rs519,500,000  and 
Rs528,500,000 for the two other  years making an average of about Rs550 m. on each and 
every year. Could the hon. Minister - because I can’t see it there - not have spared just Rs1 m. 
or R2 m. for Agalega because no mention at all is made of Agalega?  There are women there 
who are pregnant – I am not only talking while he is Minister, but even before – and who 
have to come to Mauritius for an echography.  There are people who get injured and for a 
proper x-ray to be carried out they have to be carried to Mauritius which is additional expense 
in terms of flight between Agalega and Mauritius. So, what could be done, because nothing is 

 

46 

provided here, and whether he could really consider - maybe his attention was not drawn to 
that - that we have to give better services? Maybe he could do it for Agalega - upgrading the 
service  -  because  there  has  been  a  longstanding  request  and  there  were  promises  by  your 
predecessor that this was in the process of being done.  That  would be to receive a lot of 
thanks on my behalf? 

Mr Gayan:  I will certainly look into that. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Chairperson,  if  I  may  come  back  to  the  Dr.  A.  G.  Jeetoo 
Hospital waste incinerator.  The solution evoked by the hon. Minister just now appears to be 
long-term.  Can  consideration  be  given  in  the  meanwhile  for  the  smokestack  to  be  raised 
because the low-lying black smoke creates a very bad perception in the neighbourhood which 
is a highly residential area? 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Chairperson,  I  understand  that  this  particular  measure  had 
already been taken when the issue arose. I think the issue was raised. I don’t know whether it 
is technically possible, but we will certainly have a look at it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye:   On page 221, sub head Prevention of Non-Communicable Diseases 
and Promotion of Quality of Life, item 22900(903), the hon. Minister knows the importance 
of medication and prevention of NCDs, is he satisfied that the Budget has not been increased 
satisfactory for awareness and sensitisation campaign? In the same spirit the support to NGOs 
for  Anti-Smoking  and  Anti-alcohol  Campaign  is  only  Rs500,000.  Can  he  explain  why 
nothing has been done to increase the budget for NGOs? 

Mr Gayan:  I understand that there are other Bodies that are looking at these issues 
like  NATReSA  and  all  substance  abuse  is  being  looked  at.  All  of  these  issues  are  being 
looked at by the NGOs, but I also understand that people are smoking less in the country. 

Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life (Rs9,720,000,000) was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

The Chairperson:  I suspend the sitting for one and half hours for lunch. 

At 12.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.30 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

47 

Vote 12-1 Local Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Je suis à la page 94 sous l’item 26312 Grant to Local Authorities. Je 
voulais savoir du ministre quels sont les critères qui sont considérés actuellement en ce qui 
concerne l’allocation des grants aux différentes collectivités locales ?  Est-ce que ce sont les 
mêmes critères ou bien il y a eu des changements vu que le gouvernement s’est fixé comme 
objectif de donner plus d’autonomie aux différentes collectivités locales? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  you  know,  this  grant-in-aid  has  been  prepared  since  the  1980s. 
Actually, the grant is being increased every year, but there has not been any change in the 
formula itself; there has not been any change at all since the 1980s; but we are thinking about 
working on it again. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Regarding the same issue, the formula, 
like the hon. Minister said, had been there for 25 years back and is going on, but per capita 
grant is much to my surprise, I see that for the Municipal Council of Vacoas/Phoenix, the 
grant has gone down and even for the  year 2015 and 2016, it has gone down by Rs21 m. 
when the residents are increasing with the annexed area.  Can the hon. Minister tell us why 
this is so?  

Dr. Husnoo: The grant has come down for this year. Actually, what is happening is 
that the grant for this year was calculated and actually there has been a decrease – the hon. 
Member is right - by Rs21 m. This is explained by the refund of loan of Rs30 m.  granted to 
the Municipality in 2014. This was given to cover for the deficit of the year 2013. So, if we 
compare with 2014 and 2015, we find that there is a loss. But, actually, in 2014 there was a 
loan  which  was  given  to  cover  for  the  budget  deficit  of  2013.  But,  in  actual  fact,  if  we 
compare 2013, 2014 and 2015, there has been an increase. It is just to cover the loan, that’s 
why it looks like it has come down. The loan was given in 2014 to cover for the deficit in 
2013. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Under item 26323.204 Local Development Fund, at page 94, I don’t 
see  in  the  vote  any  mention  made  about  the  project  for  housing  hawkers.  Can  the  hon. 

 

48 

Minister give us some explanation as to whether during the coming six months this project 
will start and what is the status itself of the project? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, yes, we are going to.  In fact, I am writing to the Minister of 
Public infrastructure and Land Transport to work on the layout. We are going to do the same 
like we did for the Hawkers Palace where we took a grant and gradually the Municipality is 
going to pay for it over the years. 

Mr Bhagwan: But the funds?  What about the funding of the project? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  I  told  the  hon.  Member,  we  are  going  to  take  a  loan.    The 
Municipality is going to take a loan just as we did for Hawkers Palace, and then gradually we 
will pay it. 

Mr Ramano: Toujours sous l’item Grants aux différentes collectivités locales, est-ce 
que je peux savoir du ministre s’il a en sa possession, actuellement, une liste des postes qui 
doivent  être  remplis  au  niveau  des  différentes  collectivités  locales,  par  exemple,  pour  la 
Municipalité de Quatre Bornes ? Il y a pas mal de postes qui n’ont pas été remplis jusqu’à 
présent,  et  il  y  a  toujours  des  grants  qui  sont  prévus  à  cet  effet.  Quelle  est  la  situation 
actuellement au niveau de la Municipalité de Quatre Bornes, par exemple ? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Actually, as the hon. Member said, there are quite a number of posts 
that  have  not  been  filled.    But  we  are  going  to  work  on  it  because  now  the  LGSC  is 
operational - about a month or so.  So, we are going to work on it to fill these posts. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Is the hon. Minister aware that with 
regard to construction of roads - it goes under Capital Grants – such as M1 road and other 
roads, as well as Phase I of the Ring Road, they have lightings?  All these lightings… 

The Chairperson: Hon. Sorefan, to which item are you referring? 

Dr. Sorefan: I am referring to Capital Grants.  The lightings become very costly to 
the Municipalities.  I did raise questions, in the course of the ex-mandate, to the Minister of 
Local Government to liaise with the Ministry of Public Infrastructure to see whether RDA 
can take this in charge; to pay the lighting instead of telling the Council to pay so.  Can the 

 

49 

hon. Minister liaise with the RDA or other institutions to get that funded - the Municipalities 
or RDA to pay the lightings? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, on the subject of lighting, we are going to have a look at it 

again.   It is not just for the maintenance, but also what type of lamp we are going to use.    
We will have to change to led lamp. So the whole thing is being studied, and we are going to 
look at that in the future. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    Coming  back  to  the  question  of 
Grants  under  Capital  Expenditure,  and  building  on  the  question  of  hon.  Bhagwan  with 
respect  to  hawkers’  centres,  the  previous  Government  -  now  outgoing  Government  -  did 
identify three sites.  I know there were some issues regarding the contracting, but the plans 
were already designed by the Ministry of Infrastructure.  From the Minister’s reply just now, 
I gather that he is going for a new design.  Is that right? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, the hon. Member is right.  If we take the North, for example; la 
Gare du Nord, we are going to have an integrated plan.  If you remember the plan for la Gare 
du Nord, it was only one part, just behind the police station.  But now we are going to do the 
whole thing.  On the ground floor, there will be the bus station.  Hopefully, on the first floor 
we will have the hawkers.  We are going to réaménage the whole place.  That is why we are 
working on a different plan. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  this  same  issue,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the 

timeline; when construction will begin and when these new buildings will be completed? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  I  just  mentioned,  I  am  writing  anytime  to  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure to work on the design.  But working on the design and getting the finance could 
take a little bit of time. It is difficult for me to say now how long it will take.  It will depend 
on the procedures. 

Mr Ramano: Toujours en ce qui concerne item Grants. Est-ce que je peux savoir du 
ministre si la construction du marché de Quatre Bornes fait partie de la liste prioritaire en ce 
qui concerne les capital projects à être approuvés par les différentes municipalités ? 

Dr. Husnoo: Unfortunately, it has not been included in this year’s budget. 

 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhuboo! 

50 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Merci,  Madame  la  présidente.    A  la  page  94,  il  y  a  un  montant  de  R 
96,100,000 à l’item Grants 26323.204 (a) Acquisition of compactor lorries.  Peut-on savoir 
du ministre le nom de la firme avec laquelle nous avons acheté ces compactor lorries? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Actually,  I  can’t  tell  which  firm  it  is,  but  I  can  later  on  have  the 

information.  I don’t have the name of the firm, I am afraid. 

Dr. Sorefan: I come to the question of hon. Kavi Ramano regarding the market.  If I 
read ‘Notes on Ministry - Mission Statement’, it is stated, “To empower local authorities to 
be more responsive to the needs of the local community.”  How can we go about in a local 
authority where the needs of the population of Quatre Bornes is a market – that has been all 
far since I was young - and the Ministry is not even reconciling to finance or partly to have a 
new market in Quatre Bornes?  How can we go by the ‘Mission Statement’ to say ‘to be more 
responsive’? 

Dr. Husnoo: Obviously the local Government is going to be responsive, but we have 
a budgetary constraint.  We have to see the project we are going to put this year and then next 
year. The hon. Member knows what I mean! 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    My  question  pertains  to  Grants 
again, on the same page, 94, Compactor Lorries.  One of the reasons why all along we could 
not get rid of plastic bags in Mauritius was because people use it to dump their wastes.  Will 
the compactor lorries in any way enhance waste segregation in the country? 

Dr. Husnoo: We should not just concentrate at the level of the depot where the waste 
is being thrown.  I think we have to concentrate at the level of the households, because once 
we start it here, I think we can segregate the wastes.  I think it can be done.  It is just a matter 
of education and trying  to set up the system. So, it will not just depend on the compactor 
lorries.  Compactor lorry will not itself stop this. 

Vote 12-1 Ministry of Local Government (Rs1,517,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, 

on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 12-2 Fire Services was called. 

 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem. 

51 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  96,  item  31122.803  -
Acquisition of Fire Fighting and Rescue Equipment.  May I know from the hon. Minister how 
many fire fighting lorries are scheduled to be purchased under this item for the coming year? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Actually,  for  this  provision  of  Fire  Fighting  and  Rescue  Equipment, 
provision is made for the purchase of ten portable generators, three semi urban fire fighting 
vehicles, which is going to cost Rs35,400,000, and delivery will be effected by 30 April this 
year; high angle rescue equipment to the tune of Rs1.4 m.; hopefully they will be delivered 
by the end of May this year. 

Mr Ramano:  Toujours à la page 95, sous l’item 31112.024 - Construction of Fire 
Stations.  Ma  plaidoirie  serait  que,  par  rapport  avec  la  Fire  Station  de  la  ville  de  Quatre 
Bornes, cela se trouve carrément dans l’enceinte de la Municipalité de Quatre Bornes. Mon 
appel au ministre c’est de trouver un site alternatif, parce que d’un point de vue de sécurité, 
d’un point de vue de trafic, cela pose pas mal de problèmes pratiques et aussi de sécurité pour 
la ville de Quatre Bornes.  Est-ce que le ministre peut considérer la  relocalisation du  Fire 
Station de la ville de Quatre Bornes dans un endroit beaucoup plus approprié? 

Dr.  Husnoo: Over the next one or two years, we are going to start on different Fire 
Stations in different areas.   Quatre Bornes is not included, as far as I know, for this year. But, 
maybe next year, we can include it. 

Mr Uteem: Let me go back again to page 96, Acquisition of Fire fighting and Rescue 
Equipment.  The hon. Minister mentioned the mid-level lorries.  But for the higher buildings, 
how  tall  will  be  the  ladder?    What  will  be  the  reach  of  the  vehicles  that  are  going  to  be 
purchased, to look after if there is a fire outbreak in one of the high-rise buildings? 

Dr. Husnoo: There are different types.  There is one to reach three storeys, and one to 
reach ten storeys. This one is not going to reach the 10-storey ones.  But we have a vehicle.  
This is going to be sorted out soon; the 10 storeys.  There are some problems.  It is under 
repair.  Hopefully, we should get it sorted out soon. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, on page 232, with regard to Mission Statement and 

Strategic Direction… 

The Chairperson:  We are still on the first Budget. 

 

52 

Vote 12-2 Fire Services (Rs212,500,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 12-1 Local Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  224,  the  first  item  21110.001  Personal  Emoluments, 
Basic salary. Can I ask the hon. Minister if there is any vacancy in the Municipal Councils 
and have all the posts been advertised right now? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, the hon. Member is right. There are vacancies not just in Municipal 

Councils but in District Councils as well and they are going to be advertised soon. 

(Interruptions) 

No! It is in process; some of them are being advertised at the District Councils, but in turn 
others would be advertised. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, on page 232, with regard to Mission Statement and 
Strategic Direction, it is mentioned that Ministries are going to empower local authorities, 
promote  local  democracy  and  consolidate  democracy  at  Local  Government  level.  Can  the 
hon. Minister tell us what are the measures/actions his Ministry is going to take in order to 
promote local democracy and to consolidate democracy at Local Government level? 

Dr. Husnoo: Firstly, the fact that we are going to do the elections. That is going in the 

direction of local democracy, that’s No. 1.  

Secondly, to get the people in the different councils to have a better representation, we 

are going to increase the number of Councillors. 

Thirdly,  as  we  know,  in  the  villages,  a  lot  of  people  were  being  expelled 
unnecessarily. We have taken steps to prevent them from being expelled, from losing their 
seats. These are the different steps we are taking to consolidate democracy at these levels. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  A  la  page  228,  sous  l’item  26210  Contribution  to  International 

Organisations… 

(Interruptions) 

 

53 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

Mr Ramano: Je voudrais savoir du ministre quelles sont les différentes organisations 
qui sont concernées, parce que, là, je vois que mention est faite seulement du Commonwealth 
Local  Government  Forum.  Si  ma  mémoire  est  bonne,  normalement  il  y  avait  d’autres 
organisations… 

Dr. Husnoo: Which number and which item, please? 

Mr  Ramano:  Sous  l’item  26210,  à  la  page  228,  Contribution  to  International 

Organisations. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  It  is  only  for  the  Local  Government  Forum,  that’s  the  only  one  this 

contribution is for. 

Mr Ramano: Ma question est : est-ce que cela implique qu’on ne considère plus les 
autres  organisations,  telles  que  les  associations  francophones  des  Maires  ou  aussi  les 
différentes  associations  de  l’Océan  Indien  où  l’île  Maurice  était  partie  prenante  dans  le 
passé ? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  These  contributions  are  from  the  local  authorities,  it  is  not  from  the 

Central Government. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  At  page  227,  the  very  last  item  22900.940  Operating  expenses  icw 
Centralised Unit for Building and Land Use Permits. Can I know from the hon. Minister if 
there is going to be a centralised body which is going to issue local permits or will the issue 
of permits still reside with the local authorities? Why is the Rs3.5 m. budgeted for that field? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Actually,  this  is  a  new  project  which  is  being  considered  and  we  are 
trying to work on it. It has not been centralised, because the applications will be coming from 
the Local Government. Nowadays, a lot of applications are being considered at the Central 
Government. So, they are trying to look into it again. As you know, in 2014, there was an 
ICAC  Report  which  was  done,  I  think,  in  collaboration  with  the  UNDP  and  there  was  a 
perception that, at the local authority, I am sorry to say so, there was a high perception of 
high index of corruption, especially on the issue of giving permits. That was the study that 
was  done  in  2014  by  ICAC  and  UNDP.    If  we  have  a  problem,  what  do  we  do?  Do  we 
continue to do the same thing or try to think about other ways of solving the problem? That is 
why we have earmarked Rs3.5 m., trying to work on it and see what can be done. 

 

54 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 224, under item 21110 Personal Emoluments. May I ask 
the hon. Minister of the number of vacancies in all Municipal Councils, but if he does not 
have the answer, he can circulate it later. 

Dr. Husnoo: I will circulate it later. Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  228,  with  regard  to  Capital  Grant  to  Extra  Budgetary,  item 
26323.204 Local Development Fund, (b) Contribution towards Plaza Renovation – Phase 2, 
there is no money earmarked. Is there a decision not to go ahead with any renovation with 
respect to Plaza anymore? 

Dr. Husnoo: The contract for consultancy has already been awarded to Francis Wong 
Associates for Rs6.6 m.  The total contribution from Central Government would be Rs40 m. 
and the rest would have to be sorted out by the Beau Bassin-Rose Hill Municipal Council. 

Vote 12-1 Local Government (Rs3,181,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 12-2 Fire Services (Rs461,000,000) was called and agreed to. 

Vote 13-1 Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: At page 97, under item Grants, Extra-Budgetary Units, item 26313.135 - 
National  Empowerment  Foundation.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  who  is  now 
heading  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation,  whether  the  Board  has  been  properly 
constituted? 

Mr Roopun: The Board will be reconstituted soon and the Chief Administrator is still 

in office actually. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  with  your  permission,  on  page  97.  On  the 
National  Empowerment  Foundation,  once  the  Board  is  reconstituted  and  all  these  field 
officers are appointed, can we make a request to the Minister, at least, to circulate to hon. 
Members, the different persons who have been appointed?   As MPs - you have been in the 
Opposition, you know - very often we need to contact these people and we do not know how. 

 

55 

Secondly,  on  same  page  97,  item  26313.135  (ii)  Training  and  Placement  for 
Unemployed Poor. Can we have an idea how many persons have been employed, where, in 
which sector where we have been asked to vote Rs15 m.?  

Also, same page 97, under (iii) Community Development for the Poor, where Rs10 m. 
is earmarked, can the hon. Minister give us a list of projects identified region-wise and what 
are the criteria used for giving assistance? 

Mr Roopun: Insofar as the first question is concerned, the suggestion is duly noted 
and I may add also that we are also launching a hotline at my Ministry so that we can further 
help members of the public, including MPs who want to have information about the NEF. 

Insofar  as  projects  undertaken  in  2014  are  concerned,  there  was  one  at  Grand 
Basfond,  Lallmatie  for  Rs500,000  done  in  2014  before  I  became  Minister.  There  was  the 
construction of a drain at Cité CIM at Rivière du Rempart, a night shelter at Roche Bois and a 
green space at Ripailles, among others. 

Insofar as the Training and Placement Programme is concerned, I understand from the 
NEF that the number of candidates who have been placed in 2014 was 445 and in 2013 it was 
349. The percentage of successful placements was reported to be 29 percent.  

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 97, item 22130 - Studies and Surveys, I see that there is a new 
item Marshall Plan on Poverty, there is an amount of only Rs300,000 budgeted. I would like 
to know what is this survey on the Marshall Plan of Poverty and who will be carrying it out 
for Rs300,000. 

Mr  Roopun:  Insofar  as  the  Marshall  Plan  is  concerned,  we  are  still  preparing  the 
terms of reference which are being finalised actually and consultations will thereafter be held 
with appropriate stakeholders. In the first instance, an assessment of the needs of vulnerable 
families in pockets of poverty will be carried out. This assessment will serve as a basis for 
intervention in the context of the ‘parrainage’ concept which has just been launched. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 97 item number 26313.135 (a) Operating Costs Rs49 m. 

may we have a breakdown of this figure? 

 

56 

Mr Roopun: Yes, operating costs Rs49 m. we have got –  

•  salaries for the staff in Mauritius which amounts to Rs44 m. and 

• 

 for Rodrigues it is Rs4.8 m.  

Out of the Rs44 m for Mauritius, we have got – 

•  Rs36 m. for salaries; 

•  Rs1.7 m. for utilities; 

•  Rs1.2 m. for the upkeep of vehicles; 

•  Rs1.6 m. for the fees to board members (there are in all 13 board members); 

•  we have also for publication which amounts to Rs600,000; 

• 

the maintenance cost is Rs500,000; 

•  we have rent for one building which is Rs650,000, and 

•  other incidental expenses which amount to Rs1.75 m. among others. 

For Rodrigues, out of the Rs4.8 m. we have –  

•  salaries represent Rs2.85 m.; 

•  utility costs Rs400,000; 

• 

• 

fuel Rs300,000; 

rental of building Rs900,000, and 

•  equipment, etc. Rs350,000, making a total of Rs4.8 m. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Coming back on the same Marshall Plan on Poverty, item 22130, has the 
hon. Minister already identified what are the criteria that this survey would use to identify 
these poches of poverty? How will one become a poche of poverty? 

 

57 

Mr Roopun: No, the criteria have not yet been fully worked out. There is a consultant 
from the UNDP who is working on the project actually.  Together with a dedicated team at 
the level of my Ministry we are working out on the terms of reference. 

Vote  13-1  Ministry  of  Social 

Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment 

(Rs140,500,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  13-1  Ministry  of  Social 

Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment 

(Rs415,000,000) was called. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, on page 234, Capital Expenditure item 26323.135 
(i) Integrated Social Housing Projects, there is a sum of Rs22 m. earmarked for 2015/2016. 
Can we know from the hon. Minister the number of houses to be constructed in 2015/2016 
and the regions identified pertaining to these projects? 

Mr  Roopun:  The  amount  for  Extra-Budgetary  Units,  National  Empowerment 

Foundation (i) Integrated Social Housing Projects is Rs159 m., out of which we have - 

•  Rs22 m. for preliminary expenses for integrated social houses; 

•  we also have Rs63 m. for concrete cum CIS houses 

All these projects have not yet been earmarked and, in fact, the construction of the works will 
be done in collaboration with the Ministry of Housing and Lands once the sites have been 
identified. Whenever there are beneficiaries who do not fall within the ambit of the NHDC, 
my Ministry is going to take over the construction of those houses for beneficiaries who earn 
less than Rs6200. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  the  same  score,  Madam,  can  the  Minister  inform  the  House 
whether definite criteria have been established by his Ministry for the construction of these 
houses especially with regard to the size? We have seen in the past with the whole scandal of 
having  construction  of  boites  zallumettes  type  of  houses,  whether  a  new  design  will  be 
produced  by  the  Ministry  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  in 
connection with the World Habitat UN guidelines, can the Minister inform the House?  

Secondly, I would like to know whether the Minister has put order in this question of 
allocation of du bois and tole, the same scandal we have had in the past where there have 

 

58 

been  crooks  taking  money  of  the  poor  and  beneficiating  from  the  allowances  given  to  the 
poor. 

Mr  Roopun:  Insofar  as  the  second  question  is  concerned,  the  policy  of  this 
Government is to phase out all construction in CIS houses. We are doing only construction of 
CIS houses in cases of utmost urgency otherwise we are more inclined to construct concrete 
houses  with  corrugated  iron  sheets  roof.  In  fact,  so  far  as  the  design  is  concerned,  my 
colleague, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister did mention during his Budget Speech that we are 
working on a new design. In fact, the size of the house also will be increased. It will be in 
harmonisation with the area of houses which will be constructed by the NHDC. We are also 
trying to see how we can fit in some other aspects like the environmental aspect.  We are also 
considering recreational amenities. We are viewing it in a more integrated manner. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  234,  again  on  this  Extra-
Budgetary  Units,  construction  of  Integrated  Social  Housing  Projects  item  26323,  we  just 
heard the hon. Minister mention that there will be houses constructed in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Housing. Yesterday, we voted an item here for social housing. Now, we are 
asked to vote another item which again relates to social housing. So, I would like to know 
from the hon. Minister what is the difference in criteria. Do we need to have a PEL account 
for these housing units? We need to have some clarification. 

Mr Roopun: In fact, when we talk about social housing, we have different thresholds 
of  households.  We  have  the  first  threshold  which  is  those  earning  less  than  Rs6,200  and 
thereafter we’ve got another threshold at Rs10,000. I understand that the Ministry of Housing 
and Lands is coming yet with another threshold.  I think it is Rs15,000.  Actually for those 
who earn Rs10,000, it is the NHDC who does the construction and they pay a certain amount. 
So far as those earning less than Rs6,200 are concerned, at times they do not have the means 
to construct themselves and it is where the NEF comes in and do the construction for them. 
Some constructions are done by the CSR companies, otherwise, it is the NEF who does the 
construction.  For those earning Rs10,000 it is the NHDC who does the construction and then 
allocates the units to those applicants. 

 

59 

Mr Uteem: On a follow-up on this very same item, the hon. Minister just mentioned 
that  the  NEF  is  going  to  construct  the  houses,  but  what  about  the  land.  Is  the  land  also 
provided by NEF or is the poor person supposed to bring the land? 

Mr Roopun: We have different schemes. If the beneficiary is owner of a land, we can 
construct on the land of the beneficiary, in which case he has got certain criteria to respect. 
He should be the owner. He should apply for a building permit. He should not have benefited 
from  other  housing  schemes  before  and  then  we  can  construct  on  his  property.  There  are 
other schemes where it is the Ministry of Housing and Lands which comes with an integrated 
project and there we provide in-site services on the plot of land. If the beneficiary does not 
have  the  means,  the  NEF  will  then  construct  the  housing  units  and  allocate  them  to  the 
beneficiaries. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  have  got  one  last  question  concerning  the 
houses for vulnerable groups. The other day, I asked a parliamentary question concerning the 
Petite Rivère project. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has had an opportunity to have a 
look and, at least, to give us a time frame when the remaining houses will be distributed to 
the poor  families? At the same time, are there sufficient  funds in this vote to cater for all 
remaining works including repairs to be effected to the damaged houses? 

Mr  Roopun:  Insofar  as  the  housing  project  at  Petite  Rivière,  which  is  commonly 
called  Gros  Cailloux,  is  concerned  as,  unfortunately,  I  am  taken  up  here  in  Parliament,    I 
requested  officers  of  the  NEF  to  make  a  site  visit  in  the  light  of  the  remarks  of    the  hon. 
Member. I asked them to go there with a ladder so that they can climb on the roof and see the 
structural defects which have been reported by the hon. Member. I also mentioned about the 
state of surroundings and we will see what remedial measures should be taken. 

Mr Bhagwan:  It has not been reported to me.  I go there nearly every day, so I know. 

Mr Roopun: Yes.  Insofar as allocation is concerned, we are working along with the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and also with the Ministry of Housing and 
lands so as not to repeat the same mistake which we did at La Valette. We want to make sure 
that  the  beneficiaries  are  well  integrated  in  the  region.  We  take  the  right  balance  of 
beneficiaries who are going to be there and also we ensure that they have got the capacity to 
pay. 

 

60 

Vote 13-1 Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Development (Rs415,000,000) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 14-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

was called. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Madam  Chairperson,  I  have  one  question  on  page  99,  Recurrent 
Expenditure - item 21110 Personal Emoluments. Can we have an idea from the hon. Minister 
-  three  months  have  elapsed  for  the  new  Government  -  when  will  the  post  of    High 
Commissioners,  Ambassadors  and  so  on  will  be  filled?  Is  there  a  time  lag?  Have  the 
procedures already been completed? 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Chairperson, I thank the hon. Member for his question. I 
can  safely  inform  the  House  and  the  hon.  Member  that  those  posts  are  being  filled  very 
quickly and we will all be informed accordingly. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  99,  item  22030  -  Rent,  there  is  a  massive  amount  of 

Rs76.7 m. for the six months budgeted. May we have some details on this amount? 

Mr  Sinatambou:    May  I  first  thank  you  again,  Madam  Chairperson  and  the  hon. 
Member. Well, may I just start by saying that, compared to the preceding year, it is not that 
drastically gigantic because it is just 50% of the rent which was being paid out for the same 
buildings. Now, my understanding is that part of it is about payment of rent and parking slots 
to  Belem  Ltd.  Part  of  it  is  in  relation  to  chanceries,  overseas  missions  and,  I  understand, 
residences of home-based staff overseas. 

Dr. Joomaye:  I can see from the Sub-Head 14-102: Foreign Relations, no specific… 

Mr Sinatambou:  Which page is that, please? 

Dr. Joomaye: On page 99. No specific fund has been allocated to create awareness 
regarding our claim of sovereignty over the Chagos and Tromelin. So, I would like to ask 
the… 

The Chairperson:  Which item the hon. Member is referring to, please? 

Dr. Joomaye:  Sub-Head: Foreign Relations. On page 99. 

The Chairperson:  Page 99.  Which item number? 

 

61 

Dr. Joomaye:  Item 26210 – Contribution to International Organisations. 

The Chairperson:  Yes. 

Dr.  Joomaye:    No  specific  fund  has  been  allocated  regarding  the  creation  of 
awareness for our claim of sovereignty over the Chagos and Tromelin. I would like to ask the 
hon. Minister if he has requested from the Minister of Finance for such funds? 

Mr Sinatambou:  I thank the hon. Member for his question. Madam Chairperson, as 
you will note on item 26110, the contribution to the International Organisations is such that, 
after the contribution, every time Mauritius has the opportunity of attending any meeting of 
those  organisations,  we  make  it  a  point  to  try  and  get  a  Resolution  to  the  effect  that  our 
sovereignty rights over Chagos and Tromelin have to be preserved. I hope this answers the 
question fully.  

Mr Uteem:  On page 99, item 21110 – Personal Emoluments, to follow up on what 
hon. Bhagwan asked. May I know specifically the number of embassies and other missions 
outside of Mauritius where there is any vacancy? 

Mr Sinatambou: From the time that the employment of the political nominees was 
terminated,  it  means  that  there  were,  I  think,  16  of  them.    Therefore,  those  posts  are  now 
being filled.  The procedure is nearly over. The only thing is that, as a matter of policy and of 
common sense, we cannot give any name unless and until the agrément is obtained from the 
foreign country. The hon. Member can rest assured that all this has already been processed. 
We are only now expecting matters to be completed within a short lapse of time. 

Mr Jhuboo:  On page 99, item 26 Grants.  There is a provision made of Rs6 m. to the 
Union of the Comoros. Can I know from the hon. Minister the reasons prompting to such a 
grant? 

Mr Sinatambou: In an attempt to ensure that we have good fraternal links with all the 
countries of the region and for Mauritius to show that it is, indeed, a country which promotes 
the rule of law and good governance, this amount of Rs6,750,000 concerns a donation to the 
Union of Comoros for election purposes. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 

 

62 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Regarding page 100 under the item 
Capital Expenditure; in the Government Programme it was stipulated that there will be the 
opening of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia. So, I can see no fund allocated to such effect. Can 
the hon. Minister tell us how he will manage in case this should happen in the coming year? 

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, it does not appear in the budget for the coming six months 
ending June, but I can assure the hon. Member that if he looks at the provisions for the next 
financial  year  which  is  the  Year  2015/2016,  I  think  he  will  see  that  provision  for  the 
establishment of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia has been made. 

Vote 14-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

(Rs597,100,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 14-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. At page 238, Recurrent Expenditure 
for  Foreign  Relations,  in  the  Budget  Speech  mention  was  made  for  eight  Managers  to  be 
posted  in  Embassies  and  I  see  no  provision  for  the  coming  years.  Will  the  hon.  Minister 
enlighten the House when will these be implemented? 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Chairperson, I do thank the hon. Member for his question 
which is very pertinent.  In view of the policy that we have  enunciated in the House, it so 
happens,  however,  that  our  eight  Trade  and  Investment  Advisers  are  actually  going  to  fall 
within the purview of the Board of Investment and, therefore, the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  239,  item  31  Capital 
Expenditure,  31112  Non-Residential  Buildings;  the  hon.  Minister  has  just,  in  answer  to  a 
question of my friend, hon. Dr. Joomaye, stated that provision is not made for the opening of 
an Embassy for the six months, but is made in the coming year. So, may I ask him under what 
item in 31 Acquisition of Non-Financial Assets is there any amount budgeted for the opening 
of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia? 

 

63 

Mr Sinatambou: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, let me, perhaps, recall the history 
behind this. On 20 January of this year, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister addressed to the highly 
regretted  His  Majesty  King  Abdullah  bin  Abdulaziz  Al-Saud,  a  message  that  Government 
had  decided  to  establish  its  first  Embassy  in  the  Gulf  region.  Now,  on  13  March  2015, 
Government approved the proposal for the setting up of its Embassy in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.  

Now, if I can refer the hon. Member to the very same page 239, if he looks at item 31, 
sub-item 31112.408, he will see that at paragraph (c) Other Chanceries & Home Based Staff 
Residence, there is a sum of Rs23 m. which has been earmarked.  You will also note that 
from the moment that we made the request and the moment we will receive all the approvals, 
it will take quite some time and this is why the full funding is not, here, actually put. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Referring to page 242, Notes on the 

Ministry, Key Actions for 2015/2016 -  

•  Securing of at least two new visa waiver agreements. 

May  we know  which two countries we  are talking about  and whether Dubai forms 

part of these two? 

The Chairperson: This is a policy question. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Madam  Chairperson,  the  Ministry  has  been 
negotiating  a  number  of  visa  waiver  agreements  with  several  countries,  especially  those 
which do not require a visa to travel to Mauritius and where Mauritians still require a visa 
prior to travelling to these countries. The idea is to make sure that an element of reciprocity is 
respected  by  those  foreign  countries.  I  can  inform  the  House  and  the  hon.  Member  that  a 
request has been made to the United Arab Emirates so as to obtain such a visa waiver, but I 
can  also  inform  the  hon.  Member,  Madam  Chairperson,  that  we  have  already  received  a 
positive reply, in principle, from the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  236,  item  21110.001  Personal  Emoluments,  Ambassador 
(Roving),  there  is  a  provision  made  for  Rs811,000.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 

 

64 

whether the Roving Ambassador has been identified and appointed, in what area he will be 
based and what countries will he cover? 

Mr Sinatambou: At the moment, we are concentrating on the appointment of those 
who are going to be fixed in the 16 countries, first. We will come to the Roving Ambassador 
in due course. 

Vote 14-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

(Rs1,086,300,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor-General was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: In relation to the item 15-1 Office of the Solicitor-General under 21110 
Personal Emoluments, may I know from the hon. Minister if there are any vacancies, or the 
number of vacancies that there are at the Solicitor-General’s Office at the moment? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Well, there are actually 122 officers in posts and there are 31 funded 

vacancies for the coming year. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Under  the  same  item,  Personal  Emoluments,  item  21110;  is  provision 
made for the payment of fees when those officers of the State Law Office sit on Board or 
provide advice to parastatal bodies? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: No! No such provision is made in that vote item.  Whenever officers 
do tender legal advice, it is the respective bodies or parastatals which pay them.  It is not in 
the budget. 

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor-General (Rs68,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-2 Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under the full vote, vote 15-2; I understand that there is a case pending 
before the Court. May I know from the hon. Attorney General what is the status of this case 

 

65 

and  whether  there  will  be  any  funding  provided  pending  the  outcome  of  that  case, 
challenging  the  constitutionality  of  putting  the  DPP’s  Office  under  the  Attorney  General’s 
Office? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  As far as the case is concerned, the case is returnable on 17  May.  

And yes, funding is provided. Business as usual. 

Vote 15-2 Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Rs57,900,000) (January-June 

2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-3 Office of the Parliamentary Counsel (Rs7,600,000) (January-June 2015)was 

called and agreed to.  

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor-General (Rs205,500,000) was called and agreed to.  

Vote 15-2 Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions was called. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Under the personal emoluments, item 21110; may I know from the hon. 

Attorney General what amount is budgeted with respect to the Assets Recovery Unit? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Well, for this financial year, no amount is being budgeted because as 
the  hon.  Member  will  be  aware  there  is  a  policy  decision  of  Government  that  the  Asset 
Recovery Office will no longer be vested under the office of the DPP, henceforth, pending 
proper  legislation  being  passed  through  the  House,  be  probably  vested  into  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit. 

Mr  Uteem:  As  a  follow-up  question,  the  Attorney  General  rightly  pointed  out: 
“pending the coming into legislation” because we need to have legislation to change this. In 
the meantime, is there any amount budgeted for the Asset Recovery? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  That amount is budgeted until end of June 2015 by which date we 

expect the changes will be brought through Parliament. 

Vote  15-2  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  (Rs124,200,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-3 Office of the Parliamentary Counsel (Rs21,000,000) was called and agreed 

to.  

 

66 

Vote 16-1 Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Yes, Madam Chairperson.  On page 107 – I will take two items and the 
Minister can have it once – item 28213.021 Mauritius Cane Industry Authority, the top of the 
page.  The Minister of Arts and Culture is mistaken.  It is the Minister of Agriculture, not 
Arts and Culture! 

(Interruptions) 

He is more excited than the Minister of Agriculture. Wait your turn!  We have a vote of Rs26 
m. and we all know the mess at the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority where it has absorbed 
the MSIRI.  Can the Minister inform the House whether within that vote of Rs26 m., he is 
having a project to review the whole situation at the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority and 
to make sure that the MSIRI, which was once la gloire de l’île Maurice, our reputation now 
is  completely  outburst  by  the  previous  administration  of  the  Mauritius  Cane  industry 
authority? And whether the hon. Minister can tell us if the Rs26 m. fund is allocated for the 
restructuring of that Authority?  Secondly, on the same page, Accompanying Measures for 
Sugar Sector Derocking of Small Sugarcane Planters’ Lands (incl FORIP and Fair Trade 
projects); we are being asked to vote Rs255 m. for the coming six months.  We raised that 
issue the other day about the FORIP, can the hon. Minister give us some details about how 
much the small farmers will be benefiting from that and also with regard to the Fair Trade 
projects, how much is being earmarked for the small planters? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  With regard to the first question, the 
amount being earmarked for the MCIA, Mauritius Cane Industry Authority is Rs26 m. for 
2015.  As the hon. Member is probably aware, the funding comes from the cess money and 
the merger of all the institutions financed under the cess money are now under one umbrella, 
the authority which is the MCIA and there has been a reduction in the amount of cess that 
may be allocated to that authority.  Any shortfall now is being catered by Government.  That 
amount, the Rs26 m., is to cater for that particular shortfall.  That is with regard to the MCIA.  
As for the FORIP project, for the year 2015, an amount of Rs255 m. has been earmarked and 
so far some 9,000 hectares of land have already been covered under that project in terms of 
preparation of the land and the objective is to cover 12,000 hectares of land over that period 
of time. So, for the year 2015 up to June, that amount has been earmarked to carry on with 

 

67 

that project. With regard to the Fair Trade which is under that same item of the amount of 
Rs255 m., Rs3 m. is allocated for the Fair Trade project for the small planters. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you  Madam  Chairperson.  My  question  pertains  to  page  106, 
item 22130.001 Studies and Survey, Studies (incl. Bagasse transfer pricing and Cane Harvest 
Logistics).  The hon. Minister has said in his speech, himself, that planters are being paid very 
little, a pittance almost for their bagasse that they owe. My question is what has the outcome 
of 2014 studies given, Rs10.65 m. for which was spent and what does the forthcoming studies 
over the next six months for which Rs7 m. is earmarked? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam  Chairperson, with regard to the item regarding Studies and 
Surveys,  in  fact,  last  year,  the  amount  earmarked  was  for  the  studies  carried  out  on  the 
Bagasse Transfer Pricing Project and the Cane Harvest Logistics. So far, we have done the 
surveys, but no decision has yet been taken as to the price to be paid to the planters.  There 
have been recommendations, but so far, not  yet any decision has been taken regarding the 
amount that has to be paid to small planters. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  108,  item  25  Subsidies,  25210.009  Food  Growers  (Bat  net), 
there is an amount of Rs5 m. earmarked. As the hon. Minister knows, bats have become a 
great source of nuisance for all, everyone who has a fruit tree in his yard.  So, may I know 
from the hon. Minister whether, in that Rs5 m., any amount is budgeted for ordinary people 
who have fruit trees in their yard?  Because here it is only mentioned fruit growers.  So, what 
is qualified as fruit growers? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, Madam Chairperson, that project is to provide bat net to fruit 
growers, be it backyard garden growers or professional ones. It has been given on a request 
basis.  I believe that the objective of that scheme was to protect fruit trees in orchards and 
also in backyard gardens.  So, it is not limited to only orchards. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Page 110, item 31112.045 Construction of New Slaughter House.  
May  we  know  where  this  slaughterhouse  will  be  built,  what  will  happen  to  the  old 
slaughterhouse which is found in Roche Bois, and when this new slaughterhouse will come 
into operation? 

Mr Seeruttun: As you are aware, Madam Chairperson, this project is mentioned in 
the Budget Speech.  Now that we have the money allocated for that particular project, we are 

 

68 

setting up a committee to consider how we go about with that project, and we will talk to all 
the stakeholders to see what is the appropriate place to be identified for that slaughterhouse.  
Of course, we will see to it that the place that is identified is the proper one, and then we will 
carry out the implementation of the project. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  the  same  page,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  28225.007  -  Capital 
Transfer (Livestock), (a) Cattle Breeders Scheme (Mauritius), I know that there has been an 
increase in the budgetary allocation.  May I know from the hon. Minister what this scheme is 
about and what will be the criteria to benefit from the scheme? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  In  fact,  Madam  Chairperson,  as  you  all  know,  we  are  trying  to 
promote  more  people  to  go  into  that  kind  of  activities.    What  we  are  doing  this  time  is 
increasing the subsidy with regard to the feed that is provided to those cattle breeders.  It used 
to be Rs2.00 per kilo, and now it has gone to Rs4.00 per kilo.  That is the reason why the 
amount earmarked here has increased. 

Vote  16-1  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Rs1,179,000,000)  (January-

June 2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 16-1 Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Rs2,458,000,000) was called 

and agreed to. 

Vote 17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture was called. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  114,  under  item  26313.036  -  Mauritius  Film  Development 
Corporation, we are being asked to vote Rs4.9 m. additional for the coming six months.  Can 
the  hon.  Minister  inform  us  in  which  new  film  production  his  Ministry  is  being  engaged, 
which type of films, which language, who is the producer of that film, and where the filming 
is being effected? 

The Chairperson: Too many questions in one question! 

(Interruptions) 

Does the hon. Minister want one by one or does he want a series of questions? 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  have  so  many  questions,  Madam  Chairperson.  Will  the  Minister 

reply one by one? 

Mr  Baboo:  Regarding  the  Mauritius  Film  Development  Corporation,  we  are 
developing  and  promoting  the  local  film  and  audio-visual  industry,  both  domestically  and 

 

69 

internationally,  support  and  stimulate  public  participation  in  film  and  audio-visual,  build 
capacity in the film and audio-visual sector, develop and promote Mauritius as a prime film-
making destination. 

Mr Uteem: On page 114, item 26313.102 Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund, may I 
know  from  the  hon.  Minister  who  are  the  members  of  the  Islamic  Cultural  Centre  Trust 
Fund? 

Mr Baboo: The ICC Board 2015 has 13 members, namely – 

Mr  Samioullah  Lauthan,  Professor  Subratty  Hussein,  Mr  Jaunbocus  Fareed,  Mr 
Cheeroo  Mahmood,  Mr  Assad  Bhuglah,  Mr  Sohawon  Said,  Mr  Yearoo  Afzal,  Mr  Rashid 
Neerooa and we have the co-opted members as well, namely Mr Salehmohamed Yousuf, Mr 
Taher  Swadeck,  Mr  Bundhoo  Imteaz,  Mr  Imran  Pondor,  and  the  last  one  is  Dr.  Sorefan 
Mustapha. 

Dr. Joomaye: On page 114, item 28211.026  - Socio-Cultural Organisations, a sum 
of Rs1 m. has been allocated. Can I know from the Minister what will be the mechanism to 
allocate these sums to the socio-cultural organisations? 

Mr  Baboo:  According  to  the  Socio  Cultural  Organisations,  assistance  to  socio-
cultural organisations for full cultural activities, the quantum which usually ranges between 
Rs1,500 to Rs20,000 depends on the level of the events, the number of artists involved and 
the requirement of sound and light systems. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On the last line on page 114, item 28212.014 - Financial Assistance to 
Artists, Rs4.6 m. Can the Minister inform the House whether there is a definite criteria for 
assistance to be given to artists, is there a grading, un pointage for which artists can benefit 
from this assistance scheme? 

Mr Baboo: According to me, we are working on that and it will be for all the artists 

whereby we will examine by means of a committee. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  If  the  Minister  could  later  circulate  who  are  the  members  of  the 
committee.  On  the  same  page,  item  .116  -  Speaking  Unions  where  there  is  a  total  vote  of 
Rs7.8 m. Can the Minister inform the House - we have so many Speaking Unions - how this 
sum is being apportioned to the Speaking Unions? 

 

70 

Mr  Baboo:  There  are  11  Speaking  Unions:  Hindi  Speaking  Union,  Urdu,  Tamil, 
Telugu, Marathi, English, Bhojpuri, Creole, Chinese, Sanskrit, and the Arabic is not yet set 
up. But, my Ministry is looking into the possibility of harmonising the legislation governing 
all the Speaking Unions first. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 114, I will come back to the 
same item 26313.102 - Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund. The hon. Minister just gave us 
the list of Board members, the Board of appointed members according to law, so I would like 
to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  who  appointed  Mr  Taher  Swadeck,  and  whether  he  can 
confirm  that  it  is  the  same  Taher  Swadeck  from  BAI  on  whom  there  is  an  objection  to 
departure that has been lodged? 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Allow the Minister to reply! 

Mr Baboo: Sorry, I don’t have the information right now. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Quirin: On page 115, Capital Expenditure. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Order please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, please! 

Mr  Quirin:  On  page  115,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31112.420  -  Upgrading  of 
Theatres: Serge Constantin Theatre, a sum of Rs8 m. is budgeted for the first six months of 
this year. I would like to know if the upgrading works have already started. 

Ah! Is it completed? 

(Interruptions) 

 

71 

Mr  Baboo:  Serge  Constantin  Theatre  has  been  inaugurated  on  27  March.  It  was 
inaugurated on the Theatre Day. All the works have already been completed and we can say 
it  is  the  modern  one  in the  surrounding.  It  is  eco-friendly;  we  have  done  motorisation,  air 
conditioning which is eco. So, a lot of work has been done and it is fully completed and it is 
functioning hundred per cent.  

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: At page 115, item 22900.922. Concernant la célébration du bicentenaire 
des  Archives  nationales,  est-ce-que  le  ministre  est  en  mesure  de  nous  donner  un  peu  de 
détails concernant la date et aussi la célébration concernant le bicentenaire ? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baboo:  Regarding  the  Bicentenary  of  National  Archives  we  can  say  we  are 
celebrating the 200th anniversary of its official establishment and, in this context, the National 
Archives will organise a series of activities on the national, regional and international levels. 
The  project  is  valued  up  to  Rs1  m.  We  are  holding  an  exhibition  at  the  UNESCO 
Headquarters, Paris, on the 11 and 15. There will also be some slams, quiz competitions and 
essays. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  115,  under  item  31112.038  -  Setting  up  of  Galerie  d’Art 
Nationale, where we are being asked to vote Rs5 m. Can the hon. Minister inform the House 
where we have reached with that project of the Galerie d’Art Nationale - for the coming six 
months it is Rs5 m.? How our Rs5 m. will be spent? Where the project has reached? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baboo:  I am not excited as hon. Bhagwan said! The project constitutes of the 
renovation of the ex-military hospital and its conversion into a Galerie d’Art Nationale. Its 
objective is to rehabilitate and display artworks, painting and sculptures by Mauritian artists 
which date as far back in the 19th century. The project has been delayed due to unavailability 
of expertise in the sector. Assistance of the Government of India has been obtained in terms 
of services of a consultant who has expertise in the setting up of this gallery.  

 

72 

Part of the  consultancy  fees  will be met by the  Indian Authorities.  Funds available 
will be used to meet the remaining consultancy fees, the cost of publication of books and the 
felling of trees which are damaging the ex-military hospital. 

Vote 17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture (Rs207,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture was called. 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 277, item 28212.014 - Financial Assistance to Artists, there is 
a scheme. We are being asked to vote Rs4 m. for the coming year and there is another scheme 
for  performing  arts,  another  one  for  International  Development  Grant  Scheme.    Can  the 
Minister inform the House whether a committee has been set up, how this scheme would be 
run, whether there are criteria which will be set up and all the artists will be informed and 
whether it will not be on a policy of pick and choose? Everybody must know what would be 
the criteria of assistance to be obtained from the Ministry. 

Mr Baboo: The criteria for providing assistance - we should look about the credibility 
for organisers, the level of the event, the impact of the event, the contribution of the event in 
the development of our cultural industry and the number of local artists involved. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Toujours  à  la  page  278  concernant  Preservation  and  Promotion  of 
Heritage;  en  ce  qui  concerne  le  National  Archives.    Nous  sommes  en  train  de  célébrer  le 
bicentenaire, mais nous sommes tous d’accord sur l’état déplorable des archives nationales. 
Ma  question  est:  est-ce  qu’il  y  a  des  provisions  budgétaires  qui  sont  prévues  pour 
l’amélioration  de  lieu,  pour  la  préservation  de  notre  mémoire  et  pour  la  préservation  de 
l’histoire  lui-même  parce  que  là  nous  sommes  en  train  de  parler  2015/2016,  2016/2017  et 
2017/2018? 

Mr Baboo: There are provisions. I do agree with the hon. Member on these issues.  
The purpose of the culture house will be to accommodate, inter alia, the National Archives 
Department and the National Library in an appropriate building. We are working on that. We 
understand  the  problem  they  are  facing,  but,  in  the  meantime,  we  are  also  looking  for  a 
building for rent because we know the state of these documents. My Ministry is working with 

 

73 

the Ministry of Finance so as to finalise the construction which will be at Réduit for a culture 
house where we’ll have these archives and the National Department also.  

Mr Bhagwan: On page 276, item 22130.001 (a) ‘Stade Musical’ Project, there are 
Rs2 m. earmarked. This is the project which the artists have been awaiting since many, many 
years. Can the hon. Minister give us an idea whether a site has been located, and where are 
we with the preliminary studies and the same for the National Centre for Performing Arts and 
Project? 

Mr Baboo: That is a very nice question.  We should be happy that this Government is 
bringing the ‘Stade Musical’ Project. Regarding the population of artists also, we did have a 
workshop  last  Saturday.  We  are  bringing  that  to  promote  the  artists  and  costing  for 
consultancy and preliminary work for Stade Musical will be equipped with a podium, latest 
sound and light system and changing room for artists. Consultations are being held with the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands for the identification of an appropriate plot of land. Possibly, 
it might be in Trianon or Mapou. Thank you. 

Mr Quirin:  On page 278, item 31112.417 Upgrading of Cultural Complex/Buildings 
(c) Espace Artistique at La Citadelle, there is a sum of Rs5 m. earmarked for 2015/2016 and 
the  same  amount  for  2016/2017.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  give  some  details  concerning  this 
project? 

The Chairperson: Espace Artistique at La Citadelle! 

Mr  Baboo:  The  amount  is  Rs5  m.  La  Citadelle  will  be  converted  into  an  espace 
artistique to provide a platform for our artists and local cultural entrepreneurs to showcase 
their talents in all art forms.  This project will be mounted jointly by my Ministry and the 
Ministry of Tourism and External Communications to promote the creativity industry. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Chairperson, on the same page Troupe Culturelle Nationale, 
we have heard about this project for some time. Can the hon. Minister inform the House - the 
Rs1 m. that we are being asked to vote - what is the status of the project of Troupe Culturelle 
Nationale? 

Mr Baboo: Which item? 

Mr  Bhagwan:    On  page  276,  item  22130.001  Studies  and  preliminary  project 

preparation: (d) Troupe Culturelle Nationale.   

 

74 

Mr Baboo: Rs1 m. has been provided for preliminary works and consultations with 
various stakeholders. We will begin shortly to discuss on the best way to set up une troupe 
nationale culturelle digne de ce nom. 

Mr  Uteem:    On  page  277,  item  26313.100.  Islamic  Cultural  Centre  for  Hadjj 
Organisation, we are paying Rs1.3 m.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether it is still 
going to be the Islamic Cultural Centre which will be responsible for the Hadjj organisations? 

Mr Baboo:  Regarding the Hadjj, it has been moved to the Ministry of Housing and 

Lands.  Special funds will be used… 

Under his guidance! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  Order, please!  Please, proceed hon. Minister! 

Mr Baboo: Funds will be used for – 

• 
• 
• 
• 

registration of Hadjjees;  
registration of operators; 
Hadjj awareness programme, and  
pre-Hadjj mission. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  On the same issue. We just learnt … 

(Interruptions) 

On the same issue, Islamic Cultural Centre for Hadjj Organisation, we just learned that the 
Hadjj organisation has been moved to the Ministry of Housing and Lands.  Is it what the hon. 
Minister just said?  If he does not have the answer, he can circulate it later on. What about the 
number of visas that have been negotiated and  as at now will be obtained? Does the hon. 
Minister have an idea about it? 

Mr Baboo: Well, I don’t have it. I will communicate it later. 

Vote17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture (Rs417,900,000) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

 

75 

Vote 18-1 Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Rs138,200,000) 

(January-June 2015)was called and agreed to. 

Vote 18-1 Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection was called. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, on page 285, item 26313.134 Enterprise Mauritius, 
the  budget  has  been  substantially  increased  by  Rs120  m.  for  Export  Market  Development 
Support.    May  we  have  some  more  details  about  what  this  Export  Market  Development 
Support is? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Chairperson, the Export Development Plan is that what the hon. 

Member needed more information for? 

Mr Uteem: Yes. 

Mr Gungah: In fact, in 2014 funds to the tune of Rs180 m. were provided for the 
Export Development Plan of Enterprise Mauritius under the vote of the Ministry of Finance.  
This is to improve the visibility of Mauritius as a reliable sourcing destination for – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

manufactured products;  
identified and promote our products to new buyers; 
enhance penetration in both traditional and non-traditional markets;  
develop export capability, and  
expand the pool of exporters. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, under the same item Enterprise Mauritius, may we 
know under item (d) what the Credit Guarantee Insurance Subsidy Scheme for Africa relates 
to? 

Mr  Gungah:    The  insurance  guarantee  to  exporters.  These  are  to  cover  risks 
associated  with  non-payment  for  exports  effected  and  Credit  Guarantee  Insurance  Subsidy 
Scheme is a refunded scheme for credit insurance to cover the enterprises exporting to Africa. 
The refund is 50% of the premium paid. 

Vote 18-1 Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Rs442,100,000) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

76 

Vote 19-1 Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare was 

 

called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Item  22900.912  on  page  122,  Other 
Goods  and  Services  of  which  Running  Expenses  of  Shelters  for  Children.  I  would  like  to 
know  how  many  shelters  for  children  there  are  and  what  measure  has  been  taken  by  her 
Ministry to ensure that the children who go there are safe? 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Minister! Page 122, item 22900.912 Other Goods and 

Services of which Running Expenses of Shelters for Children. 

Mrs  Perraud: The number of shelters that are  Government owned is five. Do  you 

want me to name them? 

The Chairperson: The number only, please. 

Mrs Perraud: It is five. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 123, Social Benefits, item 27210.011 Social Assistance - Benefits 
in Cash, Foster Care. There is an amount of Rs590,000 budgeted. May I know from the hon. 
Minister whether these items relate to foster parents who agree to take on board children? 

The Chairperson: On page 123, item 27210.011 Social Assistance - Benefits in Cash, 

Foster Care. 

Mrs Perraud: At present, there are 50 children who are placed in 44 foster families. 
The  number  of  children  adopted  by  their  respective  foster  families  -  44;  the  number  of 
children returned to institutions - 16; the number of children who have reached 18 years old - 
7, and the monthly allowance per child paid to the foster parents is Rs1,500. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  122,  item  21  Compensation  of  Employees,  21110  Personal 
Emoluments.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  Child  Psychiatrists  are  being 

 

77 

employed by her Ministry under this heading and whether provisions have been made for the 
increase in the number of Child Psychiatrists? 

Mrs Perraud: So, there are six. 

Mr Uteem: Have provisions been made to increase the number? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Yes! The hon. Member has another question! 

Mr Uteem: Yes. On page 123, item 28211.004 Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions, 
Charitable  Institutions,  an  amount  of  Rs16,5  m.  is  earmarked  for  transfers  to  charitable 
institutions.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  a  list  of  the  charitable  institutions  that  benefit 
from the help of the Government? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, I will do. 

Vote  19-1  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 

(Rs184,100,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  19-1  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 

(Rs428,400,000) was called and agreed to. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem,  you had a question, but it’s too late. It is too late, 

hon. Uteem!  

(Interruptions) 

You have taken too much time. Next time… 

Mr Uteem: Thirty minutes are earmarked for a project. Just give us one minute to be 

able to… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: I have given you time. Sorry. Now that the vote has already been 

passed, we can’t go back. 

(Interruptions) 

 

78 

I don’t think you can complain. I am giving you a fair number of questions. Okay. 

Vote  20-1  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 124, item 22030 Rent; may I know from the hon. Minister where 
is the building being rented situated and what procurement method has been used to choose 
that building? 

Mr Bhadain: Which page? 

Mr Uteem: On page 124, item 22030 Rent. So, I want to know what are… 

Mr Bhadain: For the first six months? 

Mr Uteem: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Item 22030 Rent, at the bottom of the page. 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Chairperson, it is the rental of building at Hennessy Court 
in Port Louis which comes to Rs1,353,000.  The building was already occupied by the public 
bodies, so no tender was required as per the law. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. At page 303… 

The Chairperson: No. We are still on the six months budget. Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  125,  item  26313.015  Extra  Budgetary  Units,  Financial 
Intelligence Unit. The amount earmarked for Financial Intelligence Unit is Rs21 m. which is 
increased on a pro rata basis from last year. May I know what this increase relates to? 

Mr Bhadain:  There are 33 officers currently at the Financial Intelligence Unit. So, to 
meet the operating costs of the FIU, i.e, compensation of the employees, the staff costs, goods 
and services. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

79 

Mr Ameer Meea:  On page 125, item 26313.015 Financial Intelligence Unit and item 
26313.016  Financial  Reporting  Council,  is  hon.  Minister  considering  to  revoke  the  Board 
and appoint new members? 

Mr Bhadain:  Is the hon. Member talking about the FIU or the FRC? 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Both. 

Mr Bhadain:  With regard to the FRC, as  I have intimated before, there are actions 
which are  going to be taken by Government because the FRC is the responsible Body for 
ensuring that proper accounts of files and the figures which are reported are accurate and that 
the public do not suffer as a result of falsified accounts. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  At  page  125,  under  item  26313.008 
Competition Commission, may I know from the hon. Minister who is now in charge of the 
Competition Commission? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Well,  the  Competition  Commission,  of  course,  has  a  Board  and  an 
Executive. The Board is still being chaired by the previous Chief Justice Ariranga Pillay and 
the Chief Executive is Mr Deshmuk Kowlessur.   

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  The hon. Minister did not give me the answer for the FIU which is 
found on page 125, item no. 26313.015 Financial Intelligence Unit.  We are asked to vote for 
an amount of Rs21 m. and with the recent event, is he considering to revoke the Board and 
appoint new people? 

Mr Bhadain:  Yes, actually the contract of the Board members has already come to an 

end and a new Board is going to be appointed soon. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  On the same item Financial Intelligence Unit, may we know from the hon. 
Minister  -  if  he  does  not  have  the  answer  with  him,  he  can  circulate  it  -  the  number  of 
suspicious transactions reports that have been filed with the FIU last year and the amount of 
investigations carried out by the FIU? 

 

80 

Mr  Bhadain:    Yes,  of  course.    I  can  provide  this  information.    With  regard  to  the 
second part, in fact, the FIU does not conduct investigations; they disseminate intelligence 
reports  to  investigatory  bodies.    So,  if  the  question  is  in  relation  to  the  number  of  reports 
which have been disseminated to ICAC and the Police, I can also provide this information. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I am referring to page 125, the 
question is more or less the same as the last one. The FRC which is a regulator for licence 
auditor,  can  we  know  in  how  many  cases  they  have  investigated  and  sanctions  have  been 
taken? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Chairperson,  I  do  not  have  this  information  at  this  present 
moment, but  I am  aware that what we have just seen with the BAI  case, there are  certain 
investigations which should have been carried out by the FRC which have not been carried 
out.  This is why we are going to sack the Board.  Well, not everybody on the Board, but 
those who are responsible. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  125,  under  item  28  Other 
Expenses,  28216.012  Contribution  for  Operation  of  Mauritius  International  Arbitration 
Centre  Limited,  Rs34  m.  had  been  earmarked  last  year  and  this  year  for  the  six  months, 
Rs12.5 m.  May I know from the hon. Minister, the number of cases that have been handled 
and determined by the Mauritius International Arbitration Centre so far? 

Mr Bhadain:  Well, the Mauritius International Arbitration Centre has been operating 
for  a  period  of  time.    I  do  not  have  the  exact  information  at  this  moment  in  time.  I  will 
provide it, of course.  Just to let the hon. Member know that the portfolio of International 
Arbitration has been recently - only a couple of weeks - attributed to my Ministry and we are 
actually setting up a hearing centre which is going to be based in Ebène for the Permanent 
Court of Arbitration which is based in the Hague.  This is the very first hearing centre which 
is outside the Hague, which is now going to be based in Mauritius. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 

81 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On page 126, under item 22120 Fees, 
a sum of Rs4,087,000 has been allocated.  Can the hon. Minister give details of the fees paid 
and who will benefit from these fees?  

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Chairperson,  these  are  fees  to  members  of  the  Tender 
Committee and fees to consultants.  I understand that this is the current practice for people in 
the Ministry who are sitting on certain committees especially when we are tendering for items 
like laptops, computers and so on. That particular amount has already been determined by the 
Ministry of Civil Service. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  The hon. Minister did not answer 
my question about the FRC. I asked how many cases where the FRC has investigated in the 
recent past and sanctions have been taken? 

Mr Bhadain:  Well, I basically stated that the information is not available, but I will 

certainly provide it in due course. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  I  am  coming  back  to  the  last  question  I  asked  about  the  Mauritius 
International arbitration Centre, item 28216.012. I understand the hon. Minister has just been 
allocated this portfolio. He is confusing Mauritius International Arbitration Centre with the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration, another item 26210.105 which relates to the Hague.   

(Interruptions) 

No, they are not the same thing! One is the host country agreement with PTA which is the 
Hague, the other one is a Government-owned enterprise.  This is where my question comes 
because we are spending a lot of money on that Mauritius International Arbitration Centre 
Limited and we need to reassess whether it is worth spending so much money every year on 
that? 

Mr Bhadain:  No, it is not for every year. In fact, the hon. Member probably is aware 
that the LCIA-MIAC Arbitration Centre and the PCA is all becoming one.  So, the figure of 
Rs12,500,000 is for the setting up and operational costs for the hearing facilities. It will be 
known as the Mauritius International Arbitration Centre Limited which is going to be based 

82 

 
at Ebène on the 7th floor in the building where my Ministry is. This is for the setting up of the 
high tech state-of-the-art hearing centre which is a matter of honour for Mauritius because it 
is  going  to  be  the  first  hearing  centre  which  is  outside  the  Hague  and  it  will  be  based  in 
Mauritius. 

Vote 20-1 Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 

(Rs153,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 20-1 Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 

was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  302,  item  22900.941 
Promotion of Financial Services, there is an amount of Rs75 m. budgeted. Will that amount 
be spent by the Ministry or will there be a separate organisation like it used to be the case, the 
Financial Services Promotion Agency? 

Mr Bhadain:  No. Of course, it is a new agency which is being created, the Financial 
Services Promotion Agency.  The amount which has been allocated to my Ministry, that is, 
Rs75 m. for promotion of financial services will also take care of the budget of the FSPA and 
allocation  will  be  made  from  this  item,  of  course,  with  the  approval  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  302,  item  22120.007  Fees  for  Training,  there  is  an 
amount of Rs25 m. which is budgeted. May we have some details of this amount, to whom it 
will be paid and who will give this training?  I  can add another question, on page 303, on 
Recurrent Expenditure, item 22120.008 Fees for Consultant Rs 17 m., may we have some 
details  on  a  breakdown  of  this  figure  and  to  whom  the  fees  will  be  paid?  Who  are  those 
consultants? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes.  With  regard  to  the  first  one,  Madam  Chairperson,  the  figure  of 
Rs25 m., in the Budget there is a specific initiative for the creation of a Financial Services 
Institute  which  will  be  the  responsible  organisation  for  training  and  capacity  building  of 
many  graduates  we  have  in  Mauritius,  who  have  studied  law,  finance,  accountancy, 
management and who are now going to be specifically trained in the financial services side, 

 

83 

relating to stock exchange, insurance, asset management, wealth management. The Budget is 
for that particular item, the creation of a Financial Services Institute. 

 The other  amount of Rs17 m. is in relation to other initiatives which are basically 
being put in place at the level of my Ministry. For instance, a Whistle Blowing Unit which is 
going to be put in place, because we have seen that whistle blowing is one of the major tools 
which has to be in place to reduce fraud, corruption, wastage and also malpractices within 
institutions… 

(Interruptions) 

Of course, we are coming with a Bill. We will be coming with a Whistle Blowing Bill before 
Parliament after obtaining the approval of Cabinet, of course. This is going to be one of the 
major  initiatives  to  stop  what  we  have  seen  -  even  the  BAI  scandal.  If  we  had  a  whistle 
blowing mechanism where people could report issues and these people, the genuine whilstle 
blowers  would  be  protected  from  recrimination,  retribution,  victimisation,  then  we  would 
detect  those  cases  and  not  take  seven  to  eight  years  before  we  see  the  situation  that  has 
cropped  up  recently.  So,  that  is  one  item.  Then,  of  course,  there  are  also  other  initiatives 
which are being put in place and the fees in relation to that will be, for instance, the reviews 
that we will be conducting with regard to the Mauritius Police Force. It is in the discours-
programme that we are getting rid of the provisional charge system. So, we are coming with a 
new structure and this will also form part of that, amongst other things. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  303,  Madam  Chairperson,  the  last  line,  item  22900.943 
Financial Crime Commission, the Minister has informed the House in one of his last speech 
he made here concerning the setting-up of the Financial Crime Commission. Can he give us 
some more details where he has reached with that Commission, whether there has been any 
preliminary studies done, contacts and outside and when Parliament is supposed to discuss 
this Bill? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes,  absolutely,  Madam  Chairperson.  The  setting-up  of  a  Financial 
Crime Commission is going to be another major initiative which is going to be led by my 
Ministry. We have seen, for instance, the recent cases of Ponzi schemes and we know one of 
the reasons as to why this has taken place in our country – not only the BAI case, but there 
have been other Ponzi Schemes before like Whitedot and Sunkai. One of the main reasons is 
because there is no synergy; there is no integration in the way that institutions are functioning 

 

84 

in  Mauritius,  whether  it  is  ICAC,  FIU,  FSC,  FRC  and  even  the  Police.  So,  the  Financial 
Crime  Commission  is  going  to  be  an  apex  body  and  as  I  have  stated  before,  an  umbrella 
organisation which is going to oversee the directorates which are going to be operating. So, 
you would have ICAC, FIU, of course, you will have the enforcement side of the FSC and 
also the Assets Recovery Agency which is going to be one body. So, to answer the question 
of the hon. Member… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, when you look at those fraudsters and the elaborate… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Order! Allow the hon. Minister to reply, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: When you look at the complexity of the cases that we are seeing today, 
of course, we need an organisation which is fully equipped both in terms of the legal powers, 
in terms of the manpower… 

(Interruptions) 

The  Chairperson:  You  are  disturbing  the  Minister,  he  cannot  reply.  Yes,  please, 

proceed! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes.  I  was  saying,  Madam  Chairperson,  when  we  look  at  the 
complexity of the cases we are seeing today and the impact that it has on our society, we need 
an  institution  which  is  fully  integrated,  enhancing,  wide  encompassing,  which  is  going  to 
have  all  the  legal  powers,  the  human  resource  which  is  required  and  also  the  appropriate 
structure. And, of course, we have been consulting with other organisations in the world like 
the National Crime Agency in the UK, the Serious Fraud Office in the UK and we are getting 
the structure in place. In due time, we will come with the appropriate Bill and I can assure the 
hon. Member that we are doing everything to eradicate fraud, corruption and malpractices in 
our society. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Under the same item, Financial Crime Commission, a sum of Rs10 m. 
has been allocated. Can the hon. Minister tell us whether this will be spent in consultancy 
fees or in setting of the Financial Crime Commission? 

85 

Mr Bhadain: It will be spent to do all the works that hon. Bhagwan has just asked 

 

about. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 302, item 21110.005, Extra Assistance, last  year, there 
was an amount of Rs1.5 m. that was spent and this year there has been a massive increase to 
Rs37.8 m. So, may we have some details on this extra assistance? 

The Chairperson: Page 302, Item 21110.005 Extra Assistance. 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. I cannot find the number right now, Madam Chairperson, but I can 
say what the Extra Assistance is all about. My Ministry has just been created, it is a Ministry 
which, of course, did not exist before and we have had to recruit staff. So, we recruited staff 
on  consultancy  basis  and  we  have  various  levels  in  terms  of  people  who  are  working  as 
Assistant Managers, Managers and people who are working as analysts as well. 

Of course, this is the Ministry of Good Governance, for God’s sake! 

(Interruptions) 

Of course! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Allow the Minister to reply, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: I have always believed that you learn from your elders and I have. 

The Chairperson: The hon. Minister  has not finished? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On this very same item Extra Assistance, being given that we are talking 
about good governance, I would invite the hon. Minister of Good Governance to circulate to 
the  House  a  list  of  all  consultants  who  have  been  recruited  since  he  has  taken  office 
indicating in each case the amount of money, of public fund paid to these people identifying 
the criteria used for selection and specifying the task executed by these consultants. 

 

86 

Mr  Bhadain:  Well,  not  everybody  has  been  recruited!  You  can  come  with  a  PQ 
afterwards if you wish, but basically the extra assistance on contract, the provision which is 
in  the  Budget  is  made  for  10  Financial  Services  Managers  which  will  come  to  a  cost  of 
Rs11.4  m.,  20  Assistant  Manager  Financial  Services  Rs15.6,  20  Analysts  on  Financial 
Services which will be Rs6 m., and then, of course, there is the end-of-year bonus which you 
have  to  pay  by  law,  which  is  Rs3.1  m.,  which  comes  to  Rs46.5  m.  Now  there  will  be  50 
people. I can tell the hon. Member that all the works which have been done by my Ministry in 
the last four months, have been done by only probably 10, 12 people, that’s all the staff we 
had and we have achieved so much. Imagine what we are going to do with 50 more! 

Vote  20-1  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms (Rs522,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

The Chairperson: I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 4.35 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.22 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Vote 21-1 Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives was called. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  At  page  128,  item  26313.061  -  National  Institute  for  Co-operative 
Entrepreneurship, Rs2 m.   Can I know from the hon. Minister whether it is the same Institute 
where  we  had  a  famous  person  who  was  on  bail  and  who  was  appointed  as  chairperson? 
What is the position?  Is he still around waiting for another conviction by the Police to be 
ejected from his seat? 

Mr Bholah: Madam Chairperson, yes, it is the same Institution. In fact, following the 

parliamentary question of the hon. Member the following day, he vacated office. 

(Interruptions) 

No, I spoke to him, and within 24 hours he resigned. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Page  127  Current  Grants,  26313  - 
Extra Budgetary Units, sub-item .083, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority 
(SMEDA).  May I know from the hon. Minister the composition of the SMEDA? 

 

87 

Mr  Bholah:  Does  the  hon.  Member  mean  the  Board?  The  previous  Chairman  has 

resigned following the election, and we are yet to appoint a new Chairman. 

Mr Uteem: On the same item SMEDA, has provision been made in this budget of 

Rs27.5 m. for the relocation of SMEDA in accordance to what was stated in the Budget? 

Mr Bholah: In fact, it is for year 01 Jan 2015 to 30 June 2015. 

Vote  21-1  Ministry  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Rs94,400,000) 

(January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 21-1 Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives was called. 

Mr  Uteem:  Page  306,  item  26313.083  –  SMEDA.    There  has  been  a  significant 

increase in the operational budget of SMEDA.  May we have a breakdown of this? 

Mr Bholah: We do not have a breakdown.  But, in fact, it is a substantial increase, as 
we are strengthening SMEDA to incorporate also the one stop shop, additional staff, as well 
as  staff  from  the  Mauritius  Business  Growth  Scheme  (MBGS).    In  fact,  this  explains  the 
increase. 

Mr  Uteem:    Under  the  same  item,  being  given  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  just 
mentioned that SMEDA is going to engulf the MBGS, can I know from the hon. Minister the 
amount of money disbursed under the MBGS Scheme and how many SMEs have benefitted 
from this? 

Mr Bholah:  I have some figures starting from year 2011 up to 2015.  In fact, the 
numbers of companies  which have benefitted are 274.  The total amount is Rs222 m. and 
84% of these beneficiaries are SMEs. 

Mr Uteem:  Still under the same item SMEDA, may I know from the hon. Minister 
what is the definition of Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) which can benefit from the 
schemes? 

Mr Bholah:  All those enterprises which have a turnover up to Rs50 m. 

Vote  21-1  Ministry  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Rs281,300,000)  was, 

on question put, agreed to. 

 

88 

Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Rs8,827,000,000) (January-June 2015)was called and agreed to. 

Vote 22-1 Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions was 

called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, on page 317, item 22120.001 - Fees for Medical 
Boards and Domiciliary Visits, may I know from the hon. Minister the number of cases that 
are heard on average by these Medical  Boards and how many  are rejected? If she has the 
figure or she can circulate it. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I don’t have the exact figure because it is by session. 

What I have been given as information are – 

No. of beneficiaries for bedridden aged 75 to 85 
No. of beneficiaries aged more than 90 years 
Children with disabilities 

3,206 
2,972 
77 

 

Mr Uteem:  Under the same item Fees for Medical Boards and Domiciliary Visits, it 
was  announced  in  the  Budget  that  there  would  be  more  Doctors  recruited  for  domiciliary 
visits, but I do not see any significant increase in the budget for domiciliary visit.  Is there a 
reason for that? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Presently,  we  have  40  Doctors.  I  understand  that  the 
number  of  Doctors  will  remain  the  same.  We  are  having  some  difficulties  because  some 
doctors do not want to take more than a certain number of patients and some Doctors refused 
to travel long distances.  Maybe we will need to review the whole policy so as to better attend 
to those who are in need of domiciliary visits. 

Mr  Uteem:    On  page  319,  item  28211  Transfers  to  Non-Profit  Institutions  - 
Probation Home for Girls and Probation Home for Boys.  May I know the number of Homes 
being concerned here and what action is taken by the Ministry to ensure that the children who 
are sent there are properly looked after? 

 

89 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  We have presently one Probation Home for girls and one 
probation hostel for boys. We have actually seven residents in Probation Home for boys and 
8 residents for girls.  We are trying to see if we can implement new policies so that we can 
have random visits at the Homes to see to it that children are being well cared. 

Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Rs18,730,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 

Islands. 

Vote 23-1 Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands 

was called  

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  139,  item  28212  Transfer  to  Households;  item  .002    – 
Compensation to Net Fishermen. I notice that there is no provision made.  Is it because the 
season has not yet started, or because there is no provision made under that item? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, there is no provision for that - does the hon. Member mean for net 

fishing? 

The Chairperson:  It is Compensation to Net Fishermen. 

Mr Koonjoo:  In the past, 33 large nets and 20 gillnets fishers were in operation. As 

at date, 16 large nets and five gillnets fishers are involved and 130 fishers are in operation. 

Mr Uteem:  That does not answer the question as to why there is no money provided. 

Is there no longer any compensation for the first six months? 

Mr Koonjoo:  We have a policy to do away with these lagoon fishing in the future. 

That’s why. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  136,  Grants  item  26313.002  - 
Agalega Island Council.  There is an amount of Rs150,000 budgeted for the next six months.  
May I know who is heading the Agalega Island Council and whether it is functional or not? 

Mr Koonjoo: The Agalega Council is functioning.  We just nominated the Chairman 
for the Council whose name is Mr Bantu and for the rest of the members, the Board will be 
reconstituted. 

 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

90 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  137,  item  28213.010  Transfers  to  Non  Financial  Public 
Corporation, Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd, may I know from the hon. Minister who 
are on the board now of the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  It  is  a  bit  the  same  as  Agalega,  Madam  Chairperson.  The  board  has 
been reconstituted and we have got Dr. Lalchand who has been nominated the chairmanship 
and the members, as usual, from different Ministries and we have got one member from our 
Ministry, Mr Labonne. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Yes,  on  the  same  page  136,  item  26313.070  Outer  Islands 
Development Corporation, there is an amount of Rs54 m. Can we have some details of this 
figure, a breakdown? 

Mr Koonjoo: We have got several projects and the first one is the upgrading of the 
airstrip,  the  construction  of  a  T-jetty  and  desalination  plant  for  water.  I  don’t  have  the 
breakdown with me. I will table it for you. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Chairperson, the answer that the hon. Minister just gave, I 
don’t think it is accurate, because there is an amount of Rs54 m. It cannot be that sum for all 
these projects that have been announced. Only the airstrip will cost about Rs300 m. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Chairperson, as everybody knows, there is a grant given by the 

Government of India, about Rs750 m. for all the jobs, will start by that, with the Rs54 m. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  I  am  quite  surprised,  on  page  137,  item  27210.009  Social  Assistance 
Benefits in Cash, Funeral Grants, an amount of Rs10,000 has been earmarked. Can I know 
who are entitled to benefit from the Funeral Grants? 

The Chairperson: On which page, hon. Uteem? 

Mr Uteem: On page 137. 

 

91 

Mr Koonjoo: For every Fisher who passed away, accidentally or naturally, there is a 

grant given to his family or her family which amounts to Rs10,000 to start with. 

The Chairperson: No questions! You have another question? 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  136, 

item  22090.007  Security  of  which  Maritime 
Communications  Services,  an  amount  of  Rs10,200,000  is  earmarked  for  Maritime 
Communications  Services.  So,  may  we  have  some  more  details  about  what  this  Maritime 
Communications Services is? 

The Chairperson: Page 136. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  136, 

item  22090.007  Security  of  which  Maritime 

Communications Services. 

Mr Koonjoo: For the maritime security, we have got different measures of security 
for the people fishing outside lagoon and we have got a method of satellite system which we 
receive and we send and for this, there is a sum of money dedicated in the budget where we 
have to pay for the department concerned. 

The Chairperson: No questions! Alright! 

Vote  23-1  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 

Outer Islands (Rs223,700,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 23-2 Fisheries was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 139, item 28212.016 Transfers 
to  Households,  Compensation  to  Heirs  of  Fishermen  icw  Accidental  Death  at  Sea,  the 
budgeted amount is Rs100,000 only. So, I would like to know from the hon. Minister how 
much compensation is paid to the heir of a fisherman if he passes away at sea? 

Mr Koonjoo: The scheme was initiated in 1998 with the sum of Rs50,000. In 2009, 
the quantum has increased and it has become Rs200,000 and this compensation is given to 
heirs of registered professional fishers who die at sea in accident. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

92 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 328, item 22120 Fees. There is an amount of Rs7.3 m. 

budgeted, may we have… 

The Chairperson: No, hon. Ameer Meea. We are still on the six months budget. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Okay. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 140, item 22120.028 Fees of which Fees for Laboratory Test. 
May  I  know  who  conducts  these  laboratory  tests,  whether  it  is  in  Mauritius  or  it  is  sent 
abroad? 

Mr Koonjoo: The tests are carried out in the port area, Mer Rouge, and we have got a 
department  which  carries  all  the  tests  for  all  the  fishes  which  they  think  are  poisonous  or 
something like that. In the laboratory there, Dr. Goordoyal is doing a very fine job and they 
are posted there with all the apparatus and there is a group of people at his office who are 
responsible for carrying out tests to see that fishes are not poisonous. 

In case they are unable to carry out the test here, they send it overseas to be tested in 
Italy  to  confirm.  But,  recently,  we  have  got  one  famous  lab  at  Socota.  I  was  there  and  I 
visited it. They have got un laboratoire de dernier cri in Socota for the testing of fishes. In 
case the Red Sea can’t, they need help, they will definitely turn to Socota. 

The Chairperson: Yes, no more questions.  

Vote  23-2  Fisheries  (Rs139,800,000)  (January-June  2015)  was,  on  question  put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 23-1: Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands 

was called. 

Mr Uteem: 26323.070 Grants - Extra-Budgetary Units - Outer Islands Development 
Corporation.  Hon.  Ameer  Meea  asked  a  question  about  Agaléga.  May  I  know  from  the 
Rs500 m. planned whether there is any development projects on any outer island other than 
Agaléga that is scheduled? 

 

93 

There  is  an  amount  of  Rs500  m.  budgeted  under  Outer  Islands  Development 
Corporation. Is all the money that has been budgeted to do with the use for Agaléga or will 
there be any money used for any other outer islands? 

Mr Koonjoo: The priority projects: construction of a cold room which is pending since 
a  long  time;  renewal  of  energy  production  including  solar  energy;  projects  relating  to 
environment  protection  and  pollution  reduction;  upgrading  of  the  sewerage  and  sanitation 
system. 

The Chairperson: Hon.  Minister, are you replying to the same question that the hon. 

Member asked! 

Mr Uteem: My question is very simple. This Rs500 m. - is it going to be spent only on 

Agaléga or are there projects in the outer islands other than Agaléga? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, only for Agaléga! 

The Chairperson: That’s it! It’s simple. Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  On the same issue of this amount Rs500 m., does this amount form 
part of the fund that Government will receive from the Government of India? Was this a grant 
or a loan? 

Mr Koonjoo:  The money received from India is a grant. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Is it these 18 million USD? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, Madam Chairperson.  It is 18 million US dollars 

Vote 23-1 Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands 

(Rs941,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 23-2 Fisheries (Rs314,400,000) was called and agreed to. 

Vote 24-1 Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach 

Management was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

94 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 143, Madam Chairperson, item 31410.402 ((a) Rehabilitation 

of beach.  We are being asked to vote Rs50 m.  

The Chairperson:  page 143! Item 31410 

Mr Bhagwan:  Rehabilitation of beach!  

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  Item 31410!  Rehabilitation of Beach! 

(Interruptions) 

Look at the Budget on page 143, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan:  I have not yet asked my question! 

(Interruptions) 

He lost his papers! Lost on the mountain! 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Minister, it is for the six-month Budget! 

It is on page 143! 

Item 31410! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan:  Now, I am asking my question!   

The Chairperson:  Hon. Minister, please sit down.  He has not asked his question 

yet! 

(Interruptions) 

 

95 

Mr Bhagwan:  We are being asked to vote Rs50 m.; can the hon. Minister give us a 
list of beaches which are being rehabilitated? I am sure the hon. Minister has the list. Also, on 
the same item (b) Beach Reprofiling Programme - Rs5 m., can the hon. Minister give us a list 
of areas where there are beach reprofiling? 

Mr Dayal:  Madam Chairperson, as far as rehabilitation of beaches for the Republic 
of Mauritius is concerned we have had Poudre d’Or - Rs14 m.; Cape Malheureux- Rs13.5 m.; 
Grand River South East – Rs18 m.; Quatre Soeurs – Rs33 m.; Baie du Cap- Rs28.6 m.; Bain 
Boeuf – Rs34.3 m.  

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: On page 144, item 31113.425 Embellishment of Infrastructure Works, 

we are being asked to vote Rs5 m.  

The Chairperson:  On top of the page!  Page 144! Sit down hon. Minister, the hon. 

Member has not asked his question yet! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether,  following  the 
parliamentary  question  I  had  asked  on  the  Minister’s  site  visit,  works  have  started  at  Le 
Dauguet health track and also the rehabilitation of the health track of the Signal mountain? 

Mr Dayal:  Both projects are being attended to.  The Dauguet  parcours de santé will 
be completed very soon and will be inaugurated.  As far as Signal Mountain is concerned, as 
well we are going for the contract for the lighting of the track is Solar-based lighting system. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  143,  under 

item  31410.402  
Improvement/Upgrading/Rehabilitation of Beaches, can I ask the hon Minister whether those 
transats and umbrellas, which is for me an eyesore for our beaches - where in the past there 
have  been  political  agents  who  have  been  occupying  illegally  all  these  beaches  -  will  be 
removed from our beaches? 

the 

same 

Mr Dayal: I thank the hon. Member for the question. Madam Chairperson, we have 
been attending to it. I personally went to some of the beaches where illegally more than 73 
transats  were  placed.  I  am  talking  about  Trou  aux  Biches.  Directives  have  been  given  for 
them  to  be  removed.  And  it  is  happening  everywhere,  all  throughtout  Mauritius,  at 
Grand’Baie, Choisy and Pereybere as well.  If they continue, we are  going to remove their 
licence. 

(Interruptions) 

 

96 

Madam  Chairperson,  we  are  un  Etat  de  droit,  we  take  contraventions  once,  twice, 

third time and if they do not obey, we remove their licence. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Chairperson, with respect to the same item Rehabilitation of 
Beaches, last year I was privileged to be part of a workshop at the University of Mauritius 
during  the  signature  of  an  MoU  where  the  professor  who  was  present,  Prof.  Murali, 
mentioned that the way we have been rehabilitating beaches in the country, is not appropriate, 
according to him. He said that in a workshop and he explained the reason for that. May I ask 
the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  new  methodology  that  we  are  adopting  for  rehabilitation  of 
beaches caters for his recommendation? 

Mr Dayal: Madam Chairperson, one week back, we had a validation workshop where 
all stakeholders were invited, we reviewed whatever we were doing and now we are going to 
have  the  recommendation.  In  this  workshop,  we  had  experts  from  JICA  and  we  had  also 
representatives of all the donor countries involved through their representatives. Therefore, 
we  are  attending  to  this  problem  in  a  very  holistic  manner.  We  are  taking  all  factors  into 
consideration. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  144,  item  31113  Other  Structure,  31113.45  Embellishment  of 
Infrastructural Works, may  I know from the hon. Minister whether any amount under that 
item  has  been  budgeted  for  embellishment  and  infrastructural  works  in  places  of  worship, 
mandils, mosques and other religious places? 

Mr Dayal: Madam Chairperson, we have made provision for the sum that is in the 
Budget and we are in the process of finalising all the places where we are going to intervene 
on a first come first serve basis and also on a basis of necessity. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  145,  under  item  31113.009  Construction  of  Solid  Waste 
Disposal  Facilities/Stations,  Cell  6  and  Cell  7  Mare  Chicose  Landfill  Site,  can  the  hon. 
Minister give us an idea about how long the Mare Chicose will be operational and whether 
the other cells have been rehabilitated? And secondly, with regard to the  Hazardous Waste 
Facility at La Chaumière, can the hon. Minister give us an idea when the waste facility would 
be operational? 

 

97 

Mr Dayal: Madam Chairperson, provision for maintenance item comprising of post-
closure  management  of  Mare  Chicose  and  maintenance  of  vehicle  and  plant  equipment 
thereat is being attended to. As far as I am concerned, we are attending to whatever had to be 
done at Cell No. 6 and Cell No. 7, but we are not neglecting the possibility of catering for a 
small  landfill  site.  As  far  as    Government  policy  is  concerned,  we  are  going  for  a  100% 
Recycling Scheme as far as Mare Chicose is concerned. 

Now coming to  La Chaumière, we have projected - the figures are in the Budget  - 
more than Rs245 m. for the construction of a storage facility for hazardous waste. All the 
procedures have been initiated and it would be commissioned as and when it will be ready. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Has the hon. Minister explored the possibility - we have had a PQ this 
morning concerning medical waste,  can the hon. Minister inform the House whether experts 
have  been  asked  to  work  on  the  possibility  of  having,    within  the  same  area,  one  same 
incinerator area for the hazardous waste and also the medical waste, because we are having 
problems not only in Port Louis,  but also in Quatre Bornes and near other hospitals? 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Chairperson,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  we  are  attending  to  all 
aspects of hazardous waste and medical waste, for me, is hazardous waste. Now, specifically 
because there has been concern, I am going to attend to it. 

The Chairperson: Last question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 145, item 26313.003 Beach Authority, may I know from the hon. 

Minister whether the Board of the new Beach Authority has been reconstituted? 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Chairperson,  yes,  it  has  been  reconstituted.  We  have  made  it  a 

point to get the best element in the country and they are functioning right now. 

Vote  24-1  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and 

Beach Management (Rs708,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 24-1 Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and 

Beach Management was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  I  think  I  will  continue  where  I  left.  On  page  344,  under  Capital 
Expenditure,  item  26323  Extra  Budgetary  Units,  26323.033  Beach  Authority.  Being  given 

 

98 

that  we  have  the  best  people,  maybe  the  hon.  Minister  can  tell  us  the  composition  of  this 
Beach Authority and  also explain why we  are budgeting Rs30 m. next year for the  Beach 
Authority as capital expenditure? 

Mr  Dayal:  We  have  projected  certain  specific  works  to  be  done  on  our  beaches 
because of erosion and many other factors. Madam Chairperson, we have a specific report 
from JICA concerning our beaches and based on that, we have made the provision. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 337, Capital Expenditure, item 28222.006 Solar Water 

Heater System, Rs 100 m. has been budgeted. May we have some details on this scheme? 

Mr Dayal: The scheme is an ongoing scheme based on the philosophy of Maurice Ile 
Durable so that we can have sustaible development. In this House, I answered a PQ based on 
the Rs100 m. that we are forecasting and  I am very thankful to the hon. Member for that, 
because  this  is  going  to  help  us  achieve  some  of  the  objectives  as  far  carbon  emission  is 
concerned,  as  far  as  certain  expenditures  that  we  are  incurring,  as  far  as  electricity  is 
concerned, more precisely in vulnerable groups.  

We are now working on the scheme. How are we going to implement it? It will be 

implemented at three levels – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

low income housing group scheme;  
as far as people who can afford it, and 
based on applications on a first-come first-served basis. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 345, National Disaster Risk Reduction, I will take it on the 
Salary of the Director General item 21110.001, can I ask the hon. Minister following his site 
visit at Morcellement Hermitage, Coromandel where there is an acute and dangerous problem 
of  land  erosion  which  is  a  permanent  danger  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  region,  whether  the 
Minister has prepared a plan to implement the project within the coming year to see to it that 
there are no further problems following heavy rains? 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  made  a  site  visit  together  with  all  the  elected 
Members thereat and I invited equally elements of the Opposition because I went there to see 
in  situ  what  is  the  problem.  Some  of  the  problems  have  been  attended  to.  As  far  as  the 

 

99 

construction  of  the  wall  is  concerned,  this  also  is  being  attended  to,  based  on  budgetary 
requirements and based on funding. Therefore, this job will be done in the course of, I hope, 
this financial year. We have a small problem as far as entering the area is concerned and we 
have already convinced the person responsible of that area to allow us free entry and he has 
accepted. Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the National Disaster Risk 
Reduction, there is the Acquisition of Non-financial Assets, Transport Equipment. We have 
seen recently the hon. Minister in action therefore, under this item acquisition of vehicles and 
equipment, is the hon. Minister considering the purchase of a helicopter? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: I must enlighten the hon. Member, Madam Chairperson, we have enough 

helicopters to do whatever we have to do in this country right now! 

(Interruptions) 

…as far as  I  am concerned, as a  pilote commandant de bord. The second thing is, we are 
buying vehicles and equipment based on our requirements and you know very well that some 
of  the  vehicles  that  we  are  utilizing,  be  it  in  my  Ministry  or  at  the  level  of  the  Disaster 
Management Centre, they are not capable of moving whenever there are floods and cyclones. 
These are the types of vehicles that we are buying. We are investing with wisdom and we are 
investing in the interest of the public. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem, you had a question? Last question! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you.  On page 337 under Capital Expenditure, item 28221.012 - 
Transfer to Non Profit Institutions, Rainwater Harvesting Scheme which is a very laudable 
initiative,  I  see  that  there  is  a  budget  of  Rs15  m.  that  is  earmarked.  Can  we  have  more 
information from the hon. Minister on what this scheme is about and to whom the grant will 
be given? 

Mr  Dayal:  The  Rainwater  Harvesting  Scheme  will  be  incorporated  in  smart  cities. 
The philosophy behind rainwater harvesting is to provide the backup facility to people who 
want  to  go  for  this  scheme.  This  is  based  on  sustainable  development.  The  scope  of  the 

 

100 

project is being worked out and the scheme will be implemented because we have found that 
we are getting landslides in certain areas, in built-up areas, because we have not attended to 
this important aspect of rainwater. So, this will be done within that framework. 

Vote  24-1  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and 

Beach Management (Rs1,806,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

The following Votes were called and agreed to -  

Votes  25-1  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  (Rs308,000,000) 

(January-June 2015) 

Votes 25-1 Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms (Rs672,000,000) 

(Interruptions) 

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  was 

called. 

Mr Uteem: On page 152, I am trying to locate the item number. I think I will take it 

under… 

 (Interruptions) 

...  the  item  21111  -  Other  Staff  Costs,  in  fact  I  am  not  sure  whether  it  is  the  correct  item 
number,  I  wanted  to  know  the  amount  that  has  been  disbursed  under  the  workfare 
programme, I see Computerization of Workfare Programme, item 31132, but I do not see any 
item for disbursement under the workfare programme. 

Mr Callichurn: It is under another item.  

The Chairperson: Under RIE. Did you say under RIE? 

Mr Callichurn:  It is listed in a different item,  Madam Chairperson. Does the hon. 

Member want me to give figures? 

Mr Uteem: I would like to know how many people are currently benefiting from the 

workfare programme? 

Mr  Callichurn:  The  number  of  workers  admitted  to  the  workfare  programme, 
according to statistics 2014, a total of 3880 out of which, 2535 male and 1345 female. The 

 

101 

number of workers who have opted for job placements: 2142 for male and 1141 female, total 
of 3283. Whereas the number placed for training and reskilling, male 135, female 123, total 
258 and a total number of 339 have opted to start small businesses. 

Does the hon. Member want the amount as well? 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: It is okay. Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: In relation to item 22030 at page 152, can hon. Minister elaborate on this 

item insofar as rent is concerned, and state who are benefiting from this rent? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Actually,  my  Ministry  is  renting  the  first  to  the  seventh  floor  of 
Victoria  House  belonging  to  a  Societé  called  Jolima  Co.  Ltd.  We  are  paying  the  sum  of 
Rs1,140,000 per month for the space we are occupying.  We also rent two floors, namely the 
second and third floors, at Crescent House for the sum of Rs206,000 per month.  There are 
regional offices which are rented by my Ministry.  There are 12 in total. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon. Minister … 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Jhugroo,  please  say  on  which  page  and  on  which  item 

number. 

Mr Jhugroo: With regard to the renting of Victoria House, which was just mentioned 
by  my  colleague,  hon.  Rutnah,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  had  been  tender 
procedures for the renting of this space?  If so, can we know when the tender was launched?  
If yes, can we know how many people have tendered for this space?  Can we know what is 
the rent per square foot for this building? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, there are different units in the said building. May I know to 

which unit the hon. Member is referring?  Is it the Employment Division?  

(Interruptions) 

I can give the answer now.  The Employment Division previously occupied a total area of 
16,956  square  feet  on  levels  2,  10  and  11  at  Sterling  House.    Recently,  the  Employment 
Division has been relocated to Victoria House, and that was on 01 December 2014. 

 

102 

In  view  of  the  relocation  of  the  Employment  Division  to  Victoria  House  and 
following the advice from the Public Procurement Office, a negotiating panel was set up by 
my Ministry in July 2013 under the Chairmanship of the APS to negotiate with the landlord 
of Victoria House the terms and conditions of the lease. Then, subsequently, on 04 November 
2014,  a  lease  agreement  has  duly  been  signed  between  Jolima  Co.  Ltd  and  the  PS  of  my 
Ministry for the renting of an office space of an area of 14,270.77 square feet on levels 10 
and 14 of Victoria House at Corner St Louis & Barracks Streets. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  154,  Capital  Expenditure,  the  last  item;  Item  31132.401  - 
Modernisation  of  Work  Permit  System.      There  is  an  amount  of  Rs5  m.  budgeted.    May  I 
know from the hon. Minister how many work permits have been processed in 2014 and how 
many are projected in 2015? 

Mr Callichurn: I don’t have the figures with me at the moment, but I can table it at a 

later stage. 

Mr Rutnah: I am grateful for the answer given by my friend, hon. Callichurn, but I 
would like to take him back to the item on which I have asked a question earlier on in relation 
to Victoria House. 

Mr Callichurn: Which page? 

Mr Rutnah: It is the same page I referred to earlier on; page 152, item 22030 - Rent.  
In relation to the company that owns this particular property at Victoria House, is the hon. 
Minister in a position today to confirm whether he would be able to give the identity of the 
directors of that company - if there are any directors or any director? 

Mr  Callichurn:  There  is  one  Mr  Chan  Sui  Ko  and  Mr  Ramjan  who  are  the 

shareholder and director of the said company. 

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training 

(Rs160,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  was 

called. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  362,  item  28212,  Transfer  to  Households,  sub-item  .028  - 
Employability Enhancement Programme: (a) Youth Employment Programme.  May I know 

 

103 

from the hon. Minister the number of trainees or people who have been recruited under the 
Youth  Employment  Programme  in  2014,  the  projected  number  of  people  who  will  be 
employed for 2015/2016 and the criteria used for allocation of the training contracts? 

Mr  Callichurn:  As  at  09  April  2015,  there  were  13,646  youth  registered  with  the 
Youth  Empowerment  Programme.    10,100  have  already  been  placed  in  companies,  out  of 
which 5,111 are females. The number of employers registered under the YEP is 1,594.  The 
criteria are as follows – 

• 

• 

the persons who are registered with YEP must be in the age range of 16 to 30, 
and 
they should be registered on the YEP database. 

Mr  Uteem:  Concerning  the  allocation  of  training,  it  is  not  a  first  come  basis  or 

matching of skills.  What criteria are used? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Well,  it  is  on  a  first  registered  basis.  If  they  have  been  registered 
right in the beginning, they will be given the first opportunity in companies and the selection 
is basically done by the companies. It depends on the profile of jobseekers they are looking 
for. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem!  

Mr  Uteem:  On  the  very  same  item  of  Youth  Employment  Programme,  it  was 
announced - I don’t know if it was in the Budget Speech or in the Government Programme - 
that the training period will be extended from one year to two years, but I see that there is no 
corresponding increase in the amount budgeted. Does that mean that less people will now be 
eligible to do the training? 

Mr Callichurn: Provision has been made. The budget has been increased. The budget 
provided for the year 2015/2016 is now Rs125 m., which is an increase compared to the year 
2014.  

(Interruptions) 

It has been increased; I can assure the hon. Member. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem!  

 

104 

Mr Uteem: Thank you. On the very last line of page 360 under Capital Expenditure, 
item 31132.401 - Intangible Fixed Assets, Computerisation of Registry of Associations. May I 
know from the hon. Minister how many associations are registered as at today? 

Mr Callichurn: It is 360. Which year is the hon. Member referring to? 

Mr  Uteem:  That  is  just  a  general  question  under  Computerisation  of  Registry  of 
Associations.  We are budgeting Rs1 m. to computerise the system. So, I wanted to know 
how many associations are concerned. 

Mr Callichurn: As at 31 December 2014, there were 9,825  associations registered 

with the Registrar of Associations and 370 Trade Unions as well. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. May I refer the hon. Minister to page 
359, item 22090 - Security. There is a provision for security amounting to Rs200,000 for the 
coming year. Can the hon. Minister elaborate on what he means by security, who provides 
security and to whom? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, basically, the provision is for security services. There are two 
companies which have a contract with the Ministry. Firstly, Genuine Security Services, they 
provide security services at Crescent House in consideration for a sum of Rs4,600 monthly 
and Brink’s Mauritius Ltd. for alarm and monitoring of labour offices across the island for a 
sum of Rs7,000 per month. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem!  

Mr Uteem: Thank you. On page 360 under Recurrent Expenditure, Compensation of 
Employees with respect to item 21110.001 Personal Emoluments, Basic Salary, Registrar of 
Associations.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  post  of  Registrar  of 
Associations has been filled? 

Mr Callichurn: Could the hon. Member repeat the question, please? 

Mr  Uteem:  We  are  budgeting,  under  the  staffing  there  is  the  post  of  Registrar  of 

Associations. I am just asking the question whether we have filled the position. 

 

105 

Mr Callichurn: Mr Hookoom retired from the service on 17 January 2015. Actually, 
there is Mr Balluck who is the Acting Registrar and the post was advertised on 25 September 
2014. Interview for the post of Registrar of Associations has been scheduled for the 14th and 
15th of this month. Yesterday, the exercise has been completed. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr  Ramful:  Coming  back  to  the  Youth  Employment  Programme  (YEP),  from  a 
question  put  by  hon.  Uteem,  I  understand  that  about  10,000  youths  have  been  placed  in 
different companies. Now, has there been an assessment that has been carried out to see how 
many  of  them  have  retained  their  employment  or  how  many  of  them  have  obtained 
employment somewhere else after the completion of that programme? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, I have already stated earlier that out of the 13,646 which are 
registered with the YEP, we have been able to place 10,100 youths on the scheme of YEP in 
different companies. 

Mr  Ramful:  My  question  is  whether  there  has  been  any  assessment  or  monitoring 
done to see how many of those 10,100 youths have retained employment at the companies 
where they were placed or how many of them have obtained employment elsewhere after the 
completion of the programme, to see if this programme is really working. 

Mr Callichurn: The Youth Employment Programme has just been transferred to my 
Ministry. Previously, it was with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. So, I 
am informed that 80% of the candidates have secured an employment. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. May I refer the hon. Minister to page 
357, Recurrent Expenditure, under item 21110.005  Extra Assistance. There is a provision for 
Rs3,300,000  for  this  year.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  enlighten  the  House  to  whom  this  extra 
assistance is provided and by whom? 

Mr Callichurn:  Extra Assistance, provision is made for salary and allowances to four 

Advisers to the Minister. 

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training 

(Rs485,800,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

106 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 156, item 28211.024 Transfers 

to Non-Profit Institutions, Financial Support to Religious Bodies.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Which page! 

Mr Uteem: Page 156.  There is only one page! 

The Chairperson:  On bottom of the page! 

Mr Uteem:  Item 28211.024 Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions, Financial Support to 
Religious Bodies. May I know from the hon. Minister of Finance what are the criteria used 
for allocation of this Financial Support to Religious Bodies? 

The Chairperson:  Page156! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    No,  that’s  not  the  problem.    I  am  just  looking  for  the 

information which I don’t have.   

The Fixed Grant Scheme was launched in Financial Year 1998-1999 and is subject to 

the following three criteria for eligibility - 

(1) The religious body should be registered with the Registrar of Associations. 

(2)  It  should  not  be  affiliated  to  any  federation  and  should  itself  have  branches  in 

Mauritius. 

(3) It should not be receiving grant/subsidy from any federation.  

On the basis of the above criteria,  currently non-affiliated religious organisations are 

benefiting from the fixed grant annually since 1998 as follows – 

•  Shri Sanathan Dharma Mandir Parishad: Rs300,000;  
•  Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University: Rs100,000; 
•  Swastika: Rs100,000;  
•  Shree Kabir Council Mauritius: Rs100,000; 
• 
•  Chinmaya Mission: Rs100,000. 

ISKCON: Rs100,000, and  

 

107 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  On page 157, item 26210.035 UNDP Sub-Office, last year a provision 
of Rs5 m. was made and this year it is nil.  So, does that mean that we are not funding UNDP 
anymore? 

The Chairperson:  UNDP Sub-Office.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The reply is another vote. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, I am not sure whether the hon. Minister of Finance 
has  got  the  correct  information.    I  was  asking  for  item  28211.024  where  the  Financial 
Support to Religious Bodies was Rs73 m. last year and for the six months it is Rs37 m. which 
is roughly half of it.  So, the name of the association and the amount that he has mentioned is 
nowhere close to Rs37 m.? That’s why I wanted to know about it. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, if I don’t have the reply, I’ll have to circulate it. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Yes, on page 156, item 28217.002 Compensation Arising out of 
Government Liability, last  year there was an  amount of Rs74 m. and this  year, there is an 
amount of Rs40 m. which is budgeted.  May we know the rationale behind calculating this 
figure? Because I think this figure is a general provision.  Can I know what is the rationale 
behind it or do we have specific cases for Government liability? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  It depends on cases arising.  Is that reply satisfying? 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: I might as well take it here. I would like to have some clarifications on item 

21210.002 Social Contributions, Defined Contribution Pension Scheme. 

The Chairperson:  On page 156! What is your question, hon. Uteem? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Can the hon. Member give me the item number? 

Mr Uteem: The item is 21210.002 Social Contributions, Defined Contribution Pension 

Scheme. 

 

108 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  21210.002, is that so? 

Mr Uteem:  Yes.  I would like to know…. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Defined Contribution Pension Scheme! 

Mr  Uteem:  …  this  Defined  Contribution  Pension  Scheme  is  in  respect  to  which 
employees and whether it is insured with SICOM or is there another pension scheme that is 
operating that Scheme. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    The  provision  made  for  Government  contribution  is  in 
respect of pension for new entrants joining the Civil Service as from January 2013.  For the 
Defined  Contribution  Pension  Scheme,  Government  contribute  12%  of  pensionable 
emoluments of new entrants while the latter contributes 6%. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government (Rs540,000,00) (January-June 

2015) was on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government was called.  

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  365,  item  28217.002 

Compensation arising out of Government Liability.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Item 28217.002! 

Mr Uteem:  Yes, item 28217.002 Compensation arising out of Government Liability. 
Last year, it was Rs74 m., next year Rs100 m. and then Rs150 m. and then Rs200 m.  Is the 
hon. Minister in a position to tell us as at to date the amount of claims that have been lodged 
against  the  Government  which  can  give  us  an  idea  of  the  contingent  liability  against  the 
Government?  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    I  have  a  total  expenditure  as  at  December  2014  of 
Rs74,670,000.  Accident involving Government vehicles: 1421, and injury on duty: 32.  Is 
that alright? 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

 

109 

Mr Uteem:  Is any amount budgeted in the Rs100 m. for the heirs of people who have 
been  found  dead  in  Police  cells?  Has  there  been  any  provision  made  in  case  there  is  any 
compensation claimed by the heirs of people who have been victims while being in Police 
custody?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The provision made to cater for any compensation to be paid 
to third parties in respect of Court cases, accidents involving Government vehicles and injury 
on duty and medical negligence; provision is based on past trend of expenditure.  The specific 
expenditure to be incurred under the item in 2015-2016 is not known in advance. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  On  page  365,  item  26313.035  –  Mauritius  Ex-Services  Trust  Fund 
Board.  Can I know from the hon. Minister of Finance whether the amount budgeted for the 
three years is meant for the ex-servicemen and, if so,  can we know for how many persons 
and  can  we  know  since  when  there  has  never  been  any  rise  in  the  amount  paid  to  these 
persons? 

Mr Uteem: I would come back to the question I asked in the previous year, which is 
here 21210.002 - Defined Contribution Pension Scheme. I had asked a question, what is it 
for? Because the budgeted amount jumps to Rs75 m. then to Rs125 m. then to Rs150 m. I 
would like to have an explanation about the exponential growth in the defined contributive 
scheme. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Pension and other benefits have increased by 6% in 2015. 
The number of beneficiaries as at March 2015 for ex-servicemen: 1,995; widows of the ex-
servicemen: 5042.  Now, I go back to hon. Uteem.  Would this reply fit the hon. Member?  
Higher provision is made to cater for full yearly contribution for existing participants in the 
scheme, one.  Two, increase in salaries EOAC and 2015 compensation and new entrants as 
from January 2015. 

Vote  27.1  Centrally  Managed  Expenses  Of  Government  (Rs1,380,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government was called. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  157,  25120.01  Subsidies  –  Financial  Public  Corporations  - 
Development Bank of Mauritius Ltd –  Interest Subsidy on Loans Rs26 m.  May I know what 
this relates to? 

 

110 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Provision  required  for  refunding  DBM,  but  the  interest 
amount  foregone  on  various  concessionary  loans  schemes  that  it  manages  on  behalf  of  
Central Government.  Those schemes include computer loan scheme, solar water heater loan 
scheme, water tanks scheme, special agricultural loan scheme, quasi equity financing scheme, 
and special loans to SMEs.  The provision represents refund in respect of financial year 2014 
and the period January to June 2015. 

Mr Uteem: Under Item 22030 Rent – it is on the same page - there is a provision of 

Rs17.4 m. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The rent of Rs17.4 m. is a provision for rental of SICOM 
Tower at Ebene by Government. This is, in fact, the space that will be occupied for the SMEs 
bank. The total floor area of SICOM tower is around 170,000 ft²; rental is Rs34 per square 
foot. That is very cheap. The building will house the SME bank; the one-stop shop for the 
entrepreneurs;  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms;  the  Mauritius  International  Arbitration  Centre  Ltd  and  the  Ministry  of  Business, 
Enterprise and Cooperatives. The rationale for making provision under this vote instead of 
individual Ministry votes is to provide flexibility in the use of office space between various 
Government and public sector bodies.  Negotiation on the basis of wholesale and long lease 
terms instead of retail and short-term and have better rental terms and lower rental cost.  In 
fact,  I  have  been  involved  in  this  with  SICOM  and  it  is  much  more  advantageous  for 
Government  to  rent  the  building  on  the  long-term.    The  building  is  then  used  by  various 
departments and ministries as and when required. 

Mr Uteem: Rental – we have just learned SICOM tower has been the subject of a lot 
of  PQs,  including  by  hon.  Mahen  Jhugroo  in  the  past  because  it  used  to  belong  to  Mr 
Gooljaury.  It  was  such  a  controversial  project.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance what procurement method has been used to identify SICOM Tower? Has there been 
public tender? Have other people been invited to bid before selecting SICOM Tower for Rs17 
m. a year? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  SICOM  Tower  belongs  to  SICOM.  SICOM  belongs  to 
Government. If I have to give some preference when we allocate resources, I would go for 
public  sector  buildings.    I  find  this  quite  natural.  Likewise  my  colleague,  hon.  Minister 
Bhadain,  was  looking  for  space  and  we  were  looking  for  space  for  the  SMEs  bank,  the 
building was there; it belongs to SICOM Government owned and we finally got the best rent 

 

111 

we could have got because this is Rs34 when the average rate there is Rs41. I am sorry, I 
have to defend this case because I know this case. What is good there is that SICOM is going 
to get a regular revenue from Government in the long-term; it helps also. 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government (Rs210,000) (January-June 

2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government (Rs1,484,000) was called and 

agreed to. 

The following Votes were called and agreed to -  

29 -1 Contingencies and Reserves (Rs200,000,000) (January-June 2015) 

29 -1 Contingencies and Reserves (Rs1,800,000,000) 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

The Schedules were agreed to. 

Clauses 1 and 2 were called and agreed to.  

The title and the enacting clauses were agreed to. 

The Bills were agreed to.  

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

 

 

 

 

112 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

ORDER PAPER - FRIDAY 17 APRIL 2015 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that in view of the fact 
that  the  consideration  of  the  Appropriation  (2015)  Bill  (No.  III  of  2015)  and  the 
Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) by the Committee of Supply is now over, 
the Order Paper dated 17 April 2015 by virtue of which the consideration of the above Bills 
was supposed to be resumed, has to all intent and purposes become null and void. 

After the adjournment of the House, a new Order Paper will be circulated and hon. 

Members are kindly requested to guide themselves accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that the House be adjourned to Friday 

24 April 2015 at 2.30 p.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 7.01 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 24 April 2015 at 

2.30 p.m. 

 

 

