 

 

1 

 

 

No. 19 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 09 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

QUESTION ( Oral) 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public)   

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 19 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 09 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

 

 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

JIN FEI ECONOMIC ZONE PROJECT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Jin Fei Economic 
Zone Project at Riche Terre, he will state where matters stand, indicating as at to date – 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

the  names  of  the  present  shareholders  thereof  and  the  involvement  of  the 
Government of the People’s Republic of China therein; 
the sums spent on infrastructure by the Mauritian side; 
the foreign investment received and the number of jobs created; 
the details of the – 
(i) 
(ii)  Memoranda of Understanding signed, and 
(iii) 
what is being proposed to the displaced planters, and 
if the Culture House project still stands. 

completed and forthcoming projects respectively; 

subleases granted; 

(e) 
(f) 
Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Jin  Fei  project  is  yet  another 
resounding failure of the previous Government.  The previous Government signed an initial 
lease agreement in July 2007 with the Tianli Enterprise Group. Subsequently, a new Lease 
Agreement  and  Framework  Agreement  were  signed  with  a  new  company,  namely  the 
Mauritius Jin Fei Economic Trade and Cooperation Zone Ltd on 16 September 2009.  Both 
documents have already been tabled on 10 February 2015. 

As regards part (a) of the question, the present shareholder of the Mauritius Jin Fei 
Economic  Trade  and  Cooperation  Zone  Ltd  is  the  Shanxi  Investment  Group  Co.  Ltd.  The 
Chinese Government is not involved directly in the Mauritius Jin Fei Economic Trade and 
Cooperation Zone Ltd. 

The Lease Agreement was for a plot of land covering an area of 211 hectares, that is, 

500 arpents, which was leased to the company for a period of 99 years. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, I am informed that the previous Government had 

invested some Rs525 m. on offsite infrastructure of which - 

• 
• 
• 

Rs115 m. for water infrastructure; 
Rs236 m. for electricity supply; 
Rs92 m. for road development, and 

 

8 

• 

Rs82 m. for sewerage infrastructure 

In addition, an investment estimated at Rs1 billion is still required to meet the water 

needs for the Jin Fei project. 

Concerning part (c) of the question, according to information provided by the Jin Fei 
Group, the total foreign investment - foreign direct investment - amounted to Rs1.7 billion 
with a breakdown as follows -  

• 
• 

Rs765 m. for on-site infrastructure works, and 
Rs920 m. for three projects, namely a  Business Centre for an investment of 
Rs580 m.; an apartment block for an investment of Rs235 m., and a warehouse 
for an investment of Rs105 m.  

The  figure  of  Rs920  m.  is  way  below  the  commitment  taken  by  Jin  Fei  Group  to 

invest a minimum of Rs18 billion by end of next year.  

An estimated 80 jobs have been created as opposed to the 5,000 direct jobs which the 

Company undertook to generate during the first phase period from 2009 to 2012.  

Concerning part (d) (i) of the question, there are four subleases granted by Jin Fei, on 

a total land area of 3.5 hectares.   

As regards part (d) (ii) of the question, no MoU has been signed outside those four 

sublease agreements.    I shall table a copy of those sublease agreements by this afternoon.  

As regards part (d) (iii) of the question, as I pointed out earlier, in reply to PQ No. 
B/16, during the last electoral campaign, we took the commitment to revive this project and 
give it a new impulse. Ever since we assumed office, we started intensive discussions with 
the promoters.  

A  high-level  delegation  from  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  comprising  the 
representatives  of  the  shareholders  of  Jin  Fei  visited  Mauritius  from  23  January  to  05 
February  2015  to  hold  discussions  with  Government.  In  the  light  of  those  discussions, 
Government made the following proposals to Jin Fei Group - 

(a) to set up a joint venture company in which Government of Mauritius will hold 80 
percent shares and the Mauritius Jin Fei Economic Trade and Cooperation Zone 
Ltd will hold 20 percent shares in joint venture company; 

 

9 

 (b) to replace the lease agreement signed on 16 September 2009 between Jin Fei and 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands with a revised lease agreement, to be entered 
between the joint venture company and the Ministry of Housing and Lands; 

(c) to allocate the 20 percent shares to Jin Fei for the contribution made by the latter 

with respect to onsite infrastructure, and 

(d) option for the Government of the Republic of Mauritius of acquiring the business 
centre, the warehouse and an apartment building developed by Jin Fei on leased 
land at a price to be mutually agreed. 

A full-fledged delegation from Jin Fei is now presently in Mauritius to finalise the 
discussion. I am pleased to inform the House that the Chinese Group has already agreed in 
principle to our proposal to set up a joint venture company with 80 percent Government of 
Mauritius and 20 percent of Jin Fei. 

The  Jin  Fei  Company  is  prepared  to  acquire  the  plot  of  land  on  which  they  have 
constructed  the  Business  Centre  and  the  Apartment  block  and  other  projects  up  to  a 
maximum  of  75  arpents,  as  compensation  for  the  total  investment  in  on-site  infrastructure 
amounting to Rs765 m.  The land to be allocated to Jin Fei will be subject to an independent 
valuation and any difference between the Rs765 m. and the actual land value will be paid in 
cash by Jin Fei to the Government of Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, we have finally succeeded to take back, at no cost to Government, 
425 arpents of the land leased to Jin Fei Group, which I have to inform the House is now 
fully serviced with all amenities.  These lands will be used to develop a smart city project 
dedicated to port logistics activities.   

As regards part (e) of the question, the previous Government refused to compensate 
the small planters who were evicted from the Jin Fei site.  It was only after a strike and a 
Court case that the previous Government was compelled to pay a total amount of Rs73 m. as 
compensation  to  227  planters  who  were  occupying  plots  of  land  in  the  Riche  Terre/Terre 
Rouge land settlement area.  Furthermore, some 106 planters were leased land to the extent of 
10 perches each for residential purposes and 34 planters were granted one arpent each for 
vegetable plantation. 

Following the meeting I had with the small planters at Solitude, we agreed -   

 

10 

(1) to  sell  the  plot  of  10  perches  of  land  being  leased  to  those  small  planters   

concerned for a nominal price of one rupee; 

(2) to  provide  the  small  planters  concerned,  grouped  in  a  Cooperative  Society, 
with a plot of  land of 100 arpents to set up a bio-farm project.  Government 
will  also  provide  all  necessary  support  for  the  Cooperative  Society  to 
successfully implement the project.  

As regards part (f) of the question, Government has decided that the Culture House 

project will not be implemented in the Jin Fei site but rather in Réduit. 

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to say that we are on the point of finally unlocking the 

Jin Fei saga.  

Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister say that, Jin Fei, through representatives who 
are  at  present  in  Mauritius,  have  agreed  in  principle  to  becoming  the  minority  20% 
shareholder in a new entity to be set up and, therefore, to take back the 425 arpents that were 
with Jin Fei. Can I know whether in principle - and then, has the value of the 80% that they 
are going to lose in a way, a 100% shareholders they were - now they are going to become 
shareholders at 20%?  Can we know whether a value has been placed on what they will ask 
from the Government of Mauritius to become minority shareholders?  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  On  the  basis  of  discussions  we  have  had  those  past  few 
days, the 425 acres will return to the Ministry of Housing and Lands. So, the company, the 
new  joint  venture  80  to  20  is  being  set  up  mainly  for  the  management  of  the  site,  for  the 
management of the whole smart city and it is in this management that Jin Fei will have 20% 
and Government of Mauritius will have 80% and the 425 acres of land will stay probably 
with the Ministry of Housing and  Lands or in a separate company. So,  we are not  adding 
those 45 acres in the joint venture itself. 

Mr Bérenger:  My question is: is the Jin Fei site so generous that they are saying, ok, 
we  hand  back  these  425  arpents,  we  become  a  minority  shareholder  in  a  management 
company and you do not compensate ‘us’ in anyway?  Is that what they are saying or will we 
have  to  pay  Jin  Fei  for  returning  that  land  and  becoming  a  minority  shareholder  in  a 
management company? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I need to say that there has been a lot of arm-twisting 
and we told the Jin Fei people that this is a highly politically explosive joint venture, which 
has not given any result after five years, in spite of the commitment they have taken. So, we 
were in a strong position to tell them that we have waited for so long, there has been no result 

 

11 

and that we now want to take back the 500 acres. It is from this point, when we said we will 
take back the total area that negotiations started and, as yesterday, they are proposing and, I 
think,  we  will  go  with  it.  There  are  75  acres  comprising  of  the  appartment  block  of  the 
warehouse and another building and they want to purchase this plot of land. 

We have made a counter-proposal that the land be leased rather to them 99 years… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  but  there  is  strong  objection.    So,  they  have  reverted  back  to  China  and  we  are  still 
insisting  that  the  75  acres  of  land  that  we  upkeep  will  remain  as  lease  lands  for  99  years 
which means, therefore, that we have taken back the 425 acres.  

Mr  Bérenger:  I  take  that  to  mean  that  there  will  be  no  compensation  for  them  to 
handing back that land, except that part over which we are discussing lease or ownership as 
they are requesting and I am glad to note that the hon. Prime Minister insists that it should be 
a  lease.  Do  I  take  it  that  the  nature  of  the  project  at  Riche  Terre  is  changing  completely 
because before Jin Fei was to come in big with 40,000 employment created, Rs20 billion of 
investment and so on, now they are out  I take it that, now, they are going to have the land on 
lease  where  they  have  already  built,  hand  over  everything  else,  be  a  minority  partner  in  a 
management company and that the rest will be returned to the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
with the main thing in mind, from what I understand, being port development. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, and I have to add also that the 75 acres of land that they 
are  proposing  to  buy  is  in  compensation  for  the  infrastructural  work  they  have  done  there 
which  is  about  Rs765  m.  So,  we  have  suggested  that  we  balance;  we  have  an  official 
evaluation of the 75 acres, and if it is more than what we owe them - because we owe them 
the work that they have done on the site: road, electricity, and water. So, they have invested 
Rs765  m.  directly  for  which  we  have  to  compensate  them.  Probably,  we  will  come  to  an 
arrangement whereby the land, the 75 acres, will be some form of part compensation for the 
investment in infrastructure. It is a management project which we propose to have with them 
and, yes, also, as you know, the smart cities will all have a theme and the theme for the smart 
city  of  Jin  Fei  is  Port  logistics.  Why?    Because  the  Port  project  we  have,  extending  from 
Grand  River  North  West  through  Bain  des  Dames  down  to  Baie  du  Tombeau,  this  huge 
project might also integrate the Port logistics project which will then give us a huge smart 
city for Port logistics plus the infrastructure for Port development. 

Mr Bérenger:  Do I take it that this Jin Fei is represented by top management from 
the other company in China and can I know whether the hon. Minister, himself, or Ministers 
have been involved in those discussions with those representatives of Jin Fei?  

 

12 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  No.  This  is  a  Technical  Committee  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economic Development headed by the Financial Secretary. My role is mainly to 
do PR with them. So, I am inviting them for dinner tomorrow with the Chinese Embassy and 
try to find a solution for this main issue which stays now; they want to buy and we want to 
give them a lease. So, we are there, there is some form of deadlock which might stay for a 
few days and I hope, hopefully, that, at the end of the day, they will accept the 75 acres of 
leased lands. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: It’s good to see negotiations taking place in front of us. Can I know 
whether the hon. Minister has information because the whole Jin Fei project was supposed to 
include  -  well,  included,  in  fact  -  granting  of  passports?    Can  I  know  within  the  Jin  Fei 
context, how many passports have been granted? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  think,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  should 

come with a substantive question because this goes outside the purview of my Ministry. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  on  to  the  subleases,  can  I  know  whether  all  of  those 
subleases were approved by Government and for what duration those subleases were agreed 
to? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  don’t  have  the  information.  This  is  why  I  am 

submitting this afternoon the four subleases signed by Jin Fei with four Chinese groups. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  understand  that,  that  land  will  be  extracted  from  what  has  been 

handed back to be subleased and what is the intention of Government - the 99-year lease? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, I have the information that the sublease was approved 

by the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the subject of the planters. At one point, the hon. 
Minister himself said that - let me quote the article concerned from what has been reported – 

“Les terres seront restituées aux planteurs.”  

Then, another statement was made to the effect that a cooperative would be set up 
on 100 arpents for those planters. Have the planters, through their representatives, agreed to 
what the hon. Minister is proposing now, that is, a 100 cooperative on a 100 arpents piece of 
land? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes. In fact, they are very indebted to the Government if we 

go ahead with both projects. That is - 

(1) that they be given the 10 perches of land against payment of a symbolical R1, and  

 

13 

(2) that  we  start  a  bio  farm  project  at  a  cooperative  level  where  they  all  will  be 

involved on 100 acres of land. Naturally, we will have to help Government also.  

Mr Bérenger: As far as the culture project is concerned, I am very happy because it 
was  my  suggestion  to  the  former  Government.  I  insisted  that  it  is  out  of  this  world  for  a 
Culture  House  to  be  placed  in  the  Jin  Fei  area,  whereas  the  2000-2005  Government  had 
already decided that it would be at Réduit. We had already placed the land for that which was 
later  on  given  by  the  previous  Government  to  MBC.  So,  do  I  take  it  that  the  Rs250  m. 
interest-free loan that China had offered still stands or is it going away with Jin Fei? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I was made to understand that it is a direct grant from the 
Chinese Government. Then, I need notice of this question. Yes, the Financial Secretary told 
me  that  this  is  a  grant.  Therefore,  this  money  would  be  used  for  the  construction  of  the 
Cultural Centre, but in Réduit. 

Mr Bérenger: I take it that this grant is still on the table, it is still offered by China? 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, it is still on the table. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the previous Government - and 
it was discussed in this House through a PQ - there was a project of a company to be set up in 
the  Jin  Fei  economic  zone  project  for  the  production  of  electricity.    Can  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister if this is still on the cards? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I am not aware. There must have been quite a few projects, 

none of them materialised. So, you might be right, but I don’t know. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: Bizin casse ene coco!  
Can the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development inform the House since 
nearly  Rs1  billion  or  more  precisely  Rs925  m.,  have  been  invested  in  utilities  by  our 
Government in terms of utilities and road development, will the hon. Minister then take this 
factor into consideration when negotiating with our Chinese counterparts because they also 
have been making use of these offsite infrastructures for the apartments, for the warehouse or 
for the business centre which they have built, and will Government allow them to sell these 
apartments after their construction? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: There are two parts in the question.  One is, I have to tell the 
House that we have squeezed them a lot. We have squeezed the Jin Fei group a lot to come to 

 

14 

this  basic  arrangement  where  they  are  returning  425  acres  back  to  Government.  So,  the 
question is whether what we have invested should get in the negotiations now.  I think we 
have  got  a  fairly  extraordinary  deal  with  the  Jin  Fei.  I  never  thought  that  this  would  go 
through. It is going through. Now, as for the apartments that they want to purchase, I don’t 
know whether they want to sell it or keep it. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: I am informed that 100 arpents have been earmarked for the planters. 
Has there been a site visit with the planters to specify which area and whether a preliminary 
study has started for that bio farm? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes.  In  fact,  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 
Security is earmarking these plots of land which might be used and which we will visit just 
after the Budget, once we are a little free. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 
Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, since Government has taken 80% of the joint venture, 
can we know from the hon. Minister quel organisme de l’État va gérer cette participation 
dans le nouveau joint-venture? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Je n’ai pas bien compris la question. Excusez-moi. 
Mr Jhuboo: Since Government has taken a participation of 80% in the joint venture, 

can we know quel organisme de l’État va gérer cette participation dans ce nouveau projet? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  the  joint  venture  will  manage.  It  is  a  management 
company. So, the joint venture needs to be set up and when we come to the bridge, we will 
cross it. But, for the time being, we have agreed to the principle that the joint venture, Jin Fei 
and Government of Mauritius, will be on the basis of 20 and 80. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  a 
feasibility study has been done before starting this project and, if so, for what reason this has 
failed? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  other  initial  project  –  no,  we  all  know  that  the 
circumstances  surrounding  the  Jin  Fei,  ex-Tianli  project,  were  done  in  very  dubious 
circumstances.  We  have  said  it  so  often.    Even  now  I  am  not  satisfied  and  I  still  don’t 
understand how the former Prime Minister could have kicked out 250 small planters from his 
own Constituency, taken back this land to give it to a Chinese company in the EPZ.  I am still 
perplexed on this. 

(Interruptions) 

 

15 

That’s  true!    I  am  not  just  saying  it.  I  am  also  quite  perplexed  that  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development also got the lease agreement signed and delivered it in 
China. So, it is very difficult not to doubt that there is more than meets the eyes in the Tianli 
project. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 
Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  From what I understand from the hon. 
Minister,  80%  of  the  development  that  is  going  to  occur  there,  will  be  from  Government 
funding, and if so, whether a feasibility study will be done in that case? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  No,  it  is  a  management  company.  The  management 
company  will  develop  the  Smart  City  on  those  plots  of  lands  which  are  there  and  we  are 
going to use extensive investment from abroad and Mauritius also.  
 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I don’t know if the hon. Minister has 
made  a  site  visit  recently  in  this  area.    It  is  a  shame  for  Mauritius.    This  area  has  been 
converted into a dumping ground.  Can I make a request - in the interest of the country, for 
our reputation - that the hon. Minister of Environment put some order to prevent the illegal 
dumping? 

(Interruptions) 

This is a case where there is a lot of illegal dumping and at least immediate action should be 
taken by the Ministry of Environment and the Environmental Police to prevent such cases of 
degradation.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The Jin Fei land is a great land for the marriage of dogs 
presently.  I  have  been  there  recently  and  there  are  hundreds  of  dogs  there,  and  there  is 
undoubtedly  an  environment  issue  there.    The  joint  venture  will  have  to  look  into  it  in 
consultation probably with the hon. Minister of Environment. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  put  a  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  that  the  House  be  kept 
informed of how discussions are finalised with Jin Fei and the final conditions both in terms 
of money, but also of the lease conditions. Once the discussions are completed with Jin Fei, 
we will be fully informed. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker, I will make a statement as soon as 
the negotiations are completed with the Jin Fei group giving full details on the whole project. 
Madam Speaker:  Any more questions!  Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you don’t 

have any more questions! 

 

 

16 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(12.01 p.m.) 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL (NO. V OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read.  

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, with your 
permission, I move that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill (No. V of 2015) be read a 
second time. 

Madam Speaker, it was announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019 that the 
Local Government Act will be amended to consolidate democracy at the local level and to 
promote better participation of the local Councillors in the management of the affairs of the 
community.  

True  to  our  words,  Government  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  under  the 
chairmanship of  hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
Tourism  and  External  Communications,  to  look  into  the  pressing  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed in the Local Government Act with a view to consolidating democracy at the local 
level.  

The Ministerial Committee met on several occasions to examine the various sections 

of the Act which require urgent attention and agreed on the following policy measures - 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

the holding of the Municipal Council elections; 
increase in the number of Municipal Councillors; 
change in eligibility to stand as candidate; 
presentation of candidates of both sexes by groups/party alliances presenting 
more than two candidates at a Municipal Council election; 

17 

 

(e) 

assumption  of  office  of  the  Lord  Mayor,  Mayors,  Chairpersons  of  District 
Councils and their Deputies; 
holding of meetings of Local Authorities, and 
the quorum for meetings of Local Authorities. 

(f) 
(g) 
Madam Speaker, the House will recall that the Municipal Council elections were held 
in December 2012.  The alliances for these elections constituted of the two major blocks, that 
is, the Alliance PTR/PMSD and the Alliance MMM/MSM.   

At the City Council of Port Louis, the then Alliance MMM/MSM won a majority of the 
seats;  similarly  at  the  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  and  Beau  Bassin-Rose  Hill.  
However, we all know subsequently what happened to the political landscape in the country 
and  the  difficulties  being  encountered  at  the  Municipal  Councils  subsequently  to  operate 
smoothly.  

Madam Speaker, we all know that the Local Government is the first public authority, 
due  to  its  proximity,  where  citizens  look  up  to  solve  their  immediate  social,  welfare  and 
environmental problems.  It is also the level of democracy in which the citizen has the most 
effective opportunity to actively and directly participate in decision-making for the society.  
In  other  words,  a  vigorous  local  democracy  is  the  basis  for  a  healthy  national-level 
democracy.   

With 

that  background,  Government  has  come  with 

this  Local  Government 
(Amendment)  Bill.    The  amendments  being  proposed  have  been  captured  in  the  Bill  as 
follows - 

At clause 3, to allow the holding of Municipal elections this year and thereafter every 
six  years,  or  earlier  in  such  other  year  as  the  President  shall,  on  the  advice  of  the  Prime 
Minister, appoint.  The primary objective of this amendment is to allow Municipal Councils 
to operate smoothly at the earliest. 

Further,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  consistency,  a  similar  provision  is  being  made  at 
clause 4 of the Bill in relation to section 12 of the Act in order to allow for the holding of the 
Village Council election prior to the date on which it falls due or in any other year as may be 
determined by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, with a view to improving local representation of the various groups at 
the decision-making level of the Municipal Councils, clause 3 of the Bill is providing for an 
increase  in  the  number  of  Councillors  to  be  returned  per  ward  in  each  Municipal  Council 
from three to four.   

 

18 

Consequently, the First and Second Schedules of the Act are being amended to indicate 
the total number of Councillors to be returned for the City Council of Port Louis and the four 
Municipal Town Councils as indicated at clauses 15 and 16 of the Bill.   

The City Council of Port Louis will now have 32 Municipal Councillors, the Municipal 
Councils of Beau Bassin-Rose Hill and Vacoas-Phoenix will have 24 Councillors each and 
the Municipal Councils of Curepipe and Quatre Bornes will have 20 Councillors each. 

In the same way, groups or party alliances will have to ensure that not more than two 

thirds of the group’s candidates for the election to the Council are of the same sex.   

However,  where  the  group  forms  part  of  an  alliance,  it  shall  be  sufficient  for  the 
alliance  to  comply  with  the  requirement  without  each  group  forming  part  of  the  alliance 
necessarily complying with this requirement.   

The House will agree with me that, for economic and cultural reasons, groups find it 
difficult to ensure that, at least, one third of their candidates in an electoral ward are women.   
The amendment proposed will require groups to ensure that not more than two thirds of 
the group’s candidates for the election to a Council area, instead of an electoral ward, are of 
the  same  sex.    This  amendment,  which  aims  at  easing  groups  or  alliances  to  ensure  the 
participation of both sexes at the Municipal election, is also captured at clause 3 of the Bill.   
Madam Speaker, the House may wish to note that the Local Government Act does not 
allow for an owner or a tenant of a business premises to stand as candidate for the Municipal 
elections if he does not reside in that particular area.  

With  a  view  to  allowing  the  business  community  of  a  Municipal  Council  area  to 
directly contribute at decision-making level in the Councils, an amendment is being proposed 
at  clause  5  of  the  Bill  to  allow  any  person  occupying  as  owner  or  tenant,  any  business 
premises in a ward of the city or town for not less than 6 months before the election to stand 
as candidate for the election.  

On  the  same  note,  the  amendment  being  brought  at  clause  6  of  the  Bill  will  allow 
chairpersons  and  members  of  statutory  corporations  and  organisations  which  are  wholly 
funded by the State to also stand as candidate for Local Government elections. 

Madam  Speaker,  following  the  last  general  elections  in  December  last  year,  a  few 
Municipal Councillors were elected and are today, Members of this august Assembly.  Their 
seats have been duly filled in accordance with the provisions of the prevailing legislation, but 
not necessarily from the groups they belonged to.  The Local Government Act provides that 
an alliance may submit a reserve list for the filling of vacancies that may arise.  No indication 

 

19 

on the group to which each candidate belongs to was required at the time of nomination for 
the last Municipal elections. 

As I explained earlier, with the new political configuration, the seats of the Municipal 
Councillors  who  are  now  Members  of  the  National  Assembly  have  been  filled,  but  not 
necessarily  from  the  group  to  which  these  Councillors  belonged  to.    Such  a  situation  may 
create imbalances or disturb the relativity between the majority and the minority groups in a 
Council. 

With a view to safeguarding the balance between the majority and minority groups in 
the  Municipal  Councils,  we  are  bringing  an  amendment  to  section  18  of  the  Local 
Government Act, which is referred to as clause 7 of the Bill, to provide for a candidate to 
declare that he belongs to a group and the alliance to which his group belongs to, at the time 
of nomination.  It also provides that the group may submit a reserve list of candidates for the 
filling of any vacancy which may arise. 

It is worth pointing out that even if the group forms part of an alliance, any vacant 
position  will  be  filled  from  the  reserve  list  of  the  group  to  which  the  outgoing  Councillor 
belonged to as indicated for at clause 13 of the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, clause 8 of the Bill is providing amendment to section 33 of the Act 
so  as  to  allow  a  Lord  Mayor,  Mayors  and  their  Deputies,  Chairpersons  and  Vice-
Chairpersons  of  District  and  Village  Councils  to  assume  office  for  a  period  of  two  years 
starting on the day of their election until such time as their successors are elected. 

Clause  9  of  the  Bill  provides  for  an  amendment  to  section  36  of  the  Act  so  as  to 
provide that, in addition to a Lord Mayor, Mayor and the Chairperson of a Local Authority, a 
Deputy  Lord  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor  and  Vice-Chairperson  of  a  Local  Authority  may  be 
revoked following a vote of no confidence. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Local  Government  Act  provides  that  whenever  a  Councillor 
resigns from his group, he shall lose his seat as Councillor.  The Act also provides that where 
a group no longer believes that a Councillor belongs to the group, it may, by notice, request 
the Chief Executive of the Council to declare the seat of the Councillor vacant. 

The  House  may  wish  to  note  that  since  the  last  Village  Council  Elections  held  in 
2012, more than ten cases have been entered by the then elected Village Councillors at the 
Supreme Court contesting the procedures followed for the declaration of their seats vacant.  
They aver that they have been unfairly expelled from their groups and have undemocratically 
lost their seats. 

 

20 

With a view to ensuring that democratically elected councillors do not lose their seats 
in an unfair manner,  amendments are being brought to section 38 of the Act to repeal the 
provision that renders the seat of a Councillor vacant when he is ‘expelled’ from his group.  
However, if a Councillor chooses to resign from his group, he will lose his seat as Councillor. 
This  amendment  which  would  be  applicable  to  both  Municipal  and  Village 
Councillors  is  being  proposed  in  clause  10  of  the  Bill.    Furthermore,  this  amendment  will 
entail  consequential  amendments  to  sections  39  and  40  of  the  Local  Government  Act,  as 
indicated at clauses 11 and 12 of the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, section 45 of the Local Government Act provides that meetings of 
Municipal and District Councils shall be held at least once every fortnight and the quorum 
should be at least half of the members. 

Following  representations  received  from  local  Councillors,  an  amendment  is  being 
brought to that section of the Act as indicated at clauses 14 and 17 of the Bill, to provide that 
meetings of Municipal and District Councils shall be held at least once every month and the 
quorum of the meetings shall be more than one third. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  confident  that  these  proposed  amendments  to  the  Local 
Government  Act  will  contribute  to  consolidate  grassroots  democracy  and  promote  better 
participation of local Councillors in decision-making at the Local Government level. 

With these few words, I now commend the Bill to the House. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Mr Gayan rose and seconded. 

 

(12.13 p.m.) 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, to us, to me in 

particular, this is another missed opportunity, another occasion ratée. 

The House will remember that the 2000-2005 MMM-MSM Government had voted a 
new Local Government Act in 2003, a new law that was both exemplaire and avant-gardiste 
in terms of Local Government. What the Minister has just said ne correspond pas à la vérité 
historique du tout, that these piecemeal amendments are moving forward, democracy and so 
on. He does not even know the recent past. 

I repeat in 2000-2005, the MMM-MSM Government voted un texte de loi exemplaire, 
avant-gardiste which gave real powers and real autonomy to Local Government Bodies and 
not only that, but which moved national unity a huge step forward by putting urban areas and 
rural areas sur un pied d’égalité. This was a beautiful piece of legislation that we voted in 

 

21 

2003. I do regret, Madam Speaker, that we did the same thing, granting maximum autonomy 
to  Rodrigues.  In  2000-2005,  the  MMM-MSM  Government  gave  maximum  autonomy  to 
Rodrigues. We voted a piece of legislation that set up a regional elected Assembly, a regional 
executive with maximum autonomy. We were wise to put that in the Constitution. 

We amended the Constitution with a three-quarter majority so that other Governments 
could not fiddle with that fundamental piece of legislation to the advantage of our Rodriguan 
brothers  and  sisters.  I  regret  deeply,  but  I  cannot  remember  why  we  did  not  do  the  same 
thing. Of course, we could not put the 2003 Local Government Act in the Constitution, but 
we  could  certainly,  as  in  the  case  of  Rodrigues,  we  did  not  put  the  Rodrigues  Regional 
Assembly Act in the Constitution, but we put l’essentiel of what Rodrigues’ autonomy meant. 
We  could  and  should  have  put  in  the  Constitution  l’essentiel  of  what  Local  Government 
democracy means. I cannot remember honestly why we did it in the case of Rodrigues and 
why we did not do it in the case of Local Government. Maybe we thought there would never 
be a Government like the previous Government that did away with such a beautiful piece of 
legislation to move backwards, decades, if not centuries. L’histoire a retenu cela! 

Never,  a  Government  like  the  previous  Government  that  did  away  with  such  a 
beautiful piece of legislation to move backwards decades, if not centuries. L’histoire a retenu 
cela. If we had put in l’essentiel of what the 2003 Local Government Act contained in terms 
of Local Government, maybe, today’s Bill  would not have come before us; in fact, cosmetic 
amendments to la loi Aimée. 

La loi Aimée was a huge step backwards! Huge step! And we all agreed on that. When 
there was the Remake, we agreed that we would go back to the 2003 Act which was superb 
and, of course, amending what needs to be updated -  not much as far as I am concerned. Not 
much!  Therefore,  il  suffisait  de  prendre  la  loi  de  2003,  de  update  it  and  we  would  have 
corrected  the  democratic  crime  committed  by  the  previous  Government  and  the  Minister 
concerned,  Hervé  Aimée,  instead  of  keeping  the  Aimée  piece  of  legislation  with  cosmetic 
amendments.  C’est  la  vie!  What  the  MSM  had  agreed  to  with  us  when  we  were  in  the 
Remake,  the  same  thing  that  we  agreed  in  the  case  of  Rodrigues,  now  has  been  thrown 
overboard  by  l’Alliance  Lepep  and  la  loi  Aimée  is  kept  intacte  except  for  cosmetic 
amendments. Shame! What a missed opportunity!  

Apart from that, Madam Speaker, it is also sad, I find, that in the case of transfuge 
this piece of legislation before us today simply deletes section 38, subsection (e). I think it is 
probably the only good thing that Aimée tried to do, that is, putting in his legislation a clause 
that  if  somebody  -  the  word  ‘transfuge’  is  not  utilised,  but  the  idea,  at  least  -  becomes  a 

 

22 

transfuge, he loses his seat. It was not perfect, it would not necessarily work, but, at least, the 
intention  was  flagged  de  condamner  le  transfugisme  and  to  provide  that  if  somebody 
becomes a transfuge, he loses his seat. This is done away completely! Totally! There is only 
one paragraph that is related to that, it is section 38, subsection (e) and this is being deleted 
by the Bill before us. Therefore, there is nothing left to compel somebody who becomes a 
transfuge, who is disciplined out of the group which got him elected, this is out.  

This  is  simply  deleted,  Madam  Speaker,  and  I  find  that  rather  sad.  As  I  said,  it  is 
probably the only thing that Minister Aimée did that was, at least, meant to be positive, that 
was at least meant to be good for democracy. It reminds me of the one case - I don’t know if I 
said that here - but it reminds me of something which happened around the (DPP) Director of 
Public  Prosecutions’  issue  where  the  previous  Government  placed  the  DPP’s  office  in  the 
same category as the Judiciary or the President or the Vice President, that is, to well underline 
its independence, as guaranteed by the Constitution. But to well underline that, in practice, 
this is probably one of the very few things that the previous Government did and that I agreed 
with. Quelle ironie that the gouvernement Lepep has hit at that! Now, gouvernement Lepep 
hits not only at that piece of legislation that targeted transfuge or transfuge en puissance, but 
also keeps the Aimée Act instead of replacing it by a new Act that would have been more or 
less  the  same  thing  as  that  Act  that  we  voted  in  2003.  This  is  why  I  say  this  is  another 
occasion ratée and it is a sad day.  To me, it is a very sad day. 

As far as municipal elections are concerned, all we have heard is that elections will be 
held this year. I looked at the estimates and I saw that I think a sum of Rs10 m. is provided in 
the estimates for the first six months of this year and nothing for next year. Of course, Rs10 
m. is not sufficient to organise the municipal elections, we could have put a token vote both 
in the first six months or the second six months, but I don’t know why Government put Rs10 
m. Anyway, elections are coming, everybody agrees with that after what has taken place.  

On a note, Madam Speaker, which I find quite ironical again, I have been amongst 
people who regularly, at every opportunity, have proposed that we ‘grignoter les pouvoirs du 
Premier  ministre’,  because  in  our  system,  nearly  all  powers  are  in  the hands  of  the  Prime 
Minister. We have changed that over the years when we became a Republic, as years went by 
we changed that and we shifted quite a number of responsibilities from the Prime Minister to 
the President. In this case, I agree with what the Bill is doing. Surprisingly, one might say! 
But I agree with what the Bill is doing because Aimée was wrong. Aimée, in his piece of 
legislation,  put  it  that  municipal  elections,  or  rather,  the  date  of  the  regional  elections  is 
decided by the President of the Republic. That is not in order because it should be by the 

 

23 

President  of  the  Republic  on  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister  in  that  case,  not  generally. 
Because, of course, the Prime Minister will take into consideration the budget time, law and 
order issues, visits of foreign dignitaries and so on to advise… 

(Interruptions) 

… the President on a given date. But Aimée, amongst everything else that he got wrong, got 
that also wrong and it went through Parliament. The previous Government had taken that. So, 
I agree, but in that case only, with that part where we are giving back to the Prime Minister 
the power to fix the date, of course, he advises the President, but it is the Prime Minister who 
chooses the date and advises the President.  

Thank you, Madam. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

(12.24 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South  & Port Louis 
Central): Madam Speaker, the Local Government Act 2011 has been one which has indeed 
been surrounded by a number of controversies and has not really been an acclaimed piece of 
legislation.  That  is  true  and  reality  has  shown  that.  I  have,  before  making  my  speech, 
appealed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local  Government  and,  indeed,  it  is  clear  that  given  that 
there  are  the  forthcoming  municipal  elections,  it  is  in  this  context  and we  have  to  bear  in 
mind when we look at the amendments why these amendments are being proposed. 

As  time  went  by,  everything  became  clear  and  what  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local 
Government  has  proposed  goes  at  length  to  redress  some  of  these  pertinent  issues  in  this 
particular context and I stress the context. We cannot, within just three months of taking up 
this Government, come  with a full-fledged, full-blown amendment without studying it and 
working on fundamental and in-depth amendments. That would be erroneous and I believe in 
his pragmatism, the hon. Minister of Local Government has borne that in mind and has stated 
that in due course, necessary amendments will come. 

Let  us  look  at  the  proposed  amendment  in  the  Bill.  As  clearly  set  out  in  the 
Explanatory Memorandum, this Act is being amended to the extent, as I have just said, to 
provide for municipal City Council elections and municipal Town Council elections. When I 
listened to the intervention of the learned hon. Leader of the Opposition, what I sensed in his 
words is a sense of what could have been, should have been, but has not been. That is what 
we have said for the Remake, it was there to have been, but it has not been! This is what I 
detect in his words and this is what I sensed in what he was trying to say. Of course, much 

 

24 

could have been, but something else has been and what has become is here to stay for years 
and years and mandates and mandates, Madam Speaker. 

One of the major flaws being set right by the Bill is the issue of repartition of women 
across  the  wards  within  the  councils.    What  we  have  had  in  the  past  is  that  we  have  had 
indeed mandatory one-third repartition of women per ward.  What has been the end result, 
Madam Speaker?  The end result, when we look at what we have had after the elections, is 
that, out of the 16 female candidates in both major alliances, only five stood elected.  This is 
what has been, in fact, the result of what was the previous law then.  What this amendment 
does?    It  is  aiming  at  striking  the  right  balance.    That  is,  at  the  same  time,  we  are  still 
maintaining the quota of one-third compulsory participation of women as recommended by 
SADC guidelines, but we are simulteanously allowing women to stand as candidate in wards 
where  they  are  much  more  at  ease.  And  this  gives  the  women  candidates  the  required 
flexibility and freedom, that is, to go in constituencies where they feel more at ease.  We have 
to  draw  lessons  from  the  past.    Indeed,  we  must  draw  lessons  from  the  past.    Hon.  Mrs 
Boygah,  yesterday,  in  her  address  to  this  House,  in  her  speech  on  the  Budget,  has  indeed 
appealed on behalf of women folk that the hon. Minister of Local Government should take 
the plight of women and should bear that in mind when coming up with laws.  And indeed, 
this is a direct response to that; this is a direct answer to what in part she has appealed for. 

This  amendment,  indeed,  will  give  an  optimal  chance  to  get  a  maximum  number  of 
female candidates to be elected.  We have to draw lessons from the past.  We have to look at 
the past.  We have, whilst looking at the past, to look forward and see how we can improve. 

I  now  turn  to  the  amendment  concerning  the  reserve  list  to  be  submitted,  that  is,  on 
nomination day.  Once more, Madam Speaker, we have to look at the past. Indeed, when we 
talk about this law, we cannot help looking back and then move forward.  What has recent 
events shown regarding the reserve list provision in the Local Government Act?  It has shown 
that the provision has failed lamentably. How so, Madam Speaker?  What we have had after 
the general elections, we have had a number of former Municipal Councillors being elected 
to this House.  They have stood as Members of Parliament, and once they have done that, 
they have had, including myself, to resign as Councillors as per the provision of the law. 

Fortunately,  but  also  unfortunately,  when  we  look  at  the  Municipal  Council,  we  see 
that, out of the four Municipal Councillors who have been elected, all four are Members of 
this side of the House.  When we have had them replaced on the reserve list, three of them 
have been Members on the other side of this House.  The result, Madam Speaker, is that there 
has been utter pandemonium in our municipal councils and town councils.   

 

25 

Let  us  look  at  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis,  for  instance.  There  has  been  an 
occasion where the Lord Mayor has called a council meeting, and this was not held because 
there has not been enough reflection, there has not been a quorum for him to hold the council.  
We do not want this to happen again.  Moreso, we go further.  What we want is what the 
people want. 

Madam Speaker, the actual system of party list would have been a perfect one, had it 
not been for certain political leaders who go on and off and this affects the partners in the 
alliance.  The end result of the Municipal Council election of 2012 is that it was called off at 
the tune of only one person after some 18 months of election.  We have felt it.  We have felt 
it at Port Louis, Madam Speaker. This political instability by leaders has led on the back of 
elected  Municipal  Councillors  a  total  upheaval  and  uncertainty  in  the  running  of  the  City 
Council  of  Port  Louis.  What  has  happened?  From  experience,  we  have  had  municipal 
councillors’ meeting, we have had our groupement, and what we are saying is: ‘what are we 
do to?’  Follow leaders or follow the will of the people?  At the end of the day, if we want to 
be  at  the  pinnacle  of  democracy,  we  have  to  follow  what  the  people  want,  and  what  this 
provision  does  is  that  it  goes  along  with  the  will  of  the  people  and  it  does  away  with 
someone’s or another’s change of mind.  This amendment is motivated by the well-being of 
our citadins; the citadins of each and every town or council where one is elected, and one has 
to be steadfast in our mandate. 

Once  the  damage  is  done,  that  is,  once  a  councillor  of  one  side  is  replaced  by  a 
councillor of another side, as has happened, what we have is that we have the tune of others 
leading  the  life  of  the  citadins,  and  this  does  not  work.    And  this  is  what  has  led  to  the 
amendments  where  we  want  to  maintain  the  statu  quo.  We  want  the  statu  quo  to  be 
maintained council level, Madam Speaker. 

Now, I turn to the next piece of amendment - and I urge this House to look at this - 
concerning the enlargement for the provision of Deputy Mayors, Deputy Lord Mayors and 
Deputy Chairpersons to committees.  What we had in the past is a provision which provided 
only for a vocation of Mayors, Lord Mayors and Chairpersons.  Clearly, this amendment will 
answer to  a lacuna in our existing law, and  I dare say a lacuna which  has caused a lot of 
distress and panic after the break-up of the ‘Remake’.  Because it was realised by some that 
there was no possibility  of putting a motion of disallowance against the then Deputy  Lord 
Mayor of Port Louis. 

Madam Speaker, we will recall how in a flush of panic on the radio we have heard that 
the Deputy Lord Mayor has stayed in his post in Port Louis “pou sa ti casse là”.  One will 

 

26 

recall that scandalous statement on the radio which stated that he stayed “pou sa ti casse là”.  
That was a very shocking comment which shook everybody, especially, Madam Speaker, in 
the light of the sincerity of that person, the devotion of that person to the City Council of Port 
Louis.  We have lived it; we have experienced it.  He did not stay for the “ti casse”.  He 
stayed for the last two years for the Lord Mayors that had come; he had stood behind them 
like  a  shadow,  assisting  them  in  their  inexperience,  holding  their  hands  to  take  major 
decisions,  holding  their  hands  in  disaster,  accompanying  them  and  advising  them.  We 
recalled the 31st May; we recalled February; we recall the accident at Sorèze.  He was there 
all the time, shadowing Lord Mayors, helping them to take decisions, and stood behind them 
steadfast.  That is why he stayed; for the people, for the Council. 

Now, the law is being amended as it should have been.  That should set some people’s 
mind at rest.  What we have now is that a motion of disallowance can be brought against the 
Deputy Lord Mayor and the Vice-Chairperson. 

Another meaningful  change being presented by  the  Local Government (Amendment) 
Bill is that now owners  and tenants of business  premises - that is all those paying a trade 
licence in the city council and town council - will now be given the opportunity to stand as a 
candidate in that council.  Formerly, the law provided that one had to be registered on the 
electoral roll before that person could stand as a candidate. 

I  commend  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local  Government  for  such  a  proposition.    This, 
indeed, Madam Speaker, allows someone who may not have been a resident, but spends a lot 
of time in Port Louis, is very much concerned in a very particular town - I mean the decisions 
of that town or city - and takes interest, can now participate in the decision of that city.  All 
those amendments that I have talked about, Madam Speaker, goes a long way to show how 
democratic we want to be and how we work along with the will of the people. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

(12.36 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East): 
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been going through this piece of legislation 
that  has  been  brought  in  and  presented,  very  briefly,  by  the  hon.    Minister.  The  speed  at 
which  he  presented  that  piece  of  legislation  explains  that  very  legislation  which  I  was 
expecting would go in line with what is provided for in the electoral manifesto of ‘L’Alliance 
Lepep’. I read here – 

 

27 

« L’administration régionale. Le Local Government Act sera revu pour donner plus 
d’autonomie aux collectivités locales ». 
 Now, when I read this in the manifesto and I heard that there was going to be a Bill 
brought  in  this  august  Assembly  to  change  fundamentally,  process  the  way  of  working  in 
Local  Government,  in  our  municipal  councils,  in  our  district  councils,  I  thought  that,  yes, 
there  would  be  a  piece  of  legislation  brought  here  by  this  new  Government  that  would 
precisely give plus d’autonomie aux collectivités locales.  

In order to do so, this Government would not have been able to have the hon. Minister 
of  Local  Government  present  this  Bill  in  such  an  express  manner  because  the  express 
manner, the rapid manner, the fast manner in which the hon. Minister of Local Government 
has presented this Bill shows, and dictates, without any doubt, that what is contained in this 
Bill  is  nothing  more  and  nothing  less.    And  I  agree  here  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, ‘cosmetic change’. For that, I thank the Government because in the process what 
they are saying is that, fundamentally they agree with the previous laws, as being brought by 
the previous Government. Had they not agreed with the previous law, the changes would not 
have been only cosmetic but would have been in-depth and fundamental.  

(Interruptions) 

That is a fact! And now I understand.  When you look at the changes here, where is it and in 
what clause do we see a fundamental change where you are giving plus d’autonomie? Show 
us in this paragraph! And here, Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister will have to answer later 
on, when he will sum up, where in this Bill do we see plus d’autonomie that is being given. 
Where? I don’t see a single clause therein where plus d’autonomie is being given in anyway. 
There  is  no  change  whatsoever  that  is  being  brought  to  the  autonomy  that  exists.  On  the 
contrary, there is no such change, but, maybe, the answer to my question was not brought in 
by the hon. Minister of Local Government but was brought in by the previous orator.  Maybe, 
she  has  given  us  the  answers  to  the  questions  the  members  of  the  public  are  asking,  the 
members of the municipal and district councils are asking, they are wondering why is it that 
we were told that there would be plus d’autonomie and we were expecting some fundamental 
changes.  Why  is  it,  therefore,  that  those  changes  never  came  up,  never  showed  up?  Most 
probably they would say later on we will come up with it, but the answer came from the hon. 
Member who preceded me and I thank her for that, Madam Speaker. 

It is that there was no time to go into fundamental changes because we had to come 
up with something three months afterwards - she said it. It was not possible, therefore, for 
this  Government  to  go  into  the  fundamental  changes  provided  for  pour  plus  d’autonomie 

 

28 

because three months only is not sufficient - I agree with that.  But it is sad that a promise 
was made and it was not kept. They could have waited. 

They could have waited! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mr Mohamed: They could have waited. And I say it again, they could have waited 
and done a better job, but no, they want to do a half-baked cake. Now, one thing which is of 
utmost  interest  -  I  go  to  the  Constitution  of  this  country  because  we  are  in  this  august 
Assembly, in the temple of democracy. When I go to the Constitution of this country and I 
read, in paragraph 1 – 

“We shall be a sovereign democratic State”. 
Everyone  seems  not  to  want  to  talk  about  that  very  important  section  of  our 

Constitution – 

“(…) a sovereign democratic State.”  

I hear the words of hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus and she is totally right once again; I agree with 
that. And I enjoyed that moment of agreeing with her, when she says –  

 

“If we want to achieve the pinnacle of democracy (…).”   
Beautiful words! 
“(…) we have to do what the people want and not what (…).” 

(Interruptions) 

I  understand  what  she  meant  in-between  the  lines,  not  necessarily  what  leaders  want,  but 
what the people want. We cannot be at the beck and call of leaders, but we should be at the 
service of the people. I agree with her. But if that is the case, then let us go back, therefore, to 
section 1 of the Constitution – 

“We shall be a sovereign democratic State.” 
There was a legislation that was passed in this august Assembly by people elected to 
represent the population of Mauritius in this august Assembly. It was voted First, Second and 
Third Reading; it was made an Act of Parliament, the Local Government Act. You may not 
agree with what is in there, you may not agree with the clauses therein, you may not agree 
with the vision  therein, you may not agree with the vision of ‘Aimée’ found  therein, you 
may  not  agree  with  us  what  we  voted  for,  but  what  is  certain,  we  are  a  democracy  and 
nowhere in there did I see a clause that said: if you do not agree that elections shall be held 

 

29 

some six years from now, that you shall call Parliament again and go against what the people 
have decided to ensure that the legislation is adhered to. I did not see it in that legislation. 

(Interruptions) 

Show me! 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 
Mr Mohamed: We shall hear a lot of noise but we shall not hear reason! 

(Interruptions) 

We shall hear a lot of noise, Madam Speaker, but I cannot hear any reasoning in that noise. 
The only way they can hush my voice down is to make noise! The only way they can stop me 
from talking is to intimidate, but I shall not be intimidated! 
(Interruptions) 

And we hear the noise going on. Where is it that in that Local Government Act… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Not really. Thank you for giving food to my – now we are going to 
talk. Now, there is someone who just said that if a Government comes to Parliament and asks 
for  elections  to  be  postponed,  that  is  undemocratic;  whereas  if  a  Government  asks  that 
election be preponed, that is democratic. There is nothing more nonsensical than that. There 
is nothing more illogical than that reasoning.  

(Interruptions) 

This is illogical. It is the first time in the years that I have practised law that I come to some 
sort of this illuminated type of reasoning. That does not make any sense. 

Now, Madam Speaker, if I am allowed to talk and if I am allowed to speak on the 

(Interruptions) 

debates … 

Madam Speaker: Order, please!  The hon. Minister of Local Government will have 

(Interruptions) 

time to reply! 

Mr Mohamed: I have the impression that some Members of this Government, if you 
have a view that is different to theirs, what they have to do is shut you down and speak you 
down. The impression I have is that if someone in this august Assembly has a different view 
to theirs, we shall not be allowed to express oneself, the only thing that they will do is say 
that you are nonsensical. 

 

30 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  No!  Hon.  Member,  you  cannot  say  that  because  I  am  here  to 

restore order! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank God Madam Speaker is here. Oh, thank God! If you had not 

been here, I would have run away! 

(Interruptions) 

I feel protected by your presence, Madam, I assure you of that. 

Madam Speaker: Let me tell you hon. Member that you cannot be ironical about me 

as well. 

Mr Mohamed: I am honest and far from ironical. I am not here dwelling in irony; on 
the  contrary,  I  say  it  out  loud,  Madam  Speaker,  I  feel  secure  in  giving  my  views,  in 
expressing myself precisely.  Because, Madam Speaker, you are here and I say it out loud and 
I feel that I should say this is what I feel.  
 
But what I would like to say here is: show me in the Act brought in by Mr Aimée, if 
you do not agree with the contents therein, do you go against what the people have done?  
They have voted in the last elections. That’s the thing! Can anyone deny what I say?  That 
people went to elections and those elections saw the defeat of the Labour Party at municipal 
level? That’s the truth? The MMM and MSM controlled the majority of Municipal Councils, 
that  is  a  fact!  The  legislator  provided  for  situations;  in  situations  where  what  happens, 
democracy is there; you do not simply come to Parliament and say: “Well, we are just going 
to bring elections, prepone it!”  It is as worse as postponing it because it goes contre le vœu 
de  l’électorat.  That’s  a  fact!  That  is  a  fact,  whether  we  like  it  or  not!  The  legislator  has 
provided for solutions in the eventuality that there is a problem at the level of the Municipal 
Council.  That is a fact!  

The  preceding  orator  said  we  have  talked  about  the  pinnacle  of  democracy. 
Democracy means that we cannot, simply because we have a majority, come to Parliament 
and  say,  the  people,  yes,  we  agree  there  were  elections,  they  came  up  with  results,  those 
results  are  clear,  no  one  challenged  it  in  any  Court  or  before  any  tribunal  or  before  any 
institution. There are Members who have been elected to do their job democratically, la voix 
du peuple. And, this time, the same party that calls itself this organisation, l’Alliance Lepep 
goes against what the people had decided and changes what the people had decided. 

The people have never mandated this Government to change. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

Show me where… 

31 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Mohamed: The question, therefore, begs to be answered: “Has the people of this 

country mandated this Government to prepone the Municipal Elections?” 

(Interruptions) 

Where? Is it in your manifeste électoral? Show me where it is in the manifeste électoral of 
l’Alliance Lepep that you said to the people during the election campaign: “we will prepone 
the Municipal Elections”. Never was this said to the people. The first time that it is being said 
was after the general elections. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr  Mohamed:  It  would  have  been  simple,  and  this  I  am  talking  au  nom  d’un 
principe; le principe that if we are a sovereign democratic State, we cannot, therefore, abuse 
our  position  as  Parliamentarians  to  come  here  and  change  what  the  people  decided.  We 
cannot! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, I said! 
Mr Mohamed: So, as I said, these are simple, les simples propositions what emanate 
from section 1 of the Constitution. People may say that section 1 of the Constitution means 
democracy whereby  you can come here and change, but what I am saying here is that the 
people  have  decided  that  it  shall  go  on  until  a  certain  date  and  le  vœu  du  peuple  is  being 
modified.  I  am  wrong,  it  is  not  being  modified;  it  is  being  violated.  It  is  being  violated, 
violated in the name of  the alleged democracy!  And last time,  I  checked to  give  a further 
explanation to my point of view. Let’s look at what is proposed!  

Now,  instead  of  ensuring  that  there  are  no  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  what  is 
being proposed by those who will one day represent us and les citadins or people who live in 
villages, in District Councils or Municipal Councils, what I read is - 

“That the chairperson or a member of the governing body of a statutory corporation or 
an  organisation  wholly  funded  by  the  State  may  stand  as  a  candidate  at  a  local 
government election.”  
Now,  people  say:  “Well,  you  know,  it  was  like  that  once  upon  a  time,  so,  there  is 
nothing wrong in going back to what it was like before.” I thought we were moving forward. 

 

32 

I thought that the whole object of this new Government was precisely to leave the dirt of the 
past,  that  they  say  so  proudly,  to  change,  to  move  forward,  but  this  is  simply  a  simple 
straightforward example of how people move backward. Would there not, in this particular 
situation - imagine you are a Chairperson of the Central Electricity Board; imagine you are 
the Chairperson of the Central Water Authority; imagine that those people or even members 
on that Board will now be able to be Councillors, would that not create potential conflicts of 
interest? What do we do then when there are potential conflicts of interest; then we are going 
to say: “Well, wait a minute, we did not think about it or we did not think it would really 
happen!”  Or are we going to simply brush it under the carpet, or maybe, I am so naive that I 
did not realise the real design of this Government. The real design of this Government is they 
do not want to go back to the situation where Members of Parliament, their candidates could 
have  been,  they  could  have  decided  to  go  back  where  Members  of  Parliament  could  have 
been candidates in the Municipal Elections. They could have done that. They decided to go 
against that.  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, I heard you.  Maybe they are scared, but my question is maybe 
this is the way to ensure not only that the jobs for the boys, as Chairpersons, they go on and 
have  additional  money  now  as  Councillors.  Therefore,  double  money!  This  is  one  way.  
Instead  of  ensuring  that  there  is  more  democracy,  instead  of  ensuring  that  there  is  more 
autonomy, what you are doing is ensuring that the boys and girls, comme l’honorable Ivan 
Collendavelloo avait dit récemment: people who are close to us will get the jobs. We decide 
people who are close to us, who are going to get the jobs that are important, people who are 
close to us will get the benefit of our generosity, because we are not in the Government of 
Mauritius, but we are in the Government of l’Alliance Lepep. Is that democracy? Tell us, is 
this democracy? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, this is a sad day for democracy. 

True it is, Madam Speaker,… 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

33 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I am only one voice in this august Assembly. It is 
true that through a lot of ladies and gentlemen here, they have got louder voices than I have, 
and can easily cover me up. 

(Interruptions) 

But I am not only one voice because out there, the people who are brought in here into power 
are watching and, right now, if they are to believe that the honeymoon period is still on, they 
are worse than mistaken. The honeymoon period they enjoyed is over, dead and  gone and 
buried. Right now, what I am saying, Madam Speaker, is the simple thing: le vœu du peuple, 
as  a  matter  of  principle,  must  be  respected.  What  this  Government  is  doing  by  preponing 
Municipal Elections is just a sham, a sham in order to pretend to be democratic, but they are 
far from it. What they are doing is being autocratic. 

Thank you very much. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Order!  Order!  I  will  now  suspend  the  sitting  for  one  and  a  half 

hours for lunch. 

At 12.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.32 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Duval! 

The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications 
(Mr X. L. Duval): Madam Speaker, I will say a few words on this Bill being presented this 
afternoon by my colleague, hon. Dr. Husnoo.  

I listened, of course, with a lot of interest to what hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus had to 
say and I thank her for her very good speech.  I listened also to hon. Shakeel Mohamed.  He 
had nothing much to say, but he said it very well.  

(Interruptions) 

And, of course, I listened to the hon. Leader of the Opposition and I think he has, at least, one 
major point wrong and I will take that in a moment.   

Madam  Speaker,  we  should  not  mistake  this  piece  of  legislation,  this  Bill,  with  the 
major reform that l’Alliance Lepep wants to bring to the Local Government.  They are not the 

 

34 

same things and we should not mistake or pretend not to understand.  This is not the same 
thing.  We know, Madam Speaker, that reform of Local Government must take account of a 
number  of  issues:  accountability  towards  the  electors;  accountability  towards  the  Central 
Government; the autonomy - how much autonomy should a local authority have in deciding 
its own affairs.  I am the first to agree that there is too many ministerial interventions in the 
present Act.   

Financing, Madam Speaker, how do we finance local authorities?  And I will come to 
that in a moment. And, of course, how does a local authority relate to its parent Ministry in 
Central  Government  and  also  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for 
funding.  

This  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  has  17  clauses.    It  is  obvious,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the 
clauses that we are presenting today - changing the Local Government Act - deal basically 
with representation, how will people live in the towns basically.  We are not really dealing 
with District Councils or Village Councils; how people living in Municipalities are going to 
be represented in the local authority. That is what this Bill is dealing with. Who may stand; 
how many Councillors do we have; what is going to happen to the reserve list, etc.  So, it 
deals with representations.  The rest of the reforms that l’Alliance Lepep wants to bring and 
we had not included them in the 12 actions that we had set out for the first three months.  So, 
there is no rush.  We are not rushing because we are just over the three months.  No!  It is not 
in the first series of actions that we had envisaged, but this is coming along.  Why? I think it 
is  a  good  question  also:  “Are  we  bringing  this  Bill  dealing  with  representations?”  I  think, 
again, Madam Speaker, the answer is fairly obvious because we have an unhealthy situation 
at  the  level  of  many  of  the  local  authorities  basically  the  Municipalities.  There  are  five 
Municipalities;  three  of  these  Municipalities  are  being  operated  by  a  Mayor  who  does  not 
have a majority.   

For  instance,  if  you  take  Port  Louis,  I  think  the  Mayor  from  the  MMM  has  8 
Councillors  in  all  vis-a-vis  a  total  of  24.  The  quorum  is  12.  So,  he  does  not  even  have  a 
quorum  to  run  his  Council.    There  is  a  problem  of  how  do  you  manage,  how  do  you  get 
effective Local Government in a Council that has a Mayor in a minority and that cannot even 
ensure that basic regulations are passed, basic actions are taken when he does not even have a 
quorum  to  run  his  Municipality.  So,  that  is  why  this  Bill  is  being  presented.  It  is  being 
presented  so  that  at  a  convenient  time,  elections  may  be  envisaged  to  put  order  in  the 

 

35 

Municipality. That is the whole point of this Bill, so that elections may be effected to put 
order.  Once  the  elections  are  effected,  we  will  come  with  a  more  important  piece  of 
legislation, but we want to do it democratically. Once the Councillors have been elected, we 
would talk to them, we would sit with them and we would see what sort of amendments, what 
sort of local authority is required and we will have, hopefully, a consensus between Central 
Government and the newly elected Councillors about the way to go. There are many things 
that need to be changed. So, the consultations will be after the elections and, as we know, the 
Bill, if passed today, will allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister effectively to decide on the date 
for the new elections. 

I was a little surprised by what hon. Mohamed said. I think we were all surprised that, 
in fact, postponing of elections is democratic, but giving power back to the people to vote, is 
actually undemocratic.  This is a very unusual  way of  putting things  and  I think it is quite 
silly.    Really!    In  fact,  after  the  general  elections,  a  break-up  of  both  coalitions  that  had 
contested the Municipal Elections, have made meaningless, in any way, the votes that people 
had effected some time ago. Not only that, to complicate matters, one party has lost quite a 
few - in Port Louis, etc. - of its Councillors. That complicates matters even more. And God 
knows whether there will be more to come. I do not know. But this complicates matters even 
more  in  the  Local  Authority.  So,  the  votes  that  were  cast,  sometimes  may  go  through  the 
Municipal Elections, basically, meaningless, because the alliances have broken and nobody 
can say who voted for whom in the PMSD-Labour Party alliance at the time or the MMM-
MSM alliance at the time. It is all gone topsy-turvy, Madam Speaker. 

So, far from being a missed opportunity, this Bill enables the elections to happen and 
enables us to bring, in consensus with the newly elected Councillors, a new Bill with a new 
vision  for  Local  Government,  plus  d’autonomie  and  less  powers  of  the  Minister.  I  would 
myself like to see that, but then there should have to be consensus amongst the majority here. 
If you look at the law, if you are going to revoke a permit of someone who has a market stall, 
you have to go back to Central Government and ask permission from the Minister. That does 
not make sense. I mean, this sort of power is ridiculous and we have to get rid of it. At the 
same time, if you want to close a road, you have to ask for a permission from the Ministry of 
Local Government. 

Other  things  which  affect  the  dynamism  of  the  Local  Authority  like  getting  into  a 
joint  venture,  like  doing  things  novel,  you  have  to  go  back  all  the  time  to  Central 
Government. I would say that some powers need to be kept, especially when we take into 

 

36 

account that about 70% of the running expenses of the Municipality are met by the Central 
Government.  The taxpayers pay this, obviously, to the Consolidated Fund and someone has 
to look after and see that this money is not wasted, Madam Speaker. 

We are told that the 2003 - I was not, obviously, in that alliance - law was so fantastic 
that it was never promulgated, Madam Speaker. So, I cannot say why. They will say why. 
But surely then, there is some sort of contradiction in having the best law in the world and not 
to  promulgate  it,  but  history  will  tell  us,  eventually,  why  that  law  was  not  promulgated, 
perhaps it was not. I would expect that good after all. 

Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, I think a number of things will need to be looked at 
in  the  new  legislation.  One  of  the  things  that  I  have  been  concerned  with,  has  been  the 
discrepancy in the grant-in-aid to the various Municipalities and District Councils. It is wide 
discrepancy, it is historical, it happens like this. There is no sense in how the grant-in-aid is 
allocated anymore, it is historical. I mean, last year, you got some money, this year it will be 
a  bit  more  or  a  bit  less  at  the  whims  of  the  Central  Government.  So,  I  would  like  to  see, 
Madam Speaker, in conjunction with the new legislation, a fairer way of allocating grant-in-
aid. 

I will take some examples for you, Madam Speaker. If you take Port Louis, Port Louis 
gets  a  subsidy  from  Central  Government  of  Rs3,500  per  annum,  per  capita.  If  you  take 
Vacoas, it gets Rs2,700.  I think Vacoas is better run. So, Vacoas needs less money, probably, 
from  the  Central  Government.  But  that  is  not  a  reason  to  penalise  people  from  Vacoas. 
Maybe they should have more amenities because their Local Council is better run. If you take 
Black River, it gets Rs3,500 per capita, per year, but where I live in Pamplemousses, Madam 
Speaker, it is only Rs1,400 per capita. Something is wrong; something needs to be looked at. 

So, we are not only talking about the Bill, but we are talking about the money that 
will make that law come true. Give the autonomy that is required, reward good administration 
and penalise bad administration where there is bad administration. So, that is also something, 
Madam Speaker, that we need to look at, that is the whole question of financing of  Local 
Authority.  You  would  be  surprised,  Madam  Speaker,  to  know  that  the  taxpayers,  as  I 
mentioned,  actually  subsidise  Port  Louis  to  the  tune  of  70%  of  its  annual  expenses, 
nevertheless, we subsidise 70% amounting to Rs3,500 per capita, yet Pamplemousses does 
not raise a cent from its own people, because there are only trade fees, whereas Port Louis 
will raise general rates on all the population in Port Louis, whereas Pamplemousses does not 

 

37 

raise  any  rate  from  its  population.  Pamplemousses  gets  Rs1,400,  runs  a  decent  District 
Council and Port Louis more than twice, at the same time, raises rates. That shows, in fact, 
that there may be a lot of wastage in the system; there may be a lot of inefficiency in the 
system that needs to be looked at. But, anyway, this is another debate and I would not go too 
much into it. 

Madam Speaker, I mentioned about the democracy a bit.  It is now going to be at the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister’s  discretion  and  I  think  that  it  is  a  good  thing.  We  won’t  have 
elections every six years, we should have them every six years, we have maintained the six-
year interval, but we are providing for some flexibility should there be something in the next 
six years that will arise, that will cause us to have to bring forward the elections and this is 
the same thing, basically, at the National Assembly.  We will have it every five years or at 
such time as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister decides. I hope it is not going to be too soon, but that 
is another thing.  

Madam Speaker, we are increasing the number of Councillors from 3 to 4, because we 
feel that it gives us a better chance to fairly represent each ward and to offer candidates who 
have  the  right  experience;  the  right  sort  of  candidates,  Madam  Speaker.  That  is  why  we 
thought that 3 candidates per ward is too restrictive. We are giving more flexibility, as my 
colleague  mentioned.  Obviously,  we  cannot  have  one  third  or  four  in  every  ward.  So,  we 
have to change it.  But we have changed it for the better, that is, now you will have to get one 
third of the whole council area. For each alliance or party presenting more than two people, 
we must have a third woman or man, but not the same. What that means, in fact, is that you 
will have your normal nomination day. The nomination day will close at 3 o’clock and from 
3  o’clock  to,  let’s  say,  4  or  5  o’clock,  whatever  will  be  discussed  with  the  Electoral 
Commissioner, there will be some time for you to bring corrections if, for instance, you find 
that an alliance or a party has not submitted the third that is required by law. Say for some 
reason, in one ward one female candidate has not shown up, then, you may have less than the 
one  third  that  is  required  per  council  area.  So,  you  will  have  some  time  to  add  another 
candidate  there  and  make  a  change  after  closure  of  the  nomination  day.  I  just  wanted  to 
mention that. It is a little bit of more complication than usual, but that was necessary to allow 
this to happen. 

Madam Speaker, as you know, we are allowing tenants and owners also to take part.  
Obviously, they will not be able to vote this time, but they will be able to take part in the 
election. One reason why we are allowing chairpersons and members of parastatal bodies - 

 

38 

board members, but not employees - to stand is to increase the quality of candidates that are 
available at election. It is not because we are desperate for another Rs9,000 for our people or 
something like that! That is quite ridiculous! But it is, in fact, because we find that many of 
the  very  able  people  are  naturally  given  a  chance  to  serve  on  boards  and  as  chairpersons. 
These able persons then are restricted from serving as an elected councillor.  So, that is why it 
is increasing the pool of able people who are able to stand in any election. I think it is a good 
thing that this is happening. We are maintaining the fact that Members of Parliament will not 
be  allowed  to  stand  because  we  feel  that  there  should  not  be  over  politicisation  of  our 
municipalities. I assure you, Madam Speaker, there are many Members here who are dying to 
stand as candidates! 

(Interruptions) 

Given the ‘batter boeuf’ that was  given  recently! But they  will be a little bit disappointed 
with this provision. 

A novelty, Madam Speaker, is that each candidate now will have to disclose if he is a 
member of an alliance and which party he belongs to. That is new and that is a good thing, I 
think. There is more transparency. At the same time, the reserve list will now be provided by 
each party so that if a member of a party resigns or loses his seat, it will be a member from 
the same party who will replace him. At the moment, the reserve list is mixed, it is a whole 
mess when someone actually resigns or loses his seat. That is going to change. 

I  must  say,  before  I  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  that,  I  think,  if  I  understood  the 
Leader  of  the  Opposition  rightly  when  he  mentioned  that  we  are  doing  away  with 
transfugisme, that is not with the control or restriction on transfugisme entirely, that is not 
true. What we are maintaining is - and if you look at section 37 (3) of the main Act, you will 
see that we have not touched that section. This is where the Leader of the Opposition, I think, 
is wrong. We have not touched that section. If you yourself resign from your party, from your 
group, as it is said in the law, you will lose your seat as a councillor. This remains. What is 
being  taken  out  is  that  if  you  are  expelled  from  your  party  -  let  us  take  the  case  of  hon. 
Barbier, if it was for Parliament, for instance, he would have lost his seat completely now if 
that same law had applied to this Assembly. We think that is unfair. We think that instead of 
being democratic, it, in fact, encourages dictatorship of the party in that if you do not follow 
the party line completely, at any time your party expels you and when you are expelled, you 
lose your seat also as a councillor.  

As  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local  Government,  mentioned,  there  are,  at 
least, 10 cases in Court where people are disputing this because they think it is undemocratic. 

 

39 

They have had a fight with their party, but they have not had a fight with the electors. This is 
going to change. If you expel someone now, he will remain as a councillor, but if he resigns 
voluntarily thinking that he will go and join another group, then he will lose his seat. I wanted 
to bring that clarification following what the Leader of the Opposition had mentioned. 

The last thing, Madam Speaker, concerns the quorum.  As I mentioned, quite a few 
councils are running with councillors less even than the quorum because the quorum is quite 
high  at  50%  and  that  can  cause  paralysis  of  councils.    We  don’t  want  that,  so  it  is  being 
brought down to one third of the councillors who will now form a quorum.  

Madam Speaker, this is what I would like to say, in fact, on this Bill. I think it is a 
step  forward  to  allow  better  and  fairer  representation  of  our  councils  and  rendez-vous  est 
donné, Madam, for the next step. Once we win the elections, we will go for the municipal 
elections, we will have the discussions with the new councillors and we will come forward 
with a Bill that is avant-gardiste and democratic and bring the councils of Mauritius to the 
third millennium.  

Thank you very much. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 
Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente, le ministre des administrations régionales, je dois dire, a raté une occasion en or 
d’entrer  dans  l’histoire  des  collectivités  locales  à  Maurice.  En  effet,  il  est  fort  dommage, 
Madame la présidente, qu’au lieu de venir avec  une nouvelle loi, il a choisi l’option de la 
facilité  avec  quelques  amendements  cosmétiques,  comme  je  l’avais  moi-même  anticipé,  et 
d’ailleurs mentionné lors de mon intervention, tout récemment, sur le budget.  

Ce n’est un secret pour personne, Madame la présidente, dans cette Chambre combien 
la loi de 2011 est rétrograde et centralisatrice. Et au lieu d’apporter plus de démocratie dans 
la  gestion  des  affaires  des  villes  et  des  villages,  cette  loi  de  2011  bafoue,  en  toutes 
circonstances la démocratie régionale. Dans ces circonstances, il était important de doter les 
administrations  régionales  d’une  nouvelle  loi  pour  assurer  une  vraie  autonomie  aux 
municipalités et aux conseils de districts. 

J’ai écouté les commentaires de l’honorable Madame Jadoo-Jaunbocus par rapport au 
manque de quorum dans les municipalités et, en particulier, à la Municipalité de Port Louis. 
Madame  la  présidente,  n’est-ce  pas  le  devoir  de  tous  les  élus  –  quel  que  soit  leur  bord 
politique - d’être présents à chaque réunion du conseil? Qui est à blâmer si les conseillers ne 
répondent pas présents aux réunions? Mais ce sont les conseillers eux-mêmes! Ils ont été élus 
pour servir et je pense qu’ils devraient être présents dans les réunions afin de pouvoir prendre 

 

40 

les  décisions  qui  s’imposent.  D’ailleurs,  ce  cas  de  figure  peut  encore  se  reproduire  même 
après les prochaines élections. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  rappeler  à  la  Chambre  qu’une  vraie  démocratie 
locale commence d’abord par une politique qui vise à transformer également les conseils de 
districts  en  municipalités.  Cela,  bien  sûr,  dans  le  but  de  permettre  à  tous  les  citoyens, 
indépendamment de leur région, d’être sur le même pied d’égalité et de participer pleinement 
au processus de décentralisation des pouvoirs. Ce qui n’est, bien sûr, pas le cas actuellement. 
Le  ministre  des  Administrations  Régionales  a  donc  choisi  de  venir  avec  des 
amendements, mais là encore il a raté une autre occasion de passer de la parole aux actes. 
Lors  de  son  intervention  durant  les  débats  sur  le  programme  gouvernemental,  il  avait  lui-
même indiqué, entre autres, et je cite –  

“We  will  amend  the  Local  Government  Act  to  consolidate  democracy  at  the  local 
level and to promote better participation of local councillors in the management of 
community affairs.” 
Je  me  demande,  Madame  la  présidente,  comment  la  démocratie  est-elle  consolidée 
 
dans les amendements que nous propose l’honorable ministre? Et je considère non seulement 
que le ministre a  choisi de conserver tous les pouvoirs que lui confère la loi de 2011, ces 
amendements  viennent  aussi,  à  mon  avis,  faire  la  promotion  du  transfugisme  malgré  les 
assurances données par l’honorable Duval que tel ne sera pas le cas. Donc, je dis bravo pour 
la démocratie ! 

Madame la présidente, il est clair que ces amendements n’ont pas été motivés dans un 

esprit de consolider la démocratie à travers les collectivités locales. 

Je tiens pour preuve l’amendement qui sera apporté à la section 16 de la loi, qui va 
désormais permettre aux nominés politiques - d’autres avant moi l’ont également souligné - 
siégeant dans les conseils d’administration d’être candidats. 

Madame la présidente, un tel amendement démontre à quel point, malheureusement, 
ce  gouvernement  ne  pense  qu’à  protéger  ses  petits  copains,  déjà  bien  lotis  -  et  copines, 
comme me le rappelle mon collègue l’honorable Baloomoody - au sein de divers organismes 
gouvernementaux.  Et  d’ailleurs,  l’honorable  Shakeel  Mohamed  avant  moi  l’avait  aussi 
souligné, et cela, bien sûr, avec des risques de conflits d’intérêts qui existent bel et bien. 

Dans la foulée, nous constatons que le ministre vient aussi avec un amendement qui 

met au grand jour la méfiance entre les différents partenaires au sein de ce gouvernement. 

En effet, la section 18, Madame la présidente, de la loi de 2011, fera de la place à une 
série  de  sous-sections  qui  va  obliger  un  candidat  d’une  alliance  d’indiquer  tout  d’abord  le 

 

41 

nom de son parti. En d’autres mots, le candidat en question ne sera pas celui de l’alliance 
avant tout, mais le candidat du parti auquel il appartient et qui fait partie de l’alliance. Il est 
aussi stipulé que chaque parti au sein d’une alliance – 

(Interruptions) 

C’est mon interprétation! Si vous n’êtes pas d’accord, c’est à vous de répondre après moi à 
travers le ministre de collectivités locales. 

Il est aussi stipulé, comme je l’ai dit, Madame la présidente, que chaque parti au sein 

d’une alliance aura la possibilité d’avoir son propre ‘Reserve List’. 

Donc,  Madame  la  présidente,  si  ce  n’est  pas  un  manque  de  confiance  entre  les 
partenaires de l’alliance gouvernementale, je me demande alors ce que c’est ! Le ministre a 
évoqué dans cette même Chambre le 26 février dernier, et je cite – 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mr Quirin:  
“We shall definitely not reinvent the wheel when we will debate the model of local 
democracy  in  Mauritius,  but  we  will  definitely  attempt  at  finding  a  model  of 
democracy which, we hope in the present time, would best suit the aspirations of our 
population and the local communities.” 

Mais au lieu d’aller dans le sens de son discours, l’honorable ministre a préféré conserver 
tous ses pouvoirs de décision au détriment d’un conseil démocratiquement élu. 

Oui, Madame la présidente, malgré les amendements à cette section de la loi, c’est 
toujours le ministre qui détient le pouvoir, par exemple, de révoquer un maire ou son adjoint 
suite à une motion de ‘no confidence’ du conseil. 

Comment  croire  que  ce  gouvernement  veut  apporter,  voire  renforcer  la  démocratie 
locale, quand le ministre des Administrations Régionales, lui-même, vient légaliser et justifier 
le transfugisme. 

Madame la présidente, les sections 38, 39 et 40 seront amendées afin de permettre à 
un  élu  de  conserver  son  siège  au  sein  d’un  conseil  malgré  le  fait  qu’il  change  de  parti  en 
cours de route. Ça c’est mon interprétation. Il est clair comme l’eau de roche que c’est une 
démarche vicieuse de la part de ce gouvernement.  Cet amendement sera sans aucun doute 
une arme dans la main du gouvernement pour inciter, si besoin est, des élus d’autres partis à 
cross the floor. 

Madame  la  présidente,  faut-il  en  rire  ou  en  pleurer  quand  le  ministre  des 
Administrations Régionales n’a trouvé comme parade pour justifier cet amendement que des 

 

42 

supposés cas devant la justice de certains conseillers qui auraient perdu leur siège suite à leur 
départ de leur parti! Et il le dit lui-même. 

“Pretty soon, we will be coming with major changes in this Act, and you know the 
Local Government Act 2011 is very undemocratic.  Any councillor who disagrees with 
his group or party can be expelled, and he or she will automatically lose his or her 
seat.” 

Avait-il indiqué dans son intervention lors des débats sur le budget. 

Madame la présidente, je dois souligner que je n’ai cependant rien constaté de tel dans 
aucune  municipalité.  Visiblement,  ce  gouvernement  a  une  drôle  de  conception  de  la 
démocratie régionale. Pourtant, Madame la présidente, la démocratie locale ou régionale peut 
se définir comme le pouvoir de décision transféré dans certains domaines de compétences par 
un  État  à  une  collectivité 
locale  ou  régionale  dotées  elles-mêmes  d’institutions 
démocratiques.  Or,  les  amendements  proposés  ne  sont  qu’un  ensemble  incohérent.  Pour 
preuve, la proposition du ministre des collectivités locales sur la fréquence des réunions des 
conseils municipaux ou de districts ! 

La section 45 sera amendée pour que les réunions du conseil se tiennent chaque mois, 
donc  une  fois  par  mois,  au  lieu  de  chaque  quinzaine.  C’est  une  incompréhension  totale, 
Madame  la  présidente,  quand  on  connaît  le  volume  de  travail  abattu  et  les  nombreuses 
décisions qui doivent être prises et ratifiées par le conseil. 

Aujourd’hui,  les  conseils  municipaux  et  de  districts  font  face  à  un  nombre 
incalculable de demandes et de requêtes, que ce soit de la part des habitants, des associations 
de jeunesse, des clubs de sports, de 3ème âge ou d’autres secteurs d’activités.  

Comment voulez-vous que des décisions soient prises dans le meilleur délai tout en 
assurant  un  service  efficient  alors  que  le  conseil  n’est  autorisé  à  se  réunir  qu’une  fois  par 
mois ? 

Est-ce de cette façon qu’on va rendre nos municipalités plus efficaces ? L’honorable 
Xavier Duval qui a présidé le comité ministériel avait pourtant affirmé, lors des débats sur le 
Local Government Bill en 2011, et je vais citer quelques phrases rapidement de son discours 
– 

 “I remember the time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when for a permit you had to wait for 
the committee to meet.  Maybe, you would have to wait for the full council to meet, 
and that might take one month or two months.  God knows how long you would have 
to wait.  This is not on these days; end of 2011 and beginning 2012.  There is need for 

 

43 

quick decision-making and the fact the council will have to meet, at least, every two 
weeks is fantastic.” 

Voilà l’honorable Xavier Duval qui s’est émerveillé en 2011 … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order now! 
Mr  Quirin:  …avec  le  changement  permettant  aux  conseils  de  se  réunir  chaque 
quinzaine, et c’est lui-même qui préside le comité ministériel et qui cette fois ramène ce délai 
à un mois, Madame la présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Je  laisse  le  choix  à  tout  un  chacun  de  tirer  ses  propres  conclusions.  Donc,  Madame  la 
présidente,  au  lieu  de  favoriser  une  gestion  plus  saine  et  plus  efficiente  des  collectivités 
locales, le ministre lui-même vient, pas le biais de ces amendements, fragiliser le système. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  ne  pourrais  terminer  sur  ce  dossier  sans  évoquer  les 
aberrations de la loi de 2011 qui n’ont pas été prises en considération dans les amendements 
qui nous sont proposés aujourd’hui. Et je sais de quoi je parle, Madame la présidente, ayant 
été moi-même membre et maire du conseil municipal de Beau Bassin-Rose Hill. 

Lors des débats sur la loi Aimée en 2011, j’avais attiré l’attention de la Chambre sur 
l’excès de pouvoir qui se trouve entre les mains du ministre des Administrations Régionales. 
Nous constatons que le nouveau ministre a jalousement conservé tous ces pouvoirs - 
absolument tous ces pouvoirs - un peu comme ces enfants qui ne veulent pas partager leurs 
jouets.  Plus  d’une  cinquantaine  de  fois  le  mot  ‘Minister’  est  mentionné  dans  la  loi.  C’est 
pourquoi  je  considère  à  nouveau,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  les  statuts  du  ministre  des 
Administrations Régionales, en vertu de la loi, sont ceux d’un super maire. 

Tout laisse croire que ce gouvernement, comme l’ancien du reste, est obsédé par la 
centralisation,  puisque  les  nouveaux  conseils  qui  seront  en  place  une  fois  les  élections 
terminées n’auront toujours pas de marge de manœuvre. 

Madame la présidente, c’est le ministre qui a le dernier mot sur tout. Sur ce point, rien 
n’a changé, y compris en ce qui concerne, par exemple, les décisions du Permit and Business 
Monitoring Committee où le ministre conserve un droit de regard sur toutes les décisions et 
les recommandations faites pas ce comité. 

Il serait bon aussi, Madame la présidente, de partager avec les honorables membres de 
cette auguste Assemblée quelques commentaires qu’avaient faits les députés du MSM, alors 

 

44 

dans  l’opposition,  lors  des  débats  sur  le  Local  Government  Bill  en  2011.    Et  dire  qu’eux-
aussi,  à  l’époque,  avait  qualifié  cette  loi  de  centralisatrice  et  je  cite  l’honorable  Pravind 
Jugnauth qui, malheureusement, n’est pas parmi nous – 

“(...)  This  Local  Government  Bill  porte  l’empreinte  d’un  accaparement  de 

pouvoirs (…).» 

Compared  to  the  Local  Government  Act  of  2003,  there  was  at  least  some 

decentralisation of powers to local authorities. 

Faisant aussi référence à la section 117 de la loi, “Application for Building and Land 

Use Permit”,  l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth  disait  ceci, et je cite –  

«Toutes les applications vont venir sur la table du ministre. Ce n’est pas lui 
qui va décider, bien sûr, mais il aura un droit de regard sur toutes les applications and 
he can intervene also because the subsection gives him the right to intervene into such 
applications ».  
Madame la présidente, actuellement au gouvernement on pouvait s’attendre à ce qu’il 
recommande à son collègue, ministre des Collectivités Locales, d’amender les clauses de la 
loi  qui  sont  anti-démocratiques  et  trop  centralisatrices,  ou  carrément  lui  recommander  de 
venir avec une nouvelle loi. 

À mon grand étonnement, il n’en est rien. Je laisse le soin encore une fois à tout un 
chacun de tirer ses propres conclusions. Par la même occasion, Madame la présidente, je me 
pose la question pour savoir quel a été le rôle du ministre des Collectivités Locales au sein du 
comité ministériel, présidé par l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, Leader du PMSD. 

Il est bon aussi de rappeler, Madame la présidente, que l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth 

- encore lui – avait aussi mentionné lors de ces mêmes débats, en 2011, et je cite – 

« Maintenant  nous  avons  le  règne  du  Parti  Travailliste  et  du  PMSD,  et 

l’image des Collectivités Locales est déjà salie. » 

Voilà  ce  qu’avait  affirmé  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth!  Comprenne  qui  pourra! 

Dois-je aussi rappeler à cette Chambre … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, allow the hon. Member to proceed! 
Mr Quirin : Dois-je aussi rappeler à cette Chambre, Madame la présidente, que les 
amendements  proposés  constituent  aussi  une  atteinte  à  la  démocratie  dans  ce  pays ?  La 
section  11  sera  amendée  afin  que  les  élections  se  tiennent  en  2015.  Or,  nous  savons  tous, 
Madame la présidente, que les élections au niveau des Collectivités Locales ont eu lieu en 
décembre 2012 et que l’échéance arrive à terme qu’en décembre 2018, donc, pour un mandat 

 

45 

de six ans. On peut se poser la question pourquoi le gouvernement s’empresse à venir bafouer 
la  démocratie  avec  des  amendements  à  l’emporte-pièce,  alors  qu’il  dispose  du  temps 
nécessaire pour venir avec une nouvelle loi digne de notre République. 

Kan pas comprend reste tranquille ! 

(Interruptions) 

La démocratie régionale suppose l’existence d’un niveau d’autorité régionale, dotée 
d’organes de décision démocratiquement élus, librement organisés et bénéficiant d’une large 
autonomie et de moyens suffisants, eu égard à leurs responsabilités dans l’exercice de leurs 
fonctions. Certains pays, Madame la présidente, notamment en Europe, ont fait des avancées 
considérables  à  ce  niveau.  Ils  ont  même  des  Chartes  sur  la  démocratie  régionale  et  la 
démocratie participative. 

J’avoue  ma  très  grande  déception  devant  le  peu,  sinon  aucune,  considération  de  ce 
gouvernement  sur  cette  question.  Madame  la  présidente,  les  amendements  qui  nous  sont 
proposés  ne  sont  que  cosmétiques,  voire  un  brin  vicieux,  taillés  sur  mesure  pour  le 
gouvernement en place. Rien de plus! 

 Je vous remercie. 

 (3.11 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  have 
listened carefully to both sides of the House and I would like to thank the hon. Members who 
have taken part in this debate.  

Firstly, I would like to answer the hon. Member who just ended his speech. When I 
started my speech, I said that we are going to look at the sections that need urgent attention. 
Did I say we are going to look at the whole Act?  No! We specify that we are going to look at 
the sections that need urgent attention, but it seems that the hon. Member must have missed 
that bit; and not just me, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister had said the same thing, that we are 
going to look at the first part now and, in the future, we are going to look at the Act again. 
We have said this twice; they have not listened or have not understood what we have said. 
They refuse to understand.  

Another thing which the hon. Member mentioned…. 

(Interruptions) 

…the council is going to meet once a month… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking, please! 
Dr. Husnoo: We have repeated it twice. 

 

46 

(Interruptions) 

Anyway, we have repeated it twice but the hon. Member has not understood. Now, we say 
that the Council should meet, at least, once a month. At least! That means you can meet every 
week if you want, if you have a lot of work you can meet every week. 

(Interruptions) 

You can meet every day if you want but you have not understood that, I suppose. 

Now, why election in 2015? You have just mentioned it. Why election? It is because 
of the mess that some of the municipalities are in at present. In Port Louis, you do not have 
the quorum and that is why we are doing that, trying to correct this. We are trying to correct 
the mess that is being created. When the Opposition party postponed the election, it is good!  
When we try to clean the mess, it is not good! That’s how the other Members see it.  I don’t 
understand that logic. I leave it to them. 

 I would like to clarify another point which was taken by the last hon. Member and the 
Leader of the Opposition as well. If a person is expelled from his group, we have repealed 
section 38 (e) so that he does not lose his seat because, Madam Speaker, that causes quite a 
bit of problem. In fact, I have mentioned, this is an abuse. This is a tyranny of the party.  If 
somebody does not listen to you, you just expel him tomorrow and he loses his seat. Is that 
what we want? Is that what this House wants? No! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Dr. Husnoo: In fact, there has been abuse of this section and some Councilors have 
unfairly lost their seats and currently, as I have mentioned it earlier during the day, you have 
about  10  cases  in  Court  now,  because  people  have  been  unfairly  expelled  from  the  party. 
However, let me say, if a person resigns from his group, then he loses his seat.  We have kept 
that section 37 (3) in the law because we don’t want people to cross the floor. You can check 
it. We have kept that section.  I think there has been some confusion somewhere and I will 
ask Members to have a look again at sections 37 (3) and 38 (e) of the Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East - unfortunately he is 
not  here  -  talked  about  democracy.  He  did  not  say  anything  but  just  mentioned  the  word 
‘democracy’  and,  unfortunately,  he  is  not  here.  But  what  did  his  party  do  last  year?  This 
Parliament was closed for such a long time; it was on holiday for such a long time.  Now, the 
hon. Member is giving us lesson about democracy. What happened last year? 

(Interruptions) 

 

47 

Exactly,  ‘off’!  Prolonged  holidays!    They  have  postponed  the  election  in  the  past,  nobody 
talked about democracy then. How many times they have postponed the elections?  Nobody 
talked about it and even now, from what I have heard in the press, they are not going to take 
part  in  the  Municipal  Elections.  I  don’t  know  how  true  it  is  and  he  is  talking  about 
democracy! He is not going to take part in the elections! 

Exactly!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I think, we have explained these points in details. I am going to repeat 
it again.  We have come to look at some of the major issues now. We are going to look at the 
other issues later on. We have said it; the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has said it, but I get the 
impression that this has not sunk in. I repeated it for a third time. I hope that it sinks in this 
time.  I  have  talked  about  the  modification  of  the  law,  sections  38  (e)  and  37  (c)  about 
crossing the floor. It is still there. But it seems that some Members have not understood it. I 
would ask them to have a look at it again. Well, Madam Speaker, with this, I will stop here. I 
submit the Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Local Government (Amendment) Bill (No. V of 2015) was considered and agreed 

to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Local Government  (Amendment) Bill (No. V of 

2015) was read the third time and passed. 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

 

48 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No.  IV 
of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

(3.20 p.m.) 

Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre D’or): Madam Speaker, 
allow me to join my other colleagues and friends of the House to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development for his Budget Speech and contents therein. 

Madam Speaker, this is the first budget of this Government for the present mandate 
and, as usual, the first, second and the third budgets are usually tough and really contain hard 
measures.  But  this  one  is  just  the  opposite.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has presented a good and generous budget. Year in year out, we all know that 
budget  expenditure  increases  and  they  are  all  financed  by  increases  in  taxes.  Surprisingly, 
Madam Speaker, this budget had no tax increases although the Opposition is insisting that 
this is not a no tax budget, but it is in fact. I have not found any increases in the taxes in this 
budget.  Well,  this  is  something  great,  Madam  Speaker,  in  this  tough  period,  during  this 
period of recession that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development comes with a 
budget without any tax.  

I also understand that this budget is a little bit of embarrassment for the Opposition 
because it contains many good measures and it is so positive, they did not find any sort of 
arguments in the budget for them to come in this House and argue against the budget. In fact, 
the budget is such a  good budget that they themselves, they have  got  no point against the 
budget. In fact, it is a big embarrassment for them.  

Madam Speaker, during the electoral campaign, we promised increases in the pension 
and we remember the hon. Leader of the Opposition and the ex-Prime Minister, they argued 
that it would be impossible for the Government to pay that much of increases and they even 
proposed  to  increase  the  pension,  but  not  to  Rs5,000  as  what  we  promised.  In  fact,  what 
happened today, Madam Speaker, is that pensions have been paid and there have been no tax 

 

49 

increases. They thought that we were going to increase taxes and pinch the poor. I remember 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  stating,  the  usual  victims  of  the 
budget,  those  who  smoke,  those  who  drink,  they  were  not  penalised  this  time.  Madam 
Speaker, this is really an excellent budget presented by the Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development. 

Having said so, I don’t have any quarrel with the Opposition. I know it is their job to 
criticise and we expect them to criticise. I know they are having big hard times outside. So, at 
least, let them crunch a little bit in the House here with some false and fake arguments. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  know,  they  themselves  know  and  we  all  know,  speak  to 
people in the streets today, the  whole population, it is a  fact, we are not inventing things; 
people  are  happy  about  this  Government  and  people  are  happy  with  the  budget.  They  are 
happy with the Government. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t realise… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I think I have to draw your attention that Members 

are required to conduct debates calmly and without passion. Please! 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, even they shout, even they disagree, it is a fact; if you 
speak  to  people  now,  if  you  speak  to  the  population,  they  are  really  happy  of  what  is 
happening in this country and they are extremely happy with the Budget.  

Last time, I listened to my good friend, hon. Ameer Meea, he raised an issue that we 
had promised 12 measures and we did not do anything, except one. It was one over twelve; 
we achieved only one over twelve. Well, I don’t know whether the hon. Member is still living 
in Mauritius.  We promised 12 measures, but we have done more than 12 things which were 
unexpected. 

Madam Speaker,… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please!  Don’t provoke hon. Jhugroo! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, when this Government took over, the state of affairs of 

this country was upside down. 

(Interruptions) 

 

50 

Madam Speaker: Now, you are disrupting the hon. Member. Allow him to proceed 

with his speech! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, Madam Speaker, when 
the new Government took over, the country was upside down. We promised 12 measures and 
these 12 measures are going to be fulfilled. There is no doubt about that. But before fulfilling 
the 12 measures, we had so many things to do; the country was upside down. Let me cite a 
little bit of what we achieved.  We started with the biggest political scandal in this country in 
the whole region of Africa where the ex-Prime Minister was caught with millions of rupees in 
his coffers. It is not an easy thing, Madam Speaker and the Government had to deal with that. 
Rs220 m.! That took a lot of time for that. On top of that, we know the Roche Noires saga 
and also Mrs Soornack is still running out and we are still chasing her. So, that took the time 
of the Government.  Last week and even now the BAI saga, the Bramer Bank saga.  Will you 
know  all  this?  This  is  taking  the  time  of  this  Government.  Repossession  of  land:  hon. 
Showkutally Soodhun has been spending so much time to get back the lands given away by 
the ex-regime. Petits copains, petites copines! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! 
Mr Fowdar:  And, last but not the least, Madam Speaker, the Betamax affair is still 
going  on.  So,  this  Government  is  doing  things  and  people  are  happy  about  it.  People  are 
happy about it that we are not sleeping on our laurels and the Government is really working 
hard. This Government, Madam Speaker, is not going to give way and it is in a position of no 
retreat, no surrender. It is going to make things happen and within the five years! Some of the 
hon. Members are so in a hurry to get things done quickly. The Government in place today 
has in front of it a system: corrupted system, fraudulent, nepotism. We have to remove all 
those incompetent people in place so that we can get things done smoothly.  

Madam Speaker, there is one thing which worries us all and it is something which I 
really care about, it is unemployment. We all know - the hon. Members of this House, even 
the Opposition - that unemployment is hitting hard and we  get requests from our mandate 
almost every day to get them a job. It is not easy and Government is trying hard to create 
employment.  I  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  to 
come up with the programme for SMEs; motivating the SMEs; giving them support, training, 
finance so that jobs can be created.  

Madam Speaker, most of the successful economies have nearly 90% of the companies 
classed as SMEs. If this happens in Mauritius, I am sure we will be able to create jobs for the 

 

51 

unemployed. But talking about this, Madam Speaker, why and how all this happened?  Why 
do  we  have  such  a  great  number  of  unemployed  persons  in  this  country?  I  listened  to  my 
friend,  hon.  Ramful,  yesterday  about  HRDC.  Madam  Speaker,  HRDC  was  created  by  the 
MMM/MSM  Government  in  2001-2002  and  I  presented  the  Bill  in  the  House.  The  main 
objectives of HRDC was to look after manpower planning, to guide the population, to guide 
parents and students, to tell them the field of study their children have to choose so that, after 
three years of study, they don’t fall on pavement with no jobs and this has not been done, 
Madam Speaker. Nine years after 2005, HRDC has been left on its own.   

HRDC has been acting as a commis de l’État.  I am not disputing the hon. Member’s 
achievement at HRDC. This is completely apart from what I am saying. The HRDC has not 
attained its objective  and they  have not accomplished their role of  guiding the population, 
guiding parents and guiding the students on what to study. I will make a humble appeal to the 
hon. Minister of Education to look into this matter and to get HRDC to come to term and to 
start  working  on  manpower  planning.  You  know,  Madam  Speaker,  we  created  the  HRDC 
Board in such a way that all the sectors of the economy would be represented. I think there 
are 14 or 18 members on the Board, representing all the sectors of the economy, who work 
together  so  that  they  can  forecast  -  following  the  economic  development  strategy  of  the 
country - what will be the need, what will be the jobs demand in three years, four years, five 
years, in ten  years so that people are prepared and they don’t waste their time in fields of 
studies which do not bring them any bonus.  

Today,  it  is  really  saddening  to  see  so  many  doctors,  many  professionals  who  are 
unemployed  and it is not the fault of the Government. We didn’t plan. There has been no 
guidance. So, it is very important and urgent that this Government, in particular, the Minister 
of Education comes up with a good programme for career guiding.   

Madam Speaker, we are now witnessing the BAI and the Bramer Bank saga.  I am a 
little bit perplexed. How the Bank of Mauritius and the FIU didn’t spot all these transfers 
made? Usually, the FIU and the Bank of Mauritius should have been aware and they should 
have stopped everything immediately. They have kept silent all this time.  And thanks to this 
Government  which  has  taken  bold  measures!    You  know  it  is  threatening.    It  is  really 
threatening,  all  these  people’s  money  at  stake.  The  ex-regime  was  just sleeping  and  doing 
nothing. I understand that some of these people are together and that’s why they have been 
sleeping. I would request the hon. Minister of Good Governance to see to it and come up with 
measures  so  that  we  can  prevent  things  like  this  to  happen  in  the  future,  like  the  Ponzi 
scheme.  The FSC is also to be blamed.  FSC n’a pas été inquiétée, Madame la présidente.  

 

52 

FSC, FIU et la Banque de Maurice n’ont pas été inquiétées. I have not read anything about 
whether  they  have  been  questioned  at  to  how  all  these  things  happened  and  they  are  still 
being  free  out  of  these  things.    Again,  I  would  congratulate  the  Government  for  bringing 
down all these things to earth and doing investigation.   

This is why I disagree with my friend, hon. Aadil Ameer Meea that we are not doing 
anything. In fact, we are doing more things that we programmed.  We programmed to do only 
twelve measures in these three months, I think we have done more than 12 things in the three 
months and we have still more to do; I am asking the hon. Member to be patient. He will see 
in a few months’ time that we will set things right and the Government will get going. Mostly 
what  we  are  really  scared  of,  what  we  are  really  worried  about  is  job  creation  and  this  is 
really taking all the resources of Government. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development has proposed finance, money  for SMEs, training and support.  I hope all this 
will happen and jobs will be created. Foremost, what is more important is in the next five 
years we don’t come up with the same number of unemployed graduates or people, so we 
have to do career guidance. 

Madam Speaker, this is what I had to say because my colleagues have pointed out all 
the good things that are spelt out in the Budget and  I don’t want to repeat the same thing 
again and again. 

I thank you for your attention. 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for  GRNW and Port Louis West): Madam 
Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, at paragraph 264 of his 
speech, whilst concluding, he stated, and I quote - 

“I am therefore pleased to announce, Madam Speaker, that the first Budget 

of this Government is a no tax budget.” 

It  is  a  ‘no  tax  budget’  according  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. But let us see what independent economists - not politicians - had to say when 
they  had  an  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  Budget.  Let  me  refer  to  Mr  Pierre  Dinan  in 
‘Week-End’ of 29 March, a respected economist, this is what he had to say – 

« Ce  n'est  pas  un  no  tax  budget  mais  une  petite  ruse  du  ministre  des 

Finances, une manière de dire ‘pas de taxe additionnelle’. » 

I will come to that if I will be allowed to. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

53 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  But  I  will  reply  only  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  with  due 

respect to the Leader of the House, of course. 

He goes even further.  The hon. Minister, at paragraph 269, stated – 

“Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  goes  far  beyond  a  classical  Budget  and 

presents to the nation a ‘véritable projet de société’.” 

This is what Mr Pierre Dinan has to say - 

“Mais je dirais pour le dernier budget qu'il suit le cours des précédents : 
une partie sur l'économie et l'autre sur le social (…) en général le budget obéit à la 
même logique économique. » 

Nothing  new!  He  goes  even  further  and  with  regard  to  the  tax  he  explained  why 
there  was  no  need  for  additional  tax.  Apart  from  the  additional  money  the  Government  is 
getting on petrol, they are getting much more than expected on VAT. We all know, Madam 
Speaker, they call it depreciation of the rupee; I call it devaluation of the rupee. While the 
rupee is being devaluated, many prices in the shop have already gone up and these articles are 
VAT rated. So, the Government is getting more money through VAT.  It is misleading to say 
that it is a ‘no tax budget’. 

Last week, I went to the pharmacy next door to buy medicaments; I met an old man; 
he  told  me:  “my  medication  now  costs  me  Rs800  more  per  month.”  The  dollar  was  only 
Rs33.00 then. If you go to the shop now, basic necessities which are VAT rated have already 
gone up because of the depreciation of the rupee, the increase in dollar. 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Labour  is  not  here.  In  addressing  the  House,  he  wants  us  to 
believe that all the people out there, even the trade unions were all happy. This is what he 
said - 

“One cannot be more royaliste que le roi. Indeed, how can one criticise this 
Budget for the majority of the trade unions, workers, representatives of Forces Vives, 
NGOs - I will come to one by one – have acclaimed most of the measures proposed 
by the hon. Minister of Finance (…).” 

 

54 

Let  us  see  the  trade  unions.  The  President  of  the  Congress  of  Independent  Trade 

Unions – 

“C’est un budget différent, cependant rien n’a été dit sur le travail décent. » 

(Interruptions) 

I  will  come  to  hon.  Benydin’s  brother!    This  is  what  the  President  of  the 

Government Services Employees Association had to say – 

“C’est une bonne chose de s’attaquer à la nation zougadère, mais rien pour 

un travail décent. » 

For the President of the Federation of Civil Service and other Unions – 

« Ce n’est pas un budget impeccable mais c’est balancé. » 

For the President of the Confédération des Travailleurs du Secteur Privé (CTSP) – 

« Beaucoup de similitudes avec le précédent régime. » 

Even  Mr  Deepak  Benydin  of  the  Federation  of  Parastatal  Bodies  and  other  Unions 

 
had some reserve about the Budget – 

“Le  budget  est  satisfaisant,  le  volet  sur  la  création  d’emplois  a  été  trop 

 

 

 

minime. » 

For the President of the FTU – 

“Ce budget laisse à désirer, ce budget est une déception. » 

For the President of the Mauritius Labour Congress – 

“Un budget de continuité mais (…).” 

Now, let us see what the JEC had to say, the private sector – 

“Budget courageux et pro-investissement.”  

And – 

« Le  JEC  se  réjouit  que  le  budget  2015-2016  contienne  des  mesures 

favorisant l’investissement en particulier celui du secteur privé.» 

Madam Speaker, when the hon. Minister of  Labour – the new Minister  – says that 
everybody is happy, it is clear that he is not in touch with the common people. I do not blame 
him; he is a good friend of mine; he just comes from the Judiciary to politics.  He does not 

 

55 

know the feeling, he does not know how to touch the pulse of the people outside, but then, I 
hope he will learn very soon. 

Coming to this  year’s  Budget, Madam Speaker,  we know that the hon.  Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development was the President of the MMM economic team.  It is 
normal that in his Budget there are some good ideas which we have discussed before in the 
Economic Commission of the MMM. Some are not too good, but there are some considerable 
ideas which are missing. There are some actions which have been taken which had he been or 
still  be  the  President  of  the  Commission  Économique  of  the  MMM,  he  would  have  never 
taken. I will come to that later. 

So, there are some good measures like I said.  The campaign they had on the nation 
zougadère,  it  is  good  that  action  is  being  taken.  But  is  it  enough?  Already,  there  is  some 
confusion about which carte gratée is allowed, which carte gratée is not allowed. There is 
confusion in the casinos about which table will tax the price and which table will not tax the 
price. Concerning the loto, so many things were said about the loto, but the loto is still here 
every week. 

 (Interruptions) 

Loto  is  still  here.  One  would  have  expected  that,  at  least,  on  the  loto,  we  would  have 
restricted… 

(Interruptions) 

I do not say ‘abolish’, probably there will be some contractual issues raised, but once, at least, 
every  month.  Why  every  week?  I  remember  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development was supposed to have a press conference on that loto.  He came to the press 
conference; he talked about everything except the loto.  The invitation was to come and talk 
on the loto: “I will announce drastic measures on the loto.” He came to the conférence de 
presse, but nothing was mentioned about drastic measures on the loto. Loto en panne! 

So, for the Petites et Moyennes Entreprises, the decision mentioned… 

Madam Speaker: Is there a phone ringing somewhere! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Even the babies are not happy with that Budget, they are crying. 
Even  the  babies  are  crying.  So,  with  the  PME,  good  measures  have  been  announced 
regarding  the  Petites  et  Moyennes  Entreprises,  but  we  have  heard  quite  a  lot  on  them  in 

 

56 

previous budgets, only time will tell you - specially the one-stop shop. You must have heard 
about it being in this House for quite a long time! How many times the one-stop shop has 
been mentioned, but has never been materialised.  

But, anyway, we wish that it materialises because it is a very important sector of our 
economy. Transforming Port Louis into a regional hub, it is welcome. But, again, time will 
tell. Reducing tax on hire purchase is a very good measure, but we have to be careful as it can 
encourage consumption. So, if people used to buy one TV set, they can instead go and buy 
two. It does not necessarily mean that we are going to reduce consumption by reducing hire 
purchase. In fact, some shops are very happy with this because they say that their sales will 
go up. Anyway, this is the choice of the people. 

However,  on  this  Budget,  I  will  address  only  four  issues,  which  I  feel  are  of 
tremendous importance.  I will not be long.  First is the issue of minimum wage; secondly, 
the issue of law and order; third, is the fight against corruption, and fourth is the fight against 
poverty. But the actual situation oblige. I will have to address the issue of the Bramer Bank 
and the BAI. Things are so serious outside! People are so much in despair; some have even 
lost their life! I will have to address this issue. 

On the question of minimum wage, Madam Speaker, much has been said during the 
campaign and most of the trade unions believed that minimum wage would be introduced on 
the first occasion. They had campaigned thoroughly on that issue. In their manifesto, at bullet 
five of the 12 points, it reads – 

“Introduire un salaire minimum pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle.” 

And God knows how many campaigns there were on this! How many false hopes 
were  given  to  les  travailleurs  au  bas  de  l’échelle!  Since  coming  into  power,  none  of  the 
Ministers, not even the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 
nor the Minister of Finance and Economic Development has mentioned this word: minimum 
wage!  

When  we  had  the  Bill  for  the  remuneration  at  the  end  of  the  year,  there  was  no 
mention of minimum wage. In this Budget, there is no mention whatsoever of, at least, a first 
step  towards  minimum  wage.  Worst,  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training addressed the House  - he had the opportunity of addressing the 
House on three occasions: first, when he introduced the Bill at the end of the year; second, 
when  he  addressed  the  House  on  the  Presidential  Address,  and  third,  yesterday  or  the  day 

 

57 

before when he addressed the House on the Budget. Not a single word on minimum wage, 
Madam Speaker! 

And  the  unions  have  done  their  work.  I  have  been  informed  by,  at  least,  one 
federation that since 07 January, they have sent a proposal. They have asked for a meeting 
with the Minister and, up to today, more than hundred days in power as Minister, he has not 
found  five  minutes  to  receive  them!  The  letter  is  dated  07  January.  They  have  given  a 
detailed proposal on how to deal with the NRB.  

There are also many Remuneration Orders which have not been renewed for years. 
My friend, the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun, knows about that. These are the people 
au bas de l’échelle. These are people whom, in all public meetings, the l’Alliance Lepep had 
addressed  them,  especially.  But  nothing!  They  have  turned  their  back  to  these  people!  No 
rendezvous up to today, following a letter sent on 07 January.  

Even on the question of NRB - I have just mentioned it - they have made concrete and 
practical  proposals,  not  imaginary  or  rêve  like  the  l’Alliance  Lepep  was  selling.  No!  They 
have  come  with  concrete  propositions  and  a  memorandum  was  submitted  to  the  hon. 
Minister. But, up to now, no reply! No answer! No meeting!  

Madam Speaker, let me address also the issue of foreign workers. Whether we like it 
or not, the foreign workers are contributing quite a lot in the development of this country, but 
we have to treat them humanely. We have seen recently  what has happened in one of the 
factories where ladies were not handcuffed, but were pushed into a bus, dragged directly to 
pick up their bags and to the airport! 

(Interruptions) 

So,  we  have  one  law  for  local  workers  and  an  inhumane  and  archaic  law  for  the 
foreign workers! Is this the image we want to project? I hope that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
has seen that programme - there was a programme recently on TV - where it showed how we 
treat  Bangladeshi  workers  and  they  were  campaigning  not  to  buy  ‘Made  in  Mauritius’  T-
Shirts because of the way we treat our workers here. Again, here, chapeau aux syndicalistes, 
they have made a proposition for an Employment and Foreign Workers Regulation to cater 
for the foreign workers. It is in the memorandum which they have sent to the Minister. Again, 
no answer! No reply! No rendezvous!  

So,  I  am  making  an  appeal  to  this  Government,  these  people  au  bas  de  l’échelle 
expected a lot. There was a lot of promise made to them. But, at least, if you cannot do things 
now,  talk  to  them,  receive  the  trade  unions,  and  keep  the  door  of  the  Ministry  of  Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training open. Because we are not talking of a simple 

 

58 

contract, we are talking of the contract of work where human conscience and la sueur are 
involved and not only money, delivery or productivity.  

Let  me  come  to  the  Youth  Employment  Programme!  It  is  a  good  step  in  the  right 
direction that we are going to extend the Youth Employment Programme. But, are you aware, 
Madam Speaker, that in the employment sector, the Youth Employment Programme is not 
recognised  as  a  temps  de  service?  Many  people  who  have  undergone  two  years  of 
Employment  Programme  in  a  specific  field,  when  they  apply  for  a  job  which  needs  two 
years’ experience, it is not recognised. They don’t recognise the Employment Programme as 
years of experience. So, in one way, it is a waste of time. If you do Employment Programme 
and you don’t get a job because it is not recognised as two years’ experience in that field, 
what  is  the  purpose  of  doing  it?  Here  again,  Government  should  sit  with  the  MEF  or  the 
Employers’  Federation  and  try  to  get  a  formula  in  which  employers  recognise  the 
Employment Programme as years of service in these specific fields. 

(Interruptions) 

Forget  about  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  or  others!  You  are  in  Government,  you  have  been 
elected on a programme and people have trusted you! Work for these people who have voted 
for you and for the country! Forget about the past! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, let me come to the question of law and order. A lot has been said again during 
the campaign about law and order. I am the one, whilst I was sitting in the Opposition, on 
each  and  every  occasion,  I  raised  the  issue  of  law  and  order.  But  what  do  we  see  in  the 
budget?  Only one paragraph with regard to law and order where the  Minister says,  and  I 
quote –  

“First, in this Budget I am making a provision of Rs7.9 billion for the Police 

Force.” 
 
But what he has not told us is how much was provided last year, what provision was 
there in the Budget for last year and for this year. If you look at the Estimates for the Police 
Force last year, the planned Budget was nearly Rs8.5 billion projected. When we know there 
is a big problem of law and order in the country, Government tells us in one phrase that they 
are  giving  Rs7.9  billion  to  the  Police.  In  fact,  he  is  giving  less  money  to  the  Police.  Less 
money is being allocated to law and order, and we all know what effect that will have on the 
social and economic; probably leading to a worst economic condition.  Government is not 
putting the money where its mouth is.   

 

59 

Law and order has been degraded in the Budget and next it is stated that there will be 
600  additional  recruits  for  the  Police,  as  if  pe  casse  grand  grand  paké.    Replying  to  the 
question of my good friend, hon. Ameer Meea, this week, on Tuesday, we came to know that 
there are already 558 vacancies in the Police Force.  558 vacancies in the Police Force!  And, 
most importantly, in the middle management!  But we are going to have 600 recruits.  How 
many years will it take for them to become middle managers?  And this is what is lacking in 
the Police Force!  Today, there is no middle management in Police Stations.  Today, I rang 
the Pointe-aux-Sables Police Station.  I wanted to speak to a senior Police Officer.  Do you 
know who was there?  A Sergeant!  I asked: “There is no Chief Inspector?” He said: “Ça 
blier ça missier, pena ça!” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 
Mr  Baloomoody:  Forget  about  Ramgoolam!    There  is  an  urgent  problem.    More 
money should be put!   More money on law and order, on recruitment, and more training!  
That’s what we need.  Law and order is an issue and it is a concern.  Recruitment of Police 
and the proper academic… 

Am I allowed to talk? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t make provocative remarks!  Allow the hon. Member 

to proceed with his speech calmly. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: So, it’s clear that the money allocated there is not sufficient.  In fact, 

it is less from what was estimated.   

We  have  other  problems  as  well.    We  talked  about  ICT,  electronic  and  everything.  
Madam  Speaker,  the  vast  majority  of  Police  Stations  are  not  equipped  with  the  Crime 
Occurrence Tracking System.  I have been informed that this is a very important tool to track 
HCs, criminals.  This is, in fact, creating much confusion and uncertainty in the case of file 
monitoring  and  preservation  of  data.    This  project  has  been  online  for  quite  a  long  time.  
Maybe the hon. Prime Minister is not aware; he does not go to the Station anymore now to 
give  a  declaration.    There  is  an  electronic  device.    It  takes  you  two  hours  to  give  a 
declaration, and, at the end of the day, it does not work because most of the Police Stations 
do not have that electronic machine.  It is not connected and it does not work.  This was made 
in order to have a data of habitual criminals and to track them so that the whole station knows 

 

60 

that you have made a declaration against X, and it is communicated all around.  But it is not 
working.  This is why we have so much confusion.  One of the causes, I can tell you, is what 
we have seen in that party, where one accused who was not supposed to be out after 0600 
hours;  it  is  because  of  this.    They  have  used  manual  communication,  sending  misleading 
information, and he was in a party in the company of our Serjeant-at-Arms.  So, there is a 
problem there.  We have to put money. 

There was another programme that was set and which we do not hear anymore, that is, 

the electronic bracelet for prisoners. 

(Interruptions) 

But, at a certain time, it would have told you that it’s 6 o’clock and you have to go home.  
That’s  the  electronic  bracelets.    So,  the  electronic  bracelet  was  a  programme  which  was 
welcomed by everybody. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Baloomoody: This was a bracelet that was welcomed.  Unfortunately, we have not 

heard anything about that again. 

I  read  yesterday  or  the  day  before  that  a  white  Policeman  killed  another  black 
American in America.  And now there is an interesting debate which I hope Government will, 
at least, try to learn from it.  They are trying to have a body camera on certain Police Officers.  
Body cameras on Police Officers who are affected to stop and search at night; a body camera, 
at least, on the one who is at guard at the station.  Because we know how people are treated 
when they enter Police Stations.  So, these are things which we can, at least, learn, and I am 
inviting  Government  –  or  hon.  Dayal  –  to  look  into  these  issues,  because  if  we  want  to 
modernise  our  Police  Force  and  stop  Police  brutality,  we  will  have  to  look  for  electronic 
machines. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  body  cameras  on  certain  Police  Officers!    I  saw  a  programme  yesterday  or  the  day 
before;  there  was  a  special  programme  on  that,  and  it  seems  that  it  has  worked  in  certain 
countries - in Japan.  But we have to see. 

Now, let’s come again to the most important thing which concerns many citizens in 
this country, namely the issue of fraud and corruption.  Again, much has been said during the 
campaign about fraud and corruption: “Once we come into power we will do this, we will do 
that.  We will clear here, we will clear there.” 

 

61 

I have already spoken about ICAC.  ICAC had a wrong start.  When we look at the 
Budget,  there  is  no  mention  of  additional  money,  be  it  for  the  ICAC  or  for  the  other 
institutions to fight fraud and corruption.  It looks like people are happy to come and say: 
“Look, we have reduced the Budget of ICAC.  Now, we have part-time directors, we have 
part-time president.”  It is a serious issue!  Probably, it is more dangerous to have part-time 
assessors than full-time.  Put the right people in the right place!  We have to spend money on 
corruption.  If you look at the report of the National Survey on Corruption for 2014, which 
was sponsored by the UNDP and done by a local firm, at page 34 of the report, it says clearly 
that the most corrupt institutions in Mauritius are – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

the Police;  
the NTA; 
the Customs/MRA - I will come to the MRA. 
the Municipalities 

 
And I am sure hon. Bodha will. 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  for  the  Government;  we  have  to  invest  in  these  institutions  to  ensure  that  there  is  no 
corruption.    I  am  not  blaming  this  Government.    But,  then,  we  have  to  put  money  in  the 
Budget.  There is no money in the Budget for these.  And the fifth one is – 

(v) 

 the Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping. 

So, if we want to fight corruption, we must have a budget for it.  But there is no 
mention  of  the  words  ‘fight  against  corruption’.    There  is  mention  of  the  word  ‘financial 
crime’. 

(Interruptions) 

No, we have to keep the item on the agenda.  The only way to keep the item on the agenda is 
to have it mentioned in the Budget; have money, specific for it so that people are aware, are 
conscious that there is a continuous fight against fraud and corruption.   

But at paragraph 246 of the Presidential Address, it is stated – 

“Government  will  relentlessly  fight  fraud  and  corruption  and  financial 

crime.  To that effect, a Financial Crime Commission will be set up.” 

No mention of this Financial Crime Commission; no budget for it; no mention in the Budget 
Speech.  It was in the Presidential Address, but no mention in the Budget Speech.  Nowhere 

 

62 

with regard to allocation of money is there specific mention of this Commission.  What is 
worse, there is confusion about what will be the role of that Commission. 

Even the president of a certain institution - I can’t mention it here but we know, those 
who were in that Committee know – and even certain officials don’t know what would be 
their role tomorrow. So, let’s be clear what this Commission will be? Come and define! It is 
more  than  100  days  and  we  don’t  know.  We  are  naming  people  here  to  head  this  or  that 
institution, but they tell us privately: ‘yes, mo fine nommé, but I don’t know what would be 
the Financial Crime Commission, etc.’. 

So,  again,  with  regard  to  fraud  and  corruption,  this  Budget  is  silent.  Ensuring 
transparency and good governance - I will start with meritocracy. I have spoken about it, so 
many  nominations  have  been  made  without  meritocracy,  but  this  time  I  will  go  on  the 
procedures for procurement. I will quote at page 37, paragraph 229 of the Budget Speech.  I 
quote -  

“The  principle  of  meritocracy  will  also  be  extended  to  procurement 
procedures.  In  view  of  the  opacity  surrounding  allocation  of  contracts  in  the  past 
which has led to shady deals and widespread corruption, we have decided, as a matter 
of  transparency,  that  all  contracts  will  henceforth  be  allocated  after full  and 
transparent  tender  procedures.  The  Public  Procurement  Act  will  be  amended 
accordingly”.  

This  is,  indeed,  welcoming  to  amend  the  Public  Procurement  Act    to  have  a 
transparent procurement exercise.  But then, what has happened in the recent past cannot just 
go  over,  because  there  have  been  so  many  cases  at  the  IRP,  Madam  Speaker.  where  the 
Independent  Review  Panel  (IRP)  has  made  severe  remarks  against  procedures;  it  has 
concluded that we have to retender; it has made severe remarks with regard to the procedure 
adopted by the Tender Board, but, again, the Tender Board decided to set aside the findings 
of the IRP and allocate the contract to the one who should not get the contract according to 
the IRP. There are so many cases, especially at the Wastewater Authority, the CWA and the 
Police. Contracts were allocated to certain contractors to build Police Stations. We have to 
look  into  that.  I  am  sure  there  must  have  been  some  external  persons,  but  who  have  put 
pressure.  Like  what happened  yesterday regarding the  Betamax case, where the  gentleman 
spent the night in jail. He said that there has been pressure. It is about time that we inquire 
about these people at the IRP, at the Tender  Board to see who has put pressure for them to do 
away with the ruling and the judgement of the IRP. I have a recent case of ‘Security Clean v/s 
Ministry of Local Government’.  In fact, there were three cases. In all these three cases, the 

 

63 

rulings were against the Tender Board, but, again, the Tender Board made fi of it, it allocates. 
It is good to question one Mr K.S. at that institution to know who has put pressure on him to 
sign  3  letters  to  allocate  contracts  to  another  party.    When  the  IRP  said  that  the  contract 
should go to ‘X’, it was allocated to  ‘Y’. So, here, again, it is good that we look into the 
matter.  

According  to  the  Standard  of  Corruption,  the  MRA  is  the  fourth  most  corrupt 
according to the survey - and we know - and I would like this to go on record. In the past, we 
know how the MRA has been used as a political tool on certain opponents. So, they can’t 
remain untouched there; they have to account, for what they did.  

(Interruptions) 

I  know  of  certain  cases.  Ok,  should  I  disclose  my  interest?  I  was  a  victim.  There  was  a 
Question here, and the next day the MRA landed in my office. We have to look at the MRA 
also. What has been their role for the past five years? 

We  are  hearing,  here,  that  this  lady  has  50  companies;  this  gentleman  has  60 
companies, but have they paid their income tax to the MRA? Have they been called upon by 
the MRA?   

(Interruptions) 

But then, we have to put it in our Budget! We have to put money and inquire about the MRA 
as well. 

(Interruptions) 

There is one thing which I would like to recommend when you inquire about the MRA. It is 
good that now we have reduced the 10% when it comes to appeal. 

Yes! What about these people, Gooljaury and others? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  
Mr  Baloomoody:  At  the  MRA,  if  you  owe  them  -  let’s  say  they  assess  you  for 
Rs500,000,  you  have  an  asset  of  Rs5  m.  or  Rs10  m.  or  three  houses,  they  freeze  all  your 
assets. If you don’t pay within one month, there is an objection to departure on you. And this 
measure they choose to whom to impose as well. So, when they freeze your assets, if you are 
in the MCIB, you can’t get any loan to settle your claim.  You have to go and beg them and 
this is where the corruption sometimes come in; then they say: ok, we will release one asset, 
you  can  mortgage  this  one.    But,  Madam  Speaker,    all  crimes  should  be  punished 
proportionately! If I owe you Rs500,000, you put Rs500,000 as lien on my asset, you don’t 

 

64 

freeze  all  the  assets.  Many  Petites  et  Moyennes  Entreprises  have  been  victims  of  this 
situation. I am inviting the Government, the hon. Minister and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
look into the matter. I think it is quite serious; there is an abuse, especially on this side. We 
have to get the MRA as well on board.  

Madam Speaker, there is also the recent report which has just been laid regarding the 

horse racing with ‘SMS Pariaz’. This is what they had to say – 

“However, there was a five-year delay in connecting the one inline bookmaker 

SMS Pariaz”.  

My  friend,  hon.  Bhagwan,  put  a  question  on  the  system  which  the  Commission 
found surprising and asked whether that company had, in fact, paid over the five-year period, 
it was not connected to the system. There was no clear answer to the query. The acting Chief 
Executive of the GRA said that tax collection was the responsibility of the MRA and not the 
GRA.  Although  ‘SMS  Pariaz’  had  a  responsibility  to  pay  tax  for  the  five  years,  it  was 
unconnected  and  the  MRA  stated  that  tax  had  been  paid,  but  there  is  no  confirmation 
available through the gabs on whether taxes had been paid to buy the company and for  how 
much. So, even at the MRA things are not clear. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  concentrating  on  the  FIU,  the  MIU,  that  lady,  the  other 

‘madame-là’, but the MRA as well has to be put  in the picture. 

Now, I come to an issue which I feel is very serious: the fight against poverty. It is 
commendable  that  there  will  be  a  Marshall  Plan  for  the  fight  against  poverty,  but  are  we 
doing  it  the  right  way  and  are  we  going  to  have  the  result  of  what  we  want  to  do?    The 
Mauritius  Systematic  Country  Report  of    2014  clearly  states  -  and  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development has stated that the gap between the rich and the poor is 
getting  wider.  There  is  an  urgency  with  regard  to  the  fight  against  poverty.  But,  Madam 
Speaker, let me refer with regard to how the Government proposes to attack that scourge of 
poverty. Again at paragraph 178 of the Budget Speech, it is said, and I quote - 

“I have given deep thoughts to the matter, and I have decided to review the 

CSR system in depth”.  
He starts by reviewing in depth! 

“I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  preferred  alternative  is  to  let 

companies decide on how best to fulfill their social responsibility (...).” 

 The companies’ social responsibility! 

“(…) and obligation in a most effective manner. Companies, hereon will be 

free to allocate the 2 percent of the CSR according to their set of priorities”.  

 

65 

Madam Speaker, it is the company now which will decide what is the set of priorities 
for those in poverty? We are talking about Rs700 m. to Rs800 m. of CSR money and that 2% 
is supposed - if not, it will go to the MRA – to be taxpayers’ money! We are giving Rs700 m. 
to Rs800 m. of taxpayers’ money to the companies for them to fight poverty! And what is 
worse, we are doing away with the guidelines at paragraph 180 -  

“I am therefore removing all existing CSR guidelines.”  
 
So, there will be no guidelines and it is good for Members, who have tapped the table 
while the speech was being read, who were not aware of the guidelines, let me tell you what 
the guidelines are! It is good to know. The guidelines give a restriction as to on which project 
you can use money and on which project you cannot use money. The approved guidelines are 
that you must use the money on certain specific projects as approved by the NEF and this is 
for the fight against poverty.  

So, now, there are four schemes which are approved for the operation guidelines of 
housing. There are four schemes proposed.  You have the concrete/CIS houses, participating 
in  social  housing  programmes,  targeting  families  with  monthly  income  of  Rs600,  etc., 
upgrading of living environment and vulnerable persons.  

So, today, the companies are free and you are not allowed to give things in kind. Your 
2% must go in a specific project on specific guidelines. So, what we are telling the company 
today is that they  are not required to follow the  guidelines. So, they  are free to invest the 
money where they are, how they are, free for all the companies.  

Government may have  a specific policy in a cité, to have drains, water supply  and 
electricity, and we know companies for whatever it spends, one cent, they will need a benefit 
either  in  kind  or  in  publicity  of  two  cents.  A  little  cité  in  my  Constituency,  Cité  Firinga, 
where the priority is probably for drainage, sewerage or to rebuild the roof of these houses, 
will  they  be  interested  to  go  there  or  will  they  prefer  to  sponsor  a  football  team,  in  the 
frontline with their names on their T-shirts, which they are not allowed to do today.  

I  have  been  informed  by  NGOs,  but  they  refuse.  A  well-known  supermarket  came 
with two vans of 8 tonnes of biscuits which are going to expire in one week.  They wanted to 
deliver that in a home and wanted them to sign this as a contribution under their CSR Fund. 
They  refused.  Another  well-known  shop,  which,  if  you  don’t  pay  the  hire  purchase,  seize 
your product like table, TV, etc.; they wanted to deliver it to a certain shelter, second-hand 
things and have these deducted on their CSR.  

So,  now  we  are  removing  all  the  guidelines.    There  would  be  no  control.    For  the 
private sector, it is a jackpot for them, Madam Speaker, giving them Rs800 m. to spend as 

 

66 

they wish and they will sign: ‘I have used it for CSR, selling their own products, sponsored 
without  looking  for  any  guarantee;  that  this  money  is  going  there  and  they  will  sign.  The 
taxpayers lose, the MRA loses those Rs800 m. and the private sector gets it, but the poor is 
not  sure  to  get  it.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  this  money  will  go  to  the  poor.  So,  this  is  a 
serious issue.  When we talk about privatisation of the fight against poverty, this is, in fact, 
Madam  Speaker,  privatisation  of  the  fight  against  poverty,  telling  the  private  sector:  go  in 
your locality, see what you think is best for you and you spend the money there. So, this is a 
serious issue. I think you should review that issue of giving to the private sector the money to 
fight poverty, the Rs800 m. to Rs900 m. 

This is what I had to say. It is a serious issue.  Look at the guidelines, you will see, 
what  they  can  do,  what  they  cannot  do.  Now,  if  they  want  to  do,  they  can  fund  political 
parties.  Because  they  can  use  the  money  as  they  want,  they  can  finance  socio-religious 
bodies; they can finance whatever institution they want. There are no guidelines and you get 
the party to sign it. I have received Rs500 m. This is part of my CSR, 2% contribution. So, 
where are we going? Is this a Marshall Plan? Is this how we are going to fight poverty? This 
is why the private sector said: “Wonderful budget!  It allows us to do what we want to do!  
Excellent for the investment!” They are getting back their 2% for them to enjoy, to spend it 
on what they want to spend. 

Madam Speaker, I can’t resume my seat before addressing the issue of the BAI and 
the Bramer Bank. In fact, I am sure we were all shocked when we read the newspaper this 
morning which says –  

“Un client terrassé par une crise cardiaque.” 
 
When he learnt that his Rs12 m. - according to what the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development has said in this House - will not be guaranteed.  And in the same 
article, two other persons had a heart problem, but thank God, they did not pass away. I have 
personally received many people and these people, Madam Speaker, they are not gamblers. 
The money that they have put is not for gambling; they have put it there for revenue; a fixed 
deposit for a better life in their old days. Some have put… 
(Interruptions) 

I will tell you how you will fight the case, but don’t penalise innocent people who have put 
their  lump  sum,  their  VRS  money,  all  that  they  have  earned  in  their  life,  because  this 
scheme… 

(Interruptions) 

 

This is a very serious question. 

67 

(Interruptions) 

We should see about the institution. I am not here to say about Mr Rawat, I am here to say 
about the institution and the creditors, those who have put their money there. This is what we 
should  aim  at;  this  should  be  our  principal  aim.  Then,  if  we  have  to  stop  Mr  Rawat,  we 
should show him if he has committed whatever crime, let him pay for that, but not innocent 
people. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, when replying to the question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 

in the first paragraph, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development said - 

“Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  I  would  like  to  state  that  we  are  all 

dealing with a crisis of national proportion that goes beyond party politics.”  

And we agree with it. The hon. Leader of the Opposition did agree, but it is unfortunate that 
when such a crisis is hitting the country, we are talking about a proportion of money which 
represents  10%  of  our  GDP;  the  number  one  in  Government  and  the  number  two  in 
Government do not agree. The number one, the Prime Minister, comes and tells us that there 
is a Ponzi scheme. The number two comes and tells us: ‘I can’t say whether there is a Ponzi 
scheme.’ 

(Interruptions) 

But this is what I am saying.  There is a disagreement already at the top level of power.  And 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development comes and says: “There is a Ponzi 
scheme.” 

(Interruptions) 

The conservateur appointed by Government, Mr Oosman comes and says:  “That is too early 
to say it is a Ponzi scheme.”   

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Duval answered to a PNQ of hon. Bérenger fourteen months ago.  I take it that the hon. 
Minister has done his homework before answering that question or he has been misled by the 
FIU or by the FSC.  But then, for an issue like this, we would have expected that there is 
unity  in  Government.    We  all  go  in  one  direction  and  the  priority,  at  this  stage,  Madam 
Speaker, is to save the money of the depositors; to save the jobs of these people; to save the 
deposits. Let me be clear: the scheme where nearly 24,000 people are concerned is called the 
Super  Cash  Back  Gold.  It  has  been  on  the  market  for  many  years.    There  has  been 
advertisement.  There have been brochures for it.  Our institutions have failed. It has been 

 

68 

approved  by  the  FSC!  Our  institutions  have  failed  and  it  is  good  to  know  that  Iqbal 
Rajahbalee, when the MSM/MMM was in Government, made a report in 2004.   

(Interruptions) 

But  then  he  was  replaced  by  another  CEO.    Subsequently,  hon.  Jugnauth,  when  he  was 
Minister of Finance, appointed another lady at the FSC.  So, these people should be made 
accountable. I understand that there has been objection to departure of so many people at the 
BAI, but about those people who were in that institution, let them come and say there was 
pressure  on  them  and  we  know  who  has  put  the  pressure.  The  Conservator  and  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development cannot come just like that and say 24,000 
people will not get their money because this is Ponzi scheme; because these people have not 
gone for interest for 50%.  The difference with them what they will be getting is 6% in the 
bank, 8% in that scheme. Had they gone to the institution, everybody would have told them: 
“Yes, it is an honest scheme. You can go.” So, where have they gone wrong?  So, we should 
work in a direction.  I make an appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and to the Government 
at  large  to  work  in  a  direction  and  to  review  their  strategy.    They  must  not  think  only  of 
penalising Mr X or Mr Y. They must think about the institution, about the people who will 
suffer.  They must look what we can salvage from this project and distribute the money to all 
these  policyholders.  Let  us  not  make  the  difference  between  one  policyholder  and  another 
one because these people are innocent. These people have invested their life saving. These 
people have invested in that scheme to get a better life when they get older or when they stop 
working.  So, my appeal to Government is to be more humane in approaching that issue and 
let  Government  go  as  a  team,  not  the  Prime  Minister  goes  this  side,  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development goes the other side, the hon. Minister of l’enquête takes 
the plane, the other one we don’t know what is happening.   

Let the professionals do their work; there should be no political interference and let’s make 
sure that, at least, all those who have contributed honestly in that project do not suffer.  

(Interruptions) 

I have done, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 
Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 
At 4.30 p.m the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 5.05 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Seeruttun! 

 

69 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  M.  le 
président, laissez-moi d’abord présenter mes vives félicitations à mon collègue, l’honorable 
Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, ministre des Finances et du Développement économique pour la 
présentation de ce budget qui est son huitième.   

C’est aussi la dix-septième fois que le Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, en tant 
que chef du gouvernement, voit son ministre des Finances dans cet exercice.  Mais avant de 
rentrer dans le vif du sujet, je voudrai répondre à notre ami, le précédent orateur, l’honorable 
Veda  Baloomoody.  A  l’écouter  attentivement  tout  à  l’heure,  il  donne  l’impression  que  ce 
gouvernement est au pouvoir depuis plus d’une dizaine d’années. Or, nous sommes là qu’à 
peine trois mois. Il veut que dans ce premier budget on réalise toutes les mesures prévues 
dans notre programme électoral qui est étalé sur cinq ans.  On sait qu’il réalise que c’est un 
gouvernement  qui  est  en  train  de  travailler  à  une  vitesse  vraiment  extraordinaire,  mais, 
malheureusement, on ne peut pas faire tout d’un seul coup. C’est vrai, on a parlé du salaire 
minimum, cela viendra. C’est un engagement qu’on a pris. On a parlé du Law and Order. Il a 
parlé. 

Il y a cinq paragraphes. 

The Deputy Speaker : Order ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Seeruttun: Il pose la question pourquoi il y a une baisse dans le budget. Mais on 
peut  faire  des  choses  d’une  manière  plus  efficiente.  On  peut  enlever  les  gaspillages.  C’est 
cela  qu’il  y  avait  avant.  Et  aujourd’hui,  ce  n’est  pas  parce  qu’il  y  a  une  baisse  dans  les 
dotations budgétaires qu’on ne va pas faire le travail mieux, avec plus d’efficacité. On a dit 
qu’on va faire du capacity-building dans la force policière, une police académie. Tout cela 
c’est pour donner les outils qu’il faut pour redresser la situation du Law and Order dans le 
pays. 

Il a parlé du ‘No Tax Budget’. Soit il ne veut pas comprendre ou bien c’est par pure 
démagogie. On a tous compris qu’il n’y a pas de nouvelles taxes. Et c’est cela qui veut dire 
un ‘No Tax Budget’. Il vient dire qu’il y a de la taxe.  Bien sûr, il y a de la taxe. 

 (Interruptions) 

 

70 

Il  avait  aussi  parlé  de  la  dévaluation  de  la  roupie  mauricienne.  C’est  totalement 
faux !  Regardons  ce  qui  se  passe  au  niveau  international!  Les  fundamentals  de  la  devise 
américaine est en train de s’améliorer. C’est cela la raison!  Cela n’a rien à voir avec ce qu’on 
fait  ici !  C’est  ça  qui  fait  que  le  dollar  américain  a  autant  apprécié.  Il  n’y  a  aucune 
dévaluation, honorable Baloomoody.  Ce n’est pas bien ! 

(Interruptions) 

Il  sait  très  bien.  Parce  qu’après  avoir  dit  tout  cela,  il  a  aussi  dit :  « C’est  un  bon 
budget. », un budget qui rejoigne un peu ce que son parti voulait mettre en place, parce que le 
ministre  des  Finances  était  aussi  responsable,  à  un  certain  moment,  de  la  commission 
économique de son parti. 

The Deputy Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Seeruttun: Concernant le CSR, lorsqu’on parle de parrainage, cela veut dire on 

prend en charge un village et prendre en charge un village veut dire regarder ses problèmes. 

Ce qu’il faut aussi faire ressortir, M. le président, c’est que le CSR est là depuis au 

moins sept à huit ans ? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, no cross-talking please! 

Mr Seeruttun: Cela n’a donné aucun résultat. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Order!  Please,  allow  the  hon.  Minister  to  continue  without 

interruptions. 

Mr Seeruttun: Le CSR est là depuis huit ans au moins et le niveau de la pauvreté 

aujourd’hui dans le pays n’a fait que détériorer. Donc, la formule en place n’a pas marché. 

(Interruptions) 

Si la formule n’a pas marché, il faut la changer et c’est cela qu’on est en train de faire. C’est 
un  peu  aussi  responsabiliser  les  entreprises.  Le  CSR  veut  dire  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility.    Ce  parrainage  va  pouvoir  donner  à  ces  entreprises  la  responsabilité  de 
prendre en charge certains lieux où vraiment ils ont besoin d’être encadrés et il faut essayer 

 

71 

d’éradiquer  le  problème  de  pauvreté.  Donc,  on  attend,  après  on  fait  des  commentaires  là-
dessus. 

L’honorable Membre a aussi dit qu’on n’a rien fait dans ce budget pour les salariés et 
pour les travailleurs. Mais bien avant le budget, on a déjà pris des mesures qu’il faut.  On a 
donné R 600 across the board à tous les travailleurs. Avant même qu’on présente ce budget, 
on  avait  déjà  enclenché  certaines  mesures  pour  venir  pallier  le  problème  que  font  face  les 
Mauriciens. 

Il  avait  parlé  des  traitements  des  travailleurs  étrangers,  la  manière  dont  ils  ont  été 
traités.  Je  ne  dis  pas  que  je  suis  d’accord  avec  comment  cela  s’est  passé,  mais  il  faut  le 
rappeler, son leader, qu’avait-il dit ? 

(Interruptions) 

On  a  un  travail  à  faire.  On  s’est  présenté  devant  l’électorat  et  on  leur  a  dit de  nous  faire 
confiance. Il y a tellement de pourriture qu’il faut nettoyer. Et c’est ce qu’on est en train de 
faire. 

(Interruptions) 

Et cela prend du temps justement ! Pour pouvoir commencer à faire des choses bien, il faut 
d’abord  enlever  toutes  ces  pourritures.  On  a  connu  l’affaire  Airway  Coffee,  on  a  connu 
l’affaire Dufry et l’affaire du coffre. Aujourd’hui, en ce qui concerne ce scandale financier, 
ce  scandale  bancaire,  M.  le  président,  on  était  à  deux  doigts  d’une  crise  sociale  sans 
précédent. Presque 200,000 personnes étaient touchées par cela. And that’s not our doing, M. 
le président, ce qui s’est passé ! Nous sommes là que trois mois ? Il a bien dit. Dans le passé, 
la sonnette d’alarme avait été tirée, mais rien n’a été fait. On a laissé perdurer cette situation. 
Alors,  qu’est-ce  qu’on  aurait  dû  faire ?  Est-ce  qu’on  aurait  dû  laisser  pourrir  encore  cette 
situation ou bien prendre les mesures qu’il faut et arrêter cette hémorragie. 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Alors  que  ce  gouvernement  a  pris  la  décision  de  sauvegarder  les 
intérêts de 50,524 clients de Bramer Bank et 135,283 polices d’assurances émises par la BAI, 
l’honorable Membre de l’opposition est en train de venir défendre M. Dawood Rawat et ses 
enfants. Aujourd’hui, c’est la perception qu’on est en train de faire une vendetta politique. 
Aujourd’hui, alors qu’on est dans une situation où les critères émis par la Banque de Maurice 

 

72 

ne sont pas respectés, alors qu’ils ont eu la possibilité de corriger des choses qu’ils n’étaient 
pas en train de comply with, M. Rawat pensait qu’avec lui tout est possible.  Il ne doit pas 
souscrire  à  ces  conditions,  donc  il  pouvait  se  permettre  et  il  croyait  que  cela  allait 
continuer de la même façon! 

(Interruptions) 

Donc,  lorsqu’on  applique  les  règles,  certaines  personnes  pensent  que  c’est  une 
vendetta politique! Mais non, M. le président ! Les règles doivent être appliquées à toutes les 
institutions  bancaires,  que  ce  soit  M.  Rawat  ou  dans  telle  ou  telle  autre  banque.  C’est  ce 
qu’on a fait. Aujourd’hui, on est en train de définir ce que c’est qu’un Ponzi scheme. C’est ça 
le débat d’aujourd’hui! Alors ce n’est pas un Ponzi scheme!  Peut-être si on parle du Ponzi 
scheme de M. Ponzi des années 30. 

(Interruptions) 

Quand on est en train d’inciter des gens à investir dans un quelconque projet d’investissement 
avec un retour vraiment alléchant, on prend cet argent et on le place dans des projets bidons, 
pour  moi  c’est  du  Ponzi  scheme,  en  sachant  très  bien  que  l’investissement  dans  lequel  on 
place  cet  argent  ne  va  jamais  avoir  suffisamment  de  retour  pour  pouvoir  payer  ces 
investisseurs. 

(Interruptions) 

Donc,  qu’est-ce  qu’ils  font?    Ils  prennent  l’argent  d’un  autre  investisseur  pour  payer  les 
intérêts à celui qui avait investi en premier. C’est cela le Ponzi scheme. 

On peut le définir dans n’importe quel sens, mais finalement c’est ça le bottom line, on prend 
l’argent… 

 (Interruptions) 

On prend l’argent… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Donc, c’est une forme de Ponzi scheme ! N’allez pas essayer de couper les cheveux en quatre 
pour voir les virgules et les points et dire que ce n’est pas un Ponzi scheme.  

(Interruptions) 

M. le président, notre pays était aux urnes en décembre de l’année dernière et il n’est 
pas nécessaire pour moi de rappeler le verdict de ces élections. Tout le monde le sait.  Depuis 
le 11 décembre, le peuple a fait confiance à l’Alliance Lepep grâce à la démocratie. Et nous 
avons donc aujourd’hui, M. le président, un droit d'honorer nos engagements. 

 

73 

En  janvier  –  le  27  plus  précisément  –  il  y  a  eu  la  présentation  du  programme 
gouvernemental pour la période 2015-2019. Les projets ont été énoncés et les débats ont eu 
lieu. Depuis, la machine est en marche et  rien ne l'arrêtera. Dès l'entrée  en fonction de ce 
nouveau  gouvernement,  nous  envoyons  de  nombreux  signaux  forts  pour  que  les  activités 
économiques redémarrent dans la République de Maurice. Et elles sont bien parties! Ce n'est 
pas le fruit du hasard. C'est le fruit d'une volonté collective et il faut oser, M. le président. 
Nous vivons dans un monde qui change constamment et la seule chose qui reste  inchangée, 
c'est le changement.  

M. le président, nobody owes us a living. Au sein de notre équipe, nous en sommes 
conscients et il existe au sein de ce gouvernement une cohérence, une cohésion et une volonté 
de  réussir.  C'est  une  équipe  soudée  dirigée  par  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth 
connu  pour  sa  rigueur  au  travail  et  à  la  discipline.  Le  lundi  23  mars  dernier,  l’honorable 
Lutchmeenaraidoo est venu avec un budget pour la nouvelle année financière 2015/2016 et 
pour  les  six  premiers  mois  de  l'année  2015.  Et  le  Grand  Argentier  nous  a  encore  une  fois 
prouvé ses compétences avec ce budget présenté dans le contexte économique mondial.  

Nous nous attendions à voir à l'œuvre une Opposition responsable et digne. Avec les 
circonstances  sociales  et  économiques  qui  prévalent  actuellement,  il  n'y  a  pas  une  seule 
proposition valable qui a été faite jusqu'ici par les intervenants de l'Opposition. Je dois avouer 
que  l’honorable  Ramano  a  été  très  juste  et  il  a  dit  lui-même  que  c’est  un  des  meilleurs 
budgets depuis les dix dernières années. Donc cela démontre quand même… 

 

Un bon garçon!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Je  reconnais  que  l'Opposition  se  doit  de  critiquer,  mais  je  m'attends  à  ce  qu'elle  le  fasse 
intelligemment  et  positivement  car  le  but  final  est  que  la  société  mauricienne,  nos 
compatriotes en sortent gagnants. 

A la place, M. le président, on voit ce parti qui s'embourbe dans le communalisme, le 

castéisme. Ce n'est pas l’honorable Alan Ganoo, président du MMM, qui me contredira.  

 

(Interruptions) 

Dans  une  interview  de  presse  récemment,  il  a  vertement  déclaré  en  parlant  de  la 
restructuration faite par son leader, l’honorable Paul Bérenger, je cite  - 

 

74 

« On aurait dû juger les valeurs des personnes en toute sérénité et faire fi de 

leurs appartenances castéistes ou communautaires»  

Et  plus  loin,  il  dit  qu'il  n'a  peut-être  pas  le  bon  profil  pour  être  leader  adjoint.  On  a  été 
choqué,  M.  le  président!  Surtout  la  jeune  génération  -  toutes  confessions  religieuses 
confondues - qui se côtoie tous les jours. A un moment où l'on communique à travers les sms, 
les Whatsapp, Viber, le MMM prône le castéisme et le communalisme.  

L'opposition, M.  le président, doit se montrer plus responsable. Il ne faut pas être des 
antipatriotes  à  ce  point. Year  in,  year  out,  l'Opposition  MMM  trouve  toujours  des  choses 
contraires à dire sur le budget. Toujours le même vocabulaire! Je vous rappelle qu'en 1983, le 
leader  de  l'Opposition  avait  qualifié  le  premier  budget  de  l’honorable  ministre  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo comme un budget de ‘couillonneur’. Qu'avons-nous vu en cours de route? 
Le  taux  d'inflation  qui  était  de  13,4%  en  1981/82  sous  les  travaillistes  tomba  à  5,6%  en 
1983/84. C'est ça qu'il appelait budget ‘couillonneur’ ! 

En 1984, toujours lors des débats budgétaires, l’honorable Bérenger déclarait que c'est 
un budget de mensonge. Qu'avons-nous vu après? Des industriels choisissaient Maurice pour 
installer leurs entreprises dans les quatre coins du pays. 

En  1985,  toujours  lors  des  débats,  le  leader  de  l'Opposition  avançait  que  c'est 
un «private  sector  budget». Qu'avons-nous  vu  après?  La  population  mauricienne  respirait. 
Des maisons en bois et tôle étaient remplacées par du béton, avec du carrelage et la télévision 
couleur  et  vidéos  players  faisaient  leurs  apparitions  dans  chaque  foyer,  les  appareils 
électroménagers mettaient aux oubliettes la «roche lavé ou roche kari» et les lampes vertes 
mortelles. 

(Interruptions) 

En 1986, le leader de l'Opposition avait dit que la population était restée sur sa faim. 
Le temps lui a encore une fois donné tort. Il y a eu le plein emploi, le gouvernement était 
obligé  d'accorder  des  permis  pour  l'importation  de  la  main-d'œuvre  étrangère  pour  que  les 
investisseurs du secteur du textile puissent honorer leurs commandes vis-à-vis des marchés 
extérieurs.  Le  Parti  travailliste,  lui,  nourrissait  le  chômage  et  n'attendait  que  la  veille  des 
élections pour offrir des emplois non-productifs. Qui ne se souvient pas des 21,000 jeunes 
embauchés à la veille des élections de 1982?  

(Interruptions) 

Sir Anerood Jugnauth avait eu raison de mettre fin à leur contrat à l'issue d'une commission 
d'enquête. Ces mêmes jeunes s'étaient retrouvés par la suite avec un emploi productif, M. le 
président. 

 

75 

De 2005 à 2014,  la population a été confrontée à de rudes épreuves, pire que durant 
la période qui a précédé 1982, M. le président. La dette publique à décembre 2014 était à plus 
de R 250 milliards; le taux de chômage était à un niveau élevé, 100,000 familles vivaient en-
dessous du seuil de pauvreté, des familles ne pouvaient pas envoyer leurs enfants à l'école, le 
nombre d'enfants de rue est en augmentation et j'en passe. 

Cet  héritage,  M.  le  président,  ne  nous  a  pas  découragés.  Le  ministre  des  Finances, 
inspiré  par  le  Premier  ministre,  a  pu  faire  concrétiser  son  rêve  avec  un  programme  pour 
l'avenir des Mauriciens. Un programme visant à redresser notre économie, à assurer le plein 
emploi, à donner un travail à chacun des 75,000 Mauriciens sans emploi, à rendre la réussite 
scolaire accessible à tous et à réduire le fossé entre les riches et les économiquement faibles. 

Comme  en  1982,  M.  le  président,  avec  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  comme  Premier 
ministre,  l'île  Maurice,  à  coup  sûr,  rebondira  une  nouvelle  fois  pour  faire  oublier  l'ère 
Ramgoolam.  En  travaillant  avec  dignité,  dans  un  esprit  d'unité  et  de  respect,  le  peuple  en 
sortira gagnant. C'est le souhait de ce gouvernement, M. le président. 

Laissez-moi revenir encore une fois à la période 1982-1995, sur un secteur qui me 
concerne directement, c'est-à-dire, le secteur agricole. Tout le monde se souvient que durant 
les années 1975/76, le pays a connu le boom sucrier ; le prix avait connu une augmentation 
énorme.  Mais quel a été le sort de ce secteur durant la période allant de 1978 à 1982? 

M. le président, the Mauritian Sugar Economy was in trouble for three unprofitable 

years - 

liquidity squeeze affecting increasing number of factories; 
• 
•  one-third of firms operating under severe financial strain; 
•  deterioration in the performance of the sugar industry; 
• 

fixed investment declining, and 
land under irrigation had fallen.  

• 

Rising costs of production resulting from low average sugar cane output were - 

• 
• 
• 

the rising costs of inputs; 
the rising financial cost, and 
the depressed prices of sugar above preferential quota which went on world 
market. 

 

76 

And some urgent actions were needed - 

• 
• 

• 

• 

to enable and encourage resumption of investment; 
to raise ability of planters to pay  for water  and  other inputs so as to raise 
yield of small planters; 
to rehabilitate the existing waterworks by building new water reservoirs and 
to promote further growth and diversification, and  
above all to stabilise the industry's costs 

Qui a sauvé l'industrie sucrière, M. le président ? C'est bel et bien le gouvernement 
de SAJ en 1982/83. C'est le même scénario qui se pose aujourd'hui pour l'industrie sucrière, 
avec tous les acquis que le pays a perdus, c’est-à-dire - 

• 

• 

• 

Le prix garanti; 
Le marché garanti, et 
Le volume d'exportation garantie 

Mais  nous  ne  baisserons  pas  les  bras.  Ce  secteur  ne  va  pas  mourir.  Vous  pouvez 
compter  sur  ce  gouvernement.  Et  comme  je  l'ai  dit  aussi  lors  de  la  PNQ  du  leader  de 
l'opposition hier, il nous faut un effort national dans ce sens. 

Le  budget,  M.  le  président,  offre  d'autres  opportunités,  dont  la  création  de  milliers 
d'emplois. Qui avait créé la Cybercité d’Ébène ? C'est bien Sir Anerood Jugnauth ! Et qu'est-
ce que l'Opposition à l'époque, surtout le Parti travailliste, n'avait pas dit ? 

Mais, Sir Anerood Jugnauth n'avait pas écouté les critiques de l'Opposition ; il a fait 
sa  route  pour  l'aménagement  de  la  Cybercité  d'Ébène.  L'Opposition  travailliste  a  eu  tort 
d'avoir  pris  position  contre  un  projet  de  cette  envergure,  devenu  maintenant  un  pilier 
important  dans  l'économie  mauricienne.   Today,  we  have  a  booming  Ébène  city  with  over 
15,000 intelligent jobs on an area of around 100 hectares of land. Avec les huit Smart Cities 
en cinq ans, le paysage mauricien changera. Nous sommes certains d'offrir à nos jeunes un 
emploi productif. 

Je  trouve  regrettable  la  position  de  l’honorable  Reza  Uteem  -  malheureusement  il 
n’est pas là aujourd’hui - qui a exprimé ses réserves quant à la démarche du gouvernement 
d'absorber le chômage. 

 

77 

Mes collègues, M. le président, ainsi que toute la nation mauricienne savent que ce 
gouvernement  va  mener  à  bien  ces  projets,  car  nous  avons  pris  l'engagement  de  servir  le 
peuple. 

Ce  budget  ranime  l'espoir  de  voir  se  concrétiser  un  deuxième  miracle  économique 
après tant d'années. En voyant le ministre des Finances prononcer son discours sur le budget, 
j'étais sûr qu'il réussirait à redonner espoir à la population et qu'il se mettait à l'œuvre afin de 
redonner le sourire à nos compatriotes et aux acteurs de l'économie mauricienne. Il n'a pas 
prononcé  des  mots  creux.  C'est  pourquoi  les  réactions  ont  été  claires  et  positives.  C’est 
pourquoi je peux ajouter à cela le sondage de DCDM publié par l'Express dans son édition du 
26 mars dernier, qui nous donne encore une fois ce soutien. L’Opposition dit que c’est la fin 
de  notre  honeymoon.    Mais  la  population  croit  en  nous,  parce  que  nous  sommes  un 
gouvernement sérieux, avec un Premier ministre, comme on dit, smart, n’est-ce pas ? 

M. le président, nous voyons déjà l'impact positif de ce budget sur le marché boursier. 
Les  déclarations  de  M.  Raj  Makoond  du  Joint  Economic  Council,  des  représentants 
syndicaux,  des  forces  vives  et  d'autres  ONG  sont  encourageantes.  Même  Mgr  Ian  Ernest, 
l’Evêque  de  Maurice,  dans  son  message  à  l'occasion  de  la  fête  de  Pâques,  l'a  bien  fait 
ressortir : ce budget propulse le pays dans la bonne direction. 

Dans ce même élan, M. le président, je lance un appel à tous les citoyens qui aiment 
notre république : venez nous soutenir dans notre mission visant à propulser l'île Maurice à 
l'avant-plan. Parce qu'en démocratie il n'y a pas d'ennemis. Comme je l'ai fait ressortir plus 
tôt, il y a une opposition et un gouvernement. Mais si nous aimons notre pays, si nous avons à 
cœur l'avenir de nos compatriotes, ne soyons pas des oiseaux de mauvais augure, ne prions 
pas pour l'échec de ce gouvernement, mais soyons les bons semeurs. Que le gouvernement 
gouverne avec droiture et discipline et que les critiques de l'Opposition soient constructives. 

Ayons un but commun : tout faire pour que notre pays oublie les moments douloureux 

qu'on vient de vivre avec la saga de la BAI. 

Comme le ministre des Finances l'a bien dit : “We are at a crossroad”.  Nous sommes 

à la croisée des chemins. Ne ratons pas notre rendezvous avec l'Histoire. 

Vous avez tous vu comment, durant les années de règne de Navin Ramgoolam, il y a 
eu cette cassure entre l'État et le peuple. Avec ce budget, nous avons pu reconstruire ce lien 
État-peuple,  primordial  pour  l'avancement  d'une  société.  Quand  nous  disons  que  nous 
sommes à la croisée des chemins, cela veut dire que nous nous séparons d'une route, celle 
éventrée  par  le  PTR,  pour  emprunter  une  autre  voie  construite  par  l'Alliance  Lepep,  bien 
meilleure et sécurisante, pour aller droit vers le but fixé par ce gouvernement. 

 

78 

Together with our people we will live our life in such a way that whenever we stop 
and look at the footprints, we see a path that we are all happy to call it’s our own and one that 
the future generation will benefit. Above all, the future generation will be able to say 'thank 
you' for leaving a legacy which we would be proud of. A country which will allow future 
generations to live happily and decently! Not a country where all the money is in the safe of 
one or two persons. 

M. le président, nous entrons maintenant dans une phase extrêmement concrète.  Le 
ministre  des  Finances  a  brossé  un  tableau  des  indicateurs  économiques.  Il  compte  prendre 
contrôle et maîtriser la situation. 

 (Interruptions) 

Il a annoncé qu'il vise une croissance de 5,4% pour 2015/2016 et 5,7% pour 2016/2017 et 
c'est réalisable, M. le président. Je suis triste de la déclaration des membres  de l'Opposition 
disant que les objectifs de la croissance fixés pour l'année prochaine ne seront pas atteints. Au 
lieu de nous encourager, de prier pour que le pays progresse et que les Mauriciens en sortent 
gagnant, ils se laissent animer par la négativité. Comme on le sait, la négativité ne fait que 
casser le moral mais fort heureusement que nous avons un moral d'acier. 

Regardez  les  pays  en  développement !  Leurs  dirigeants  espèrent  atteindre  une 
croissance moyenne de 5,3% et 5,4% pour l’année 2016 et 2017 respectivement. La Chine et 
l'Inde, deux pays émergents, visent une croissance de 7% pour l’année 2016 et dans ces pays, 
l'Opposition ne rouspète pas. Maurice ne peut adopter une attitude défaitiste avec l'héritage 
laissé par le Parti Travailliste. Nous sommes motivés et nous travaillerons sans relâche pour 
réussir. 

M. le président, laissez-moi revenir aux mesures annoncées dans le discours budget 
pour  le  ministère  de  l'Agro-Industrie  et  de  la  Sécurité  Alimentaire.   Je  me  réjouis  de  la 
décision prise concernant le paiement d'une compensation aux planteurs de canne à sucre.  Ils 
passent par des moments difficiles ces dernières années avec la baisse continue de prix du 
sucre sur le marché européen et la dernière baisse a fait chuter le prix de R 16,500 en 2013 à  
R 12,400 pour la récolte de 2014. Ça a été un autre grand coup dur pour ce secteur.  

Les  planteurs,  et  plus  particulièrement  les  petits  planteurs,  ont  un  rôle  important  à 
jouer  pour  la  survie  de  l'industrie  sucrière  car  leur  production  de  canne  à  sucre  compte 
beaucoup pour avoir la masse critique nécessaire à la viabilité de ce secteur.   Beaucoup de 
petits planteurs, découragés par la baisse de prix, les augmentations des coûts de production 
et  du  manque  de  main-d'œuvre,  ont  préféré  abandonner  la  culture  de  la  canne.   Ce 

 

79 

gouvernement est disposé à prendre les mesures adéquates pour encourager les planteurs à 
continuer de cultiver la canne à sucre. 

Tout un arsenal de décisions doit être pris pour la valorisation de ce secteur, autrefois 
l'épine  dorsale  de  l'économie  mauricienne.  Pour  que  les  planteurs  n'abandonnent  pas  leurs 
terres,  il  faut  une  vision  claire  et  des  actions  d'ampleur  nationale.  Une  fois  qu'on  arrive  à 
franchir cette étape et qu'on transforme cette industrie en une industrie cannière à forte valeur 
ajoutée,  la  jeune  génération,  qui  ne  s'intéresse  pas  aujourd'hui  avec  l'industrie  sucrière 
traditionnelle, se tournera volontairement vers ce secteur. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

L'introduction de nouvelles variétés à meilleur rendement en remplacement de 
celles qui ont fait leur temps est nécessaire; 
Les résultats des recherches qui sont en cours pour l'amélioration de la culture 
de la canne doivent être suivis de près et vulgarisés auprès des petits planteurs; 
La technique de zero budgeting farming sans utilisation des pesticides est une 
pratique qui ne nécessite pas de gros investissements. Cette méthode qui existe 
en  Inde  est  très  intéressante.  Déjà  à  Maurice,  un  individu  dans  la  région  de 
Flacq a recours au zero budgeting farming sur une petite échelle et les résultats 
sont  très  concluants.  Cette  technique,  on  doit  la  faire  parvenir  aux  autres 
planteurs, et 
Soutenir sans aucune hésitation la production d'éthanol pour le marché local et 
aussi pour l'exportation.   

Mais il est dommage, M. le président, que l'ancien gouvernement nous a fait perdre 
une enveloppe de R 200 millions  pour n'avoir pas respecté l'engagement auprès de l'Union 
Européenne  dans  le  cadre  des  mesures  d'accompagnement  pour  la  réforme  sucrière  et 
l’honorable Osman Mahomed  sait de quoi je parle. Un projet qui aurait déjà dû être mis en 
place, le blend d’E5 d’éthanol avec la gazoline. Un projet pilote a été entamé mais est resté 
dans le tiroir quelque part. Quel gâchis, R 200 millions parties ! 

M. le président, des provisions budgétaires de plus de R 600 millions ont été faites 
dans les deux budgets en cours pour permettre  à d'autres planteurs de se joindre au projet 
FORIP afin d'augmenter leur production et réduire leurs coûts de production. 

Le Consultant, Landell Mills Consulting, vient de soumettre  un rapport préliminaire 
sur la restructuration de l'industrie cannière afin d'assurer sa pérennité, spécialement en vue 
de l'échéance de 2017 qui verra l'abolition complète des quotas sur le marché européen.  Les 

 

80 

consultations avec les différentes parties concernées sont en cours et le rapport sera finalisé 
très bientôt.  Le gouvernement prendra, bien sûr, les décisions appropriées en vue de reformer 
ce secteur en s'assurant que les intérêts de tout un chacun soient préservés dans la mesure du 
possible. 

M. le président, une autre mesure qui intéresse grandement les consommateurs est la 
culture des produits agricoles bio.  C'est un fait indéniable qu'il  y a  actuellement un usage 
abusif, et peut-être involontaire de la part de certains planteurs de produits chimiques dans la 
culture  des  fruits  et  des  légumes.   Ces  produits  rentrent  sur  le  marché  avec  le  risque  de 
contenir  des  résidus,  des  pesticides  et  ce  qui  expose  les  consommateurs  à  des  risques  de 
problèmes  de  santé.   Il  a  été  très  difficile  déjà  jusqu'ici,  en  dépit  des  mesures  prises,  de 
retracer les planteurs concernés afin de les conseiller sur les pratiques agricoles appropriées à 
prendre. 

La solution idéale est d'encourager les planteurs à adopter l'agriculture soutenable ou 
la culture des produits organiques qui nécessitera une diminution graduelle, éventuellement 
l'élimination complète de l'usage de fertilisants chimiques et autres pesticides dans la culture 
des fruits et des légumes. 

Le  gouvernement  viendra  avec  des  mesures  incitatives  pour  encourager  nos 
agriculteurs à se tourner vers la culture bio.  La législation sera amendée afin de permettre 
l'importation et l'utilisation des fertilisants bio.  La production et l'usage de compost seront 
encouragés.  Le gouvernement subventionne déjà le prix du compost.  La culture protégée, 
telle que l'hydroponique, recevra une attention particulière.  

M. le président, autre mesure qui va vraiment marquer l’histoire, l’annonce dans le 
budget de venir avec un National Wholesale Market project.  As the House may be aware, the 
present  marketing  conditions  in  which  fruits  and  vegetables  are  offered  on  the  wholesale 
market are considered to be mostly unsatisfactory by almost all operators of the production 
and marketing chain at the national level. 

Small growers are asking for an alternative marketing solution to the existing auction 
markets  in  Port  Louis,  Vacoas  and  Flacq.   Auctioneers  are  operating  in  unacceptable  and 
unhygienic conditions, particularly in Port  Louis. Small retailers have to reach the auction 
markets very early in the morning to get good quality products.  Wholesalers working mainly 
with store chains have to make long queues before delivering their products.  Store chains 
have expressed the wish to have alternate supply solutions to accompany their growth. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a timid attempt was made by the previous Government to 
remedy the situation.  This situation cannot persist.  We, as a responsible Government, are 

 

81 

sympathetic to the plights of the planters and other stakeholders and have decided that the 
wholesale marketing system should be completely revamped and modernised to reflect the 
image of a modern Mauritius. 

The  objective  of  the  National  Wholesale  Market  is  to  reorganise  the  wholesale 
marketing for fruits and vegetables at national level by creating a concentration of volumes in 
a  single  place.   This  will  bring  market  efficiency,  synergies,  and  improved  costs  sharing 
between operators, better transparency, modern and adequate premises to the whole fruit and 
vegetable food system. 

The new National Wholesale Market will make provision for a modern warehouse to 
attract  store  chains,  wholesalers  and  importers  for  expanding  and  modernising  their 
businesses.   Other  services  such  as  banking  facilities,  agricultural  inputs,  sale  of  seeds, 
fertilizers and pesticides will also be offered. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  another  project  that  deserves  to  be  mentioned  is  the 
construction  of  a  new  slaughterhouse. The  Central  Abattoir  is  more  than  37  years  old  and 
most  of  its  equipment  has  become  obsolete.   We  may  soon  find  it  difficult  to  ensure  the 
production of quality meat as per quality standard.  In fact, it cannot adapt to the exigencies 
of a modern slaughterhouse. 

There is, therefore, an urgent need for the setting up of a modern slaughterhouse with 
all facilities and protocol to ensure improvement in animal handling and strict adherence to 
operational  and  hygienic  norms  in  the  production  of  quality  meat  for  both  domestic  and 
export markets.  

The specific objectives of the new project are as follows - 

• 

• 

to  ensure  that  slaughtering  is  carried  out  under  high  standards  of  hygienic 
conditions  in  compliance  with  international  norms  and  practices,  and  I  may 
add, 
to ensure also improvement in operational efficiency with cost reduction. 

M. le président, il y a une série de projets en cours au niveau de mon ministère pour la 

protection de nos forêts et de notre biodiversité. 

•  Un  nouveau  projet  de  loi  sur  la  biodiversité  -  the  Native  Terrestrial 
Biodiversity and National Parks Bill - est en voie d'élaboration et sera présenté 
à la Chambre prochainement. 

•  Une  campagne  nationale  de  reboisement  de  nos  forêts  avec  la  plantation  de 

500,000 arbres sur les prochaines cinq années. 

 

82 

•  Une nouvelle pépinière sera aménagée au sanctuaire d'oiseaux à l'Estuaire de 

Terre Rouge.  

•  Un Wetland Bill va être présenté bientôt.  
•  Un plan de gestion des ilots sera élaboré bientôt.  
•  Mon ministère travaille aussi de concert avec l'Aapravasi Ghat Trust Fund sur 
le projet de l'UNESCO visant à retracer la route des travailleurs engagés car il 
existe des ruines sur l'Ile Plate datant de l'époque de l'arrivée des travailleurs 
engagés à Maurice. 

S'agissant  des  jardins  de  Maurice,  j'ai  la  ferme  intention,  M.  le  président,  de  les 
transformer en des sites de références mondiales avec des attraits historiques, culturels, loisirs 
et économiques dont nos compatriotes et touristes peuvent en profiter. 

M. le président, j’aimerai conclure en réaffirmant la conviction de ce gouvernement 
pour gagner la bataille du développement en vue de réaliser le deuxième miracle économique. 
Et comment en cette occasion ne pas avoir une pensée spéciale et une grande admiration pour 
le leader de cette équipe gouvernementale. Lui, qui est source d'inspiration pour beaucoup 
d'entre nous. Aux jeunes, je leur recommande de lire et relire la biographie de Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, pour connaître le profond de cette personnalité.  Il se décrit lui-même et comme je 
cite -  

«I'm a simple man and I live a simple life »  
Contrairement  à  l'autre  qui  ‘tousse  sali’ et  qui  a  fait  beaucoup  de  tort  à  cette  Ile 

 
Maurice pluriculturelle.  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! Hon. Bhagwan, no cross talking! 
Mr Seeruttun: To be more specific and precise, I'll say that only simple and humble 
people with the utmost simplicity in their lives who come as blessings and when you have a 
simple man like Sir Anerood Jugnauth at the head of the country, you own the most beautiful 
treasure of the world. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo!  

(5.50 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to comment on 
the Budget Speech.  

 

83 

In  Parliament,  a  serious  Government  presents  its  policies  and  a  serious  Opposition 
presents its alternatives. We have a responsibility in saying whether the Government is taking 
the  proper  direction  or  not.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  these  measures  are  inappropriate  without 
proposing alternatives. This very House is the place to debate on national matters to express 
our concerns on what should be done and emphasise on what should be avoided. The people 
have  spoken.  L’Alliance  Lepep  has  won  the  elections;  Ministers  have  been  appointment; 
policies and orientations have been defined. After preliminary inquiries, it is now apparent 
that public affairs have been mismanaged. Then, if one has departed from the basic rules of 
good governance, transparency and plunged into the ones of favouritism and corruption, he 
will  be  answerable  to  the  law,  in  strict  compliance  with  our  constitutional  and  legal 
frameworks.  

As far as my intervention on the Budget Speech is concerned, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I shall observe the strict guidance of our Standing Orders which stipulates that a debate 
upon a Bill shall be relevant to the Bill, and I have no intention to depart from that principle. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I inherited from my father sugarcane fields, like many other 
Members of this House and due to hard work, perseverance, vision and luck, I transformed 
these  unproductive  assets  into  a  diversified  group  with  interest  in  the  hospitality  sector, 
supermarkets, agribusiness, port centres, education and real estate. I believe this gives me a 
unique insight to the challenges and opportunities entrepreneurs face in our country.  

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has presented his Budget, I 

wish him and the country well, but my concerns are as follows. 

 M.  le  président,  l’orientation  de  ce  budget  fait  la  part  belle  aux  smart  cities  qui 
devront  porter  notre  croissance  économique  et  comme  l’a  dit,  à  juste  titre,  l’honorable 
ministre des Finances et comme nous le savons tous, quand la construction va, tout va. Cette 
initiative  est  certes  ambitieuse,  mais  tient-elle  la  route?  L’impact  positif  sur  notre  produit 
intérieur brut des constructions et autres développements liés à ces smart cities sera colossal. 
Mais il est bon de rappeler que ces projets de nouvelles villes sont pour la plupart déjà sur le 
marché et certaines depuis un certain temps déjà. D’autres ne se sont pas concrétisés eu égard 
à certaines lenteurs administratives mais la stricte vérité est toute autre. Cette vérité que tout 
projet  immobilier  prend  du  temps  pour  être  imaginé,  financé,  conçu  et  finalement  bien 
réalisé.  L’immobilier  étant  le  socle  de  tout  projet  économique  ou  social,  une  école,  une 
université, un hôtel, un centre de sport, une usine ont besoin de terrain et de mur. Ces projets 
s’inscrivent dans une logique de long terme et ne se réaliseront qu’en séquence. À ce titre, M. 
le président, je voudrais déposer deux documents : le premier d’Omnicane et le deuxième de 

 

84 

Médine,  qui  indiquent  que  ces  développements  sont  prévus  dans  la  durée.  Donc,  celui  du 
Médine  Master  Plan  est  inscrit  pour  la  période  2005-2025  et  le  Mon  Desert-Mon  Trésor 
Urban Master Plan Mauritius, it is a long term regional development vision pour 2065. 

M. le président, l’immobilier a été pour moi, créateur d’opportunités. Mais la chose 
est  simple,  comme  je  vous  l’ai  dit,  ces  deux  projets  prennent  du  temps  car  ils  répondent 
principalement à une logique qui est tout simplement celle du marché, celle de l’offre et de la 
demande.  Je  peux  vous  confirmer  que  tout  investisseur  avisé  ne  prendra  jamais  le  risque 
d’investir  massivement  dans  un  projet  si  le  marché  n’est  pas  prêt,  si  le  marché  n’est  pas 
capable  d’absorber  les  mètres  carrés  additionnels.  Il  faut  apprendre  des  erreurs  du  passé ; 
aussi bien le secteur privé que le secteur public, des échecs du projet de Centre Point, du 
Merit  ou  du  Mall  of  Mont  Choisy  sont  avant  tout  des  erreurs  commerciales  qui  viennent 
confirmer  que  le  marché  est  incapable  aujourd’hui  d’absorber  le  nombre  de  mètres  carrés 
additionnels à court et à moyen terme.  

Je  suis  donc  curieux  de  savoir  quelle  est  la  part  de  ces  centaines  milliards 
d’investissements  prévus  par  le  ministre  des  Finances  qui  vont,  pendant  les  18  prochaines 
mois, permettre de porter notre croissance à 5.3%. Par ailleurs, ce projet prévoit de revoir les 
guidelines RES et IRS pour, entre autres, lutter contre la création des ghettos de riches ou par 
soucis de mixité sociale. Force est de constater que ce ne sont pas seulement des étrangers qui 
achètent dans les IRS ou dans les RES.  Force est de constater également que la majorité des 
projets  de  morcellement  haut  de  gamme  réalisés  depuis  de  nombreuses  années  sont  des 
ghettos, de belles maisons entourées d’un grand mur et d’un gate à l’entrée, on peut voir ce 
type  de  morcellement  à  Tamarin,  à  Moka,  à  Belle  Vue,  à  Grand  Baie  et  j’en  passe.  Les 
différents promoteurs qui les ont réalisés ont répondu aux attentes d’une certaine clientèle, 
soucieuse  de  sécurité  et  d’un  développement  planifié  et  qui  respecte  scrupuleusement  les 
guidelines  afin  d’avoir  une  certaine  cohérence  esthétique  et  un  bon  entretien  des  parties 
communes.  

Personnellement, je suis contre ces gated communities mais je comprends ceux qui se 
sont laissés tenter par ce style de vie, car, malheureusement, les gouvernements précédents et 
les autorités locales n’ont pas su apporter les bonnes réponses à leur problématique. Dans les 
morcellements  traditionnels  on  le  voit  bien.  L’État  bien  souvent  ne  joue  pas  son  rôle  en 
laissant  proliférer  des  soi-disant  morcellements  agricoles  et  en  ne  sanctionnant  pas  les 
constructions sauvages et illégales.  

 

85 

M.  le  président,  l’État  doit  pleinement  assurer  son  rôle  de  garde-fou  de  notre 
démocratie et pas seulement pour faire part, pour faire la une des journaux à sensation mais 
aussi pour veiller à ce que notre population vive dans un environnement de plus en plus de 
qualité, en ville ou en région rurale. 

M. le président, je reviens en quelques mots sur cette volonté de ce gouvernement de 
revoir  l’accession  à  la  législation  RES/IRS  et  je  tiens  à  rappeler  quelques  chiffres.  Ces 
produits ont rapporté 44 milliards de FDI.  Ils ont remporté 4.4 milliards de taxes directement 
collectées  par l’État. C’est quatre-vingt-cinq millions de roupies injectées dans  le social et 
cela représente 24% du FDI pour toute la période. Cette législation est globalement bonne 
mais  certains  aspects  doivent  être  modifiés  notamment  une  obligation  de  GFA  couvrant 
toutes les phases du projet; tous les propriétaires terriens devraient avoir le droit de faire un 
IRS ou un RES. Cette restriction de small landowner n’a pas de sens.   

Si le landowner veut vendre son terrain et ne veut pas prendre le risque du projet, il 
doit pouvoir le faire.  Il ne doit pas être contraint de rester dans l’actionnariat. Les frais de 
transferts et d’enregistrement doivent être alignés sur la législation nationale et non plus être 
uniformisés sur un palier de 25,000 dollars par  résidence. Au-delà de  cette taille, il  y  a la 
nécessité  d’avoir  un  vrai  aménagement  et  de  ce  fait  une  législation  qui  pourrait  être  ou 
encadrer celle des fameuses Smart Cities. Ainsi, ces nouveaux quartiers où quartiers rénovés 
pourraient être habités par des mauriciens et seront aussi attractifs pour les étrangers. Et pour 
cela,  j’estime  qu’il  ne  faudrait  pas  avoir  l’ambition  de  se  limiter  aux  Smart  Cities.  Nous 
devons avoir l’ambition de transformer toute notre île en un smart island.  Il faut encourager, 
encadrer les promoteurs immobiliers : petits, moyens et gros à faire de meilleurs projets plus 
réfléchis, mieux ciblés, et surtout mieux intégrés. Il faut encourager une rénovation urbaine 
nationale pour que nos villes redeviennent des endroits où il fait bon vivre.  

Quand on parle encore aujourd’hui de Curepipe, ville lumière; Quatre Bornes, ville 
des fleurs ; quand on voit ce que Grand Baie et Flic en Flac sont devenus, on mesure le travail 
qui nous reste à accomplir pour changer et transformer le visage de notre île. Nous devons 
prendre ville par ville, quartier par quartier, ensemble avec le privé, imaginer, conceptualiser, 
végétaliser, oxygéner toutes ces espaces. Ces Smart Cities ne sont pas une réponse durable 
car elles laissent de côté tout le reste de la population. Explorons le concept de Smart City 
mais étendons ce concept à un smart island ainsi que des smart neighbourhoods dans tous les 
endroits.  Ayez le projet, certes ambitieux, d’un vaste chantier de rénovation urbaine. Alors 
où  commencer ?    Je  m’adresse  à  l’honorable  ministre  des  Terres  et  du  Logement.    Tout 

 

86 

simplement par dépoussiérer le rapport MATIM. Ce rapport MATIM dort dans les tiroirs du 
ministère  des  Terres  et  du  Logement  depuis  bientôt  40  ans.  Ce  fameux  rapport  MATIM 
(Mission  d’Aménagement  du  Territoire  de  l’île  Maurice)  date  des  années  70  et  avait  pour 
cadre de définir l’aménagement cohérent de notre territoire. Je laisse le soin au Vice-Premier 
ministre de le sortir, de le dépoussiérer et de voir si ce rapport est encore d’actualité ou pas. 
Cela pourrait être un début.  

Pour conclure sur le volet terrien, M. le président, il faut que notre pays s’ouvre non 
seulement  aux  investisseurs  mais  aux  étrangers.    N’ayons  pas  peur  de  l’étranger.    Nous 
sommes tous de par nos origines un peuple de déracinés et nous avons pourtant appris à vivre 
ensemble. Il suffit de voir arriver 500 familles étrangères que l’on s’offusque de l’invasion de 
ces derniers. Nous avons besoin d’idées nouvelles, de capitaux frais et, à ce titre, il est temps 
d’accepter et de partager nos espaces avec ces nouveaux immigrants économiques car il en va 
de notre avenir.  Je crois que ce gouvernement doit clairement indiquer ce qu’il veut faire de 
notre  île  et  envoyer  des  signaux  clairs.  Je  recommande  fortement  la  mise  en  place  d’un 
comité  d’experts  afin  de  rédiger  un  Regulatory  Impact  Assessment  préalable  à  la  mise  en 
place  des  nouvelles  règles  IRS/RES.  Si  ce  gouvernement  se  veut  responsable,  il  doit  être 
totalement  conscient  de  l’impact  de  tout  changement  de  loi  -  impact  qui  peut  s’avérer 
dramatique sur l’attractivité de notre île.   

M. le président,  je souhaite maintenant survoler rapidement certains secteurs de notre 
économie et identifier quelques lacunes. La part de l’investissement public dans ce budget est 
réduite de trois milliards; miser uniquement sur celle du privé et risquer dans les objectifs 
d’atteindre  une  croissance  de  5.3%  sera  sérieusement  compromise.  Par  ailleurs,  la 
contribution de notre secteur manufacturier au produit intérieur brut est en baisse. A part le 
seafood hub et quatre pôles textiles: le jean, la chemise, le pantalon, le T-shirt qui ont su se 
réinventer  et  ont  été  en  mesure  de  rivaliser  et  d’être  compétitifs,  en  général  le  secteur  est 
morose. Il est prévu d’investir quatre cents millions de roupies pour ce secteur.  J’espère que 
celui-ci  sera  utilisé  pour  cibler  et  valoriser  notre  savoir-faire.  Nous  ne  sommes  plus  en 
compétition avec la Chine ou le Vietnam mais nous devons monter en gamme toujours à la 
recherche d’un marché de niche et nos compétiteurs directs sont Italie et Singapour.   

M. le président, un point inquiétant concerne la productivité de nos employés et, à ce 
titre, elle doit être au centre de nos préoccupations car il faut inculquer que pour gagner plus, 
il  faut  travailler  mieux  et  il  n’en  ait  pas  fait  mention  dans  ce  budget.  Une  meilleure 
productivité de l’économie nationale engendrerait une meilleure production qui de source se 

 

87 

traduirait  par  un  meilleur  partage  national.  Il  faut  une  profonde  réflexion  et  une  réforme 
structurelle dans ce secteur. 

Sur le volet agricole, M. le président, depuis que nous avons opté pour la monoculture 
suite  aux  accords  préférentiels,  nous  ne  produisons  plus  rien  depuis  cinquante  ans.  Fut  un 
temps  où  nos  campagnes  produisaient  tout:  du  lait,  des  légumes  et  des  animaux  de  ferme.  
Aujourd’hui, nous importons pratiquement tout. J’invite l’honorable ministre de l’agriculture 
à venir avec des assises du secteur agricole afin que nous redéfinissions l’avenir de ce secteur 
ainsi que du pôle gagné. 

M. le président, je souhaiterai également commenter les mesures en relation avec le 
CSR.  La  plus  grosse  difficulté  des  entreprises  était  ces  fameux  CSR  guidelines  dont 
l’obligation était de faire pré-approuver tous les projets par le National CSR Committee. Au 
fil des années, ces CSR guidelines se sont complexifiés par de nombreuses restrictions. Il y 
avait  pour  résultat  que  l’entreprise  privée  faisait  de  l’administration  et  non  plus  du  social. 
Pour autant, devons-nous, l’État, nous désengager de notre mission première. J’ai appris une 
chose dans la vie. Si on veut réussir, il faut savoir se focaliser sur une ou deux choses, un ou 
deux  objectifs  atteignables  à  défaut  de  se  disperser  sur  plusieurs  autres.  Ces  entreprises, 
comme l’honorable Baloomoody l’a fait ressortir, ont contribué à hauteur de six cents à sept 
cents  millions  l’année  dernière.  Concrètement,  comment  cela  va  se  passer  s’il  n’y  a  plus 
d’interaction  avec  l’État.  L’entreprise  financera  qui  elle  veut  à  savoir  du  déjeuner  de 
vieillesse,  au  ballon  de  football  du  club  de  la  localité  ou  même  les  associations 
socioculturelles, donc totalement diffus, disperse, non-ciblé et sous productif.  

Il  me  semble  primordial  d’identifier  au  minimum  un  cadre  ainsi  que  des  actions 
définies.  Si  le  ministère  de  l’intégration  sociale  en  ligne  avec  le  plan  Marshall  de  ce 
gouvernement  estime  que  la  lutte  contre  l’extrême  pauvreté  commence  par  un  logement 
décent,  le  social  housing,  faisons  de  cette  orientation  une  priorité  majeure  et  concentrons-
nous dessus. Je pense que déléguer au privé sans avoir préalablement défini une orientation 
laisse le champ libre aux abus et aux actions qui n’auront pas le résultat escompté. Je tiens 
par ailleurs, M. le président, à saluer les initiatives suivantes - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

l’abolition du plastique, en espérant que la prochaine étape sera le tri sélectif ; 
l’intention de transformer le port ; 
la création de technopoles ; 
la maison de la culture mauricienne ; 

 

88 

• 
• 

l’évolution de l’agriculture bio, et 
l’amendement de ce Local Government Act. 

Mais plus en profondeur car j’étais - tout comme l’honorable Madame Boygah et l’honorable 
Rughoobur  et  même  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  qui  a  commencé  comme  Chairman  du 
village de Palma - moi-même District Councillor pendant dix ans, donc c’est un secteur que 
je  connais  bien.  Et  à  ce  titre  j’ai  pu  constater,  de  l’intérieur,  les  lacunes  inhérentes  à  ces 
départements.  Donc, une fois pour toutes, réformons cette loi inadaptée. 

M. le président, quelques mots sur ma circonscription rapidement. Je demanderai aux 
autorités d’y accorder une attention particulière. En effet, elle souffre d’un manque cruel de 
logements  sociaux,  d’une  infrastructure  inappropriée  et  dans  certains  endroits,  on  y  côtoie 
une pauvreté  extrême.  

Voilà, M. le président, nous sommes à l’aube de ce premier budget l’Alliance Lepep. 
Critiquer  dans  le  vide  n’a  pas  de  chance,  critiquer  sans  pouvoir  comparer  en  ce  qui  était 
promis et réalisé n’est pas productif. Nous le ferons donc en temps et lieu.  

En attendant, je vous souhaite à toutes et à tous bonne chance.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

(6.06 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun):   

M. le président, laissez-moi pour commencer dire que l’honorable Jhuboo a été très 
fair dans ce débat et il a trouvé juste de dire qu’on ne peut comparer à ce stage puisque nous 
sommes seulement là en train de dire quels sont nos projets. Et, en temps et lieu, il pourra 
juger si nos projets vont finalement se concrétiser ou pas. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  stand  before  you  today,  before  this  House  as  a  proud 
Member of a Government, a Government to which I belong and which has proved, right from 
the beginning of its mandate, through its first Budget, that it means business. 

I have to extend my congratulations to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development and his team who have masterminded the whole enterprise. 

The Finance Minister has indeed set the tone right by demonstrating its capacity to 
align  the  Budget  on  the  Government  Programme  he  presented  to  the  nation  for  the  period 
2015 and 2019. 

89 

This House will recall paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Government Programme that read 

 

thus – 

“Government’s  objective  is  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  truly  forward 
looking,  environmentally  sustainable,  economically  vibrant  and  innovative  country 
with modern infrastructure, global connectivity, high skills and technology.” 

Again, paragraph 7 had this to say – 

“Government  will  improve  quality  of  life,  accelerate  social  integration, 
strengthen  democracy  and  ensure  the  independent  functioning  of  institutions.  The 
ultimate aim is to shape a second socio-economic miracle in the interest of one and 
all.” 

And  now,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  us  cast  an  educated  glance  to  the  4  main 

objectives of this Budget. The first reads thus – 

 “Steer  the  economy  towards  a  path  of  high  investment  and  high 

employment.” 

And the remaining 3 go thus – 

•  Secure long-term sustainable development for all; 
•  Achieve greater equity and social justice for one and all, and 
•  Promote transparency and good governance in the management of public affairs. 

Anyone would see the coherence between the two documents, indeed, the discourse has not 
changed. 

In fact, the discourse has not changed an iota since the time of the political manifesto 

of “l’Alliance Lepep” that did emphasise the paramount necessity for – 

-  greater justice and socio-economic betterment; 
- 
the creation and sharing of the national wealth; 
institutional credibility, and 
- 
enhanced  transparency,  accountability  and  good  governance  in  the  conduct  of 
- 
Government affairs. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  carefully  scrutinised  the  Budget.  A  classic  budget 
presentation merely indicates what measures will be taken and where the money will go for 
the year - in other words, the here and the now. 

 

90 

But this budget goes many steps further.  It indicates a clear vision of the future that 

this Government wants to construct for the nation. 

This is a vision that is not constricted by the carpe diem principle. The carpe diem 

principle which says – 

 “Seize the day, trusting as little as possible in the future.” 

No,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Budget  does  not  rely  on  this  philosophy.  This 
Budget  is  instead  solidly  anchored  in  an  article  of  faith,  a  vision  for  the  future  whose 
foundation is laid today. 

And I see this vision built on 3 major areas of focus - 

1.  Infrastructural Environment; 
2.  Employment Generation, and 
3.  A People Centred Development. 

Let  us  take  the  infrastructural  environment.    We  have  what  we  call  the  “Mega 
Projects”  centred  around  a  policy  thrust  aimed  at  the  development  of  the  country’s 
infrastructural environment for a more than decent future for all. 

The smart cities, the transformation of the Port Louis harbour into a regional hub for 
bunkering, seafood, transhipment, cruise and petroleum, the restructuring of the IRS/RES – 
all spell out an approach that necessitates mammoth investments. 

This  would  appear  daunting,  but  when  we  keep  the  dividends  in  balance,  the 

investment would definitely be worthwhile. 

In  fact,  any  investment  that  projects  a  country  in  the  future  is  worth  making,  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

When we come to employment generation, the second area of focus is directly related 
to the first. This has to be with employment generation and, as a case in point, let us briefly 
concentrate  on  the  new  growth  pole  that  has  today  secured  international  acceptance  and 
recognition, namely, the Blue Ocean Economy. We know exactly how ground-breaking this 
is likely to be. This is what UNCTAD 2014 Report had to say about the Oceans Economy: 
opportunities  and  challenges  for  Small  Island  Developing  States  has  to  say  about  it,  and  I 
quote – 

 

91 

“The oceans economy offers significant development opportunities and also 
raises  challenges  for  SIDS  in  sectors  such  as  sustainable  fisheries  and  aquaculture, 
renewable marine energy, marine bio-prospecting, maritime transport and marine and 
coastal tourism.” 

The  Abu  Dhabi  Declaration  on  the  Blue  Economy  of  January  2014,  for  its  part, 
offered a framework to protect and enhance the value of marine and coastal systems through 
an integrated approach. Such is likely to be the growth of this new economy that a plea has 
been made for enhanced mechanisms for governance of the high seas to be set up while all 
parties – States, international agencies and donors – were called upon to work out means to 
support and facilitate the implementation of the Blue Economy in developing countries. 

Thus,  once  the  port  infrastructure  is  properly  kick-started,  it  will  become  a  key 
contributor to the development of the ocean economy. The impact this will have on the SMEs 
and even the non-formal sector will be incredible.  And above all, this will call for a massive 
demand  for  a  workforce  for  the  relatively  new  types  of  jobs  that  will  be  created.    The 
National Ocean Council will thus have a heavy responsibility to shoulder in the process of 
coordination for the effective implantation of Ocean Economy. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that was only in relation to the  Blue Economy. When we 
think  about  the  other  sectors  the  Budget  looks  at  -  the  SMEs,  the  Agro-Industry,  the 
manufacturing industry as well as Tourism, Financial Services and ICT, we realise the whole 
new set of job opportunities that will be created.  Employment prospects when realised and 
employment  opportunities  when  presented  become,  in  fact,  the  instrument  for  social 
integration, social peace and the base for human and societal development. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  allow  me  to  come  to  the  third  major  pillar  on  which  this 
Budget  is  premised.  In  the  2014  statement  of  its  position  on  the  post-2015  development 
agenda - the African Union Groups, Africa’s development priorities into 6 pillars, the third 
one  in  that  list  is  the  People-Centred  Development.  The  House  will  remember  that  even 
before his Budget Speech, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development had been 
steadily  stretching  the  importance  he  meant  to  attach  to  social  uplift  of  the  people  of  the 
Republic. No one can say that he has not lived up to his words. 

We recall here paragraph 14 of the Government Programme which reads thus – 

 

92 

“A key  consideration of Government during its mandate will be to reduce 
the  gap  between  the  rich  and  the  poor,  promote  social  justice,  economic 
empowerment and national unity and protect the elderly and vulnerable ones.” 

The House will agree that both the NGOs and the community at large have been all 

praised in favour of the Marshall Plan against poverty. 

Of special interest to them has been an appreciation of the concept of ‘parrainage’ for 
a list of pockets of poverty that exists in Mauritius. We are not here talking of the one-off 
CSR  sponsorship  or  a  strategy  based  on  adhocracy.  Rather,  we  are  talking  about  a  well-
planned  and  well-implemented  programme  that  looks  at  the  overall  development  of  a 
deprived region in a comprehensive manner. 

As the Budget indicates, this takes on board these expected outcomes – 

Improved living conditions generally; 
raised level of employment; 

• 
• 
•  curb of social ills; 
•  school  attendance  by  children  taken  up,  integral  holistic  development  of  these 

children; 
the creation of sports and leisure facilities, and 
the improvement of the quality of life generally. 

• 
• 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this together with Government’s commitment and a spate of 
other measures that go in the direction of improving the lot of the people, the provision of 
improved health care facilities, environmental betterment, new social security measures and 
so  on  will  no  doubt  bring  results.    But,  by  no  means,  will  Government  abdicate  from  its 
responsibility towards the deprived. It will be good to remind Members of the Opposition that 
this Government is led by Sir Anerood Jugnauth, a Prime Minister who has the trust of the 
people, a Prime Minister who will not, at any cost, tolerate dilly-dallying. This is our asset, 
our Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and we will certainly work hard and manage to 
attain our goals. 

With  your  permission,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  now  concentrate  on  the 
measures relating to my portfolio, that of Education. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the first annual 
report  by  J.  P.  Morgan  Chase,  the  extremely  renowned  firm  of  huge  financial  assets,  is 
reputed to have stated the following, and I quote –  

93 

“The  power  of  intellectual  capital  is  the  ability  to  breed  ideas  that  ignite 

 

value.” 

And, a few years back, the Deutsche Bank took out a big advertisement in the Wall 

Street Journal with the headline: ‘Ideas are capital.  The rest is just money.’ 

This,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  the  world  in  which  our  youth  are  called  upon  to 
evolve. Education is now viewed as the creator of the intellectual capital and hence, logically 
the  economic  capital.  This  places  a  major  onus  on  education  and  training  as  the  driver  of 
socio-economic transformation. 

I  will  now  talk  about  the  integral  development  of  our  learners  and  this  has  to  start 
quite early, in fact, right from the pre-primary subsector and onwards. We need to move away 
from the kind of rote learning and didactic frontal teaching to-the-text that have characterised 
primary  schooling  so  far.  We  are  killing  the  creativity  of  our  children.  Nor  are  we 
successfully inculcating a system of values and right attitudes in them. 

Competitiveness  has  become  the  catchphrase  and  leaves  our  children  with  no 
opportunity  to  demonstrate  their  multiple  talents  and  non-academic  achievements.  And, 
these,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  are  instrumental  in  the  promotion  of  self-esteem  and  self-
confidence within them. 

My Ministry accordingly intends to stress the inculcation and assimilation of the right 
values  -  civic  and  moral  -  as  part  of  the  curriculum.  Further,  we  also  want  to  allow  the 
complete holistic development of our children by providing opportunities for them to develop 
their full potential. Arts, music, dance and drama need to be introduced in our schools from 
the very early stages, primary level, indeed. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Mauritius has a plural society and it is of crucial importance 
that  our  children  learn  to  respect  and  accept  others.  This  is  why  it  is  essential  that  they 
acquire  knowledge,  skills,  attitudes  and  behaviours  which  will  enable  them  to  develop  a 
global culture of greater respect for human dignity. And it is now time to introduce human 
rights education in our schools. This will allow our children to grow with a high self-esteem 
and a notion of justice, freedom, equality and peace. We intend to roll human rights education 
at lower secondary level as from January 2016. I would like here to thank the Prime Minister 
and the Prime Minister’s Office for the support given to my Ministry for the introduction of 
human rights education in our schools. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  numerous  cases  of  child  abuse  clearly  underlines  the 
urgent need to introduce sexuality education in our schools. And, thus, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, the recent unfortunate case of a child in a primary school has reinforced my conviction in 

 

94 

making sexuality education fundamental for all learners and, thus, with a view of protecting 
our children, of making them aware of the risk that they may face. I think this is extremely 
important  and  need  to  be  taken  on  board  very  soon.  We  will  need  to  talk  with  all 
stakeholders,  get  the  support  of  the  different  stakeholders;  the  parents,  the  teachers,  the 
different groups of schools, managers of schools to come up with the proper programme to 
ensure that our children are well protected. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will now quickly talk about the nine year continuous basic 
schooling. For a decade or more people have been expressing their concern with regard to the 
CPE. What hasn’t been said about the corrosive power of the CPE? Agreed, it did serve a 
purpose  at  a  time  when  the  educational  landscape  was  not  dotted  by  high  number  of 
secondary schools. A l’époque, un examen qui aurait fait office de certification ainsi que de 
sélection  comme  passage  obligatoire  au  cycle  secondaire  était  de  rigueur.  Mais  le  CPE  a 
aujourd’hui fait son temps.  

It has also been the cause of a constant hand-wringing in all quarters – the parents, 
first,  who  see  the  debilitating  effect  it  has  on  their  children;  the  school  next,  that  see  the 
system encouraging rote learning and teaching to-the-text rather than developing the whole 
child in an integrated manner. Et ensuite nous avons cet élément de décrochage, une perte 
importante  de  ressources  humaines  qui  est  économiquement  intolérable  et  moralement 
inacceptable pour un pays comme Maurice. Donc, je le répète, le CPE a aujourd’hui fait son 
temps.  

The  new  Government  will  not  batten  down  the  hatches  and  wait  for  the  storm  of 
universal dissatisfaction to pass. Rather we will meet it headlong. We are within the next few 
weeks coming up with a carefully thought through programme for the implementation of the 
nine years of basic continuous education. Hon. Members on the Opposition side should rest 
assured that  I intend to have a large-scale consultation with all stakeholders, including the 
hon. Members of the Opposition, prior to the implementation of the new system. For today, 
let it suffice for me to say that full-scale roll out of the nine year basic schooling is for soon. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  if  we  all  agree  that  every  child  should  have  a  right  to 
education, then we must bear in mind that this is true for every child and especially for those 
having special educational needs. The Special Education Needs Resource and Development 
Centre is welcome as it is an imperative to ensure that access to education is open to all. 

Furthermore, four resource centres are being set up at Allée Brillant, Centre de Flacq, 
Rivière des Anguilles and Plaine Magnien. They will contribute to extend services offered to 
children  with  special  needs,  providing  special  therapies,  paramedical  and  psychological 

 

95 

support. Together with the precious help of the NGOs, we will ensure that these centres, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, give a new dimension to the life of these children. Ces enfants doivent 
pouvoir mener une vie normale et aspirer à un épanouissement sain.  

M. le président, mon ministère a la responsabilité d’un réservoir de jeunes avec un 
destin à façonner. Ces jeunes sont dans l’expectative d’un futur qui leur soit favorable, que ce 
soit au niveau autant professionnel que personnel.  

However, the unfortunate fact is that, so far, this has not happened. Rather we have 
been losing our youth to frustration and dispiritedness. For the last few years, the mantra that 
had been driven into the youth psyche was that of becoming graduates – no matter what the 
cost.  The  Government,  therefore,  inherited  a  situation  where  youth  employment  and 
employability started to play second fiddle to the cheap politics of slow organising the nation. 
On  n’a  pas  oublié  encore  le  ministre  Dr.  Jeetah  passant  de  porte  en  porte  disant  ‘one 
graduate per family’ and the like, without any guarantee of quality or any project for ensuring 
employment of these young graduates. 

And what has been the result? Thousands of students with degrees, some of which are 
not even recognised are still awaiting an opportunity to get a job. Obviously, we cannot leave 
these young people in the lurch, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. This is why this Budget gives the 
expectations  of  the  young  people  a  timely  shot  in  the  arm.  They  will  now  be  given  the 
possibility of sharpening and updating their skills through bespoke ‘crash courses’ in fields 
with  high  job  prospects.  These  will  be  conducted  in  recognised  Tertiary  Educational 
Institutions.  It  certainly  takes  a  Government  with  a  heart  to  assume  the  responsibility  of 
covering  the  annual  fees  amounting  to  around  Rs80,000  for  every  such  student.    We  are 
planning to have the service given to about 3,000 graduates without employment. 

 Et  là,  je  voudrais  faire  ressortir  que  le  membre  de  l’opposition,  l’honorable  Reza 
Uteem,  a  raison  de  dire  qu’il  est  important  de  bien  encadrer  les  étudiants  afin  qu’ils 
choisissent  des  filières  appropriées  pour  assurer  leur  avenir.  Le  Human  Resource 
Development  Council  et  le  service  de  Careers  Guidance  devront  tous  deux  déterminer  les 
filières porteuses et guider les jeunes d’une manière efficace. 

M.  le  président,  le  secteur  de  l’enseignement  supérieur  a  souffert  des  carences  du 
régime  précédent.  Que  l’environnement  pour  l’enseignement  supérieur  à  l’île  Maurice  ait 
connu  une  évolution  effrénée,  pour  ne  pas  dire  anarchique,  les  quelques  dernières  années, 
l’ont amplement démontré. Oui, M. le président, dans pratiquement tous les domaines, qu’il 
s’agisse de l’enseignement médical supérieur ou le secteur des sciences pures, de l’ingénierie 
ou des sciences sociales, le nombre croissant d’institutions d’études supérieures, les contenus 

 

96 

académiques et les rapports de ces institutions à leur environnement ont rencontré des défis 
majeurs au cours de cette phase de croissance. Et cette phase de croissance, qui a quelquefois 
été au détriment de la bonne gouvernance, n’a hélas pas été sans heurts, et nous en faisons les 
frais aujourd’hui. 

Ainsi, le régime précédent s’est permis de donner des orientations malencontreuses 
aux  étudiants  ces  dernières  années,  et  la  tâche  nous  est  maintenant  confiée,  au  nouveau 
gouvernement, de veiller à ce qu’aucun étudiant ne soit laissé pour compte en cours de route ! 
L’un  des  objectifs  de  la  politique  de  mon  ministère  et  du  gouvernement  est  donc, 
présentement,  de  rechercher  l’approche  optimale  pour  relever  les  défis  que  présente  cet 
environnement alité de l’enseignement supérieur. 

Afin  de  traduire  dans  la  réalité  les  axes  de  développement  dans  ce  secteur,  il  est 

question dans un premier temps – 

• 
• 

de relever le lien entre les efforts de recherche des institutions, et 
d’enquêter  sur  l’ensemble  des  questions  d’optimisation  de  réglementation, 
d’assurance  qualité,  de  financement  et  d’accréditation  de  l’enseignement 
supérieur, avec un accent particulier sur leur agencement dans les arènes de 
l’innovation et de la bonne gouvernance de tous nos organismes de formation. 

Notre  vision  est  donc  d’abord  sur  la  mise  en  place  des  systèmes  de  formation 

académique – 

• 
• 
• 

de bon standing; 
accessibles à la fois aux jeunes et aux adultes, et 
qui  leur  garantiront  un  emploi  à  la  fin  de  leurs  études,  avec  des  diplômes 
reconnus académiquement et professionnellement. 

M. le président, notre auguste Assemblée n’est pas sans savoir qu’un audit de notre 
système  de  l’enseignement  supérieur  a  été  effectué  par  la  Quality  Assurance  Agency  de 
l’Angleterre.  Une  première  ébauche  de  ce  rapport  nous  est  déjà  parvenue  avant  que  les 
rédacteurs n’aillent de l’avant avec la phase finale.  Mais d’ores et déjà on voit l’étendue du 
travail  qui  attend  mon  ministère.  N’empêche!  Mon  Ministère  est  actuellement  un  pied 
d’œuvre pour repositionner le secteur afin qu’il puisse être une plate-forme fiable et crédible 
pour l’éducation et la formation. 

Plus concrètement, on vient, comme annoncé dans ce présent budget, avec un projet 
de  loi  sur  l’enseignement  supérieur,  qui  est  en  cours  de  préparation.  C’est  ainsi  que  nous 

 

97 

agencerons  nos  universités  en  termes  d’accès,  de  disponibilité,  de  différentiation  des 
prestations  de  formations,  et  les  contenus  de  programmes  afin  d’assurer  la  qualité  et  la 
progression durable de ces formations sur le long terme. 

Pour réaliser cette vision, mon ministère et la Tertiary Education Commission, dont le 
fonctionnement  sera  revu,  seront  des  plateformes  de  coordination  et  d’engagement 
approfondies,  afin  qu’ensemble  et  avec  l’expérience  nationale  et  internationale  dans  ces 
secteurs nous trouvions des solutions aux problèmes identifiés. 

Puisque  notre  gouvernement  souhaite  faire  de  Maurice  un  centre  de  savoir,  il  nous 
faut nous assurer que l’éducation de qualité soit délivrée par toutes nos institutions et surtout 
de  nous  assurer  également  qu’il  n’y  ait  point  de  dissonance  entre  l’offre  académique  et  la 
reconnaissance professionnelle ultérieure de cette formation universitaire. S’il le faut, nous 
allons trancher, et trancher sur le vif. 

La TEC est aujourd’hui appelée à être plus vigilante et à résilier toute accréditation 
accordée à des institutions d’études supérieures qui ne sauraient être en règle avec les normes 
de qualité et de pérennité. 

M. le président, si on veut tabler chez une économie du savoir, il faut bien que nos 
institutions de l’enseignement supérieur fassent la part belle, d’une part, à la recherche, qui 
est la source même du savoir. Les services informatiques, la médecine, la biotechnologie et 
l’industrie marine sont autant de secteurs de recherche qui méritent une attention particulière 
de par l’aspect pratique qu’ils engendrent non seulement pour Maurice mais également pour 
la région. 

D’autre part, je trouve dommage qu’un pays aussi multilingue que Maurice n’est pas 
encore  misé  sur  le  développement  des  capacités  de  nos  jeunes  dans  le  domaine  de  la 
traduction et de l’interprétariat, surtout quand on a comme ambition de faire de l’île Maurice 
une destination pour les conférences internationales. 

J’ai  bien  l’intention  d’y  remédier  en  encourageant  et  l’Université  de  Maurice  et  le 
MGI à mettre en place des laboratoires linguistiques et multimédias, afin de donner un essor à 
ces nouveaux domaines de développement. C’est tout cela qui nous donnerait une longueur 
d’avance sur nos compétiteurs dans ces niches areas. 

M. le président, vous comprendrez donc que l’enseignement supérieur est un secteur 
auquel je paie une attention particulière. Je suis déterminée à redonner ses lettres de noblesse 
au secteur de l’enseignement supérieur, afin que celui-ci soit fermement ancré  et imbriqué 
dans la grande famille de l’éducation, et aussi à exercer efficacement son rôle de contribution 
à la croissance sociale et économique de notre pays. 

 

98 

 Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my Ministry has the responsibility to ensure that our young 
learners  avail  themselves  of  all  curricular  competencies  for  a  smooth  transition  and 
progression from these different levels of education. Maintaining a strategic linkage between 
these  subsectors  is  crucial,  especially  given  the  potential  to  propel  secondary  and 
technical/vocational students in the entrepreneurial hubs. 

I  also  deem  it  vital  to  have  an  effective  articulation  between  TVET  and  higher 

education. 

Today’s  global  conversation  resolves  around  the  linkage  between  the  world  of 
education and human resource development and the dispersion of responsibilities related to 
human  resource  development.    Education  and  human  resource  policies  have  then  to  be 
situated  in  the  promotion  of  lifelong  learning  within  a  human  resource  development 
perspective. Our learners will have to develop great versatility. 

This  is  especially  so  given  that  we  have  a  wide  range  of  learners  who  would  be 
expected to go through a constant phase of de-skilling and re-skilling at different stages of 
their professional lives. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the new impetus in the world of TVET is today leading the 
country to step up and venture into new areas of training. Thus, as Mauritius positions itself 
to develop its ocean economy as well as the SME sector, the TVET and the human resource 
development  subsectors  will  be  called  upon  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  as 
providers of skilled workers and technicians. 

In particular, it is intended to put up an appropriate skills development system which 

will contribute to strengthen the human capital base of the country. 

If there is one myth that is hard to eliminate from the minds of people - and only in 
Mauritius - it is that concerning the TVET sector. For a long time now, skills-based learning 
has been frowned upon as lower level at best, demeaning at worst. 

There  is  a  pressing  need  to  revaloriser  ce  secteur.    It  is  about  time  that  people 
understand  and  appreciate  the  role  of  institutions  providing  technical  and  vocational 
education in genuine human resource development. 

I am deeply appreciative that this Budget has stressed the significance to be attached 
to  polytechnics.  Modern-day  polytechnics  are  no  less  in  significance  and  scale  than 
established  universities.  In  fact,  they  provide  for  the  filling  of  major  positions  for  middle 
level professional and technical skills, skills that ultimately contribute to the empowerment 
and quasi-employment of work-ready graduates. 

 

99 

The polytechnics in Mauritius will work with both private and public sector players to 
successfully provide the necessary skilled manpower for the emerging sectors highlighted in 
this Budget as well as enhance national productivity. 

It is also worth highlighting that my Ministry has already embarked, with the support 
of development partners (Agence Française de développement), on the formulation of a new 
National Skills Development Strategy for Mauritius over the short and medium term, in view 
of identifying and matching the skilled labour supply requirements for existing as well as the 
emerging  sectors  of  the  economy.    It  is  worth  noting  that  elsewhere  in  the  world,  young 
people favour entering the technical stream as the related salary package tends to be more 
attractive  and  sometimes  the  pay  package  is  higher  than  for  graduates  from  the  academic 
stream. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  three  parastatal  organisations  responsible  for  TVET 
subsector, and which fall under the aegis of my Ministry, namely the MQA, the HRDC, the 
MITD and the polytechnics, will be called upon to shoulder higher-order responsibilities in 
the near future, in the fulfilment of their strategic functions – that of regulatory body for the 
MQA,  HR  planning  and  orientation  for  the  HRDC  and  that  of  training  provider  for  the 
MITD. 

Among other things, for example, the HRDC will need to spearhead and facilitate the 
implementation of training programmes, which are critical for the development of the new 
growth poles of the economy as well as provide all necessary support for such crosscutting 
projects as – 

• 

• 

the  three  Polytechnics  under  construction  at  Réduit,  Montagne  Blanche,  and 
Pamplemousses, and 
the  conversion  programme  for  some  3,000  unemployed  graduates  whose 
training do not match market requirements. 

Again, the HRDC will – 
(i) 

(ii) 

be called upon to forge deeper linkages with the private sector and operating 
on a demand driven basis rather than the generic recommendations on skills 
gaps, and 
concentrate on its role to stimulate a culture of training and lifelong learning at 
the  individual,  organisational,  and  national  levels  with  a  view  to  enhancing 
employability  of  the  labour  force  and  contributing  to  their  enhanced 
innovation and productivity, and 

 

(iii) 

100 

they  will  also  be  required  to  significantly  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the 
current mechanism for administering, controlling and operating the National 
Training  Fund  such  that  we  obtain  value  for  money  in  the  allocation  of 
financial and levy grants. 

In this regard, I wish to reassure the House that the provision has been made in the 
Finance  Bill  such  that  the  Human  Resource  Development  Act  2003  will  be  subsequently 
amended with a view to streamlining its institutional provisions. 

We  will  also  thereby  ensure  that  the  skills  mismatch  issue  is  addressed  in  a  more 

effective manner and the trainer-employer synergy be promoted. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my Ministry will introduce a Chambre des Métiers Bill that 
will  provide  for  the  establishment  and  management  of  the  Chambre.  This  Chambre  des 
Métiers  will  give  due  recognition  to  the  various  professions,  including  the  registration  of 
people in the different trades, setting standards for training facilities and qualification in each 
stream. The main objective of the Chambre will be to encourage tradesmen to become true 
professionals  through  appropriate  skills  development.  Enable  small  enterprises  to  have  a 
platform for the promotion of the interest of tradesmen and their trade in general and improve 
the status and safeguard the interests of tradesmen and trades in general. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  has  already  worked  out  a  preliminary  draft 
“Chambre des Métiers’ Bill after discussions with the close collaborators of the public sector 
and  the  private  sector.  My  Ministry  will  shortly  initiate  wide  consultations  with  relevant 
stakeholders in Mauritius of this draft Bill prior to its finalisation. 

We are also looking into models available in other countries and how the “Chambre 
des  Métiers’  has  to  be  set  up  in  Mauritius  and  how  it  could  be  adapted,  taking  into 
consideration  the  specificities  and  realities  of  our  own  labour  market.  In  this  regard,  I  am 
pleased to inform the House that representatives of my Ministry met a delegation from the 
“Chambre des Métiers et de ‘l’artisanat’ of Reunion Island last week in Mauritius to explore 
collaborative ventures between the two islands. The ultimate aim is to instil a high dose of 
professionalism in the ‘métiers of artisants’ and craftsmen in Mauritius.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, John Fitzgerald Kennedy is known to have once said - 
“When written in Chinese, the word ‘crisis’ is composed of two characters. 
One represents danger and the other represents opportunity”. 

 

101 

As  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research, I look upon these challenges in the education and training fields and they are many 
as opportunities to bring about change and transformation. 

The  significance  of  knowledge  as  a  critical  input  for  modern  economies  has  since 
long been recognised. This implicitly places into focus the necessity to create conditions for 
the  establishment  of  what  has  been  called  the  ‘Knowledge  Triangle’,  the  linkage  between 
education, research and industry. 

My endeavour will be, in fact, to work towards creating the enabling conditions for 
the learners to live fulfilled life both as individuals and the intellectual capital “breeding idea 
that would ignite value”. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

(6.42 p.m.) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume the Chair. 
At this stage Madam Speaker took the Chair. 
Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite  Rivière):    Madam 
Speaker,  allow  me,  first  of  all,  before  coming  to  the  Budget,  to  wish  the  Minister  of 
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, bonne chance.  
The  Ministry  of  Education  is  a  very  important  one  and  the  Minister,  hon.  Mrs  Dookhun-
Luchoomun has the very delicate task to clean the mess left by the former Minister Jeetah, 
especially at the TEC and she can rely on our support, not only for the education sector which 
is a non-political issue but also as other sectors where that person had his hands.  

Coming  to  the  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  very  proud  to  stand  in  the  National 
Assembly as it is my 32nd year as MP and I shall be giving my comments on the 32nd budget 
of a Government. I had the opportunity of commenting on several budgets, be it as MP, as 
PPS, as a backbencher, as a Minister of Government, and now as a Member of the MMM 
Opposition. As I said, I am very proud to be here to give my comments on this very important 
item on our Parliamentary democracy system.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  I  was  here,  listening  to  the  budget 
presented by our Minister of Finance, my good friend hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo and 
the Prime Minister was then the Prime Minister in 1989. 

And after the presentation of the budget, for several weeks, even months, the effect 
of  his  speech  was  there  within  the  population,  not  only  the  common  man,  but  the  private 
sector,  the  civil  servants  and  the  business  community;  they  were  all  discussing  after  one 
month the effect of the budget. We have had the Budget Speech on 23 March 2015 and it is 

 
our  6th  sitting,  three  weeks  now  since  we  are  discussing  on  this  Budget.  What  do  we  see 
outside? The population is no longer talking about the Budget; things have changed.  

102 

(Interruptions) 

Allow me to speak! I have listened to your speech.  The mood of the population has changed 
- it might be because of events. There have been events after the presentation of the Budget et 
quelles  sont  les  préoccupations  de  la  population?  Je  ne  veux  pas  être  démagogique,  mais 
c’est l’augmentation du coût de la vie, le problème de law and order.  Il y a un problème réel 
de  law  and  order  dans  les  différentes  circonscriptions,    il  y  a  un  problème  réel  au  niveau 
organisationnel  de  la  Police.    And  there  is  the  recent  problem  of  the  British  American 
Insurance.  Everybody is talking about it. It doesn’t affect only the business community, the 
banking sector, our reputation as a financial sector in general, but also those innocent people 
who have invested in this scheme.  

This morning, I received, as MP, three old ladies. One has invested Rs5 m. after the 
sale of the house which she had obtained from her husband.  She got into that project through 
a salesperson. There is one civil servant who has put all his retirement benefits in that scheme 
and there is a person who has put all his VRS money in that scheme. These are poor innocent 
people and all of them have shown me their certificates. This is where I join my friend, hon. 
Baloomoody, for the plea he has made to Government.  

We, as MPs, have been talking about the difficulties that we are facing as politicians. I 
have  been  discussing  with  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Soodhun,  who  is  also  a  long 
standing Member of the House. We are not interested to know whether the owners still have 
their first class tickets to travel around the world or whether the owner can hire a private jet to 
go to the Bahamas.  This is not our problem. As MPs, we have also a duty towards the nation 
to see to it that these persons pay for what they have done. This is why Government has its 
duty and is doing what it should have been doing.  

Government must also have at heart the interest of these poor innocent people who 
have been caught, perhaps, in a trap and, at least, show them some sense of humanity. This is 
the plea that I am making, right at the outset of my intervention, before coming to the Budget, 
because we meet members of the public. During the weeks to come, I have heard that some 
people  are  gathering  all  these  persons.  There  might  also  be  people  trying  to  group  these 
people and form a new political party. This is their problem, but we, as MPs, as far as we are 
concerned, we have at heart the interest of these poor people who have been caught in this 
trap. 

 

103 

Madam Speaker, before coming to the Budget, I would talk on the agricultural sector, 
especially the small planters.  Since three months now, we have witnessed the crusade which 
the hon. Prime Minister is leading against those corrupt people. There have been results; we 
have  seen;  we  have  witnessed,  but  once  we  had  this  slogan  of  ICAC  -  ‘ICAC  pas  capave 
guete figir’, what I am asking Government, through the hon. Prime Minister, is that, at least, 
Government should not pick and choose. There is an impression; those who have to go to jail 
must  go  to  jail.  Those  who  have  done  dirty  things,  they  have  to  pay  because  it’s  public 
money,  it’s  morality,  but  Government  should  see  to  it  -  and  I  appeal  to  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister – that there is no discrimination. I am not saying that he is making discrimination, 
but  people  are  talking,  names  are  being  mentioned  that  certain  people  are  being  spared, 
because they will be the star witness, and so on. I take one name, that of Mr Gooljaury. There 
is another one who is still hiding in UK, Mr Teeren Appasamy. All the proceedings of what 
he did at the MCB/NPF are still there. He was supposed… 
(Interruptions) 

‘Mo  pane  cause  are  toi  Gayan,  laisse  mo  terminer!  To  so  avocat  toi?  To  avocat 

Teeren Appasamy toi?’ 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking, please! Address the Chair! 
Mr Bhagwan: Let me have my views. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, address the Chair! 
Mr Bhagwan: And then, we have one Mr Lee-Shim who came to Mauritius.  It can 
be a previous case but we have a Government, it might be the previous Government, but what 
we are asking is that this case be re-opened and see all the avenues. We have to bring that 
person here who has stolen Rs800 m. of public money from the NPF and MCB, and then we 
have  one  Mr  Lee-Shim  on  whom  I  asked  PQs  myself.  He  was  persona  non  grata  in 
Mauritius.  How  come  he  came  to  Mauritius,  he  went  directly  to  the  Central  CID,  gave 
statements and then, left the country! 

(Interruptions) 
And he went on the radio when he was at the Central CID. 
(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please! 
Mr Bhagwan: This is why I am asking with all seriousness, the hon. Prime Minister 

with all his reputation, at least, to see to it that nobody is spared. 

(Interruptions) 

But there are new cases also. 

 

104 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  maintenant  venir  sur  quelques  commentaires  sur  le 

budget du ministre Lutchmeenaraidoo.  

Madam Speaker, yesterday, we had a PNQ on the sugar industry and we all know that 
la survie même de l’industrie sucrière est menacée. The hon. Minister has given replies to us, 
we are satisfied with them, but we see that this very important industry is in danger and the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition made a request to the hon. Minister to have a Master Plan and 
to see to it that there are new incentives, there  are new avenues to redevelop, to save that 
industry.  

This morning, I was listening to one of the trade unionists, Mr Ashok Subron, who 
was appealing to the hon. Minister concerning one particular report and if we want to succeed 
in  that  reorganisation  process  which  started  back  in  2002/2003  when  hon.  Jugnauth  was 
Minister of Agriculture, we will need to have everybody on board, not only the owners of the 
factories,  but  even  we,  Parliamentarians,  we  will  have  to  give  a  helping  hand  because  it 
concerns the survival of the main industry which has been there for such a long time. So, I 
appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister,  at  least,  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  trade  unionists,  not  only  Mr 
Ashok Subron, who is a trade unionist, but also others who are also very keen to give their 
support to the Ministry and the Government in order to save this very important industry.  

Madam Speaker, our basic agricultural production is severely suffering these days and 
yet,  we  are  talking  of  agro-industry.  The  budgetary  measures  announced  for  the  Agro-
industry sector, according to me, are not enough for a country which needs absolutely to aim 
at  food  security  in  a  viable  and  competitive  agricultural  sector.  We  need  to  facilitate, 
encourage and technically support our planters and farmers to achieve self-sufficiency in our 
basic agricultural production. We are, here, thinking about the potatoes,  onions, garlic and 
even vegetables, and also animal products. This is a very important sector where I think the 
hon. Minister must give maximum attention to facilitate and encourage  our planters. Once 
this  sustainability  is  attained,  we  can  think  about  the  next  step  which  is  agro-industry. 
Government  has  come  up  with  a  bio  farming  development  certificate.  This  certificate  will 
include a package of incentives and an 8-year tax holiday and other facilities. 

Once  more,  Government,  through  this  Budget,  is  giving  monetary  incentives  to  the 
private sector because such project is only implementable by the private sector, but in order 
for  small  planters  to  take  advantage  of  such  facilities,  there  will  be  a  need  for  technical 
support and appropriate training facilities for our planters also. This, the Government has not 
mentioned,  the  hon.  Minister  has  not  mentioned,  I  am  appealing  to  the  hon.  Minister  and 
asking  him  to  see  to  it  that  our  small  planters  also  be  given  training  facilities  in  this  bio-

 

105 

farming sector.  These days when we talk about small farmers, ils sont très démotivés que ce 
soit au niveau du secteur agricole mais aussi au niveau des légumes, be it small planters, be 
it big planters.  

Madam Speaker, with this Budget, the small planters feel that they have been excluded; 
they have raised several issues through their representatives on radios and in the press which 
are genuine concerns to this sector.  The hon. Minister has informed the population that the 
Government is giving a one-off Rs2,000 per tonne assistance for those producing up to 60 
tonnes  and  Rs3,400  for  those  who  are  producing  less.    From  what  we  have  gathered,  this 
money  comes  from  the  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  Board.  These  farmers  have  appealed  to 
Government that special efforts be made to increase this grant because of the difficulties they 
are facing, they have not even been able to purchase fertilisers these days because of their 
income.    You  know  better,  you  have  been  in  this  sector,  Madam  Speaker.  These  small 
planters don’t have much revenue.  The price of sugar has been falling over the years and 
they have had very, very big problems which are not taken care of. Whatever has been said in 
speeches has not been taken care of by the different Governments during the past 10 years. 
So, there is need to help and make a special additional effort for these small farmers. 

Madam Speaker, the planters have also asked the hon. Minister - I think they have sent 
a request - for the amendment of the Sugar Industry Efficiency Act with regard to the price of 
bagasse.  Actually, they are receiving Rs24 per tonne of bagasse and we all know that this 
bagasse is being used for the production of electricity. We have also been made to understand 
that, with the trend which we are having, it may happen that there is no bagasse at all.  The 
planters have gone less to their fields and the outcome is that bagasse is less. So, this will 
give an incentive to the farmers to go to their fields. We all know the impact of bagasse for 
the production of electricity which has a big impact on the financial outcome on the sugar 
industry itself. 

We  all  know  also  that  planters  are  abandoning  -  I  stated  yesterday  -  because  of  the 
problem of métayage. The hon. Minister has agreed to relook into this FORIP mechanism. 
Planters  are  abandoning  their  fields  and  this  has  been  going  on  and  figures  have  been 
produced.  One  demand  which  has  also  been  made  by  the  planters,  Madam  Speaker  c’est 
d’aplanir les difficultés légales pour qu’ils puissent donner leur terrain pour la construction 
des  maisons.    At  a  certain  period  of  time,  there  was  a  legislation  which  was  passed  or 
regulation giving planters incentives for doing small morcellements like those planters who 
could  not  go  into  the  agricultural  sector,  who  could  not  continue  with  the  sugarcane 
plantation.  We don’t know what has happened afterwards because normally if you go for a 

 

106 

morcellement,  there  is  need  for  money  to  be  injected,  for  money  to  be  given  as  bank 
guarantee.    The  hon.  Minister  may  inform  us  later  on.    We  shall  be  coming  with  a 
parliamentary  question  on  that  subject  so  that  these  planters  may  be  allowed  to  do  small 
morcellements  of  two,  three  or  four  plots  and  even  to  give  plots  to  their  families  to  build 
houses. Actually, there is some technical problem on that score. 

As  far  as  the  vegetable  planters  are  concerned,  Madam  Speaker,  I  know  in  the 
Constituency of the hon. Minister, at Quatre Soeurs and all the coastal regions, onion planters 
are facing lots of difficulties with the problem of erosion, with the problem of their deeds 
with the hon. Minister of Housing and Lands.  

As  far  as  we  are  concerned,  in  our  own  Constituency,  we  have  the  planters  of  La 
Chaumière which is  a grenier de l’île Maurice.    Normally, after each election we have  a 
Minister  who  comes.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Cooperatives  has  been  there  from  what  I  have 
heard for a site visit with television and so on. It is a one-off visit. So, I would appeal to the 
hon. Minister. There is even a store which was given to them by the Agricultural Marketing 
Board.  These planters, who are in Constituency Nos. 19 and 20, have been on their own for 
many, many years. These planters have been giving a lot of their time since generations.  At a 
certain  period  of  time,  there  was  not  even  electricity.  They  were  given  all  incentives  like 
additional land.  So, what I would appeal to the hon. Minister is, at least, to make a special 
effort  to  regroup  these  planters  and  give  them  whatever  technical  support  in  terms  of 
fertilisers, subsidy or pumping equipment. Some have even boreholes. It is the country which 
will benefit from that.  I would request the present Government to help these planters. 

Madam  Speaker,  je  demanderai  aussi  à  l’honorable  ministre  de  faire  un  effort  au 
niveau des éleveurs de porcs de St Martin. Je ne sais pas si cela tombe sous son ministère ou 
le ministère des coopératives. Au niveau de St Martin, though there is a need to boost up this 
sector,  there  is  a  real  problem  of  environment  which  is  affecting  the  health  of  the  people. 
Maybe, the hon. Minister of environment can help. There is a borehole near La Ferme from 
which not only the people of the region, but also the CWA takes water. 

Madam Speaker, I will come to two housing projects in my Constituency.  Last time, I 
asked a parliamentary question to hon. Minister Soodhun concerning the houses which are 
being  built  at  Chebel  and  Maingard.    From  what  we  see,  these  housing  projects  had  been 
initiated  without  any  proper  planning.  There  is  one  at  Maingard  which  is  called  Barkly 
Maingard; the houses are built in a low area.  I think it is a marginal land which has been 
given  to  Government  under  this  2,000  arpents  scheme.  In  case  the  Ministry,  through  the 
NHDC,  does  not  invest  in  a  proper  drainage  system  and  if  these  houses  are  delivered  to 

 

107 

people  benefiting  from  the  lower  level  scheme,  then  there  will  be  big  problems.  I  am 
appealing  to  the  hon.  Minister,  through  the  new  Budget,  to  see  to  it  that  there  is  a  proper 
Master Plan for the drainage and same applies for Chebel.   

At Chebel also, there are houses which are being built here and there.  On small plots of 
lands, there are two or three houses. There is no proper planning. So, there is an urgent need 
for the hon. Minister to have a rethink in this housing project which is being implemented at 
Cité Chebel - where there are, I think, 50 houses which are nearly under completion - so that 
these works may be effected prior completion. 

The same applies for the project at Petite Rivière. At Petite Rivière, the project was 
initiated when hon. Duval was the Minister responsible. It was in 2011. There also, Madam 
Speaker,  there  are  59  housing  units,  commonly  known  as  lakaz  boîte  zalimet.  Even  the 
l’Evêché did an exhibition here, at Cathedral Square, to show that Mauritians cannot survive 
in so small boîte zalimet. 

Hon. Minister Roopun is not in the House. I asked a parliamentary question regarding 
these houses where the contractor has defaulted. He has defaulted not only in terms of time 
frame but also in terms of quality. I asked the hon. Minister to have a site visit because he has 
been given a wrong reply. My colleague, hon. Quirin and myself, we know what is happening 
there. The reply of the hon. Minister was that there was no structural damage. And if you go 
and visit these houses – only 5 or 6 houses have been delivered following the flash floods of 
Port  Louis. We have got people in Pailles who have been transferred there.  But the house 
itself, cela commence à craquer and the officers of the Ministry has informed the Minister 
that -  

“I am informed that no structural defect has been noted till today.” 

So, this reply is not correct and I informed the hon. Minister that there is urgency not only to 
ask the contractor that he must have a bank guarantee or some deposits, but also to have an 
inquiry,  through  the  relevant  authorities,  of  how  these  houses  have  been  constructed  and 
whether  the  procedures  have  been  followed.    We  have  been  told  that  the  procedures  have 
been followed, but we do not think so. It is a shame for modern Mauritius if you go there and 
see the way these houses have been constructed - boîte zalimet. If you ask me and my friend, 
hon. Jhugroo, to go through the door, we would not be able to get in the house. The door is so 
small. 

(Interruptions) 

 

108 

Madam  Speaker,  since  we  are  talking  about  Budget,  our  Constituency  has  been 
penalised - I am not doing politics - for the past years as far as projects from the NDU and the 
Ministry of Public Infrastructure are concerned.  Perhaps there are other Constituencies also.  
So, we are appealing to the Prime Minister responsible for NDU through the PPS. 

I have been a PPS myself; I have never done such things. When you ask a PPS who is 
responsible for two Constituencies, he will spend most of his time in looking  about his own 
Constituency  and  even  taking  the  maximum  of  the  budget  allocated  to  him  to  his 
Constituency  instead  of  sharing  it  equitably.  So,  what  I  am  appealing  to  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister is, at least, to make sure that the PPS responsible for our Constituency, makes sure 
that nous rattrapons ce retard. We are not asking more, but we are asking for the projects 
identified,  especially  land  drainage  and  roads  rehabilitation  and  the  same  for  the  Public 
Infrastructure.  There  is  one  particular  project  which  started  from  July  last  year  and,  up  to 
now, the work is not completed.  

At Chebel, at the road leading to the temple, starting from the main road, there was a 
drain.    It  is  a  classified  road,  so,  it  is  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure.  Work started some 8 months back by COLAS and then it was left behind. We 
have been told that there is no money. So, we  have had lots of problems during the rainy 
period and we foresee further problems in case this project is not completed. It is left half or 
three-quarter completed as is the case now. 

Madam Speaker, a budget is the intention of Government. It is a new Government and 
the first budget. There are some positive measures. My good friend, hon. Dayal, is not here. I 
started through the National Environment Commission when the hon. Prime Minister chaired 
in 2000. We first initiated several strategic measures and one is to stop the extraction of sand. 
Mauritius is gaining, it is revitalising our lagoons like lead-free petrol. We started first with  
biodegradable plastics and the next step would have been banning plastics, I would say, the 
common plastics which are used and found everywhere. So, the decision of banning plastics 
is a good initiative. From what I heard, the manufacturers would be brought on board and we 
are also asking the hon. Minister what he has promised, the plastics which are being used by 
the household, in the poubelle¸but this also should be taken care of. 

Madam Speaker, those were my comments on the Budget. We will be here next year 
to make the bilan, we will be asking questions at Committee Stage and, at the end of the day, 

 

109 

it is the country which must be the winner. We will be around to see and examine the results 
the next coming financial year. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun! 

(7.13 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, he is, as we say, the pioneer in this House, my  good  friend, hon. Rajesh 
Bhagwan,  who  is  a  good  brother  as  qualified  by  the  hon.  Member.    I  am  not  going  to 
comment  for  the  time  being  concerning  the  proposals  or  the  remarks  made  by  my  good 
friend. I can assure him that this Government is not going to faire la sourde oreille. He also 
rests guaranteed that he is dealing with responsible people who are going to listen and we are 
going to implement what we have said. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has rightly 
pointed  out  that  we  are  indeed  at  the  crossroad  of  transforming  Mauritius  into  a  country 
where socio-economic conditions benefit each and everyone. 

Madam Speaker, without wasting the precious time of the House, let me come to the 

measures pertaining to the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

First of all, I will elaborate on housing issues, which concern everybody, the whole 

population. 

During  the  last  10  years,  only  2,585  housing  units  of  39  square  metres  have  been 
constructed  by  the  previous  Government  and  I  have  already  given  the  details.  My  good 
friend,  hon.  Ganoo,  asked  me  a  parliamentary  question  and  I  gave  him  clear  details  about 
this. This is the bilan of the Government of Navin Ramgoolam. 

L’Alliance Lepep has, on its side, promised 10,000 housing units during our mandate 

of 5 years and we are going to make it. 

I announced earlier in the House that this Government will provide for decent housing 
units which cater for the real needs of the population. Parole donnée of Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
is parole sacrée! I had a long discussion with the Prime Minister and he has given me a clear 
instruction  on  how  he  wants  the  houses  to  be.  I  totally  agree  with  my  good  friend,  hon. 
Bhagwan, that the houses which have been built during the 10 years were qualified by Père 
Labour as “des boîtes d’allumettes”.  It is true. 

 

110 

Madam Speaker, the size of the new housing units is being increased from 39 m² to 50 
m². In his intervention, hon. Uteem said that he was very disappointed about the fact that the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development announced only 1000 low-cost houses on 83 
arpents of State land and only 700 housing units under the NEF that will be constructed. Let 
me inform the House that for the moment, 1423 housing units are under construction now. 
The project of building of 1000 low-cost houses on 50 m² is expected to start within three 
months.  I believe as at  April 2016, 3,000 housing units will be completed. What they had 
done in 10 years, I am going to complete more than that in one and a half years. Insha Allah! 
I am sure, Madam Speaker. 

Furthermore, hon. Uteem claims that the Government has not taken into account the 
housing needs of various income groups. Well, I will refer the hon. Member to the definition 
of social housing. It is housing provided to people with low income or with particular needs. 
This Budget perfectly responses to the requirements of social housing. 

However, my Ministry, in collaboration with the NHDC is studying the setting up of 
new  eligibility  criteria.  Different  categories  of  income  groups  are  being  studied  to  further 
benefit more citizens. 

Hon. Members are aware that the NHDC is located in Rose Hill. There is only one 
office for the whole country. Therefore, applicants for the different facilities have to go to the 
NHDC for any queries and so on. I am proposing now to decentralise the service so as to 
spare  applicants  of  the  ordeal  to  call  at  the  NHDC.  Henceforth,  applications  for  housing 
facilities and assistance under the other housing schemes will be registered at the Citizens’ 
Advice Bureau offices throughout the island. To assist applicants in filling their respective 
application forms, CAB officers will be appropriately trained so that they can properly advise 
callers around the island.  

(Interruptions) 

If needed, we are going to do that. This is not a problem. But we are going to try.  Let us try! 
However,  all  applications  will  continue  to  be  examined  and  processed  at  the  level  of  the 
NHDC for eligibility and determination. 

The housing estates will be designed in such a manner as to accommodate some basic 
social  and  recreational  amenities  like  polyvalent  hall,  playing  space,  crèche  and  other 
facilities.  It  is  really  well  mentioned  by  my  colleague,  hon.  Bhagwan,  that  for  the  actual 
construction,  we  only  have  small  houses  with  no  social  amenities.  These  social  and 
recreational infrastructure facilities will be managed by the respective local authorities. 

 

111 

Madam Speaker, for the first time, the financial assistance for roof slabs and even the 
income threshold have been increased. It is also through the contribution.  We have listened 
carefully to our friends in the Opposition and we have taken them into consideration and the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been able to do it. The Roof Slab Grant 
Scheme has gone from Rs65,000 to Rs75,000 for those earning up to Rs10,000 monthly. In 
the past, all those earning less than Rs8,500 were eligible for the scheme. Let me remind the 
hon.  Member  that  now,  we  are  also  including  persons  who  earn  as  from  Rs10,001  up  to 
Rs15,000 monthly. For this category, the Roof Slab Grant Scheme will be up to Rs40,000. 
This is new! We are targeting more than 2,000 families who will be able to benefit from this 
aid  of  the  Government  annually.  Furthermore,  Madam  Speaker,  the  financial  aid  for  the 
purchase of construction materials has been increased from Rs55,000 to Rs65,000. Families 
earning up to Rs10,000 can apply for that grant. 

Hon. Uteem also believes that households with monthly income exceeding Rs15,000 
are  being  left  out,  but  he  is  wrong.  The  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  is  providing  436 
serviced plots of land to families with monthly income between Rs10,000 to Rs25,000. An 
appropriate extent of 60 toises is being provided for this income group, at the annual nominal 
rental fees of Rs3,000. 

Madam Speaker, our  actions do not limit to only  providing housing units, serviced 
plots or financial aid. My Ministry is also involved in the process of the democratisation of 
land ownership. It is not the same as hon. Ms Deerpalsing, alias micro. Better forget! 

(Interruptions) 

That is through sale of lands to the families holding building site leases over plots of State 
land  not  exceeding  10  perches  and  over  which  stand  their  residential  unit.  Again,  3,543 
genuine  cases  have  been  found  by  the  Ministry.  Now,  we  are  initiating  the  procedures  to 
allow these families to become owners of the plot of land which they are occupying. 3,543 in 
nearly four months! 

Madam Speaker, for the first time in the history of Mauritius, my Ministry is coming 
up with a humane solution to tackle the issue of squatters. Let me inform hon. Members that 
Port Louis will be the first region concerned. Out of 332 families leaving as squatters on State 
land, the situation of 52 will be regularised at the actual place they are occupying.  233 will 
be relocated at Pointe aux Sables, whereas the Ministry is looking for an alternative site for 
the relocation of some 43 families. Madam Speaker, as at 01 May of this year, my Ministry 
has decided to clear all squatters in Port Louis.  

(Interruptions) 

 

It is the first time!  

112 

(Interruptions) 

We will have no more squatters! And we are not just destroying the houses or whatever; we 
are providing other facilities, much better than where they are.  This is what we are doing. 

These  families  will  be  able  to  seek  assistance  from  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation and the Mauritius Housing Company.  So, as from next month, the problem of 
squatters in Port Louis will be sorted out. 

In connection with the efficient management of State land, my Ministry came up with 
a proposal for the creation of a State Land Register.  A request to that effect has been made to 
the  existing  contractor  of  the  LAVIMS  project.  Following  submission  of  the  contractor, 
consultations with the Procurement Policy Office and Central Informatics Bureau are on. 

Let  me  now  come  to  the  allocation  of  State  land.    Who  has  ever  thought  that  big 
sharks are not caught only in the sea but also on State land?  The former Prime Minister, Dr. 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam, and the previous  Government had distributed prime land, even 
pieds dans l’eau, to relatives, cousins, cousines, copains, copines, political agents, and even 
to mistresses of political agents. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah,  please,  do  not  interrupt  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

(Interruptions) 

Minister! 

Mr  Soodhun: Since,  Madam  Speaker,  I  assumed  office  in  line  with  Government’s 
vision,  efforts  are  being  made  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry  to  retrieve  all  lands  where  the 
promoters have systematically not complied with the conditions. 

Consideration is also being given to the retrieval of land in cases where the proposed 
development has not taken place.  As at today, the process has been initiated for the retrieval 
of some 500 arpents of State land resulting from such non-compliance.  Some other cases 
have  already  been  referred  to  the  State  Law  Office  for  advice  with  a  view  to  retrieving 
approximately another 100 arpents of land.  Do you imagine!  And these people are not only 
criminals!  To take this bold decision and to retrieve the land was not easy.  Let me inform 
the House that several times they threatened to kidnap my granddaughter. 

Yes. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please no cross talking when the hon. Vice-Prime 

Minister is intervening! 

 

113 

Mr Soodhun: I have to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and hon. Minister Pravind 
Jugnauth who have given me full support in every incident that happened.  Even when I was 
going  for  shopping,  there  was  a  ‘Sungkur’.  Certainly,  I  don’t  have  a  bodyguard  to  go 
shopping with my granddaughter of two and a half years at Super U.  It was not easy to tackle 
with  these  people.    My  friends  on  the  other  side  –  the  young  boys  in  this  Parliament,  I 
appreciate hon. Jhuboo’s sober speech. 

(Interruptions) 

I will explain later how he got the plot of land at Trou-aux-Biches. 

Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that I have set up a dedicated committee 
at  the  level  of  my  Ministry  to  examine  and  identify  weaknesses  in  the  present  system  of 
allocation  of  State  land.    The  committee  will  also  propose  new  ways  and  means  to  bring 
fairness and transparency in the exercise. 

Furthermore,  this  committee  will  be  coming  up  with  a  revised  policy  framework 
which will clearly lay down the procedures for the processing of application for the allocation 
of  State  land.    In  this  connection,  the  legislative  framework  will  also  be  reviewed  and 
consolidated to ward off any abuse and sanction of malpractices.  Then, as announced in the 
Budget, for greater transparency, the names of the beneficiaries of new leases of State land 
will be published in the Government Gazette, giving details of the lands leased and for which 
purpose. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Town  and  Country 
Planning Act, which dates back to 1954, and the Planning Development Act of 2004 will be 
reviewed.  Instead, a new Land Use Planning and Development Act will be prepared in order 
to come up with a proactive approach to land development. 

I must add to that, Madam Speaker, that a much-delayed positive outcome in urban 
planning has been the preparation and finalisation of the new Outline Planning Schemes for 
the  five  municipal  council  areas  following  a  full-fledged  revision  of  the  1995  outdated 
scheme. 

Not  later  than  this  week,  the  new  Outline  Planning  Scheme  for  Curepipe  has  been 
approved by the President of the Republic. The new schemes for Beau Bassin/Rose Hill and 
Quatre Bornes are being approved at any time now. The last two Outline Planning Schemes 
are Port Louis and Vacoas-Phoenix; they will be submitted for approval shortly. 

Madam Speaker, a Fast Track Committee is being set up at the level of my Ministry 
under my chairmanship. The objective is to avoid all bureaucracy concerning requests which 
aim to attract foreign direct investment. 

 

114 

Madam Speaker, it is important that we let the population know why mud is being 

thrown on the Budget presented by the Government. 

When Sir Anerood Jugnauth was the President of the Republic, it was none other than 
the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Paul Bérenger, who convinced him to jump back into the 
political field.  I am the star witness together with my friend hon. Dr. Joomaye. 

Star witness of this negotiation. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

We can say that the Leader of the MMM told Sir Anerood Jugnauth many things in front of 
us.  I am not going to reveal all, but a few: “Pays à la derive;  Ramgoolam pe pourri ça pays-
là;  bizin  nettoyer;  redresse  l’économie ;  combatte  fraude  et  corruption.”    This  was  the 
starting point between two leaders.  As a true patriot, Sir Anerood Jugnauth came out to save 
the  country.    I  have  to  mention  it.    He  said:  “Paul  to  pe  dire  moi  sorti,  pangare  to  pou 
abandonn mwa au milieu chemin.”  It was said on that particular day.  This is very important 
for all, and maybe many hon. Members were not aware.  Even Paul Bérenger used to say that 
Remake c’est le cauchemar de Navin Ramgoolam.  We had everything to win. 

Today, my friend, the hon. Leader of the Opposition should have been on this side of 
the  House,  on  the  front  bench,  governing  the  country,  cleaning  the  mess  created  by  the 
previous Government as he had promised to do so. But what happened? The Labour Party 
made hon. Paul Bérenger believe that with remake, he will have to wait too long to become 
Prime  Minister,  whereas  Dr.  N.  Ramgoolam  was  offering  the  possibility  to  make  hon. 
Bérenger  Prime  Minister  as  soon  as  he  departs  from  the  State  House  after  the  general  
election. 

(Interruptions) 

No, we should not blame hon. Ganoo. Anybody cannot do without the permission of a leader. 
Even me, I cannot move without the permission of the leader. I have nothing to blame hon. 
Ganoo. 

(Interruptions) 

That was the ‘véritable  partie de pêche of requins’.  The  whole of the  MMM got caught. 
Then hon. Bérenger started the episode of ‘on and off’. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

 

115 

Mr Soodhun: It hurts me. Hon. Ganoo and I, we started in the political field at the 
same time, in the same month. Madam Speaker, it has also been mentioned in this Parliament 
that the Parliament has remained ‘off’ for almost nine months. Democracy!  

(Interruptions) 

Sincerely,  he  did  not  believe  in  it  himself!    What  has  hon.  Paul  Bérenger  not  said  on  Dr.  
Ramgoolam!  

He said -  

“Mo péna enn sou confiance lor Navin Ramgoolam. Enn boug péna vision. 
Pas kapav prend li au sérieux. Péna et pa pu ena oken koz kozé ek Parti Travailliste.” 
I am very sad to see my friends on the other side.  They do not deserve to be where they are. 
You will recall that before concluding an alliance with the Labour Party, hon. Paul Bérenger, 
Leader  of  the  Opposition  used  to  hold  press  conferences  on  a  weekly  basis  to  denunciate 
scandals such as Bangalea, Soornack, EILLM University, Betamax … 

(Interruptions) 

Oui,    MPCB  tou,  Neotown,  Jin  Fei,  the  cracks  of  the  Ring  road,  l’affaire  Roches  Noires, 
MITD and so on. He was right. I have mentioned in my speech about the Pandit Sungkur who 
did not make appropriate application for State Land to the Ministry. Let me tell you the story 
of this Pandit Sungkur and Dr. N. Ramgoolam. We have to say this because it concerns the 
State land. I know that he is not so happy with that, but I can say it is …. 

(Interruptions) 

This is the real story of the State land. Pandit Sungkur has never applied for a State land. 
Never!  

(Interruptions) 

Who  applied?  Mr  Seeruttun,  the  Director  of  the  Beach  Authority  who  applied  for  this 
particular plot of land situated at Trou aux Biches. 

(Interruptions) 

Without  any  application,  without  any  demand,  the  then  Prime  Minister  considered  that  all 
State  lands  belong  to  him,  le  propriétaire!  He  got  a  fake  Letter  of  Intent  which  does  not 
appear  in  the  file;  I  have  gone  through  the  file.  Il  l’a  fabriqué!  And  he  gave  it  to  Pandit 
Sungkur, officially – we have seen in the newspaper. How come? 

(Interruptions) 

What is very sad is that the Leader of the Opposition closed his eyes on all these scandals, 
cases of favoritism, etc., saying that le passé c’est le passé, nu bizin guet l’avenir’. 

(Interruptions) 

 

116 

This hurts the population. L’avenir with Dr. Ramgoolam, a person comparable to President 
Mugabé! There is no difference between Dr. N. Ramgoolam and the President Mugabé who 
was a dictator, achieving his personal ambitions by abusing his authority  

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Paul  Bérenger  was  aware  about  the  way  a  Government  led  by  Dr.  N. 
Ramgoolam  used  to  work  because  they  were  in  alliance  in  1995.  The  MSM  also  was  in 
alliance with the Labour Party and it has seen their rotten ways of working.  Chatte boire enn 
sel fois di lait chaud, deuxième fois li pa boire! 

It  is  disappointing  how  all  of  a  sudden,  how  ‘le  cœur  de  militant’  of  hon.  Paul 
Bérenger  started  beating  for  a  leader  who  has  mismanaged  the  country,  leading  to  the 
dilapidation of public funds.  Was the hon. Leader of the Opposition not concerned about the 
waste  of  taxpayers’  money  in  hedging?  Betamax:  Rs8  billion!  Hedging  STC:    Rs5.7  m., 
hedging Air Mauritius: Rs10 m. Nearly Rs25 billion! It is the taxpayers’ money. It is really a 
pity! And it is with the same Dr. Ramgoolam that hon. Paul Bérenger decided to join hands to 
make Mauritius a model to combat  fraud and corruption. Le grand nettoyage! How could 
hon. Paul Bérenger forget about the statements Dr. Ramgoolam made against him?  

Let me remind the House that in May 2011, Dr. N. Ramgoolam stated the following – 
“Paul  Bérenger  so  rôle  mickey  finn  fini.    Zamais  li  pu  rentre  dan 

gouvernement. Ça tou seki suive li pu reste lor coltar ». 

It is true ! Koma dire linn guet ça dans boule de crystal! 

(Interruptions) 

And, Dr.  Ramgoolam further stated –  

“Bérenger est l’instrument du grand capital”.  

So many insults over the years and the MMM was o.k. with that. Blinded by power, 
they decided to go forward with the Labour Party. So, I am really very sad to see the MMM 
of Zeel Peerun, Chafeekh Jeerooburkhan, Jooneed Jeerooburkhan as it is today.  

Let me also say that the MMM presently is going through a crisis whereby many of its 
Members are leaving for valid reasons. Today, even Members like my good friend, hon. Alan 
Ganoo, who gave a statement, and had the courage to tell the truth. Hon. Kavi Ramano, hon. 
Steve Obeegadoo, ‘die-hard MMM’, have expressed their feelings about how the MMM is 
deviating  from  its  principles.  Dr.  N.  Ramgoolam  has  been    mocking  ‘l’Alliance  Lepep’, 
calling us ‘camion saleté’, but today, he himself is like in a septic tank – I am sorry to say so. 

(Interruptions) 

 

117 

The Labour Party is trying to consolidate its core electorate.  Exit Dr. Ramgoolam, 
enter Dr. Arvin Boolell. What’s the difference? Bonnet blanc, blanc, blanc bonnet! It is the 
same culture.  Is there any difference today between Parti Travailliste and Parti Malin?  Parti 
Malin ena plis credibilité! 

I  agree  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  who  recently  stated  that  it  will  be 
impossible for Dr. N. Ramgoolam to bounce back in the political field. I agree with him.  Let 
me  tell  you,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  is  known  as  ‘le  père  de  l’économie,  de  la  stabilité,  de 
l’unité et de progrès’, and he has proved it all the way. 

Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam is know as ‘le père de la nation’, but what about the 
son, Dr. N. Ramgoolam? Dr. N. Ramgoolam should be known as ‘le père de la honte’! This 
is for this country. 

Let  me  come  to  the  intervention  of  hon.  Aadil  Ameer  Meea,  my  good  friend,  who 
stated  that  hundred  days  in  power  of  l’Alliance  Lepep,  did  not  bring  about  any  positive 
changes.    He  expected  more  changes.    Well,  let  me  remind  him  that  l’Alliance  Lepep  has 
been implementing measures announced in its manifesto as soon as we came to power. 

Be  it  increase  in  pensions,  payment  of  wages  for  the  workers  of  the  sugarcane 
industry  engaged in strikes, compensation for all workers or abolition of SC/HSC fees, on 
which my colleague, hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun is working.  We do not have 
baton magique, but we have the willingness and the ability to achieve our goals. 

Then, as we promised that we will uncover all malpractices during the leadership of 
Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, inquiries have been initiated on the affairs of Roches Noires, 
money in coffers, Duty-Free Paradise, Betamax, etc. In my Ministry, every day we have ten 
officers from the Central CID who are carrying out inquiries. Every day! You can go and see! 
It  is  the  Government  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  who  had  the  courage  to  cancel  the 
contract of Betamax; to set up an inquiry on the cracks found on the Terre Rouge-Verdun 
Road;  examine  all  cases  of  State  Land  allocation  where  procedures  have  been  bypassed; 
review  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission  which  has  been  closing  eyes  on  universités 
marrons et faux certificats. 

The  Opposition  does  not  seem  to  blame  the  previous  Government  for  all  the  harm 
caused to the country, but instead they are pointing fingers at the good work being done by 
Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth’s  team.  But  they  will  have  to  answer  for  the  coming  élections 
municipales. 

 

 

118 

I must also seize this opportunity to applaud hon. Ivan Collendavelloo who refused to 
be a blind follower of his ex-Leader. He has the courage. I don’t think there are many people 
who would like to be in his place to take such a responsibility, we know all. When he saw 
that  his  ex-Leader  was  deviating,  he  expressed  his  disagreement  by  slamming  the  door. 
Today, it is hon. Ivan Collendavelloo who seems to be the real Leader of the MMM and who 
is fighting for the cause of militants. 

(Interruptions) 
He has the militantisme. He is working for ‘la lite militant’.  
(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo has also been an exception in the MMM. He 
got the message that the MMM is going in the wrong direction. He made the right choice by 
joining our team. 

We will all recall that in 2007, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
MMM,  hon.  Paul Raymond  Bérenger  himself  had  qualified  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  as  “le 
meilleur ministre des finances”. Besides, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo was chairing the economic 
commission  of  the  MMM.  Hon.  Paul  Bérenger  used  to  praise  him  as  being  an  ‘economist 
intellectual’  in  his  party,  always  using  the  term  of  ‘Top  Team’.    However,  when  hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo refused to support his leader, in a “voie suicidaire”, hon. Paul Bérenger 
insulted him by saying that he is not genuine. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that if the MMM was on this side of the House, forming 
part  of  the  governing  team,  he  would  have  pat  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  on  the  back, 
applauding the measures. 

The Opposition is doing its work in its best capacity, I agree, while some Members act 

as des prophètes de malheur, but we have no lesson to learn from them. 

The first budget of l’Alliance Lepep reflects the vision of the Government to build a 
better  Mauritius,  a  country  where  every  citizen  feels  that  democratic,  meritocracy  and 
corruption-free  values  are  duly  promoted.    Therefore,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  deserves  our  appreciation  and  congratulations  for  laying  the 
necessary foundation for a prosperous economy. 
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun, before I pass on to the next orator, I just want to 
draw your attention to the fact that during the course of your speech, you averred that Pandit 
Sungkur attempted to kidnap your… 

 

119 

Mr Soodhun: I did not mention that. 
Madam Speaker: …two and a half… 
Mr Soodhun: I said there are people… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Did  you  say  that?  Because,  if  you  did  aver,  from  my 
understanding, if you did aver that Pandit Sungkur tried to kidnap your two and a half-year 
old  granddaughter,  then  this  is  a  very  serious  allegation,  and  I  hope  you  will  take  full 
responsibility for that. 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, on a point of explanation, what I mentioned is that I 
have been threatened. People are threatening to kidnap my granddaughter. It is true. I am not 
referring only to that case. I don’t want to mention people’s names. Everybody knows in this 
country  that  I  was  doing  communalism  or  what  it  is!  You  know  very  well.  I  have  not 
mentioned Pandit Sungkur, but there are other people. This is what I want to mention. 

Madam Speaker: Thank you. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(7.52 p.m.) 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  and  Phoenix):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate you for having been elected to the 
Chair  of  this  National  Assembly  as  Speaker  and,  secondly,  having  been  decorated  by  the 
President of the Republic of Mauritius as Grand Commander of the Order of the Star and Key 
of the Indian Ocean. I am deeply honoured with you in the Chair, because you are among my 
best friends in this august Assembly.  
Madam Speaker: Thank you. 
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, now let me come to the Budget itself. To start with, as 
my colleagues, hon. Lesjongard, hon. Barbier and hon. Ramano, said they had no quarrel, so 
do I. I have no quarrel with the contents of this Budget, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development said that 
we are indeed at the crossroad. Yes. We are at the crossroad, Madam Speaker, and the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development has proposed various measures that to him 
is the road that he wants to venture with a vision. A vision of the gouvernement Lepep! The 
hon.  Minister  presently  standing  at  the  crossroad  and  saying  to  us:  ‘If  you  choose  not  to 
follow me, I will move on without you.’  

Madam Speaker, there are two ways to go when you hit that crossroad that the hon. 
Minister is talking about.  In one’s life, there is the bad way, when you think of giving up, 
and then there is really the hard way when one fights back. I honestly think the hon. Minister 

 

120 

of Finance and Economic Development is going the hard way to come out successfully for 
the  nation  at  large.  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  crossroad,  life  presents  us  with  moments  of 
decisions.  Either we choose a new direction and move on, or cling to what we already have 
and be miserable. Madam Speaker, I don’t want to be miserable and I think no one wants to 
be miserable in this House. 

Madam Speaker,  I think  you will agree that these Budget Estimates are not always 
tied up in neat little packages, occasionally we find ourselves at unexpected crossroads with 
more than one opportunity  from which to choose. Madam Speaker, time itself is often the 
best indicator of which decision to make, for it can tell so many things that are now hazy. 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the real issue of the budget that I would like to 
question or to get clarifications upon or to propose for amendments.  The first issue, Madam 
Speaker, concerns the megaprojects where I think it is left to the private sector to deal with. I 
want to know how far the public sector will get involved in those projects, I mean, financially 
so  as  for  the  Government  to  get  a  long-term  durable  benefit  that  can  be  translated  to  the 
benefit of the population. I know many benefits are mentioned in the megaprojects which, 
when the projects are completed, only the capitalists will sit back and enjoy their capital gain, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  about  the  SMEs,  this  is  a  real  long-term,  durable  and  sustainable 
project  that  we  must  fully  concentrate  on  because  SMEs  do  not  fall  in the  preview  of  the 
capitalist world. By the  way, Madam Speaker, capitalists in the world are decreasing their 
investments  in  manufacturing  or  troublesome  industries.  They  prefer  to  invest  in  financial 
projects  where  they  can  sit  back  and  enjoy  their  capital  growing.  So,  SMEs  like  the 
abbreviation means Small and Medium Enterprises is the lifeblood for the future generation. 
All the measures to facilitate the SMEs in the budget are most welcomed but the mind-set of 
the public officers in the SME department should be refreshed if we want to succeed, Madam 
Speaker. We must also prohibit local artisanal objects pertaining to Mauritius, for example, 
dodo  sculptures,  etc.,  which  are  made  abroad  to  enter  in  Mauritius  to  prevent  competition 
with our local market. 

Madam Speaker, regarding diaspora, I think the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  is  ill-advised  on  this  issue.  Those  who  are  presently  settled  abroad  and  are 
working will not come back to Mauritius although we are proposing a tax relief. What about 
those who have recently come back from abroad and who are working in Mauritius by giving 
a helping hand to improve the economy of Mauritius at the expense of getting less money 
compared to what they were earning abroad? Shouldn’t they get the same facilities, Madam 

 

121 

Speaker? It may be interpreted as deux poids deux mesures. One issue that may crop up in the 
future  is  that  some  rich guys,  with  lots  of  black  money,  encourage  their  relatives  to  come 
back to Mauritius to start a business and get involved in money laundering. What I propose, 
Madam Speaker, is to let the Mauritian diaspora alone where they are and start with a policy 
to  make  Mauritius  a  larger  Mauritius.  This  group  of  Mauritian  diaspora  is  well-educated, 
well-connected  and  well-disposed  to  Mauritius  in  business,  academia,  science  and  other 
issues. The Mauritian diaspora is distinguished, Madam Speaker. The Mauritian diaspora is a 
worldwide web of ideas and influence. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  large  expatriate  community  should  be  a  source  of  strength  and 
confidence for us. We should not resent, attack or criticise them because of their talents in 
achievement  abroad.  We  should,  Madam  Speaker,  accept  whenever  expatriates  express  an 
opinion on our country. We should celebrate their success wherever they live. We should use 
our expatriates as an instrument of soft power, that is, the ability to attract and to cope rather 
than use force or give money as a means of persuasion.  We should draw them more fully in 
the mainstream of our national life. Creating a global community of Mauritians would help to 
make  us  a  larger  country,  a  larger  Mauritius.  What  I  mean  by  larger  Mauritius,  Madam 
Speaker,  is  that  the  Government  should  compile  a  list  of  Mauritians  abroad  about  their 
qualifications,  types  of  work,  their  interests  and  from  there  to  let  them  help  Mauritius  in 
terms of ideas, criticisms and proposals. I know, Madam Speaker, many are willing to do so 
and some are already doing so at no cost. You know, Madam Speaker, diaspora makes the 
world  a  global  village.  With  information  technology,  most  things  are  at  our  doorsteps. 
Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  should  not  turn  inward  trying  to  get  Mauritian  diaspora  back 
instead Mauritius should turn outward. When one starts to think outwards, it is then that the 
Mauritian economy will boost up. Madam Speaker, the Asian States, including India, have an 
outward looking policy.  Why not Mauritius? 

Madam Speaker, if we can’t get them back, at least, we can use them. Let them be our 
Ambassadors to the capacity for Mauritius. Talking about Ambassadors, Madam Speaker, we 
have many in different countries. We should tell them to mandatorily inform the Government 
about any contagious diseases that are being manifested in the country so that Government 
can advise and inform the travelling Mauritians to avoid such cities and countries. Recently, 
the hon. Minister of Health said that we had about 21 cases of dengue fever in Mauritius. The 
contamination  resulted,  if  I  am  not  wrong,  from  India.  Had  we  known  that  such  and  such 
cities have dengue fever, we could have informed the travellers from Mauritius to avoid these 
cities. Is the hon. Minister of Health aware that about three weeks ago, a resident of Quatre 

 

122 

Bornes who came from India died from H1N1 virus? Has there been a notification from the 
private clinic for this case?  The poor lady was, at last, transferred to SSRN hospital where 
she passed away. That is a very recent case. It is up to the Ambassadors in different countries 
to  inform  us  what  is  going  on  in  that  country  so  that  we  can  prevent.  It  is  not  when  the 
travellers come back with the disease that we start panicking and doing a lot of expenses to 
prevent the disease from propagating. 

Madam Speaker, let me say a few words on our parastatal bodies. Many of them have 
enormous  debts.  For  example,  through  a  parliamentary  question  addressed  to  the  hon. 
Minister Pravind Jugnauth with regard to the Rs150 paid to MBC by the households, to my 
great surprise, the hon. Minister said that MBC has a debt of nearly Rs1 billion.  Many other 
parastatal bodies are in the same red situation. I keep asking myself, Madam Speaker, how 
can these parastatal bodies function properly with such huge debts?  If MBC wants to embark 
on a new project or innovation that costs money, how can MBC, CEO or Minister concerned 
approve such project? Is it possible for the Government to come with some sort of financial 
policy to help these bodies?  Of course, if the Government does so, the CEO will have to be 
answerable for future management of their fund. It is just an idea, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I would like, now, to propose an amendment for the consideration of 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  This  concerns  the  first-time 
buyers. Madam Speaker, first time buyer of bare land.  The hon. Minister has increased the 
ceiling to Rs1.5 m. Madam Speaker.  My amendment to this is that every first-time buyer will 
not be charged duty of the Rs1.5 m. even if the land costs more than Rs1.5 m. Presently, if 
the land costs, say, Rs1.7 m., the buyer will have to pay duty on the whole Rs1.7 m. This is 
unfair, Madam Speaker. We must not forget, Madam Speaker, how land is rocketing high. 

The same goes for the first-time buyer of flats.  They should be exempted of duty to 

the tune of Rs4 m. even if the flat costs Rs4.5m. or Rs4.7 m., Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  ICT,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has mentioned that ICT companies that recruit a minimum of 100 employees 
will be allowed to bring a quota of foreign qualified employees. Madam Speaker, I think the 
minimum amount of 100 employees is on the high side to encourage ICT players to set up 
business in Mauritius. 

Most welcoming is the increase of Wifi hotspots to 350. The sooner the better and 

undoubtedly will propel us as a larger Mauritius. 

 

123 

Madam Speaker, tax on SMS was a non-event  since its introduction.  It was just to 
increase the revenue; there was no reason for its introduction at that time. I am glad, after the 
hon.  Minister  answered  my  PQ  on  this  issue  that  I  knew  then  that  the  hon.  Minister  will 
abolish the 10 cents levy on SMS. 

Madam Speaker, regarding infrastructure, nothing much as major projects apart from 
consultancy services for grade separated junction at Pont Fer/Jumbo to the tune of Rs25 m. 
and consultancy services for renewal phase II, A1, M1 Bridge to the tune of Rs50 m. that are 
earmarked for June 2015-2016 Budget. 

Madam  Speaker,  road  maintenance,  that  we  have  a  huge  sum  of  Rs3  billion,  is  an 
ongoing project.  Madam Speaker, I am hoping that the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure 
will strongly consider going ahead with the construction of the traffic centres mainly at Ébène 
and St. Pierre to the tune of Rs100 m. for each as has been mentioned in the Budget. 

Madam Speaker, the LRT project has suffered the on and off phenomenon for some 
years. Like the MMM/PTR on and off, so was LRT. When LRT was on, there was no bus 
lane, when LRT was off, the ex-Government came with third lanes on the M1 motorways at 
an astronomical cost for introduction of the bus lane. Madam Speaker, the ex-Government 
put the bus lane on hold when they started dreaming of the juicy lucrative contract for the 
new LRT to be financed by the Indian Government to the tune of Rs19 billion. Now that this 
Government has shelved the LRT project on the off mode, will it come with bus lane and 
make it on the on mode as we have already in place the third lane that has been well done but 
not used for bus lane? By the way, what happened to the issue of the Rs19 billion to finance 
the LRT by the Indian Government? We would like to know whether it is still available and 
for what purpose it is going to be used. 

Madam Speaker, I would not go to the issue of underpasses as opposed to flyovers. 
The hon. Minister of Infrastructure is well aware of my proposal dealt this Tuesday through 
my PQ. 

Madam Speaker, Verdun/Terre Rouge, we all know the fate of this road and so for the 
Ring Road Phase I. One piece of advice to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure: ‘pas 
barre delo montagne avec banne chemin, toujours la nature ki sorte gagnant’. Concerning 
Phase II, there are reports that are unfavourable for construction of roads on the slope of the 
mountain.  This  project  of  tunnel  and  Ring  Road  Phase  II  should  be  abandoned.  Use  the 
money  somewhere  else!  If  the  Ministry  goes  for  the  Phase  II,  as  scheduled  by  the  ex-

 

124 

Government, I hope one day I do not have to come and say: ‘Hon. Bodha, sorry, we have got 
another crack or landslide in that region’ - like I did with ex-Minister Bachoo. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  why  there  are  no  major  projects  from  MPI  for  the 
moment, the answer is that the ex-Minister was so greedy that he left no major road projects 
for this Government. Hon. Minister Bodha would remember, when ex-Minister Bachoo was 
intervening on previous Budgets, we were together on the other side. 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member should address the Chair! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  When  ex-Minister  Bachoo  was  intervening  on 
previous Budgets, he spelt out road projects that were under construction and in the pipeline 
without forgetting how much each project cost. He gave us a list and every time he came as a 
tape  recorder.  For  every  project,  he  knew  the  exact  amount  for  the  project.  And  all  the 
projects  were  mainly  to  Colas.  I  am  sure,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  financial 
Services and Good Governance will undoubtedly look in those juicy contracts. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 

mentioned at section 244 that – 

“(…)  We  bypassed  international  tenders  for  the  SSR  International  Airport 

and paid Rs14 billion for a contract that was not worth more than Rs8 billion.” 

I am sure the hon. Minister knows what he is implying. My PQs on the airport were not fully 
answered, Madam Speaker. Do we know that the contractor has fixed metal roof of 1 mm 
thickness when the contract talks about 1.2 mm? Do we know that the structure made in steel 
frame is zinc plated instead of galvanised?  

Madam Speaker, do we know that the glass window panel is of bad quality and not of 
BS standards as per the contract? The panels are showing signs of warpage and cracks and 
some of them are being replaced now. I hope that they are not being replaced by the same 
kind, but that the people there watch it that they are replaced by those of BS standards. The 
quality of tiles - most of us have gone through the VIP. Have a look on what you walk! There 
are different shades of the tiles and their quality. It is a pity for VIPs to go and walk around 
there.  

Madam  Speaker,  when  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
mentioned Rs14 billion, to know the exact amount, I came with a parliamentary question for 
the Ministry of Financial Services to contact Aconex Ltd. which is a software management 
enterprise. They have all the payments done stored in their software. The hon. Minister of 

 

125 

Financial Services has promised me that he will go for an audit trail and I am dying to know 
the exact amount of this substandard bijou, as said by Navinchandra Ramgoolam.  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  deal  now  with  hire  purchase  where  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  reduced  the  interest  from  19%  to  12%.  Quite 
welcoming! But I just learned that we have a monopole of only one lending firm – the CIM, 
Madam Speaker. When somebody goes to buy from a shop on hire purchase, the storekeeper 
refers  the  buyer  to  the  CIM  which  used  to  charge  19%  yearly.  Now,  it  will  charge  12% 
yearly. And the CIM also charges the storekeeper 15% on the selling price of the goods. That 
makes a lot of money that the buyer pays! For CIM, to curtail the loss of interest of 7% that 
has been proposed in this Budget, it has contacted all shopkeepers to increase their margin of 
profits and CIM charges 15% on the new selling price to curtail the 7% loss. So, the people 
buying on hire purchase are not benefiting from this decrease.  

Madam  Speaker,  now  let  me  deal  with  illicit  monies  as  per  the  Global  Financial 
Integrity Report 2003-2012. The illicit financial flows from Mauritius average per year is 153 
m.  US  dollars.  The  total  for  2003  to  2012  is  1,532  m.  US  dollars  illicit  money  leaving 
Mauritius. The trade invoicing outflows from 2003 to 2012 amounts to 1,170 m. US dollars. 
Illicit  hot  money  outflows  from  Mauritius  for  2012  is  360  m.  US  dollars.  Gross  trade 
misinvoicing import and export totalled to 3,102 m. US dollars. That makes for about seven 
or  nine  years,  Rs100  billion  which  left  Mauritius  illicitly!  That  probably  is  new  to  some 
Members. Rs100 billion!  

I am sure, Madam Speaker, for 2013 and 2014, illicit money must be very high. All 
these  illicit  monies  are  big  losses  to  the  country.  From  what  we  have  witnessed,  Madam 
Speaker, from Friday last, how much illicit money left Mauritius, without forgetting the case 
of Mrs Soornack, the ex-Prime Minister and many others! 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  said, 
through  the  press,  that  the  Central  Bank  will  buy  an  undisclosed  amount  of  gold  from 
Australia’s Perth Mint. Why undisclosed amount? The public should know! Like many of us 
in this House - I am sure - do not know or they have probably just heard of it that in 2009 
Mauritius  bought  two  tonnes  of  gold  from  the  International  Monetary  Fund  valued  at  an 
equivalent of 72 m. US dollars at that time. The introduction of a plan for Mauritius Gold 
Fund on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius with tax exemption is a good idea. 

I  will  not  be  long,  I  have  nearly  finished.  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  nation 
zougadère, we cannot stop people from dreaming, but we can minimise some not to become 
chronic  zougadère.  Madam  Speaker,  one  issue  that  bothers  me  is  the  way  the  drawing  of 

 

126 

winning numbers is carried out by Lottotech. To me, it is semitransparent. I have my own 
theory on how this is done. I get the impression that it is up to the management to decide 
which week they want to issue a jackpot. The magnetisation of the winning ball numbers may 
be the way they can control their wish whether to have a winner or not. My proposal, Madam 
Speaker, is that the drawing of winning numbers should be done at the Government House 
where the winning numbers for Loterie Verte, as we know, is done. It is more transparent and 
it works on a suction technique. There, it is not at the whims and caprices of the management 
to decide when to give or keep it in the bank for interest. 

Madam Speaker, section 140 talks about Trade and Investment Managers who will be 
posted in our embassies. I am glad that this Government is embarking on this like the United 
Kingdom Trade and Investment Department has opened an office in Mauritius on 27 January 
2015.  These  eight  managers  should  be  well  qualified  and  trained  on  bilateral  trade  and 
businesses. They should not be political nominees. I personally think that those selected eight 
managers  should  follow  an  intensive  course  helped  by  the  UK  Trade  and  Investment 
Department which recently got an office in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, our ocean is very vast and we must not let foreign countries exploit 
it. They can help, but whatever investment they come with, Mauritius should be a partner and 
the  financial  benefit  should  be  above  50%  of  the  profit  and  exploitation.  Madam  Speaker, 
India  will  soon  start  exploration  of  mineral  deposits,  mainly  polymetallic  sulphides  along 
10,000 square kilometres mid Ocean ridge of Mauritius. The development comes following 
approval  from  International  Seabed  Authority.  Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  needs  to 
follow the path of India expertise and to seek help to explore our seabed for metallic deposit, 
amongst others. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget - it goes without saying - has brought a feel good factor 
among the population. Why? The answer, I think, as I am in the medical profession, is that 
the Budget proposal has minimised stress on Lepep. If one is not stressful, his internal body 
feels happy. Stress is a slow killer, Madam Speaker.  

This House has witnessed how some MPs end up with cardiac problems because of 
stress.  I, myself, was very stressful in a party, which I left, because of a leading virus that 
wants everyone to always agree with him.  In our laboratory here, we are coming with an 
anti-viral medicine that will take care of this virus. The drug is nearly ready and very soon we 
will administer the anti-viral drug to eliminate the virus from this House, and all of us will be 
free from this inflicted stress on us.  I, myself, am free from mental slavery, free to express 

 

127 

myself, to voice my opinion and to head a better life with normal blood pressure, slow heart 
rate and hope to live longer. 

Madam Speaker, to conclude, I wish everyone of us to do our job as faithfully as we 

can, with least possible stress. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  century,  I  think  the  heroes  will  be  the  people  who  will 
improve their quality of life, fight poverty and introduce more sustainability, and I pray God 
that  this  Budget,  with  some  of  my  observations  and  suggestions,  will  bring  happiness  to 
everyone of us. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

(8.28 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central):  Madam  Speaker,  given  the  time,  I  would  do  my  best  endeavour  not  to  tax  this 
House with a too lengthy speech. 

 Madame la présidente, promesse faite, promesse tenue. Je dis encore : promesse faite 
lors des élections, promesse tenue.  Lors de la  campagne  électorale,  L’alliance Lepep  avait 
promis une série de mesures à être implémentées une fois au pouvoir. 

We had said for instance that we are going to increase old age pension to Rs5,000.  
We have done it within weeks.  We have talked about une compensation salariale equitable.   
Madam Speaker, we have done it.  We have promised 100% subsidy on examination fees, 
irrespective of means of that parent, irrespective of the number of students, in order to help 
those families.  We have again done it.  We have many other examples which I will refer to 
later on in my address to this House. 

Madam Speaker, within less than 100 days we have achieved a number of things that 
we have promised to the people of Mauritius. This Budget, Madam Speaker, has proved a lot 
of people wrong; les oiseaux de mauvais augure qui criaient sur tous les toits que ce serait 
impossible de réaliser ces promesses sans une augmentation des impôts.  We have proved 
them wrong.  We have yet again done it, Madam Speaker. 

Yet, in spite of having done so, we are being taxed again and again, and I refer to a 
particular speech of one hon. Member on the other side of this House who has taxed the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  having  come  with  a  no  tax  budget.  
Why?  Because he has said before that, in order to give compensation, to increase old-age 
pension, tax will have to be increased.  When he does come up with a no tax budget, he is 
being taxed for that.  This is the views of those on the other side of the House. 

 

128 

Talking about hon. Members on the other side of the House, hon. Bhagwan had stated 
in his address to this House that small planters are suffering.  True! They are suffering.  We 
should not forget that funds which had been received from the European Union had, in fact, 
been  dished  out  to  the  private  sector  for  payment  of  VRS  by  the  previous  Government, 
Madam Speaker.  This money was meant for small planters.  Let me remind the House that 
when hon. Pravind Jugnauth, then Minister of Agriculture, was there, the private sector had to 
fund the VRS themselves; not from European Union funds, not from Government funds. 

So, money, in fact, meant to provide assistance to the small planting community had 
gone to the sugar barons.  It is now for us to help them to breathe again. Hence, the numerous 
measures  brought  in  by  this  Budget,  which  will  be  implemented  by  our  hon.  Minister  of 
Agro-Industry. The Minister of Agro-Industry stated, in reply to the PNQ of yesterday - we 
heard it - that the number of métayers had considerably decreased in this country.  Why so, 
Madam Speaker?  Because the previous Government … 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please resume your seat! 
Mrs  Jadoo-Jaunbocus:  Because,  Madam  Speaker,  the  previous  Government  took 
back land which had been given to the métayers of the sugar industry.  Hundreds of métayers 
were  compelled  to  give  back  their  land  for  peanuts  with  the  excuse  that  the  sugar  barons 
needed prime land.  When these métayers had taken the land initially from those sugar barons 
50 years ago, these lands were bare and arid and, today, they have transformed these very 
lands  into  first-class  agricultural  lands.    But,  unfortunately,  for  the  previous  Government, 
democratisation of the economy meant taking away from small people to give away to those 
who have a lot; the other way round, that is, Robin Hood in reverse mode, Madam Speaker. 

Now, what do we see? The Budget of 2015-2016, as I have just stated, is a no tax one.  
As they said: “Séki nu dire nu faire!”  After le miracle politique réussi par l’alliance Lepep, 
now, surely, with this Budget - and le peuple believes in us - we are paving the way towards a 
second miracle économique. 

Going through this Budget, we find a series of measures that strike the equilibrium 
between le développement économique et le social, and this is important.  One of the major 
problems to be addressed by this Budget is the creation of jobs.  Indeed, the hon. Minister of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development,  in  his  speech,  when  he  talks  about  job  creation,  he 
comes up with a number of measures.   One of the measures that he  comes  up with is the 
mesure  phare,  as  we  say,  for  the  creation  of  jobs;  the  reform  of  our  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise sector (SME sector), which, in the next few years, will become the driving force 
behind our deuxième miracle économique. 

 

129 

As stated at paragraph 28 of the Budget Speech, Madam Speaker, I quote – 

“(…) making the SME sector the backbone of our economy.” 

it is one of the most ambitious goals of this Government.  Yet, we are taxed for not having a 
vision and not dealing with the problem of job creation, and I will address that in my speech, 
Madam Speaker. 

Another  mesure  phare  is  the  creation  of  smart  cities.    Yet  another  one  is  the 
development of the port area, which will be extended right from Baie du Tombeau to Grand 
River  North  West,  and  this  to  make  it  a  regional  hub  for  bunkering  both  onshore  and 
offshore. 

Another example of the mesure phare is the innovation and development of the ICT 
sector.    I  will  dwell  a  lot  on  the  SME  sector,  Madam  Speaker.    As  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development said, it is the backbone of our economy, it is the greatest 
source of creation of jobs.  What do we see today, Madam Speaker?  Through this Budget, 
Government is proposing a complete re-engineering of the SME sector.  It is not merely a 
question of injecting Rs10 billion over the next five years into the SME sector.  We are doing 
more than that.  What we want by creating the SME bank, is to bring the necessary reforms to 
the  SMEDA  and  to  bring  about  real  change  in  the  mindset  of  entrepreneurs.    We  want  to 
come around with a new revolution in the way things are being seen by our entrepreneurs and 
things are being done by our entrepreneurs. 

Going through the measures announced in this sector, we realise that a new avenue of 
success  is  being  opened,  especially  for  young  entrepreneurs  of  this  country  who  have  the 
willingness and the capacity to work and assert themselves.  Why not so? 

Madam Speaker, I recall upon first being elected, coming to this House, I went to the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  after  having  spent  a  few  weeks  in  the  Citizens’  Advice  Bureau 
(CAB).  What was being asked from me all the time, is a job in the Government.  I said to the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister: “What do we do?”  With all his pragmatism, he said to me: “Pas pou 
capav donne tou dimoune travail dan gouvernement; bizin trouve bannes avenues.”  This is 
one of the examples. 

Apart  from  finance  for  years  the  SMEs  sector,  in  fact,  has  lagged  behind  due  to  a 
number  of  administrative  constraints.  How  can  we  not  express  our  gratitude  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development for his vision, whilst dealing with SMEs as 
we go through the measures that he has announced and this we see, Madam Speaker, at the 
annexes where no less than eight measures have been announced in order to lighten up the 
SME sector and to make it more accessible and to facilitate business. I refer, for example, to 

 

130 

the  exemption  of  Corporate  Income  Tax  for  the  first  eight  years.  Another  example  is  the 
exemption from the requirement to operate tax  withholding under tax deduction at source, 
that  is,  TDS  for  the  eight  years.  I  refer,  yet  again,  to  the  exemption  from  submission  of 
financial statements and annual returns through the Registrar of Companies for the first eight 
years. There are eight measures and it is found in the document, so, I will not go in all the 
details,  but  we  note  that  these  measures,  Madam  Speaker,  are  innovative  and,  for  the  first 
time, we see a Budget qui pointe du doigt sur les vrais problèmes qui ont miné ce secteur 
pendant des années et des années.  

For too long, our entrepreneurs have been stunned with our upcoming generation and 
nipped  in  the  bud  by  all  these  administrative  hurdles  because  for  a  beginner  to  set  up  a 
business,  a  small  or  a medium  enterprise,  it  would  appear  like  he  has  to  climb  the  Mount 
Everest, an uphill strive, with so many complications and so many hurdles. Madam Speaker, 
this Budget should be looked at globally as we have a series of measures within that Budget 
that are interlinked to create the right environment for us to achieve our end result, that is, our 
miracle économique. 

This has been done by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, a 
man of vision who has integrated the development of the SME together with the retraining 
and  reintegration  of  our  graduates  within  the  job  market  in  a  very  holistic  manner  and 
complementary  manner.  Here,  Madam,  I  am  referring,  for  instance,  to  the  measure  of 
providing the sum of the maximum of Rs80,000 per graduate for their reconversion. We have 
heard  hon.  Members  on  the  other  side  of  the  House  criticising  even  this  measure,  Madam 
Speaker,  to  say  that  this  is  just  a  question  of  Mathematics  -  they  are  good  at  Maths!  Of 
course, we have seen that!  Results have proved how good they are!  And that this is going to 
just result in a reduction in the unemployment  rate.  Let us look at the reality of what this 
does! 

The previous Government has gone at length to create, and I say it, une génération of 
gradués  chômeurs,  and  the  only  solution  they  came  up  with  was  to  give  unemployment 
benefit. What a shame! Not a shame, of course, to those who will benefit from this, but what 
a shame for not coming up with a better solution! They failed to create a job market, they 
failed to cater for our young graduates and now what they do is take away their dignity. But 
what  this  Government  is  doing,  what  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  together  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  doing,  is  to  give  back  to  these 
people  their  dignity,  reset  their  dignity  and  tell  them:  go  again  and  find  a  job  because  we 

 

131 

know without retraining, it would be so difficult for these graduates to reintegrate into the job 
market. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  the  one  who  is  providing  long-term  and 
permanent alternatives to our young graduates. I am sure, Madam Speaker, that no section of 
the population will be left out and left outside this revolution within the world of small and 
medium enterprises. 

I  hereby appeal to the hon. Minister of  Finance  and Economic  Development in his 
quest  to  get  each  and  every  willing  and  budding  entrepreneur  on-board  of  this  country, 
involved in this development, to consider opening a branch of his proposed SME Bank in my 
constituency. This is a special appeal  I make to him so as to make accessible all facilities 
proposed to the people of this region who, as everybody knows, have been the driving force 
and  economic  parallel.  Here,  I  refer,  Madam  Speaker,  to  the  marchands  ambulants.  Much 
have  been  said  about  them,  much  have  been  said  to  take  away  their  dignity  and,  again,  I 
appeal to take into account this sector and to  give them the  chance to  come back into the 
mainstream  and  reintegrate  the  mainstream,  another  way  of,  yet  again,  giving  them  their 
dignity and their status.  

I now turn, Madam Speaker, to smart cities. Madam Speaker, this Budget will surely 
bring back memories to those who have witnessed the duo Sir Anerood Jugnauth and Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo in the 1980s. I myself was not so mature in those days, but I was young 
enough  and  could  grasp  what  was  happening  and  what  I  have  grasped  and  what  I  have 
learned from our history is that, they have dared to take steps then that were deemed to be too 
risky. History bears witness to that, history bears witness to the fact that with those calculated 
risks, the country has known unprecedented development.  

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security, hon. Seeruttun, had talked about it 
in his address: ‘Lacaz la paille finn remplacer par lacaz béton, roche lavé finn remplacer par 
machine laver, foyer dibois finn remplacer par plaque à gaz’, and I can go on with the list, 
Madam Speaker. The standard of living, in fact, by these bold measures have been given a 
boost, and for those people, the sky was the limit in those days. 

(Interruptions) 

I think I will be less than four minutes.  I had promised and in l’Alliance Lepep we 
keep our promise; I will be less than four minutes. In those days, we had people who painted  
– the very same people - a very bleak and alarming picture of what was to happen within the 
then  Government.  Yet,  we  stood  fast  and  had  we  then  listened  to  them,  our  first  ‘miracle 

 

132 

économique’ would never have been, Madam Speaker, had we had stood still, it would never 
had become reality.  

Today, Madam Speaker, the legendary duo has come back and they have responded to 
the call of the nation. Yes, they are back, Madam Speaker, this legendary duo and they fear to 
tread where angels dare to tread. 

Yet again, the sequel to our first economic development begins all over again – bold 
measures  are  being  taken,  a  leap,  but  a  very  calculated  leap  aimed  to  trigger  the  second 
‘miracle économique’ is being taken and all of us together we are going into that direction 
but, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the wagging tongues do not stop wagging. They are here, 
again, the very same one - as in the 1980’s - are back again. Sadly so! Sadly because they are 
here,  yet  again,  auguring  ill  in  the  future,  for  the  future!  Malheureux  sont  ceux  qui  nous 
pointent du doigt et n’ont pas appris de leurs erreurs. Ces gens n’ont jamais voulu ni oser 
prendre des risques calculés. 

Madam Speaker, when we are talking of small citizen port development, those are the 
vision  of  the  very  much  forward  looking  Government  who  moves  with  time.  Madam 
Speaker, c’est tout à fait légitime de rêver. Not the sort of ‘rêver’ that was referred to by hon. 
Dr.  Sorefan  for  the  ‘zougadères’,  but  the  sort  of  ‘rêver’  that  this  duo  has  dared  to  dream 
about in the past. For, Madam Speaker, we have to dream and only then we can realise our 
dream. We must have a vision in order to conceive that vision into the modern future. We 
know for a fact, as this has been tried and tested in the past, that under the leadership of Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, real dreams become true.  Yes, we dare to dream and we make that dream 
a reality with Sir Anerood Jugnauth and, most importantly, it is the rêve of ti-dimoune which 
becomes true and that is what we are here for. We have dared to dream, but we are also aware 
that in order to get that dream into reality, we have to create that feel good factor. The other 
Members of the House have said it, everybody reluctantly says it. It is like extracting a tooth 
from the Opposition that we have created a feel good factor. But this is the reality and we 
cannot run away from it. We have done it. Creating this feel good factor has been possible, 
we do not hold a magic wand and we say ‘be’ and it is, like the Godmother in Cinderella.  We 
do not have that but what we have, is we have laid the foundation in a pragmatic and realistic 
way in the Sir Anerood Jugnauth way as usual. This Government together with our Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development have come up with a series of measures which have 
been criticised, sadly so, as being small.  

We  are  told  that  giving  6  m3  of  water  is  a  small  measure.    Too  small,  Madam 
Speaker! We are being told that removing tax from SMS is too small, Madam Speaker.  We 

 

133 

are told, therefore, Rs5,000 for the elderly is too small. We are even told that giving 100% 
subsidy on examination fees are too small, Madam Speaker.  

Everything that we do is too small, Madam Speaker. But little by little - and that is 
mathematics, it adds up and it becomes the bigger picture. That is what it is all about and that 
is where they got their mathematics wrong. We start by little and we take over.  

(Interruptions) 

A small part;  le plus petit parti, je me souviens mais ‘coument nous dire, ti piment, li bien 
fort ça!’ 

These little things make a difference for small families of small means, because I see 
them every day and I see the gratitude in their eyes. We have heard we do nothing for law 
and order; we do nothing, no provision, no measures for the Police, for law and order. I have 
had officers from the Force today, coming up to me and it gave me a boost, Madam Speaker, 
as we say, little things, it gave me a boost: ‘Madame, zot gouvernement pou vini avec ça bane 
mesures ki zot ine dire la, pour nous, bane policiers?’ These people are waiting with bated 
breath, the Police Academy, re-training, giving the dignity to these Police will have Police 
Officers who are walking along the street, proud of their uniform and wanting to accomplish 
their duty. Those little things will bring those big results, Madam Speaker, and the little that 
we have, means a lot to these people.  

Let us now, Madam Speaker - because time is pressing - travel to the future with this 
budgetary  train  à  grande  vitesse.  Each  and  every  future  development  will  inevitably  and 
inexorably have to travel through the fast lane of the ICT and technological development, be 
it a small enterprise, be it a big development, be it the oceanic development, be it the port, be 
it construction of smart cities, be it energy development or any other field that one can think 
of and I am sure that a number of fields I have missed out, our Motherland has to adapt itself 
to the changing information and technology sector.  

De nos jours, we talk about fibre optique, broadband fibre connectivity, safe cables, 
lion networks, lion 1 lion 2, it goes on.  Innovation and development of the  ICT sector est 
incontournable and it is the cornerstone of any progress and advancement of the country. The 
number of free Wi-Fi spots increasing from 15 to 350 is in itself a major progress, and it has 
huge impact. Just imagine, the knowledge covered will now know no bounds and will not be 
limited to a selected few.  Hon. Pravind Jugnauth will now bring knowledge knocking at the 
door of each and every family of this country. How can we not applaud this measure, Madam 
Speaker! Just imagine this, just for innovation, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development has allowed a sum of Rs125 m. to be injected to fund a National Innovation 

 

134 

Programme.  I  dare  say,  Madam  Speaker,  only  those  with  a  limited  vision  -  and  I  will  go 
further to say - with the twisted vision and twisted agenda, will dare criticise such initiatives. 
Again and again, we are told: ‘Zot pas comprend zot, zot pas cone narien zot, zot pe tape la 
table, ki zot comprend zot?’ Don’t we know anything and, yet, we are here! Even now they 
have not learned to respect. We listen to constructive measures and propositions, we listen 
and we  adapt, but do they listen? They  call us imbéciles, they  call us limités.  Look in the 
mirror! That’s what I will say! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, at this point, I have to turn to the National Development Unit. I have 

to. I am part of it and I have to turn to that. Under the leadership of… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus: Under the leadership of our able Prime Minister, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth,  our  budget  of  nearly  Rs1.4  billion  will  be  judiciously  utilised  for  the  optimum 
benefit  of  this  nation.  I  will  not  go  into  the  issues  of  debts.  The  hon.  Prime  Minister  had 
explained it only the day before about how many debts that we have to pay for the previous 
Government.  

In my Constituency, Madam Speaker, we have identified a number of projects.  Let 
hon. Bhagwan rest assured that we will have budget for each and every Constituency and I 
am sure that hon. Boissézon will make sure that the distribution is equitable and fair in the 
constituencies of which he is PPS.  

We  have  identified  a  number  of  projects  and,  as  we  say,  ‘Insha'Allah’,  it  will  be 
realised  in  the  near  future  within  the  limits  of  the  budget.  I  say  this  because  often  we  are 
asked why are we not starting any work within the NDU and I speak in the name of all the 
PPSs who are here in this House; we are awaiting to pay debts that were contracted in our 
name by the previous Government. We honour our debts, we are going to pay our debts and 
then, we will start working for the nation.  

But this is not all, Madam Speaker. This is a Government which operates in good - I 
am  on  the  last  page,  Madam  Speaker  -  symbiosis.  Why  do  I  say  ‘we  operate  in  good 
symbiosis?  It is because we do not set limits. For instance, the hon. Minister of Housing and 
Lands has not been deaf to the appeal of those in my Constituency, that is, the Camp Manna, 
Tranquebar and the Vallée Pitot.  He has today said in his speech that all those squatters in 
these  regions,  hopefully,  will  be  regularised.  So,  we  have  been  working,  we  work  in 
partnership.  

 

135 

The hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications 
as well as the hon. Minister of Arts and Culture, hon. Baboo has listened to our appeal to look 
at Montagne Citadel and to revamp it. Hon. Raj Dayal has heard and responded to my appeal 
and, again, hon. Bhagwan will be very happy to hear of the revamped rejuvenation given to 
Le Dauguet, which has been dying into a slow death, I dare say.  Over the last 10 years, all 
the aspects which have been left to neglect over the last nine/ten years, we are now going to 
tackle them one by one over the next five years, Madam Speaker. 

This  Government  will  not  stay  still,  as  I  have  said,  the  Dauguet,  the  Citadel,  the 
Montagne Signaux and I make an appeal it will go to - even though the hon. Minister is not 
here - Vallée Pitot to have another parcours de santé there. 

Madam Speaker, to conclude, I have one thing to say:  que l’Opposition fasse sa tâche 
promise,  comme  elle  l’a  promis.  Qu’elle  vienne  avec  des  propositions  concrètes  et 
constructives, et non critiques, just for the sake of criticising again and again. It is easy to 
point fingers, but what has the past Government done in the constituencies nine years ago and 
especially, in the ninth year with the blessing of the mauves, what has it done, what has it 
achieved?    On  sait  le  résultat  que  cela  avait  apporté;  jamais  une  décision  politique  avait 
enchaîné autant de rejets que l’alliance PTR-MMM.  J’espère qu’ils en ont tiré de leçon. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

  Mr Tarolah rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  &  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn to Friday 10 April 2015 at 
2.30 p.m. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 8.54 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 10 April 2015 at 

2.30 p.m.                                      

 

 

 

136 

