No. 10 of 2015 

 

 

1 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

FRIDAY 13 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

 

MOTION 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

      Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 
GCSK       

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 10 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 13 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.00 p.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

MOTION 

STANDING ORDERS – PROGRAMME-BASED BUDGETING - AMENDMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the following motion standing in 

my name – 

“This Assembly is of opinion that in view of the enactment of the Finance and 
Audit (Amendment) Act 2015 which provides for simplified estimates to be laid before 
this Assembly for the appropriation, by vote of expenditure, of the sums necessary to 
meet the financial requirements on all the services of the Government, it is necessary 
and expedient that the Standing Orders Committee be empowered, and it is hereby 
empowered,  to  look  into  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly 
(1995) presently in force, more specifically Standing Orders 52 and 73, with a view to 
making recommendations for the necessary changes to be brought to the provisions 
relating to the procedure in connection with the Appropriation Bill”. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam Speaker, I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in supporting this motion which calls for 
amendments to be brought to the Standing Orders and the Rules of the National Assembly 
following the enactment of the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Act of last week which has 
already done away with the Programme-Based Budgeting. 

Through this motion, we will, therefore, empower the Standing Orders Committee to 
look into and consider the draft proposed amendments to the Standing Orders and Rules of 
the National Assembly which have been circulated with this motion. 

You  will  recall,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Programme-Based  Budgeting  was 
introduced in 2008 and we all remember the particular context at the time which necessitated 
the amendments. In addition, we remember the remarks that were made by the then and now 
hon. Leader of the Opposition on this particular issue. 

Today, we are being called upon to align our Standing Orders mainly in regard to the 
procedure  and  connection with the  forthcoming  Appropriation  Bill which,  I believe, is the 

 

8 

only logical suit to follow, following the amendments that have been brought, as I explained 
earlier to the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Act. 

The  difference  with  what  happened  in  2008,  the  amendments  which  were  brought 
only to Standing Orders 2 and 73 of the Standing Orders of the National Assembly, we know 
this time that an amendment has also been proposed to Standing Order 52 following a ruling 
dated 21 July 2009. That ruling, Madam Speaker, was given in response to the Point of Order 
taken  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  regarding  the  contents  of  the  Finance 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill to the effect that the Bill contained, inter-alia, issues that had 
nothing to do with the Ministry of Finance. 

Since there is no specific provision in our Standing Orders governing the contents of 
the Finance Bill, the Chair ruled in favour of the hon. Leader of the Opposition. I understand, 
therefore, that the proposed amendment to Standing Order 52 stands to correct that particular 
issue. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and also recommend 
that the Standing Orders Committee be empowered to look into proposed amendments and 
any amendments incidental thereto; and to recall the words used by then the Leader of the 
Opposition back in 2008, may I also say I wish them bon travail. 

Thank you very much. 

The motion was, on question put, agreed to. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Saturday 14 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTER RAISED 

FLASH FLOODS – VICTIMS – ASSISTANCE 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, thank 

you for having granted me the permission to raise a matter at Adjournment Time. 

9 

 
The issue I am going to raise concerns the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of 
Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  and  probably  the  Minister  of 
Social  Integration and Economic Empowerment.  It is an issue which deals with the recent 
floods that the country has been having recently, Madam Speaker. I wish to make a plea to 
the  hon.  Prime  Minister  so  that  Government  can  come  to  the  assistance  of  those  floods’ 
victims. 

In  the  region  of  Bel  Ombre,  Chamarel,  Baie  du  Cap,  St.  Martin,  even  in  other 
constituencies La Flora and other areas, we have seen on the electronic media what damage 
has been caused by the recent floods in the course of past years. 

Madam Speaker, when hon. Pravind Jugnauth was a Member of the Opposition, I put 
a PQ to the then Prime Minister concerning the flash floods which assailed our country in 
March 2013. We were given certain answers concerning a scheme that was put up at that time 
by  the  then  Government,  a  scheme  of  distributing  purchasing  coupons  for  the  victims  of 
floods. This was a support for those who have sustained material losses because we know, 
Madam Speaker, that, according to the Social Aid Regulations, an allowance of Rs133 per 
day only is payable to each member of a household for a maximum number of three days in 
case  torrential  rain  persists.  In  addition,  this  allowance  is,  of  course,  not  meant  as  a 
compensation for loss of property, but it is a subsistence allowance in cases where damage or 
loss of foodstuff has been sustained. 

Therefore,  my  plea,  today,  is  to  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  consider  the 
possibility. We are not bound by previous schemes. Government does not necessarily have to 
do the same thing that we have done in the past in terms of scheme because I can inform the 
House that, at that time, money was collected from the private sector; the Prime Minister’s 
Relief Fund also contributed to assist these flood victims. Rs29 m. was also collected from 
private donors and the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund spent about Rs30 m. in those days. 

Of course, the scale is different today. I am not talking of such amount of money that 
has to be distributed, but my plea is to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to be good enough to 
consider the possibility of coming up with the scheme because many people in Bel Ombre 
have lost their furniture and, in other areas, in Chamarel a whole house has been struck by the 
waters; in La Flora a bridge has crumbled down. We know what has happened during these 
past days. 

10 

 
Therefore, my humble plea to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is if he can, with the other 
Ministers concerned, see to it that a scheme is designed so that these people can be  given 
some assistance. Of course, we know what the risks of abuse in such cases are, but I am sure 
the  Police  Stations  have  already  recorded  the  names  of  the  victims;  this  has  already  been 
done in other areas. I am sure Government can see to it that no abuse is made of the system 
and can come to the assistance of these people. So, I am very grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, I am sure he will come up and think about some scheme. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we will look into the matter and come with a 

statement in due course. 

At 2.17 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Saturday 14 March 2015 at 

2.00 p.m. 

 

