 

1 

 

 

No. 12 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

FRIDAY 20 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTIONS 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

       PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 
      GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 12 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 20 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

A.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
 
 
 
B. 
 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions – 
(a) 

The Digest and Water Statistics 2013. 
The Digest of Environment Statistics, Year 2013. 
The Digest of Public Finance Statistics 2013. 

(Amendment  of  Schedule)  

(Amendment  of  Schedule)  

The Unemployment Hardship Relief (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 25 of 2015). 
The  Unemployment  Hardship  Relief 
(No. 2) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 26 of 2015). 
The  Unemployment  Hardship  Relief 
(No. 3) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 27 of 2015). 
The  Social  Aid  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice  No.  
28 of 2015). 
The Social Aid (Amendment No. 2 ) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice 
No. 29 of 2015). 
The Social Aid (Amendment No. 3) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice 
No. 30 of 2015). 
The  Social  Aid (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 31 of 2015). 
The  Social  Aid  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.  2)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 32 of 2015). 
The  Social  Aid  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.  3)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 33 of 2015). 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger)  (by Private Notice)  asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the 
Chagos  Archipelago  and  the  so-called  “Chagos  Marine  Protected  Area”,  he  will  state  if 
Mauritius is in presence of an official copy of the Ruling delivered yesterday by the United 
Nations  Arbitral  Tribunal  and  of  the  statement  made  on  the  said  Ruling  by  the  United 
Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office and, if so, indicate if - 

(a) copy thereof will be circulated, and  

(b)  he  proposes  to  carry  out  consultations  with  the  Opposition  before  issuing  any 

statement on the Ruling or deciding on the way forward. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I had already planned to make a statement this 
afternoon  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Award  has  been  delivered  in  the  case  brought  by 
Mauritius against the United Kingdom in respect of the Chagos Archipelago.  I thank the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition for giving me an earlier opportunity to address this issue. 

This  Award  is  an  important  milestone  in  the  relentless  struggle,  at  the  political, 
diplomatic  and  other  levels,  of  successive  Governments  over  the  years  for  the  effective 
exercise by Mauritius of its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. In this respect, I need 
not remind the House of my own initiatives, both as Head of State and Head of Government, 
to  reaffirm  the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago  and  to  press  for  its 
early and unconditional return to the effective control of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, in pursuance 
of our ongoing struggle, Mauritius initiated on 20 December 2010 proceedings against the 
United Kingdom under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to 
challenge the legality of the ‘Marine Protected  Area’  (‘MPA’) which the United Kingdom 
purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010.  

Since  Mauritius  and  the  United  Kingdom  did  not  agree  on  the  means  for  the 
settlement  of  the  dispute,  it  was  submitted  to  arbitration  in  accordance  with  Annex  VII  to 
UNCLOS.   

9 

 
After lengthy written pleadings by the Parties and a hearing from 22 April to 09 May 
2014 in Istanbul, Turkey, the Arbitral Tribunal set up under Annex VII to UNCLOS gave its 
Award on 18 March 2015.  The Award is final and without appeal, and is binding on both 
Parties.  It has been made public this morning and may be consulted on the website of the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration.  

The  Tribunal  unanimously  held  that  the  ‘Marine  Protected  Area’  which  the  UK 
purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010 violates international law. 
This  is  a  historic  ruling for  Mauritius.    It  is  also  the  first  time  that the  United  Kingdom’s 
conduct with regard to the Chagos Archipelago has been considered and condemned by any 
international court or tribunal.  

Madam Speaker, the Award is a resounding victory for Mauritius. In a closely-reasoned 
decision of over 200 pages, the Tribunal held unanimously that, in declaring the ‘MPA’, the 
United Kingdom violated international law. It ruled that the United Kingdom has breached its 
obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2), and 194(4) of UNCLOS. 

In reaching these conclusions, the Tribunal made a number of important findings. It 
considered  in  detail  the  undertakings  given  by  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  Mauritian 
Ministers  at  the  Lancaster  House  talks  in  September  1965.  The  UK  had  argued  that  those 
undertakings were not binding and had no status in international law. The Tribunal  firmly 
rejected  that  argument,  holding  that  those  undertakings  became  a  binding  international 
agreement upon the independence of Mauritius, and have bound the UK ever since.  

It found that the  UK’s  commitments towards Mauritius in relation to fishing  rights 

and oil and mineral rights in the Chagos Archipelago are legally binding. 

Moreover, the Tribunal also found that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return 
the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally 
binding. This establishes beyond doubt that, in international law, Mauritius has real, firm and 
binding rights over the Chagos Archipelago, and that the United Kingdom must respect those 
rights.  

The Tribunal went on to hold that the United Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’ 
binding  legal  rights  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago.  It  considered  the  events  from  February 
2009 to April 2010, during which time the ‘MPA’ proposal came into being and was then 
imposed on Mauritius. The Tribunal stated that it, I quote – 

 

10 

 “finds it difficult to reconcile this course of events with the spirit of negotiation 
and consultation or with the need to balance the interests at stake in the waters of 
the Archipelago.”   

It considered that the United Kingdom, I quote - 

“has not been able to provide any convincing explanation for the urgency  with 
which it proclaimed the MPA on 01 April 2010.”   

It held that, I quote - 

“To the extent that the timing of the declaration of the MPA was in fact dictated 
by  the  electoral  timetable  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  an  anticipated  change  of 
Government, the Tribunal does not accept that such considerations can justify the 
disregard of the United Kingdom’s obligations to Mauritius. The absence of any 
justifiable rationale for the United Kingdom’s haste - which, the Tribunal notes, 
stands in sharp contrast to the absence of implementing measures following the 
MPA’s  declaration  -  exacerbates  the  inadequacy  of  the  prior  consultation  with 
Mauritius.”  

 
The Tribunal also observed that the failure of the United Kingdom to balance its own 
rights and interests with those of Mauritius is to be contrasted with the approach adopted by 
the United Kingdom with respect to the United States.  It noted that the record demonstrates a 
conscious  balancing  of  rights  and  interests,  suggestions  of  compromise  and  willingness  to 
offer assurances by the United Kingdom, and an understanding of the United States’ concerns 
in  connection  with  the  proposed  ‘MPA’.    Those  elements  were  noticeably  absent  in  the 
United Kingdom’s approach to Mauritius. 

Accordingly, the Tribunal found that, in declaring the ‘MPA’, the United Kingdom 

had acted unlawfully and in disregard of Mauritius’ rights.  

Madam Speaker, Mauritius had also asked the Tribunal to rule that the United Kingdom 
was not the “coastal State” for the purposes of UNCLOS, because the excision of the Chagos 
Archipelago  from  Mauritius  was  contrary  to  international  law.  Three  members  of  the 
Tribunal found that they did not have jurisdiction to rule on that question; they expressed no 
view as to which of the two States has sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. However, 
and very significantly, two members of the Tribunal, namely Judges Wolfrum and Kateka, 

 

11 

held that the Tribunal did have jurisdiction to decide this question, and concluded that the 
United Kingdom does not have sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. They found that - 

(a) 

internal United Kingdom documents suggested there was an ulterior motive 
behind the ‘MPA’ and noted the disturbing similarities and common pattern 
between the establishment of the so-called “BIOT” in 1965 and the 
proclamation of the ‘MPA’ in 2010; 

(b) 

the excision of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 shows a 
complete disregard for the territorial integrity of Mauritius by the United 
Kingdom; 

(c)  UK  Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson’s  threat  to  Premier  Sir  Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam in 1965 that he could return home without independence if he did 
not consent to the excision of the Chagos Archipelago amounted to duress;  

(d)  in 1965, Mauritian Ministers were coerced into agreeing to the detachment of 
the Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law 
of self-determination, and 

(e)  the ‘MPA’ is legally invalid. 

 
This  is  a  highly  significant  moment.    It  is  the  first  time  ever  that  any  international 
judge has looked at the legal merits of this issue. Indeed, Judges Wolfrum and Kateka have 
unequivocally affirmed the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago. They have 
also gone on to find that the United Kingdom had acted in bad faith in declaring the ‘MPA’ in 
2010. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  significant  that  the  Tribunal’s  Award  also  determined  that,  I 

quote - 

“the  United  Kingdom’s  undertaking  to  return  the  Chagos  Archipelago  to  Mauritius 
gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon the possible future 
uses of the Archipelago.” 

The result of the Tribunal’s decision is that, to use the very words of the Tribunal, I 

quote - 

“It is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would 
have  expected  prior  to  the  proclamation  of  the  MPA,  with  a  view  to  achieving  a 

12 

 
mutually  satisfactory  arrangement  for  protecting  the  marine  environment,  to  the 
extent necessary under a “sovereignty umbrella”.” 

I am tabling copies of the Award and of the Dissenting and Concurring Opinion by 

Judges Kateka and Wolfrum. 

Madam Speaker, as at the time of the drafting of this reply, we have not come across 
any official statement made by the British side on the Award.  I am, however, informed that 
in  an  article  published  in  ‘The  Guardian’  of  yesterday,  comments  were  made  by  a 
spokesperson of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on the Award. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) of the question, my Government will study the 
Award with all the care it deserves, with the assistance of our local and external legal teams.  
In the coming period, we will define the steps that will now need to be taken to give effect to 
the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago, explicitly recognised by two of 
the arbitrators and denied by none of the other three. We will also consider the steps that need 
to  be  taken  to  give  effect  to  all  our  rights  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago,  including  those 
relating to fisheries, and oil and minerals which the Tribunal has unanimously affirmed. 

 
As I had mentioned in my reply to the PNQ on 26 February 2015, in keeping with the 
bipartisan  approach  we  have  always  adopted  on  issues  of  national  importance,  the  hon. 
Leader of the Opposition would be consulted at the appropriate time. 

 
I  propose  to  chair  a  committee  which  will  consider  the  best  way  forward.    I  am 
formally  inviting  the  hon.    Leader  of  the  Opposition,  as  well  as  a  representative  of  each 
political party represented in this House, to form part of this committee.  The committee will 
be assisted by our local and external legal teams, as and when required. 

May I also add that this victory today is a victory for Mauritius as a whole, including 
those of our fellow countrymen who are of Chagossian origin.  It is a victory for the nation 
and the people of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I take the opportunity, finally, to thank our team in Mauritius led by 
our agent, Mr Dheerendra K. Dabee, Solicitor-General, and our external  legal team led by 
Professor Philippe Sands QC for their excellent work and their dedication. 

Our friends in Africa, Asia,  Latin America and the rest of the world have over the 
years consistently supported us in our efforts to effectively exercise our sovereignty over the 

 

13 

Chagos  Archipelago.    In  fact,  during  his  recent  visit  to  Mauritius,  Prime  Minister  Modi 
reaffirmed India’s support for Mauritius on this matter.  We are thankful for this international 
solidarity and have no doubt that all our friends will rejoice in this victory, which some might 
compare to the victory of David over Goliath.  We are confident that we can continue to rely 
on their staunch support in the pursuit of our ongoing and just fight. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for providing us 
with an official copy of both rulings; the unanimous and the minority ruling of the Tribunal.  
But I am a bit surprised because, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just said, ‘The Guardian’ of 
this  morning  quotes  an  official  reaction  from  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office 
yesterday afternoon, as soon as the ruling was out, and we are still not in presence of any 
official communiqué, any official statement.  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 
our Mission in London has tried to obtain a copy of any official reaction yesterday afternoon 
from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on that?  Because it is important for us to have 
the official text and not just what ‘The Guardian’ has simply produced. 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  are  not  in  a  hurry  to  make  public  comments,  Madam 
Speaker.  Insofar as any expression on the part of the Commonwealth Office or UK External 
Affairs is concerned, we have had no official copy so far. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on the first issue, it is a fact that the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister has said that the Tribunal has ruled that the UK acted illegally in setting up the MPA 
-  Marine  Protected  Area.    It  has  ordered,  in  fact,  the  UK  –  London  -  to  renegotiate  with 
Mauritius  the  setting  up  of  such  a  MPA.    But,  in  the  reaction  from  the  Foreign  and 
Commonwealth  Office,  as  reported  by  ‘The  Guardian’  of  this  morning  -  until  we  have  an 
official document - London was cheeky enough to declare itself ‘pleased’ with certain aspects 
of the ruling, and has tried to downplay terribly the impact of the ruling, indicating that they 
are prepared only to discuss our fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago.  As I have said, we 
want to have the official statement.  But have we already protested on the basis of what they 
are doing, trying to downplay completely the importance of that ruling, and limiting whatever 
discussion there will be on fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago, full stop? 

The Prime Minister: Could we expect anything else from them, anything contrary 
from  the  stand  they  have  been  taking  all  along,  from  the  time  they  excised  part  of  our 
territory?  They are the culprits, and we know - last time when I answered a question here I 

 

14 

said that their philosophy is, might is right, and this is on what they are relying.  But I hope 
finally justice will prevail and we will get our full sovereignty for the Chagos Archipelago. 

Mr Bérenger: On the same issue, Madam Speaker.  There are going to be general 
elections in the UK on 07 May; in six weeks’ time.  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree 
with me that it is necessary to get in touch right now, after this ruling, with both the outgoing 
Prime  Minister  and  the  outgoing  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  to  prepare  the  ground  for 
substantial discussions after 07 May, especially so, that the Chagos Archipelago in 1965 was 
supposedly detached from Mauritius whilst the Labour Government was in power in London?  

The Prime Minister: Insofar as their interests are concerned, Madam Speaker, I am 

sorry to say there is no difference between Labour and Conservative. 

Mr Bérenger: In fact, maybe the Labour Government was worst in London than the 
Conservative Government.  If I can move on to the fundamental issue of sovereignty, Madam 
Speaker,  I  agree  fully  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  c’est  un  grand  pas  en  avant 
because two of the judges, UN judges, concluded that Mauritius has sovereignty, as the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister said, over the Chagos Archipelago, being given that, I quote – 

“in  1965,  Mauritian  Ministers  were  coerced  into  agreeing  to  the  detachment  of  the 
Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law of self-
determination.” 

Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that the other three concluded that 
they did not have jurisdictions to pronounce themselves to take a stand on sovereignty, but it 
is  also  very  important  that  none  of  them  said  that  UK  has  sovereignty  over  the  Chagos 
Archipelago? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, I said so in my reply. This is a fact and we know that the 
whole  transaction  that  took  place  was  under  duress,  and  we  also  know  that  from  the  very 
beginning the excision was illegal. I said so some time back when I answered a question over 
here. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me.  With 
this ruling in our hands, the question is: from now on where do we go? And I am sure that the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that there are key strategic decisions to be taken 
without losing time.  With this ruling, two UN Judges pronouncing themselves for the first 

 

15 

time in favour of our sovereignty, what line of action are we going to take?  Are we going to 
try and bring London to agree to go to the International Court of Justice, or instead are we 
going to take new diplomatic initiatives, possibly including the initiatives which we took in 
2000/2005 on the issue? 

The Prime Minister: I cannot answer this right now. I have said there is going to be a 
Committee which will decide what line we are going to follow, but, definitely, we are going 
to stand firm and we are going to fight against the United Kingdom to retrieve our territory. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I welcome the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s decision to chair a committee 
- a political committee with the required experts - on the issue. Therefore, I welcome that, I 
thank him for that. I welcome that totally.  But will he agree with me that there is no time to 
waste? The UK reacted immediately yesterday afternoon in a nasty way.  There is, therefore, 
no time to waste.  Will he agree with me that this committee, which he is going to chair, 
should get to work as soon as possible? 

The Prime Minister: Certainly, we will do that. We are also in a hurry. 

Mr Bérenger: My last question, Madam Speaker. I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
thank Professor Philippe Sands, the leader in our legal team, and the local people concerned 
also, the Solicitor-General and others. Indeed, this is a historic ruling, an important milestone 
- to pick up the words which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has used. Therefore, can I suggest - 
he has thanked Professor Philippe Sands and the others - that the House expresses its thanks 
and  conveys  its  thanks  to  Professor  Philippe  Sands  and  to  his  team  for  the  fantastic  work 
done; that therefore the  House should - not just the hon. Prime Minister - thank them and 
address our thanks to them. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the  House  is  joining  me  to  thank  everyone  who  has 

helped in this matter. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Jhugroo, I am sorry, the last question usually 

rests with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

 

16 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(2.30 p.m.)  

STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE - REPORT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg leave to move the Motion standing in 

my name and which reads thus - 

“This Assembly resolves that the Report of the Standing Orders Committee in regard 
to the amendments to the Standing Orders and Rules of the National Assembly (1995), 
presently in force, more specifically Standing Orders 52 and 73, which was laid on 
the  Table  of  the  National  Assembly  on  14  March  2015  be  approved,  and  that  the 
amendments contained therein come into operation forthwith.” 

Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Standing  Orders 
Committee  for  the  diligence  and  promptness  with  which  it  has  discharged,  under  your 
chairmanship, the task of reviewing Standing Orders 2, 52 and 73 of the Standing Orders and 
Rules of the National Assembly which had been entrusted to it. 

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, the amendments to Standing Order 73 have 
become necessary as a result of the enactment, on 05 March 2015, of the Finance and Audit 
(Amendment)  Act  2015,  which  provides  for  the  replacement  of  the  Programme-Based 
Budgeting  by  a  simpler  and  more  flexible  process  of  annual  appropriation  of  budgetary 
resources  by  the  Vote  of  Expenditure  and  making  their  Estimates  documentation  much 
clearer and more readily understandable to hon. Members and the public at large. 

I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  by  doing  away  with  Programme-Based 
Budgeting, we have not made any compromise on transparency and accountability. On the 
contrary,  the  new  framework  is  fully  compliant  with  the  principles  of  Performance-Based 
Budgeting and will, therefore, enhance transparency and accountability.  

As  explained  previously  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development, 
information on the allocation of financial resources for all Government services and details of 

 

17 

expenditure will continue to be disclosed fully and clearly. Provisions have also been made 
for monitoring mechanism in the form of progress reports on performance and achievements 
on budgetary measures.  

I also wish to underline the fact that the shift from Programme-Based Budgeting has 
been  undertaken  after  consultations  with  the  IMF  and  our  Development  Partners  and  their 
observations have been taken into consideration. 

Madam Speaker, the other main amendment proposed relates to Standing Order 52. 
Up  to  the  year  2013,  two  Bills,  namely,  the  Finance  Bill  and  the  Economic  and  Financial 
Measures Bill were being simultaneously introduced to implement the measures announced 
in the Budget Speech.  As pointed out by hon. Mohamed last week, this follows from a ruling 
of Mr Speaker in 2009 to the effect that, in the absence of provisions in the Standing Orders, 
a  Finance  Bill  should  cover  only  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  Speech  relating  to 
taxation and national finance.  

Accordingly, Standing Order 52 has to be amended in order to provide for measures 
announced  in  the  Budget  Speech,  whether  relating  to  taxation  and  national  finance  or 
otherwise, to be covered in one single Bill, namely the Finance Bill.  

However, I hasten to add that where a new legal framework is required to implement a 
measure announced in the Budget Speech or a measure requires substantial amendments, a 
new Bill or an Amendment Bill may still be introduced separately. 

Finally, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Members to the fact that the Standing 
Orders Committee has, for the sake of greater clarity and precision, deemed it fit to reword 
the first sentence in the proposed new paragraph (1) of Standing Order 73, to make express 
reference therein to the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet the 
Estimates. 

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to thank the Standing Orders Committee for 

having diligently completed the task assigned to it. 

With these words, I commend the motion to the House. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 

  

 
(2.36 p.m.) 

18 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, as you know, I am 
not going to repeat myself.  We have made it clear that we are in disagreement with the way 
we  are  doing  away  with  Programme-based  Budgeting  and,  secondly,  that  we  are  in 
disagreement  about  going  back  to  financial  year  ending  at  the  end  of  June  of  every  year 
instead of the calendar year.   

But apart from that, you, Madam Speaker, chaired the Standing Orders Committee and 
the report is before us and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is asking us to approve that report.  I 
find it quite sad.  When we were in Government in 2000 and 2005, one important symbolic 
move  that  we  made  was  to  everywhere  where  you  find  ‘Chairman’  replace  it  by 
‘Chairperson’.    It  was  a  sweeping  measure,  very  symbolic  dans  sa  portée,  whereas  in  the 
report of the Committee which you chaired, it is still ‘Chairman’ all the way.  We missed the 
opportunity  of  putting  in  ‘Chairperson’  instead  of  ‘Chairman’.    It  is  not  too  late.    It  is 
symbolic.  It is not too late, but I think it is important just as wherever we have ‘Mr Speaker’, 
it could be ‘The Speaker’, because now we have ‘Madam Speaker’.  But we still go on and on 
with Mr Speaker and especially ‘Chairman’ instead of ‘Chairperson’. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker:  Is there any other Member who wishes to intervene on this motion?  
No other Member!  So, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as Leader of the House and the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition for commending the work of the Standing Orders Committee, 
and now I will put the question.  

The motion was, on question put, agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD (AMENDMENT) 

BILL (No. II of 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Construction Industry Development 

Board (Amendment) Bill (No. II of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

 
(2.39 p.m.) 

19 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, we are, today,  here to debate the Construction  Industry  Development Board  Bill, 
and last Saturday most of the hon. Members of this National Assembly received their Order 
Paper in the morning telling us that there will be the First and Second Reading of that Bill, 
which was certified as being an urgent Bill under Standing Order 65 by the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister. I asked myself: “Why is this Bill so urgent? Why is it that this Bill is providing for 
a retrospective application that will come to effect on 01 February 2015?”  And this because 
of this rush, because we are talking about the second Bill presented by the new Government 
when  we  have  so  many  other  Bills  like  the  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Act  which  has 
already been circulated in the past. There is the Consumer Protection Bill.  There are so many 
Acts.  Why is this piece of legislation so urgent? So, I went back and did some research and 
tried  to  understand  what  is  this  urgency.    The  Bill  has  three  objects.    Two  of  them  are 
relatively non-controversial and can be disposed of very quickly.  

The first object is the recomposition of the Council.  We have absolutely no problem 
with having the representative of the Professional Architects Council, Professional Quantity 
Surveyors’ Council or Council of Registered Professional Engineers. In fact, we welcome the 
decision  of  the  Government  to  include  on  the  Board  a  representative  of  the  Ministry 
responsible for the subject of environment because this was a proposal, a suggestion made by 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition when the main Bill came before this House in 2008 and 
listed, and I quote – 

“(…) how is it, when we are talking about the building industry, that the Ministry of 
Environment is not represented on the Council?  We talk of ‘Maurice Ile Durable’ and 
then when we have a chance to put the membership of the Board, where our mouth is, 
we forget the Ministry of Environment.”   

So, it is the most welcome move by this Government to at least include a representative from 
the Ministry of Environment.   

We are less enthusiastic about the amendment to the composition of the Board where 
there  would  be  a  representative  from  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises,  but  chosen  by  the 
Minister.  There would be a representative from Association of Contractors appointed by the 
Minister.  There would be a person of wide experience in the construction industry appointed 

 

20 

by the Minister.  So, why this mainmise of the hon. Minister?  We are talking here about the 
Council which has to be independent, which has to be seen to be independent because they 
are the ones who are going to propose grading.  They are the ones who are going to register 
contractors.  So, it has to be above board.  But other than this, we don’t have any major issue 
with the composition of the new Council that is being proposed. 

The  second  object  of  this  Bill  is  to  change  the  definition  of  ‘foreign  contractor’  and 
‘foreign consultant’.  Again, we don’t have any serious issue with that.  The hon. Minister 
Bodha, last week, explained that it is important that we get rid of the requirement of non-
residency. He also explained how, as the law stands today, after four  years of operation, a 
foreign contractor, a foreign consultant is deemed to be a local contractor; four years after 
coming into force… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes.  Four years in the past ten years. So, we don’t have any major issue with this.  We don’t 
know  this  new  protectionist  policy;  how  would  that  fair  vis-à-vis  the  donor  countries,  the 
bailleurs  de  fonds,  the  international  community,  when  they  will  come  to  finance  tender 
exercise because we know, all of us, that there is a move in the World Trade Organisation to 
eliminate  barriers  not  only  on  export/import  of  goods,  but  also  services  that  necessarily 
include provision of consultancy services and  contractor services.  But then, again, Madam 
Speaker, I think that we can at least justify this protectionist move because our construction 
industry is in very bad shape.  Since 2011, we have had negative growth reaching a peak of 
almost 10% in 2013.  So, I am sure that we will be able to justify this decision; for the time 
being, at least, keep the registration of foreign contractors, foreign consultants on a case by 
case basis.  

But it is the main object of this Bill which is more of an issue for us, Madam Speaker.  

The main object of the Bill is the amendment to section 37 that – 

 ‘(a)  

that a firm or person that or who was providing consultancy services, 
or undertaking construction works, in Mauritius immediately before 1 
August  2014  may  continue  to  provide  consultancy  services  or 
undertake  construction  works  for  such  period  as  may  be  prescribed, 
without being registered as a consultant, contractor, foreign consultant 
or foreign contractor, as the case may be;(…)’  

 

21 

So, Madam Speaker, we want to know, on this side of the House, why are we amending this? 
The hon. Minister Bodha, last week, intervening on the Bill, actually justified the amendment 
as follows, I quote – 

 ‘In  fact,  (…)  it  is  providing  for  an  extension  of  the  transitional  period  for 
registration  of  consultants  and  contractors  which  has  already  expired  on  31 
January 2015 – hence the retrospective application - and which is depriving 
almost 80 per cent, as I said, of the consultants and contractors the opportunity 
to register with the CIDB.’ 

In fact, what are they called upon to decide, to debate on and resolve today, Madam Speaker? 
Are  we  really  extending  the  transitional  period  of  registration?  Are  80  per  cent  of  the 
consultants and contractors today deprived of the opportunity to register with CIDB? Madam 
Speaker, nothing can be further from the truth! In fact, it is absolutely the opposite. As at the 
law stands today, section 19 and section 20 of the Act make it compulsory for all contractors, 
all consultants, be they local, be they foreigners to come and register with the Council, with 
the  CIDB.  If  they  do  not  register,  they  are  not  allowed  to  continue  providing  consultancy 
services, continue providing construction services. Today, they are bound to register. It is not 
a  matter  of  they  having  no  opportunity  to  register,  they  have  to  register  and  we  are  now 
telling them: “You do not have to register”. That is what this amendment is telling them. It is 
telling  all  you  people  who  can  and  should  register  do  not  register,  because  if  you  were 
providing consultancy services, if you were a consultant, before the 01 of August 2014, you 
can continue to do that. There is no need to register. 

And 

then,  Madam  Speaker, 

the  Construction  Industry  Development  Board, 
Regulations of Consultants and Contractors Regulations 2015, which came into force on 01 
August 2014, already sets out the registration process. There are prescribed forms to be filled, 
there  are  specific  qualifications  required.  If  you  want  to  be  providing  project  management 
services, you need to have a qualified project manager. If you want to provide engineering 
services, you need to have qualified engineers. If you want to provide architectural services, 
you need to have qualified architect, and then you make application; the Council has 30 days 
to resolve. The Council can accept and register you if you fill the criteria or it can reject you. 
If  you  are  aggrieved  by  the  decision  of  the  Council,  you  may  have  recourse.  There  is  an 
appeal procedure, there is an ad hoc committee which is headed by an independent barrister. 
He comes, he considers, he listens to you and then the committee decides whether to grant 
you registration; yes or no! So, the registration is there, all the steps to be registered are there. 

 

22 

So, I totally disagree with the hon. Minister when he says that we are amending the law today 
because 80% of contractors/consultants are deprived of the opportunity to register. And why 
should we register? 

 
Madam Speaker, the need for consultants and contractors to register was highlighted 
in the report published by the Council, CIDB, in a paper named: A Strategy Paper for the 
Construction  Industry  published  in  July  2013,  that  is,  before  the  coming  into  force  of  the 
regulation. This is what the Council said – 

 

“Registration  of  consultants  and  contractors  which  since  long  has  been  overdue 
should  be  undertaken  at  its  earliest.  This  crucial  exercise  would  have  a  multiplier 
effect in improving service delivery in the sector. The grading of contractors would 
enable  a  sort  of  pre-qualification  of  contractors  according  to  their  capabilities  and 
resources  and  hence  would  facilitate  the  procurement  of  construction  works  and 
services and would, on the other hand, improve quality and overall capability.” 

There was  general consensus, Madam Speaker, in this House in 2008, when the main Bill 
was  passed  and  it  should  be  this  way,  because  any  person  who  has  been  engaged  in 
construction,  any  one  of  us  here  who  had  a  house  built  knows  the  trouble  of  selecting  a 
contractor. We have no criteria of selection; we go by words of mouth, at our own expense. 
The registration would have provided clear criteria. You want to construct such house, you 
have such type of engineer. You - the Government - want to come ahead with a certain type 
of project: you have grade A, you have grade B, you have grade C as contractors. And that 
was helpful also for the contractors; they knew what were their grades. So, whenever there 
was  a  public  tender  or  private  tender,  they  would  already  focus  on  that  particular  job 
description.  And  what  is  more  interesting,  Madam  Speaker,  is  -  and  I  went  through  the 
debates - the one person who made the most passionate speech on that day was hon. Bodha. I 
totally  agree  with  what  he  said.  He  had  done  research  on  South  Africa  and  other  African 
countries  and  he  was  very  forceful.  He  said  that  registration  will  provide  a  performance 
record  for  contractors,  regulate  the  behaviour  and  promote  minimum  standards  and  based 
practice of contractors.  

 
Registration  would  resolve  the  problem  of  delay,  and  quality  would  reduce 
administrative burden associated with the award of contract, reduce tendering cost. He even 
stated  that  registration  will  enhance  democratisation.  That  was  when  he  was  in  the 
Opposition. Now that he is the hon. Minister - even last week, in his intervention, the hon. 

 

23 

Minister highlighted the benefit of registration of consultants and contractors. I am not going 
to  repeat  whatever  the  hon.  Minister  said,  safe  and  only  that  we  fully  agree  with  all  the 
reasons  he  put  forward  to  have  contractors  and  consultants  registered.  Why?  Because  we 
know  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  fiasco.  We  know  the  Ring  Road  fiasco.  We  know  the 
Bagatelle fiasco. We need to have a register, so that we can ensure that there is not a repeat of 
Terre Rouge-Verdun, of Ring Road, of Bagatelle Dam and other things. But this is exactly 
what we are not doing today! Today we are not requiring contractors to register. Today, we 
are not requiring consultants to register. 

Madam Speaker, what is more hurtful is that this Government had the bold initiative, 
welcome  initiative  of  appointing  a  Minister  -  unfortunately,  he  is  not  here  -  of  Good 
Governance. Good governance requires  you, when you do your tender process, to give the 
job  to  the  most  qualified  contractor,  to  the  most  qualified  consultant.  Good  governance 
requires  that  before  someone  applies  we  know  his  qualification.  This  is  good  governance! 
Then, we do not waste time, we do not have, as what was said yesterday in the press and I 
quote from the people in the industry – 

 «Les  deux  représentants  du  secteur  affirment  à  l’unanimité  qu’il  y  a  un  manque 
d’inscription régulière par les institutions concernées, ce qui a entraîné une hausse 
de contracteurs marrons.» 

We were talking about universités marrons. If you do not regulate contractors, if you do not 
regulate  consultants,  you  are  bound  to  end  up  with  contracteurs  marrons,  consultants 
marrons. If you have these, obviously, you would have the problems that we are having when 
we allocate tender to those who do not qualify or should not have qualified.  

When  you  have  a  registration  process  which  is  valid  for  one  year,  there  is  a 
 
monitoring because if during that period of one year you have not performed, the Board can 
cancel your register and take sanctions against you if you have been convicted of an offence 
of fraud or you have been found guilty of malpractices. 

Madam Speaker, the other reason which the hon. Minister advanced for today’s Bill is 
that we are only extending the transitional period. He is not saying that we are not registering.  
He says that we are only extending the transitional period; later on, we will have to register. 
But is it what we are doing? Are we extending the transitional period of registration? Let me 
enlighten the House on what the situation is today. When the Bill was voted in 2008, there 

 

24 

was a transitional provision in section 37 (2) (a), which indeed provided that any firm which 
is providing consultancy services, or undertaking construction works at the commencement 
of sections 19 and 20 - that is, as at 01 August 2014 because that is when this section came 
into being - shall within six months of the commencement of sections 19 and 20 apply for 
registration as consultant or contractor.  

So,  there  was  a  delay  of  six  months  given  to  those  who  were  already  providing 
consultancy services or undertaking construction works. They were given a six months’ time 
frame  which  was  voted  and  approved  by  Parliament  so  as  to  give  them  sufficient  time  to 
compute whatever documentation or information required for the purpose of registration and 
to ensure that there is continuity in the project pending their registration process. 

But  today,  what  we  are  being  asked  to  do,  Madam  Speaker,  is  to  allow  these 
contractors and consultants to work indefinitely without any registration, or worst to continue 
to  work  without  registration  indefinitely  until  such  period  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the 
Minister.  

(Interruptions) 

From a sitting position, the hon. Minister is talking about six months. But why is it not in the 
Bill? Why don’t we have an extension of six months? 

(Interruptions) 

Now it is taken away from the august Assembly, from hon. Members, and it is given to the 
bon vouloir du ministre. By regulation, he will decide.  He said six months and if he wants to 
make it 10 years, he can do it! 

(Interruptions) 

He can do it because it is outside the purview of this House. So, if he had intended six months 
- as he is saying from a sitting position - I would have expected an amendment to say that 
they  are  given  another  six  months  and  not  that  they  can  work  until  such  time  as  may  be 
prescribed by regulation. 

Madam Speaker, being given that there is consensus in this House and outside this 
House that we need to regulate consultants and contractors, then the question on everybody’s 

 

25 

mind is: why are we postponing registration? Why are we giving them more time to register?  
The hon. Minister stated last week and I quote –  

“(…) quite a fairly large number of employees of these consultants and contractors 
would be laid off (…)” 

If we don’t do this amendment, if we don’t compel them to register, they will have to lay off 
employees.  The hon. Minister can enlighten the House; he can tell us how many employees 
would be sacked according to him. But is it not the case that already most of the big players, 
most  of  the  grade  A  contractors  and  most  of  those  heavy  employers  who  recruit  most 
employees  have  already  registered?  It  is  only  the  contracteurs  marrons  who  have  not  yet 
registered.  Those  who  are  serious  were  given  six months  and they  have  registered.  In  any 
event,  Madam  Speaker,  how  can  we,  in  the  name  of  job  preservation,  sacrifice  good 
governance  at  the  risk  of  having  another  Terre  Rouge-Verdun,  another  Bagatelle  Dam  or 
another Ring Road? 

The second reason which the hon. Minister advances is that - it is quite surprising and 

I quote –  

“(…) consultants and contractors are reluctant to register as this would imply that they 
would have to comply with a number of criteria which would, ultimately, determine 
their real capabilities in undertaking contracts for infrastructural projects.” 

But, Madam Speaker, this is exactly why they have to register! They have to register so that 
we  can  determine  their  real  capabilities  in  undertaking  contracts!  It  should  not  be  because 
they don’t fulfil the criteria, they can’t provide the information or they don’t have qualified 
engineers and project managers, we allow them to work. That should be the main reason to 
object this Bill coming from the hon. Minister, not the reason to postpone registration again. 
What about good governance and all this? 

Madam Speaker, I have thought a lot about this and after reading the hon. Minister’s 
speech  last  week  and  in  2008  to  really  think  why  is  it  that  the  hon.  Minister  Bodha  who 
agrees that we need to register these consultants, and obviously he is very passionate about 
this registration process, why then are we are amending the law?  Why are we saying that 
they don’t have to register and they can continue to work?  Madam Speaker, the answer lies 
in a directive issued on 27 November 2014 by the Procurement Policy Office, section 7, and I 
quote –  

26 

 
“For  procurement  proceedings  to  be  conducted  henceforth,  public  bodies  should 
ensure  that  bidders  comply  with  the  registration  requirements  of  the  CIDB  as 
prerequisites for eligibility to bid and to meet the qualification criteria contained in 
standard bidding documents.” 

This  is  the  real  reason,  Madam  Speaker!  If  you  are  not  registered,  you  cannot 
participate in public bidding. Even sub-contractors and sub-consultants  must be registered, 
otherwise they cannot participate in public tenders. We all know what is the date today. We 
all know that we are 20th of March. We all know what is going to happen on Monday, 23 
March. We will have the Budget. We will have money. We will have public tenders. We will 
have to give jobs for the boys and girls, copains et copines.  So, these people who today do 
not qualify... 

(Interruptions) 

… are not registered and they probably do not meet the required criteria.  We will have to 
make do with them, we will have to give them the leeway because we will have to put our 
Viré Mam first, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition was right when he said “A peine 
100 jours se sont écoulés, les masques commencent à tomber, la désillusion s’installe. Ploré 
Mam!” 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

(3.04 p.m.) 

Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Madam Speaker, 
let me first of all congratulate my good friend, hon. Minister Bodha for bringing this Bill to 
the  House  although  the  Opposition  is  claiming  that  it  is  too  late  or  too  early,  I  do  not 
understand. We are in Government only a couple of months and the Bill has been brought to 
the House. 

I listened carefully to the speech made by hon. Minister Bodha last Saturday. I was 
outraged.  It  was  surprising  that  the  preceding  Government  took  six  years  to  bring  a  very 
simple regulation for an important sector of the economy, a vital sector of the economy, that 

 

27 

is, the construction sector. They took six years!  Yet, the previous Government has always 
been blowing its trumpet on what it has achieved and it is still blowing its trumpet on what it 
has done. An important sector like construction has been neglected. The hon. Minister stated 
last week that only 140 consultants and 1,400 contractors were not registered.  

This is serious, Madam Speaker. We have only 60 consultants and 100 contractors who 
are being registered. I congratulate the hon. Minister for taking this matter as being urgent. I 
fail  to  understand  why  the  Opposition  feels  it  is  not  urgent.  It  is  urgent.  It  goes  for  the 
Government  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  customers.  And  if  we  do  not  have  a  regulated 
sector, you can’t control things. It is unacceptable that all these contractors and consultants 
are operating now illegally.  I don’t know why they are not registered.  It seems to me that 
either they are not registered because they don’t qualify, they do not respect the norms or 
probably they are hiding their true grades which will enable them to bid for bigger projects 
below their capacities. I think it is a real danger to let them. But, I am happy that the hon. 
Minister has just stated that he is going to give another six months for them to register. I am 
sure that the Ministry - the officers of the Ministry are here - will chase those unregistered 
consultants and contractors to get them registered as quickly as possible. 

Madam Speaker, we are speaking about the construction sector. We all know that the 
construction industry plays  an important  role in  the economy.  It is the engine itself of the 
economy.    Nous  savons  tous  ce  qui  se  passera  si  rien  ne  va  plus,  si  l’industrie  de  la 
construction ne va pas.  The activities of the industry are vital to achieve the socio-economic 
goals of providing shelter, infrastructure and employment. It is clear, Madam Speaker, that 
the construction industry affects nearly every aspect of the economy and its growth is vital 
for the continued growth of the economy. 

Last  Saturday,  the  hon.  Minister  stated  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  industry  dropped 
from 11.1% in 2008 to 6.7% last year.  A drop of nearly 40%. The fact that the construction 
sector has an effect on all the other sectors of the economy has been a serious loss for the 
economy during these last years due to the negligence of the previous Government on this 
sector. I always had the impression from the last Government that the previous Minister of 
Public Infrastructure was the most performing Minister; so many roads and so many works 
done.    Mais  le  masque  tombe!  Just  like  my  good  friend  has  just  stated,  Madam  Speaker.  
Today,  we  all  know  what  he  is  doing.  One  of  this  is  the  construction  sector.  We  know 
Bagatelle.  We know Terre Rouge-Verdun. There is a lot! 

 

28 

Madam  Speaker,  every  sector  of  the  economy  needs  to  be  properly  regulated  for  a 
smooth running and for its success itself. Only discipline and compliance with the law will 
enable  a  systematic  growth  and  will  bring  benefits  to  the  country.    Another  construction 
industry is the engine of the economy and I am happy that the hon. Minister brought this Bill 
as  early  as  he  could  to  this  House.  I  know  that  the  public  sector  is  protected  because  the 
Public Procurement Office undertakes only bids from registered consultants and contractors, 
but  the  private  sector  and  the  public  at  large  are  at  risk  when  they  are  dealing  with 
unregistered consultants and contractors. 

Madam Speaker, I also welcome the amendments brought to section 2 of the Act, to 
rectify  the  anomalous  issue  regarding  foreign  and  local  consultants  and  contractors.  The 
foreign consultants and contractors have been privileged for a long time and they had an edge 
over the local  contractors and consultants.  I am  happy that this is being  rectified now  and 
they will be on equal footing. 

One last thing, Madam Speaker, is regarding the composition of the Board. I don’t have 
any  quarrel  with  the  members  in  the  Board.  I  am  happy  that  we’ve  got  a  very  good 
professional as the Chairman of the Board. A person of long-standing. A person who knows 
the work. So, I congratulate the hon. Minister for appointing the Chairman for the CIDB. But, 
Madam  Speaker,  I  would  request  my  good  friend,  hon.  Bodha  to  see  whether  the  HRDC, 
which is responsible for manpower planning, could be on the Board probably as an observer 
as  well,  just  to  keep  them  abreast  of  the  needs  of  the  sector  and  the  training  needs  also. 
Because the HRDC will then communicate to the MITD and to the other training providers 
on what sort of people we need in the construction sector. I know that - being an ex-Minister 
for Training - this is a sector which needs training although we just feel that no people just 
know by experience, but we have to train these people and training will give better results, 
good products and bring benefit to the economy. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would once again congratulate my friend and together with him, 

I commend the Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

 (3.13 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):    Madam  Speaker,  I 
would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to comment on the CIDB Bill. The 

 

29 

construction  industry  being  a  sector  which  I  am  familiar  with,  therefore,  I  would  like  to 
highlight the following. 

Madame la présidente, comme de nombreux professionnels du secteur, je suis d’avis 
que l’industrie de la construction a besoin d’un meilleur encadrement et des lois plus adaptées 
aux  réalités  actuelles.  Et  les  amendements  proposés,  en  l’occurrence  l’enregistrement  des 
consultants  et  contracteurs,  ainsi  que  la  réintroduction  du  grading  system  sont  accueillis 
favorablement  et  seront  une  bonne  avancée;  une  avancée  même  salutaire  pour  l’industrie. 
Cependant,  certains  amendements  proposés,  à  mon  avis,  méritent  d’être  plus  ambitieux. 
Prenons  tout  d’abord  la  question  des  consultants  ou  compagnies  étrangères,  objets  de  la 
section 2 du CIDB Bill. 

Madame  la  présidente,  si  nous  faisons  un  rapide  retour  dans  le  passé,  attirer  des 
compagnies  étrangères  avait  deux  vertus.  La  première  de  notre  phase  de  décollage 
économique,  des  compagnies  telles  que  Transinvest  pour  des  travaux  routiers  nous  ont 
accompagnés  car  nous  ne  disposions  pas,  alors,  de  l’expertise  locale;  s’ensuivit  d’une 
deuxième  vague  d’entreprises  étrangères  en  raison  de  la  compétitivité  de  leurs  coûts  de 
construction ou encore par rapport aux lignes de crédit ou de financement octroyées par leurs 
pays  d’origine  qui  se  sont  implantés.  Maurice  a  eu  besoin  de  ces  apports  de  compagnies 
étrangères pour accompagner notre développement. Il est évident que nous avons aujourd’hui 
des compagnies mauriciennes capables de réaliser techniquement les mêmes travaux. Mais il 
est dangereux d’installer des barrières protectionnistes trop fortes.  

Le  dilemme  d’aujourd’hui  est  de  trouver  le  juste  milieu ;  l’équilibre  entre  la 
protection  de  notre  industrie  locale  et  l’emploi  local  qui  doit  être  au  centre  de  nos 
préoccupations, tout en ayant des prix compétitifs qui seront répercutés sur le consommateur 
final,  l’État.  L’État  a  besoin  de  routes,  de  logements  sociaux,  de  bâtiments  qui  sont 
structurellement viables et à des coûts attractifs, et la même logique s’applique au privé. 

De nombreuses questions, Madame la présidente, méritent d’être posées. Entre autres, 
comment  est-ce  qu’une  entreprise,  en  l’occurrence  chinoise,  est-elle  capable  d’écraser  ses 
coûts  par  rapport  à  une  entreprise  mauricienne ?    Premièrement,  son  cash  flow.  Elle  paye 
généralement  ses  employés  en  fin  d’année.  Les  employés  reçoivent  un  stipend,  mais  la 
majeure partie du salaire est versée à la Fête du Printemps. Ces compagnies font fi de nos lois 
locales,  en  l’occurrence  les  heures  légales  de  travail,  ses  employés  sont  beaucoup  plus 
productifs  que  les  nôtres,  et  elles  source  tous  ses  équipements  en  Chine ;  Bobcats,  grues, 

 

30 

clous,  ferrailles,  uniformes,  céramiques,  sanitaires,  et  j’en  passe.  Donc,  comment  au-delà 
d’une  barrière  administrative,  rendre  nos  entreprises  plus  compétitives ?  Madame  la 
présidente, c’est là la vraie question. 

Il  faut savoir la chose suivante.  Il  existe déjà une barrière protectionniste - vous le 
savez.  Dans  l’exercice  de  sélection,  nous  avons  déjà  une  barrière  protectionniste  et 
administrative qui est la suivante : elle s’appelle le margin of preference. Pour tout contrat 
supérieur  à  100  millions  de  roupies,  une  entreprise  incorporée  à  Maurice,  donc,  de  droit, 
mauricien, et qui emploie plus de 80 % de la main-d’œuvre locale, bénéficie d’un margin of 
preference de 10 à 15 % par rapport à toute autre entreprise étrangère. Quelles sont les autres 
solutions? 

La  première,  soit  augmenter  ce  margin  of  preference,  le  passer  de  15  à  20 ;  une 
possibilité pour soulager notre industrie locale.  Deuxièmement, favoriser les joint ventures 
avec les entreprises étrangères, afin que nos entreprises locales apprennent à se réinventer, 
comment source différemment, comment comprendre le mécanisme qui fait que les ouvriers 
chinois soient plus productifs que les nôtres, et qu’elles réalisent désormais que nous vivons 
dans un monde global, et à ce titre elles pourraient rivaliser et se projeter même en Afrique ou 
sur  la  zone  de  l’océan  Indien,  tant  et  si  bien  qu’elles  apprennent  à  se  réinventer. 
Troisièmement, sous prétexte de nous octroyer des lignes de crédit, certains pays amis nous 
imposent  des  contacteurs  étrangers.  Cela  doit  s’arrêter,  car  le  montant  des  variations  est 
abyssal, et la variation sur un contrat, comme vous l’avez mentionné, Monsieur le ministre, 
doit être l’exception et non pas la règle. 

Un  autre  point  fondamental,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  le  suivant ;  et  en  cela  j’ai 
circulé un amendement que je propose d’amener au Committee Stage, et je cite la déclaration 
du ministre en deuxième lecture - 

“The Mauritius Institute of Surveyors, the Mauritius Standards Bureau, the Ministry 
responsible for the subject of Employment and the Ministry responsible for the subject 
of Human Resources Development are being replaced by the Ministry of Environment 
and  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  as  these  two  Ministries  have  a  very  direct 
interest and involvement in the construction industry.” 

Retirer le représentant du ministère du Travail ou du HRDC de ce Board, Madame la 
présidente, est à mon avis une profonde erreur, et je vais vous expliquer pourquoi. Le Board 

 

31 

du CIDB est le forum où tous les acteurs de la construction seront mis en présence, et à ce 
titre seront en interaction - constructeurs, ingénieurs, QS - et cet organisme sera l’épicentre de 
tous les projets majeurs. 

Le gouvernement a annoncé la création d’une Chambre de Métiers qui regrouperait 
toutes les formations en relation avec la construction ; apprenti, charpentier, maçon, peintre, 
plombier et tant d’autres corps de métiers liés au bâtiment. Il me semble évident, Madame la 
présidente,  que  le  CIDB  a  un  rôle  majeur  à  jouer  dans  la  mise  en  place  et  dans  le 
fonctionnement de cette future Chambre de Métiers. Il me semble évident que le représentant 
de  ce  futur  organisme,  qu’il  soit  sous  le  ministère  du  Travail  ou  de  l’Education,  soit 
représenté sur le Board du CIDB, car il est appelé à être de facto l’interface entre le système 
éducatif et l’entreprise. On pourrait même imaginer que lors de l’enregistrement annuel des 
différentes  entreprises  du  secteur,  ces  dernières  fassent  part  de  leur  capacité  d’accueil  des 
apprentis. 

Par ailleurs, Madame la présidente, j’aimerais faire ressortir que le YEP devrait aussi 
être  amendé  pour  permettre  à  un  apprenti  qui  est  déjà  employé  et  qui  souhaite  avoir  une 
formation en parallèle puisse le faire, et à ce titre le YEP devrait faire place aux employés qui 
souhaitent recevoir une formation dans le cadre de la Chambre de Métiers. 

Finalement,  un  autre  point  technique,  Madame  la  présidente,  concerne  la  garantie 
décennale présente dans notre Code civil, qui stipule que, pour toute construction réalisée, le 
contracteur s’engage à réparer structurellement tout défaut, et ce pendant une période de 10 
ans ; donc, d’où la garantie décennale. En France, cette garantie est inscrite dans le Code civil 
comme à Maurice, sauf  qu’en  France la loi exige du promoteur une assurance de  garantie 
décennale dans l’éventualité où le contracteur ne pourrait honorer ses engagements dans le 
cas de faillite, le départ  du territoire. À Maurice, certains promoteurs  respectueux de leurs 
clients et soucieux de préserver leur réputation, prennent cette assurance qui est de l’ordre de 
2 à 3 %. Il serait judicieux d’introduire cette loi, l’assurance de la garantie décennale, à la 
charge du promoteur immobilier. Il faudra bien sûr veiller à ce que le ministre des Finances, 
en qui j’ai confiance, revoie ces honoraires à la baisse. 

Madame  la  présidente,  pour  conclure,  je  tiens  à  féliciter  le  ministre  pour  la 
nomination  de  Monsieur  Gaëtan  Siew,  professionnel  reconnu  dans  le  domaine,  et  je  lui 
souhaite bonne chance. 

32 

 
Merci. 

(3.20 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my hon. friends on both sides of the House to have 
participated in the debate. They explained the urgency, why we brought the Bill. 

Let me just take one project to address a number of issues which have been, in fact, 
raised by hon. Members here.  First of all, it took six years for the regulations.  I think it took 
too long.  Second, most of the big projects which have been undertaken in Mauritius in the 
last years were undertaken, in fact, by companies, by contractors and consultants who are not 
registered,  because  there  have  been  applications  for  registration.    So,  in  fact,  there  is  no 
registration as such so far. 

I would like to say to the House that the transition period that we are going to extend - 
I said six months; my officers are proposing one year - is only for the reason of practicality, 
that is, we are giving another six months or a year - I can assure the Assembly here - for the 
registration  period.    That’s  all!    So,  there  is  no  hidden  agenda  or  ulterior  motive.    It  is  a 
question of practicality, it is a question of efficacy, and it is a question for the Board now to 
come with the communication strategy, to encourage everybody, all the contractors and all 
the consultants to be on the register. 

Let me take this project of Terre Rouge-Verdun, Madam Speaker.  Today, I, in fact, 
informed  my  colleagues  in  Government  that  -  and  this  is  the  truth  -  the  tests  which  were 
carried out in this major project, which were supposed to cost Rs2.1 billion - today we know - 
were inadequate; totally inadequate.  They started at Rs2.1 billion and reached Rs3 billion 
and,  at  that  point  in  time,  they  realised  that  where  they  were  cutting  the  mountain,  the 
variation would cost about Rs900 m. and could not be entertained in the same project.  So, we 
had phase II, and now we realise that the tests were inadequate by Egis BCEOM, that the 
detailed  design  of  that  project  for  Rs900  m.  had  not  been  completed,  and  they  gave  the 
authority to go to the Procurement Board to launch the tenders.   

Now, how do we take them to task?  How do we deregister companies which have, in 
fact, cost us hundreds of millions of rupees?  That is where the CIDB will have to play its 
role.  The registration, today, is the first step, and we will see to it that, within the transition 
period, be it six months or a year, all the contractors and the consultants register.  The Board 

 

33 

then will have also a register of all the projects; public or private.   For public projects, we 
have this condition that if you do not register you can’t apply for a tender. 

 
For the private projects, they will also have to decide to choose a contractor according 
to the grades which will have been registered at the Board and then we will have a record of 
all the projects, public or private, and we will know which is the consulting company and 
which contracting company is going to implement the project.  

My friend, from the other side of the House, raised one issue about the Government to 
Government projects, but projects funded by Lines of Credit. You have some projects which 
are funded by Lines of Credit.  For example, l’Agence Française de Développement, ce qui 
nous donne la possibilité de faire un appel d’offres international et toute compagnie qualifiée 
peut  faire  une  offre.  Donc,  la  ligne  de  crédit  n’est  pas  assujettie  d’une  contrainte  dans  le 
choix du consultant ou du contracteur. But, when it comes to China, for example, we know 
what are the conditions, and often,  you find  yourself with two Chinese companies bidding 
against each other.   

Let  me  now  raise  one  issue.    We  have  been  here  for  three  months;  we  are  not 

responsible for what has happened. 

(Interruptions) 

Entre guillemets! So, Madam Speaker, let me give you an example.  How come the former 
Minister allowed lorries to come - which were old lorries - from China? Sinohydro brought 
them! We have seen the lorries. How come that the drivers of those lorries were Chinese and 
they were carrying the topsoil, and everything, during the implementation of that Sinohydro 
Project on the third lane?   I am going to request the CIDB to see to it that, now, plant and 
machinery, which is available in Mauritius, should not be imported because we have so many 
people who have taken a loan to buy a lorry and who were trying to provide their services.  

I think we have to review the whole industry when it comes to standards. I remember 
my speech; I still stand by all I said. We need to have the standards.  Otherwise, what is going 
to happen? Tomorrow, we are going to start the Ring Road Phase 2, the Ring Road Phase 3, 
we have the Bagatelle Dam, we are going to build other dams, we are going to dig a tunnel 
under the Signal Mountain, so we need to have the best firms.  We need to have the best 
standards and value for money. We can’t start a project of Terre Rouge-Verdun which starts 
with  Rs2.1  billion  and,  today,  we  are  already  at  Rs4  billion!  And  now,  we  have  not  yet 

 

34 

addressed the issue of the last cracks,  which will cost,  I don’t know how many millions - 
hundreds of millions of rupees. So, Madam Speaker, the role of the CIDB starts now because 
we want accountability, we want the best standards and we want everybody to be on board.  

Now, there was this anomaly about the foreign consultancy; things are clear now. You 
are a non-citizen, whether  you are a resident of  Mauritius or not,  you qualify  as a foreign 
consultant. There is no prequalification as regards your aggregate performance of four years 
in  the  past,  prior  to  1999,  everybody  is  at  the  same  level  and  this  is  as  regards  the 
consultancy.  We  have  thought  about  it.  My  friend,  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Energy and Public Utilities, hon. Collendavelloo, and some other friends on this side of the 
House,  we  thought  about  this.  Why  we  are  doing  this,  Madam  Speaker?  Because,  the 
Mauritian  market  has  to  be  regulated,  the  players  have  to  be  regulated,  there  should  be 
accountability.  

Now,  I  am  going  to  take  the  example  of  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  again.    Who  is 
responsible  for  what  has  happened  and  which  is  going  to  cost  Mauritius  another  billion 
rupees? Who do we sue? I refer to what hon. Jhuboo said about la garantie décennale; this is 
true. He made a good suggestion that we should have an insurance, a written commitment by 
the company that, over ten years, we have a guarantee that the works were done according to 
standards. We have the non-defect liability period of one year, which, in the case of the Ring 
Road which collapsed, has been able to be implemented and they are now doing the repair 
works and it is going to be paid from that money. But, when it comes to Terre Rouge-Verdun, 
the  road  has  cracked  two  months  after  a  year;  that  is,  after  the  non-defect  liability  period, 
Madam Speaker.  

So, the role of the CIDB will be, first, to register the contractors and the consultants, 
and  it  will  be  very  clear  who  is  a  foreign  one  and  who  is  a  local  one.    Second,  the  local 
contractor  will  have  a  registration  for  a  year  and  the  foreign  contractor  will  have  a 
registration over two stages,  a provisional for the bidding and  a temporary  for the time of 
implementation of the project. I think, Madam Speaker, that we have to regulate that industry. 

I will just say a few words about the Board. We have to regulate the industry because 
we  have  to  spend  in  the  coming  years  some  Rs20  billion,  Rs30  billion,  again  in  the 
modernisation of Mauritius, like roads, tunnels, dams, and that is where the CIDB will come 
with a list and they will have to register.  They will be registered, they will be accountable 
and they will do the bidding as required - I think the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

 

35 

Development has agreed. We have agreed that we will go for international bidding processes 
for all the major big projects. We are not going to have this G to G or having this, as we said, 
“bidding” between two companies of the same country.  

Now,  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  take  this  example  about  the  whole  project  for  the 
decongestion which the former Minister presented to this House for about Rs30 billion. In the 
end, there was only one company and we were getting involved in a project of Rs30 billion 
and Government was financing, in fact, Rs20 billion as a loan in advance. So, all these things 
have to stop.  There should be accountability and this variation that we have had over the 
projects.  I  have  nominated  at  the  Road  Development  Authority  (RDA),  the  former 
Chairperson of the Council of Engineers, Mr Wong So, because I want things to be done, this 
Government wants things to be done; there should be no variation. We should have value for 
money. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, this is his state of mind. This is our state of mind; this is 
our culture and, at the same time, we want to have value for money when it comes to the 
other projects. I am very happy that the House pays tribute to Mr Gaëtan Siew. In fact, he is a 
school friend of mine and I would… 

(Interruptions) 

He is  a school friend of mine; we both come from the Royal College of Cassis. We have 
worked together in the beginning when I came back, because I am a town planner. I am very 
happy that he accepted, with all the challenges that we have to address in this industry. Mr 
Gaëtan Siew is an architect of international repute. The CIDB, the RDA, all our institutions 
will have to get involved in what we are going to do again, we are redesigning the time and 
country planning network of Mauritius, with the new satellite city, with the new dams, with 
the new roads structure and with the new mass transit system; because, if you have Highlands 
as a satellite city and we are going to have Port Louis, it is a totally new image of Mauritius. 
To build that, we need institutions and that is why we came fast with this amendment. We 
have no ulterior motives, we have no hidden agenda, the only thing that we have, is that it 
should be done in the best interest of the professionals and in the best interest of the country. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

 

36 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD (AMENDMENT) 

BILL  

(NO. II OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4 (Section 8 of principal Act amended). 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Jhuboo: I move for the following amendments in clause 4 - 

“By deleting paragraph (a) and replacing it by the following paragraph – 

(a) in subsection (2), by repealing paragraphs (b) to (k) and replacing them by the 

following paragraphs – 
(b) a representative of the Ministry; 
(c)  a representative of the Ministry responsible for the subject of  

environment; 

(d) a representative of the Ministry responsible for the subject of local 

government; 

(e) a representative of the Ministry responsible for the subject of human 

resource; 

(f)  a representative of the Ministry responsible for the subject of 

employment; 

(g) a representative of the Professional Architects’ Council established under 

the Professional Architects’ Council Act; 

(h) a representative of the Professional Quantity Surveyors’ Council 

established under the Professional Quantity Surveyors’ Council Act; 

(i)  a representative of the Council of Registered Professional Engineers of 

Mauritius established under the Registered Professional Engineers 
Council Act; 

 

37 

(j)  a representative of the small and medium enterprises of the construction 

sector, to be appointed by the Minister; 

(k) a representative of an association of contractors for building and civil 

engineering works, to be appointed by the Minister; 

(l)  a representative of an association of contractors for mechanical and 

electrical works, to be appointed by the Minister; 

(m)  a person having wide experience in the construction industry, to be 

appointed by the Minister. 

Amendments defeated. 

Clause 4 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 5 to 8 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and the enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Construction  Industry  Development  Board 

(Amendment) Bill (No. II of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Monday 23 March 2015 at 5.00 p.m. 

Mr P. Jugnauth rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

 

MATTER RAISED 

(3.38 p.m.) 

 

38 

ROCHE BOIS – THIRD LANE - CONSTRUCTION 

Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): 

Madam Speaker, my point concerns the Minister of Public Infrastructure. 

J’ai  un  point  pour  l’ajournement.    Cela  concerne  la  troisième  voie.    Au  fait,  j’aurai 
besoin  de  l’honorable  ministre  des  Infrastructures  publiques,  mais  il  s’en  va.    Non, 
l’honorable ministre revient ! Donc, cela concerne la troisième voie qui est en construction à 
Roche Bois.  Au fait, ce qui se passe c’est qu’auparavant il y avait un trottoir qui longeait le 
Princes Tuna jusqu’au rond-point Abattoir ; on appelle ça aussi le rond-point Cocoterie.  Les 
piétons  s’en  servaient  surtout  dans  l’après-midi  pour  retourner  à  la  maison,  mais  avec  la 
construction de la troisième voie, ça a été enlevé.  Hier, dans l’après-midi et dans la soirée, il 
y avait eu beaucoup de gens qui ont contesté l’enlèvement de ce trottoir.  Cela a causé pas 
mal de problèmes à ces personnes. Etant le député de la circonscription, ils m’ont alerté, et je 
suis allé sur place pour voir de visu. Donc, j’adresse ce problème à l’honorable ministre des 
Infrastructures  publiques,  s’il  peut  rectifier  le  tir  avec  ses  ingénieurs  par  rapport  à  ce 
problème de trottoir qui se trouve sur le tronçon de l’autoroute qui mène vers la capitale.  

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha):  
  
Madam Speaker, the problem, again, is how to reconcile the priorities of the road users.  In 
fact, we have just counted the number of vehicles at peak time; 2,000 vehicles took that third 
lane  to  be  able  to  enter  into  Port  Louis,  to  some  extent  to  alleviate  the  whole  congestion 
problem with the closure of the road.  Now, the Terre Rouge-Verdun Road most probably 
will have a diversion in about two weeks, which will help us to address this issue.  Anyway, I 
am going to talk to the engineers at the RDA to see what can be done.  

Thank you. 

At 3.38 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Monday 23 March 2015 at 

5.00 p.m.  

