 

 

1 

 

 

No. 27 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

THURSDAY 04 JUNE 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

MOTION 

  

President of the Republic of Mauritius – election  

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

            Hansard Editor 

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 27 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 04 June 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

7 

MOTION 

PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS - DR. MRS BIBI AMEENAH 

FIRDAUS GURIB-FAKIM, C.S.K. - ELECTION 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  the  motion  standing  in  my 

name and which reads as follows – 

“That, pursuant to section 28 of the Constitution of the Republic of  Mauritius, Dr. 
Mrs Bibi Ameenah Firdaus Gurib-Fakim, C.S.K., be elected President of the Republic 
of Mauritius.” 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

On question put, the motion was agreed to. 

(Applause) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members,  I declare Dr.  Mrs Bibi Ameenah Firdaus Gurib-
Fakim, C.S.K., elected President of the Republic of Mauritius.  Hon. Members will agree that 
this is a special historic moment for the whole country as it is the first time in our history that 
a woman will be holding such a high Constitutional post. On behalf of the House and in my 
own personal name, I offer Dr. Mrs Bibi Ameenah Firdaus Gurib-Fakim, C.S.K., my sincere 
congratulations and wish her a fulfilling career. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to say a 
few words on the historic occasion about Dr. Mrs Bibi Ameenah Firdaus Gurib-Fakim, the 
first woman to hold the Office of President of the Republic. 

Madam Speaker, the election of Dr. Gurib-Fakim as President of the Republic will 
certainly go down in history as another landmark in my Government’s relentless pursuit to 
place women in their rightful place in the Republic of Mauritius. 

The recent appointment of the first woman as Speaker of the National Assembly and 
now the election of the first woman as President of the Republic constitute major milestones 
in our journey towards greater gender equality and empowerment of women in our country. 
The elevation of Dr. Gurib-Fakim to the highest office of the State will surely give a high 
profile voice to women in the public sphere and in the democratic life of our country. 

 

8 

Madam Speaker, the House will recall that, in the run-up for the last general elections, 
the name of Dr. Gurib-Fakim had been proposed as future President of the Republic and the 
proposal  was  acclaimed  by  a  large  majority  of  the  population.  She  will  therefore  be  the 
President of the People very much like we have a Government of the people. We have today 
not only fulfilled a pledge which we made to the nation, but we have also written one of the 
most glorious pages of our history by electing the first woman to the highest Constitutional 
office. I am particularly glad to see the smooth transition leading to her installation in office, 
in total conformity with the Constitutional provisions. This reflects our deep respect for our 
democratic institutions and the values and principles that we stand for. 

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, Dr. Gurib-Fakim is one of the leading figures 
in the local academia whose reputation has gone well beyond our shores. She is no doubt one 
of  the  best  and  brightest  minds  this  country  has  produced  and  her  impressive  professional 
career is a perfect illustration of the triumph of hard work, courage and determination. She is 
a perfect role model and source of inspiration for our youth.   

 
Dr. Gurib-Fakim started her  career way back in 1987 as  Lecturer  at the Faculty  of 
Agriculture at the University of Mauritius. By dint of hard work and discipline, she gradually 
climbed  the  ladder  to  serve  successively  as  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of  Science  and  Pro-Vice-
Chancellor from 2004 to 2010.  She was until recently the Managing Director of the Centre 
for Phototherapy and Research and Professor of Organic Chemistry with an endowed chair at 
the University of Mauritius.   
 
regional and international organisations, inter alia -  

Dr.  Gurib-Fakim  has  also  been  serving  in  different  capacity  in  numerous  local, 

• 
• 
• 

the International Council for Scientific Union; 
the Mauritius Research Council;  
the  first  regional  research  project  on  the  inventory  and  study  of  medicinal  and 
aromatic plants of the Indian Ocean, funded by the European Development Fund 
under the aegis of the Indian Ocean Commission; 

•  National Coordinator for the ‘Indian Ocean University’ funded by the European 

Union; 

•  Founding Member of the Pan African Association of African Medicinal Plants; 
•  Member  of  the  Reference  Group  of  the  International  Science  Programme  of 

Uppsala University, Sweden; 

•  Scientific Advisor to the International Foundation of Science, Stockholm;  

 

9 

•  Member of the Expert Panel on ‘Infectious diseases’ of the Special Programme 

convened by the UNDP, UNICEF, WHO and the World Bank;  

•  Member  of  the  Scientific  Advisory  Council  of  NTembi  and  Nuclear  Energy 

Commission of South Africa, and 

•  Member of the International Advisory Committee for the Cyclotron project of the 

Indian Ocean based in Reunion (France). 
 

 
Dr. Gurib-Fakim has authored or co-edited 26 books and several book chapters. She 
has authored numerous scientific articles and lectured extensively across the world within the 
field  of  biodiversity  conservation  and  sustainable  development.    Her  contribution  in  the 
protection  and  conservation  of  the  environment  is  quite  remarkable  and  it  is  a  noteworthy 
coincidence  that  she  will  be  sworn-in  on  05  June  when  the  World  Environment  Day  is 
celebrated.   She is also a member of the editorial boards of major journals, having served on 
technical committees in various capacities, including the chair of several national committees 
in Mauritius.  
 
Dr. Gurib-Fakim has been elected Fellow of the Linnaean Society of London in 2007; 
Fellow of the Islamic Academy of Science, Jordan in 2009; Fellow of the African Science 
Institute in 2010 and Fellow of the African Academy of Sciences in 2013. 
 
She received the 2007 L’Oreal-UNESCO Prize for Women in Science and Laureate 
of  the  National  Economic  and  Social  Council.  She  is  recipient  of  the  African  Union 
Commission Award for “Women in Science” for the Eastern African Region in 2009.  
Dr. Gurib-Fakim was elevated to the Order of the Commander of the Star and Key by 
 
the  Government  of  Mauritius  in  2008  and  admitted  to  the  Order  of  the  Chevalier  dans 
l’Ordre des Palmes Académiques by the Government of France in 2010. 
 
In 2013, she received the Honorary DSc (Doctor Honoris Causa) from the prestigious 
Université Pierre Marie Curie of the Sorbonne, Paris, France. In April 2014, she was elected 
on  the  Governing  Council  of  the  African  Academy  of  Sciences  as  the  Regional 
Representative of the East Africa region. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  exceptional  track  record  of  Dr.  Gurib-Fakim  has  earned  her  a 
golden acclaim from one and all and the Mauritian people hold her in highest esteem.  It is 
our  firm  belief  that  Dr.  Gurib-Fakim  has  all  that  it  takes  to  discharge  her  State  duties  as 
President  of  the  Republic  and  she  will  rise  to  the  challenge  with  her  usual  brilliance  and 
distinction.   

 

10 

Hailing  from  the  scientific  community,  Dr.  Gurib-Fakim  owes  allegiance  to  no 
political party, but only to the State and to the people of this country. She will bring to the 
presidency  added  respect  and  prestige  along  with  the  decades  of  scientific  rigour  and 
discipline, thus giving a new dimension to the function.  She will also have the opportunity of 
advancing the causes which are of profound concern to her, within the four corners of the 
Constitution.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  Dr.  Gurib-Fakim  will  have  a 
significant contribution to make in crafting the modern and more prosperous Mauritius which 
we all have envisioned and she will prove herself to be the worthy successor of the great men 
who have so far served at Le Réduit.  I wish her well and I congratulate her heartily.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

ADJOURNMENT 

adjourn to Tuesday 01 September 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 11.47 a.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 01 September 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

