No. 42 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 02 DECEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 42 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 02 December 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

     The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 
 

A.           Office of the Speaker – 

The Annual Report and Audited Accounts of the Independent Commission 
Against Corruption as at 31 December 2014.  

 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

(a)  The Digest of Crime, Justice and Security Statistics 2014. 
(b)  The Digest of Labour Statistics 2014. 
(c)  The Digest of Agricultural Statistics 2014. 

 
              

 

C.    Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 

Scientific Research – 

(a)  The Education (Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice 

No. 227 of 2015)  

 

(b)  The Private Secondary Schools (Amendment) Regulations 2015.  

(Government Notice No. 228 of 2015)  

 

D.    Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives – 

The Annual Report and the Audited Financial Statements of the Small and 
Medium  Enterprises  Development  Authority  for  the  year  ended  31 
December 2010 and 2011. 

 

 

8 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

TRIPARTITE COMMITTEE – WAGE COMPENSATION 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  annual  wage 
compensation  payable  to  employees  for  loss  of  purchasing  power  due  to  inflation,  he  will 
state – 

(a) 

(b) 

why tripartite meetings for discussion thereof have not been held to date, 
indicating if same will be held urgently and, if so, when and if not, why not, 
and 
if  same  will  be  paid  to  the  employees  of  both  the  private  and  the  public 
sectors, as from 01 January 2016. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Tripartite  Committee  usually  meets 
annually  a  few  weeks  before  the  Budget  exercise  is  completed.    This  year  is  exceptional 
because the budget covers a period of eighteen months ending June 2016.  The next budget 
exercise is expected to be completed by May next year.  In years when the fiscal year begins 
on  01  July,  the  Tripartite  Committee  Meeting  was  held  in  the  month  of  May  and  the 
Additional  Remuneration  Bill  was  introduced  in  the  National  Assembly  after  the 
Appropriation Bill has been passed. 

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  Cabinet  has  decided  that  a  Meeting  of  the 
Tripartite Committee be convened for determination of the payment of salary compensation 
on Thursday 03 December. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to remind the House that the policy priority of Government 
this year has been to improve the purchasing power of the most vulnerable families and deal 
with the issue of absolute poverty.  To this end, we have taken several measures. 

First, we granted a salary compensation of Rs600 across the board, with effect from 
01 January 2015 to all employees which was well over and above the inflation rate of 
3.2 percent.  This has cost Rs1.3 billion to the public sector and Rs3 billion to the 
private sector for a total of Rs4.3 billion. 

Second, Government has also increased, under the Marshall Plan announced by the 
Prime Minister, the Basic Retirement Pension substantially, from Rs3,623 monthly to 

9 

 
Rs5000.    This  has  cost  the  Budget  an  extra  amount  of  Rs4.7  billion,  bringing  the 
annual  budget  for  Basic  Pensions  from  Rs11.7  billion  to  Rs16.4  billion,  that  is,  an 
increase of 40 percent. 

Third, we have lowered the price of mogas at the pump from Rs45.95 to Rs41.35 per 
litre, that is, by 10 percent. 

Fourth, we have lowered the price of diesel from Rs37.80 per litre to Rs32.75, that is, 
by 13.4 percent. 

Fifth, Government is subsidising basic commodities like cooking gas, flour and rice at 
a cost of Rs810 m. 

Sixth,  Government  has  extended  the  Youth  Employment  Programme  (YEP)  to  the 
public sector, thus employing an additional 1,000 youths. 

Seventh, as announced last week, Government is introducing a new social electricity 
tariff for some 70,000 low-income households that will be effective as from January 
next year. 

Concerning  the  inflation  rate  for  the  year  2015,  it  is  estimated  to  be  around  1.3 
percent. This would be the lowest inflation rate over the past 28 years. Government policies 
and measures aimed at improving the purchasing power of the population have contributed 
significantly to bringing down the inflation rate to such a low and stable level. 

I must stress that if we want to join the league of advanced countries, it is imperative 
that increases in the wage bill is matched by increases in labour productivity. This is crucial 
to  improving  the  competitiveness  of  the  country,  attracting  more  investment  and  creating 
more jobs. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  a  1%  increase  in  wage  bill  will  cost  the  economy 

around Rs1.3 billion, that is, 0.3% of GDP. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the issue of salary compensation will be addressed 

by the Tripartite Committee which will make recommendations to the Cabinet. 

At this stage, it is premature to pre-empt the decision of Cabinet on this matter. 

Mr Bérenger: Am I given to understand since the hon. Minister has made reference 
to  the  fact  that  it  is  sans  précédent,  that  it  is  on  the  eve  of  Christmas  that  the  Tripartite 
Meeting is being called? Is it not a fact that, in fact, it is being called because in a letter dated 

 

10 

26 November, ne voyant rien venir, all the trade unions wrote to the Minister of Finance to 
request that this Tripartite Meeting should take place? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  Tripartite  was  scheduled  to  take  place  this  year.  So, 
there was this question of when.  Well, Cabinet has decided that we are meeting tomorrow. 
The Tripartite will be meeting tomorrow afternoon and any decision to be taken will be taken 
by Cabinet. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister wants to make us believe that a meeting was to take 
place  in  December,  we  beg  to  doubt  that  very  much,  Madam  Speaker.  I  heard  the  hon. 
Minister say that the Tripartite Meeting will be held tomorrow, if I got him right, whereas 
Cabinet announced, after Cabinet met last Friday, that it would meet on Friday and then a 
second time on the 8th and it was even announced that Parliament would consider the Bill to 
implement  whatever  decision  is  taken,  that  Parliament  would  meet  on  11th  to  vote  the 
required Bill. Is that still on?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, what is still on is that we are meeting tomorrow; we 
are listening to the various parties as usual. If we need to meet a second time, we will meet. 
We  can  make  formal  proposals.  I  will  go  to  Cabinet  with  the  proposals  and  Cabinet  will 
decide on the quantum. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister insist that it is the lowest rate of inflation that 
we have this year, for many years, but the tone adopted could be interpreted as meaning that 
there will be no wage compensation as from 01 January, being given this rate of inflation. 
Can  I  ask,  therefore,  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  principle  that  there  will  be  a  wage 
compensation as from 01 January is on? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The principle of a wage compensation is on, though we all 
know that, in one PRB Report, it was agreed that for the public sector when inflation rate is 
less than 5%, there would be no compensation. We also realise that when it comes to decision 
making, we have to see and listen to everyone. So, the meeting with the unions tomorrow and 
the employers will allow us to make a clearer picture of where we are going and where we 
should go. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Regarding  part  (b)  of  my  question,  the  hon.  Minister  has  just  come 
back to the country, I think, but I am sure he must have had time to feel the frustration, the 
concern in the public sector, being given that information is circulating that if there is a wage 
compensation in the private sector, there might not be one because of the PRB considerations. 

 

11 

Now,  can  I  know  whether  the  trade  unions  from  the  public  sector  will  be  present  at  the 
Tripartite Meeting that has been called for tomorrow and, if not, whether this is not sending 
the wrong signal to the public sector? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  public  sector  trade  unions  are  being  invited  for 

tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  mentioned 
that we have a Budget for 18 months which will end in June of next year, 2016. So, may I 
know  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  whether  there  would  be  a  second  exercise  of 
compensation carried out in July 2016? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: When we come to the bridge, we will decide. 

Mr Bérenger: My last question: being given that the Minister has said the principle 
that there will be a wage compensation to compensate for inflation is on, can I know at this 
stage whether the Minister has any ordre de grandeur that would be suggested to the trade 
unions tomorrow? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  cannot  pre-empt  on  the  outcome  of  the  Tripartite 
Meeting. We are four Ministers present there, we have the private sector, we have the trade 
unions and I want to listen to them - listen and come with proposals. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

 (11.46 a.m.) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

STC – PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - TRANSPORTATION COST 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  propose  to  make  a  statement  with  regard  to  the 

 

12 

costs  incurred  by  the  State  Trading  Corporation  (STC)  for  the  transportation  of  petroleum 
products for the country from May 2011 to July 2016. 

On 08 September 2015, I informed the House that in November 2009, the STC signed 
a  Contract  of  Affreightment  (COA)  with  Betamax  Ltd  for  the  transportation  of  petroleum 
products over a period of 15 years at an estimated minimum cost of Rs10 billion, excluding 
the cost of bunker fuel, demurrage fees, port dues, and the element of escalation rate.  The 
COA became effective in May 2011. 

Towards the end of January 2015, the STC stopped having recourse to the services of 

Betamax Ltd. 

From  May  2011  to  January  2015,  Betamax  Ltd  had  transported  4,067,703  tons  of 
petroleum products for the STC for which the STC had paid the sum of 125,244,128 USD to 
Betamax Ltd, that is, an average of 30.79 USD per ton.  

For the period February to November 2015, the STC had recourse to spot charters for 
the transportation of 859,486 tons of petroleum products and has paid freight and demurrage 
amounting to 22,383,358 USD, that is, an average rate of 26.04 USD per ton.  Thus, the STC 
has  saved  4.75  USD  per  ton,  representing  a  total  amount  of  4,082,559  USD  for  the  said 
period. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please, don’t start interrupting! 

Mr Gungah: In the meantime, the STC has carried out a tender exercise for the award 
of Contracts of Affreightment to cover the period December 2015 to July 2016, that is, the 
end  of  the  current  contract  of  supply  of  petroleum  products  between  the  STC  and  the 
Mangalore  Refinery  Petrochemicals  Ltd.    The  STC  had  enlisted  the  services  of  an 
international consultant, Ocean 5 GmbH, for that purpose. 

I am informed by the STC that on 26 and 30 November 2015, it has proceeded with 
the award of two Contracts of Affreightment for the transportation of white oils and black 
oils respectively for the period December 2015 to July 2016. 

As per these COAs, the STC estimates that 786,000 tons of petroleum products would 
be  transported  to  Mauritius  with  freight  costs  amounting  to  17,910,480  USD,  that  is,  an 
average of 22.78 USD per ton, excluding demurrage fees. 

In  this  context,  when  making  provision  for  two  days  of  demurrage  per  trip,  the 

average cost for freight and demurrage would amount to 23.79 USD per ton. 

13 

 
 Thus, when compared with the average rate of 30.79 USD per ton paid to Betamax 
Ltd, it is estimated that the savings to be made by the STC would range between 7 to 8.01 
USD per ton, representing a total amount between 5,502,000 to 6,295,860 USD for the period 
December 2015 to July 2016. 

Consequently,  for  the  period  February  2015  to  July  2016,  the  STC  would  make 

savings of not less than 9.5 m. USD. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XXIX OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading Read. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Constitution  (Amendment) 

Bill (No. XXIX of 2015) be read a second time. 

Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill, as stated in the Explanatory Memorandum, is 
to  amend  section  8  of  the  Constitution  so  as  to  provide  for  the  taking  of  possession  of 
property – 

  (i) 

  (ii) 

under the ownership of a person to an extent which is disproportionate to his 
emoluments and other income; 

the ownership, possession, custody or control of which cannot be satisfactorily 
accounted for by the person who owns, possesses, has custody or control of 
the property; or 

(iii)  held by a person for another person to an extent which is disproportionate to 

the emoluments or other income of that other person, by way of confiscation. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No. 
XXIX of 2015) is intrinsically linked to the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill 
which equally appears on the Order Paper of today’s sitting and which seeks to promote a 
culture of integrity and good governance in the country.  

14 

 
Madam Speaker, on 10 December 2014, the people of the country voted massively for 
a change of Government.  They wanted to put an end to a period that was characterised by 
widespread  fraud  and  corruption,  and  where  accumulation  of  wealth  from  illicit  gains  had 
become the norm.  

People were fed up with the unbridled malpractices and abuse of positions and power 
in the public domain and they finally expressed their disapproval and resentment by booting 
out a political establishment that was rotten to the core.   

The message that the people sent was very clear. They wanted a society free from the 
shackles of corruption, mafias and political interference.  They wanted a fairer society, where 
there are opportunities for all and not for a privileged few.  And this is precisely what we 
promised to the nation.  They expressed their overwhelming support and faith in our projet de 
société, which rekindled their waning hope in the future of this country.   

We  pledged  to  conduct  business  on  the  principles  of  discipline,  transparency, 
accountability and exemplary governance.  We took a firm commitment to act decisively to 
address the social and economic problems that have plagued our nation for nearly a decade.  
We  have  a  clear  mandate  from  the  people  to  bring  about  meaningful  change.  And  good 
governance is a prerequisite for meaningful change. We will therefore remain steadfast in our 
commitment and relentlessly fight fraud, corruption and financial crime.  We will leave no 
stone unturned to eradicate malpractices and irregularities from all aspects of public life and 
restore our national values.   

The  scourge  of  grand  corruption  is  a  cancer  that  is  at  the  root  of  many  of  our 
problems. I have, therefore, made the fight against fraud and corruption a high priority for my 
Government.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  questions  that  the  proposed  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill 
seeks to address go to the heart of what type of society and economy we want to have in this 
country. As we all know, there has been a lot of hue and cry over these two Bills.  Let me 
most emphatically state what this Bill does not intend to do.   

The Bill is not making everybody a prime suspect of illicit enrichment. We are also 

not implying that getting rich is a sin.  

15 

 
We are not against the rich or the accumulation of wealth per se. Honest people have 
nothing  to  fear.  Whatever  they  may  have  earned  rightfully  and  lawfully  will  be  theirs  to 
enjoy.  The  aim  of  Government  is  to  check  accumulation  of  wealth  through  backdoor 
mechanisms. And there is nothing wrong with this.  

This is the reason why the majority of the people of this country support this initiative 
of  Government.  Besides,  in  an  interview  given  on  a  private  radio  in  the  context  of  the 
introduction of these two Bills, a former Chief Justice (Sir Victor Glover) stated, and I quote - 

“Vous  et  moi,  nous  savons  qu’il  y  a  des  gens  autour  de  nous  et  nous 
demandons  comment  ils  ont  reçu  cet  argent-là.  Ce  n’est  pas  une  mauvaise 
chose de savoir où ils ont eu cet argent-là”.  

He added, in the same vein, that the proposed new Bill is tenable and will be useful if it is 
applied properly.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  new  Bill  provides  for  a  confiscation  mechanism  to  allow  the 
Integrity Reporting Services Agency to proactively question suspicious unexplained wealth 
and to start proceedings for the confiscation of the relevant assets.  

Of course, we do have the Assets Recovery Unit and also had the defunct Drugs Asset 

Forfeiture Office.  

But as you all know, the rate of asset recovery by these two agencies has undeniably 
been very low, compared to the suspected scale of the problem.  Building strong and effective 
institutions  is,  therefore,  key  to  fighting  grand  corruption.  The  experience  of  Ireland  with 
confiscation of unexplained wealth has confirmed its effectiveness in depriving criminals of 
their ill-gotten gains.  

The confiscation mechanism has been so designed, so as to make it easier to target 

criminals who have connections with organised crime.   

As  you  all  know,  it  often  takes  years  to  build  a  case  against  people  involved  in 
organised crimes because it is hard to connect money to crimes and when you consider the 
scale  of  the  problem  you  realise  that  we  are  indeed  lacking  from  a  law  enforcement 
perspective. 

16 

 
Madam  Speaker,  corruption  will  not  be  overcome  if  preventive  measures  are  not 
accompanied  by  effective  deterrents.  Confiscation  of  the  proceeds  of  crime  constitutes  an 
important additional deterrent that often has a greater impact than fines or prison terms. The 
threat of confiscation also entails preventive effects, as it makes the commission of the crime 
less attractive.  

I find it useful to again quote here, as I did in my reply to the PNQ from the Leader of 
the Opposition on 17 November last, the following extract from the Report of Booz-Allen—
Hamilton under the Comparative Evaluation of Unexplained Wealth Orders, and I quote - 

“The importance of confiscating proceeds of crime has long been recognised 
as  an  effective  tool  in  disrupting  the  activities  of  organised  crime.  The 
underlying  reason  is  that  profit  or  financial  gain  is  the  main  motive  for 
criminals  to  engage  in  criminal  activities.  This  profit  is  used  to  fund  lavish 
lifestyles, as well as invest in future criminal activities. Indeed, removing the 
profit  motive  is  considered  to  act  both  as  a  preventive  and  a  deterrent  to 
criminals by diminishing their capacity to invest in future criminal activities.  

The  strategy  of  hitting  criminals  where  it  hurts  most,  “their  pockets”,  is 
regarded as an effective strategy by law enforcement agencies for organised 
crime.  While  organised  crime  has  shown  resilience  and  a  high  level  of 
adaptability to other law enforcement strategies, removal or reduction of assets 
is  considered  to  have  an  impact  on  their  operations.  Thus,  confiscation  of 
criminal proceeds is embraced by many countries through conviction and non-
conviction based confiscation mechanisms”. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  concept  of  asset  confiscation  is  not  totally  new  in  our 

jurisdiction. It also exists in our body of law.  

As a matter of fact, the Asset Recovery Act already introduced in the Mauritian law 
the  concept  of  a  non-conviction  based  recovery  of  assets.  The  amendment  which  is  now 
being proposed constitutes an important additional arsenal in the hands of the State to track 
down and recover ill-gotten gains. 

Madam Speaker, as the  House is aware, section 1 of the Constitution provides that 
“Mauritius  shall  be  a  sovereign  democratic  State  (...)”    and  section  2  provides  that  the 

 

17 

“Constitution is the supreme law of Mauritius and if any other law is inconsistent with the 
Constitution, that other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void”.   

Madam Speaker, Government is mindful and respectful of the provisions of sections 1 
and 2 of the Constitution and is aware that the Supreme Court, acting within its constitutional 
powers and functions, is empowered to strike down any law which breaches the Constitution.  

Government fully endorses that right and is committed to ensuring that any proposed 

legislation passes the test of constitutionality.  

We  are  also  aware  that  Constitutions,  insofar  as  rights  are  concerned,  have  to  be 

interpreted generously.  

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  case  of  Attorney-General  of  The  Gambia  v/s  Momodou 
Jobe – (1984), Lord Diplock, dealing with the Constitution of The Gambia observed, and I 
quote - 

"A constitution, and in particular that part of it which protects and entrenches 
fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  to  which  all  persons  in  the  state  are  to  be 
entitled, is to be given a generous and purposive construction."     

It is with this perspective in mind that Government decided to come up with an amendment to 
section 8 of the Constitution in order to ensure that assets which are confiscated pursuant to 
the proposed Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, when enacted, are confiscated 
pursuant to a law which meets the test of constitutionality. 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No. XXIX of 2015) purports to introduce a new 
paragraph (aa) in section 8(4) of the Constitution. The new paragraph will be inserted after 
section 8(4)(a) and is a standalone paragraph which will read as follows - 

“8(4)  Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1) – 

(aa) 

or any other provision of Chapter II of the Constitution, to the 
extent that the law in question makes provision for the taking of 
possession of property - 

    (i)  under the ownership of a person to an extent which is disproportionate to 

his emoluments and other income;  

 

    (ii) 

18 

 the  ownership,    possession,  custody  or  control  of  which  cannot  be 
satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  the  person  who  owns,  possesses,  has 
custody or control of the property; or  

    (iii)  held  by  a  person  for  another  person 

is 
disproportionate to the emoluments or other income of that other person, 
by way of confiscation, except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing 
done  under  its  authority  is  shown  not  to  be  reasonably  justifiable  in  a  democratic 
society.” 

to  an  extent  which 

The underlined has been added to the initial amendment.  

Madam Speaker, this new section will allow property to be seized, but is not a section 

which will allow an action in personam against a person who holds unexplained wealth.  

Let me again put it clear that it is only wealth that cannot be explained that will be 
open  to  confiscation.    Wealth  that  can  be  explained  will  not  be  the  subject  matter  of  any 
confiscation.  Our proposed amendment to the Constitution, in my view, should dispel any 
lingering  doubts  about  whether  the  confiscation  procedure  provided  for  in  the  Good 
Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill meets the test of constitutionality. 

Madam Speaker, this proposed amendment to the Constitution is being brought before 

this House for the following reasons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

it ensures that assets will only be confiscated pursuant to the exception 
provided for by section 8(4)(aa) of the Constitution; 
if section 8(4)(aa) is not adhered to by any law which provides for the 
confiscation of assets, that law will be unconstitutional; 
section 8(4)(aa) of the Constitution, when enacted, will protect the rights of 
our citizens. 

It should also be highlighted that it is the judiciary which will be empowered under 
the  proposed  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  to  make  any  order  to 
“confiscate” someone’s property.  Hence, there is no violation of the doctrine of separation of 
powers. We are also not narrowing down our democratic space. 

Democracy is, in fact, weakened by grand corruption. By building strong institutions 
and  stepping-up  our  fight  against  corruption,  we  are,  on  the  contrary,  strengthening  our 

 

19 

democracy.  We  must  not  be  oblivious  to the  fact  that  those  who  are  involved  in  unlawful 
wealth accumulation are seeking to take the law into their own hands.  

Their ultimate objective is to put themselves above scrutiny and above the law so that 

they can continue to indulge in illicit enrichment with impunity. 

I wish to underline that my Government stands committed to protect the fundamental 

rights of our citizens and to widen, not restrict, the contours of our democracy. 

Let  me  also  remind  the  House  that  it  was  my  Government  which,  in  1991,  solidly 
entrenched  section  1  of  our  Constitution  in  order  to  ensure  that  Mauritius  remains  a 
democratic State. 

This  is  what  I  had  stated  in  this  Assembly  while  presenting  the  constitutional 

amendments, I quote -  

“Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  the  opportunity  has  also  been  taken  to  make  some  other 
amendments  to  the  Constitution.    Members  of  the  House  will  recall  that  a 
number  of  legislative  measures  have  been  introduced  over  the  past  twelve 
months in order to consolidate the democratic foundations of our society. 

Today, we are taking that exercise a little further … the present Government 
also  wants  to  establish  firmly  the  democratic  basis  of  our  Constitution  by 
making it practically impossible to amend section 1 of the Constitution. Let it 
not,  therefore,  be  said  that  this  Government  does  not  cherish  democratic 
principles.” 

It  is  also  apposite  to  note  that,  during  the  course  of  the  same  debates,  hon.  Alan 

 
Ganoo, then Attorney General and Minister of Justice stated, and I quote - 

“Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  now  come  to  a  last  point  of  my  intervention.  It 
concerns the first section of the Constitution, Sir. If the prospect of acceding to 
the status of Republic arouses, as I just said, a feeling of pride and dignity is in 
all of us today. 

I think the thought of amending section 1 of our Constitution to render  this 
clause practically unamendable should rejoice all of us who are true democrats 
in this House. 

 

20 

On  a  philosophical  level,  Sir,  and  globally,  if  you  look  at  all  the  proposed 
amendments, you will see that the common feature, the thread which ties most 
of those principal amendments to our Constitution today is the consolidation 
of the democratic foundation of our country (...). 

I  think  that  there  are  very  few  countries  in  the  Third  World  with  a  written 
Constitution like ours which have achieved what we are achieving, Sir. 

We  are  deciding  that  to  amend  the  democratic  nature  of  the  State,  you  will 
need a referendum and you will need the approval of all the Members of the 
House. I do not know of any other country which has done this!” 

Moreover,  Madam  Speaker,  the  highest  Court  in  our  legal  system,  the  Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council, in the case of Khoyratty vs The State of Mauritius (2004), 
placed on record the exceptional degree of entrenchment of section 1 of the Constitution and 
this should bear testimony to my credentials as a democrat. 

It  is  certainly  not  my  Government  that  will  today  do  anything  that  will  alter  the 

democratic character or any of the fundamental principles of our Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, soon after the presentation of these two Bills, the hon. Minister of 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms initiated wide public debate 
and encouraged a participatory approach on these proposals. 

We have been attentive to the views and genuine concerns expressed by responsible 

and credible persons. Some, however, had a different sinister agenda altogether. 

A  number  of  valid  proposals  were  made  and  at  the  same  time  clarifications  were 
provided  on  the  different  provisions  of  the  Bills,  mostly  those  related  to  the  Unexplained 
Wealth Orders and the confiscation of property. 

In  order  to  show  our  good  faith  and  reassure  those  who  have  genuinely  expressed 
their  concerns  on  certain  aspects  of  the  Bills,  Government  has  agreed  to  bring  certain 
important amendments to the two Bills. 

As requested previously by the  Leader of the Opposition, the proposed amendments 

have already been circulated. 

An  additional  safeguard  has  been  introduced  in  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill 
No. XXIX of 2015, which requires that the new provision for confiscation of unexplained 
wealth or the things done under the authority of that provision, will have to be reasonably 
justifiable in a democratic society. 

 
I  spelled  out  the  whole  new  proposed  section  earlier  that  takes  on  board  the 

21 

suggestion from the Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, we have seen that our  existing legislation has not allowed for the 
forfeiture of ill-gotten assets of individuals nor has it curbed unexplained wealth in Mauritius. 

With this proposed amendment to the Constitution, the message that is being sent is 
that it will no longer be business as usual for individuals who have disproportionate wealth 
with regard to their declared income and other means. 

We do not wish the property market in Mauritius to be distorted by persons who have 
unexplained wealth and prevent hard working citizens from being able to compete with them 
on a level playing field on the property market.   

We want hard work to be recognised and valued and we want to curb dishonesty in all 
walks of life.  What we are doing with this amendment is to simply set out the legal basis in 
our Constitution for confiscatory action with respect to unexplained wealth and we are doing 
so for the benefit of all law-abiding, decent and honest citizens of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I therefore urge every Member of this Assembly to put the country 

first and support this Bill which is in the national interest.   

We have a choice – either condone unexplained wealth, or curb it.  We have chosen to 
curb  it  and  I  trust  that  Members  of  the  Opposition  will,  when  the  time  comes  for  voting, 
assume their responsibility towards the citizens of this country. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  Act  No.  33  of  1986  was  passed  before  this  House  on  24 
October 1986, every single Member present, out of the 62 Members of the House, had voted 
in support of the legislation that I brought before the House to enable the forfeiture of ill-
gotten property in possession of drug traffickers. 

Now, in 2015, crime has become more complex and drug trafficking is not the only 
scourge of our country. It is in this context that the present amendment to the Constitution 
assumes all its importance.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House.  
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 (12.18 p.m.) 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  stand  to 
speak on these two Bills, but, on the constitutional amendment first, I need not remind the 

 

22 

House  that  our  party,  the  MMM,  has  always  been  à  l’avant-garde  of  this  struggle  against 
fraud,  corruption,  money  laundering,  illegal  enrichment,  ever  since  its  creation,  and 
something that made me very sad was that we proved that when we were in Government in 
2000,  we  came  with  the  avant-gardiste  piece  of  legislation  that  created    the  ICAC,  the 
Prevention  of  Corruption  Act.  That  was  really  avant-gardiste,  that  broke  new  ground,  but 
that, unfortunately, was dénaturé after the elections of 2005 and stands dénaturé to this date, 
Madam Speaker.  

But let me place what we are called upon to vote today, and probably tomorrow, in a 
historical  and  global  context,  Madam  Speaker,  and  I  will  argue  that  Mauritius  should  and 
must follow global approaches that have been adopted these past years to combat crime, but, 
at the same time, providing for the necessary constitutional and legal safeguards. 

 Madam  Speaker,  political,  social  and  economic  considerations  in  the  increasingly 
tough  fight  against  crime  have  compelled  legislatures  worldwide  to  adopt  innovative 
approaches to tackle  criminals and the proceeds of crime, including shifting standards and 
burdens  of  proof  and  moving  from  criminal  to  civil  confiscation.  Anti-money  laundering 
legislation, proceeds of crime legislation allowing for civil asset recovery whether conviction 
or  non-conviction-based,    have  included  in  Mauritius  since  quite  a  number  of  years  back, 
being given that we passed the Financial Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act as far back 
as 2000.  

It  was  followed  by  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  and 
Prevention of Corruption Act (PoCA) in 2002 and the Asset Recovery Act in 2011.  And, in 
fact,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  did  not  say  it,  but  the  concept  of  unexplained  wealth  is 
already  present  and  was  already  present  in  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act  that  we 
introduced.  

However, Madam Speaker, a more recent approach to combating illicit wealth, money 
laundering and so on, has been the unexplained wealth approach, rather recent, as a weapon 
to tackling crime with the idea - as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said - to target the pockets of 
criminals and confiscate their property in a civil proceeding by doing away with the need to 
establish a link between property and wrongdoing and reversing the burden of proof.  

Apart from what we are introducing more in detail, only a few countries like Ireland 
or  Australia  have  adopted  this  new  unexplained  wealth  approach.  The  need  for  effective 

 

23 

crime-fighting has to be balanced, Madam Speaker, by respect for fundamental principles of 
justice and fairness and respect for the rights of defendants, innocents and third parties, and it 
is quite a difficult task to find the right equilibrium.  

In some jurisdictions, Madam Speaker, in Australia itself such as Western Australia 
and  Northern  Territory  which  were,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  first  to  adopt  unexplained 
wealth laws, there has been constitutional and legal challenges that have led to the restoration 
of  a  nexus  between  property  and  unlawful  activity  as  minimal  evidence  by  the  State.  
Subsequent  federal  unexplained  wealth  legislations  in  Australia  have  clearly  specified  the 
need to establish a link between property and an offence. 

Madam Speaker,  we believe that Mauritius cannot remain isolated from the global 
trends in the legal and legislative actions taken to address crime and this is why the MMM is 
in favour of unexplained wealth laws and in favour of amending the Constitution to allow for 
confiscation of unlawfully acquired wealth. We have always been for that and, today, more 
than ever, being given that the systems that are set up by those benefiting from unexplained 
wealth get more and more complicated, Madam Speaker.  

But the Mauritius Bills before us, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, I 
will talk more at length when we reach that, but that Bill - from my point of view - is an 
extreme  form  of  legislation  that  will  inevitably  be  subject  to  legal  and  constitutional 
challenges as in Australia. We must, therefore, act with every caution and take the maximum 
and put in the maximum of safeguards and precaution when we come to that Bill. That is why 
- and I will come back to that in due course - we have given ourselves time to do this and this 
is why we have proposed that the debate on the Bill be postponed to give more time to one 
and all to do their work properly. I will come back to that later on, Madam Speaker, but let 
me come back to Mauritius.  

At first, we said we were not going to vote the amendment to the Constitution and we 
were dead against the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill in its initial form. The 
main thing we were against was the fact that there was some resistance from the part of the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister to repeat in that new paragraph - because we are introducing a new 
paragraph  –  that  provides  in  our  Constitution,  for  the  first  time,  for  confiscation  of 
unexplained wealth. 

We are in favour, we are going to vote, but we pleaded that the same paragraph that is 
in other parts of section 4, should be repeated there, that is, whatever legislation we vote later 

 

24 

on - not in the Constitution, but whatever legislation, in our case the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill - must be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society and whatever 
is done - not just the law - must also be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and I appreciate a lot the fact that he has agreed to 
come with an amendment that includes that safeguard, that possibility of appeal against any 
Government, not necessarily this Government.  Any Government!  Therefore, we are going to 
vote, in its amended form, for the constitutional amendment. 

As far as the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill is concerned, we will have 
the opportunity of discussing more at length, but there were, from our point of view, certain 
very dangerous aspects. The main one being that laws that said that: “the agency to be created 
looks for information from anybody and if that person refuses to provide information, then it 
becomes a criminal offence and it can land up in prison.” We were dead against that.  And, 
again, I appreciate a lot that this is gone. We will talk more at length when we will reach that 
Bill, but that is a big objection that we had and it is gone. Now, the agency to be created will 
ask  for  information.    If  information  is  not  forthcoming,  the  agency  will  go  to  a  Judge  in 
Chambers to ask for an order and we know that the Bill provides for the Judge, if he feels that 
it should be referred to the Supreme Court instead of taking issues in Chambers, it can refer it 
to the Supreme Court.   

There are other issues on which we are still in disagreement, but we move forward. I 
must  say  also  that  at  one  point  -  and  it  is  still  my  conviction,  I  referred  earlier  on  to  the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, avant-gardiste that we voted and that was dénaturé after 2005 
and that remains dénaturé.  And this is why I believe that instead of coming with a new piece 
of legislation – I am talking about the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill - it was 
and  it  still  is  that  we  should  have  taken  time  to  amend  existing  legislation,  consolidate 
institutions that already exist instead of creating new institutions and coming with a new Bill.   

I had, therefore, suggested that the Prevention of Corruption Act, that the MRA Act and 
the Asset Recovery Act should be consolidated, amended and the institutions created under 
those  Acts,  consolidated  and  amended  instead  of  going,  as  I  said,  through  a  new  piece  of 
legislation  and  new  institutions.  That  was  our  opinion  and  it  remains  our  opinion,  but  the 
Bills are before us and, in particular, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill is 
before us. Therefore, I wish to saluer le progrès que nous avons fait, especially on these two 
points:  the  constitutional  amendment,  and,  secondly  this  idea  of  when  somebody  refuses 

 

25 

information, direction la prison de Melrose ou de Beau Bassin.  It is a big step forward that 
these two issues have been settled, Madam Speaker. But as far as the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill is concerned, we are still not fully satisfied.  Far from it!  

We have just received the recommendations of the proposals of the Bar Council, of the 
lawyers.  They have had to work under intense pressure.  It is not normal. They should have 
been given more time. It is not normal that they should have to work under such pressure and 
we have to consider their recommendations under intense pressure also. I believe that, as the 
Bill stands, there are several clauses that will be challenged successfully before the Supreme 
Court and maybe higher up, if I may say so, Madam Speaker. That is why we believe, the 
MMM believes that we should take more time to try and read the same, more than consensus, 
unanimity, I believe, apart from some in the Opposition. 

(Interruptions) 

I am not making a joke! I am saying that on the constitutional amendment, I would have been 
happier - I am happy that this amendment has been approved - if it was unanimous. But the 
official  Opposition  and  the  Government,  on  the  constitutional  amendment,  are  moving 
forward together.  On the constitutional amendment! But it would be ideal if we could do the 
same thing on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. We are fully satisfied with 
the constitutional amendment. We are going to vote as amended, but we are not fully satisfied 
–  far  from  it  -  as  far  as  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  is  concerned. 
Especially, I am very uneasy because it took us some time to realise that Government was 
looking  for  a  three-quarter  majority,  not  just  to  amend  the  Constitution,  but  to  use  this 
hammer on property.  The section 8 (4A) (a) which reads, as we know - 

“Notwithstanding (…) or any other provision of the Constitution, no law (…)” 

We are talking about the kind of legislation that is before us, that is, the Good Governance 
and Integrity Reporting Bill - 

“(…)  relating  to  the  compulsory  acquisition  or  taking  of  possession  of  any  property 
shall be called in question in any court if it has been supported at the final voting in the 
Assembly by the votes of not less than three quarters of all members of the Assembly.” 

It took us a little while to realise, therefore, that Government was after a three-quarter - if I 
get the message right – majority not just to amend the Constitution, not hide, but to protect 

 

26 

itself  behind  that  clause  that  has  never  been  challenged  since  1983.    I  was  Leader  of  the 
Opposition when that was voted in Parliament, but we voted. We had prepared it together 
when we were all in the MMM.  

So, it was required with what we had in mind in those days. It is a long time past 1983, 
it was approved and it was never challenged. I ask myself, up to this date, whether it cannot 
be challenged before our Supreme Court and even the Privy Council. It is a long debate. In 
India, it is a long debate whether there are certain aspects of the Constitution that cannot be 
amended in any way. Here, you could have the Supreme Court or you could have the Privy 
Council say: “okay, not because three quarters of the Members of the Parliament have voted 
this, that this is in line with Mauritius being a sovereign democratic State and whether this is 
reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.” This clause has never been challenged, but, as 
at now, we are not voting.  We would wish to be able to vote, under this paragraph, the Good 
Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill,  like  we  are  going  to  vote  the  constitutional 
amendment, but, at this stage, we cannot do it. 

That is why I suggested that we vote the constitutional amendment today and then we 
postpone the debate on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. We digest what 
the Bar Council has just submitted, other ideas, we take time and then we try to reach the 
same unanimity – well, unanimity again is not the word - but the same large consensus that 
we have reached on the constitutional amendment. Some - the PMSD, the OPR, everybody 
will be called upon to take our responsibility. 

I  repeat, what  I would  wish to see happening is we adopt in  a large consensus the 
constitutional amendment and then we postpone the debate. We take time and see whether we 
can reach the same large consensus on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. I 
say  that  je  salue  les  progrès  faits.  It  is  not  often  -  especially  that  we  each  have  our  own 
personality  -  that  we  make  concessions  in  that  way.  Very  Good!  It  is  very  good  for  our 
Constitution, but for the country at large, Madam Speaker. 

I  will  end  with  two  points.  One,  which  I  mentioned  when  we  discussed  recently.  I 
think the level of the debate - unfortunately, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was not here - when 
we debated the Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill was great, un bon moment de nos travaux 
parlementaires!  What  I  said  then,  I  would  wish  to  repeat:  there  is  une  multiplication  des 
institutions. I am sure everybody will agree it can’t  go on like that. We have l’ICAC (the 
Independent Commission Against Corruption), we have the FIU and now the FIU includes 

 

27 

the Asset Recovery Unit, but tomorrow no! Tomorrow, there will be a unit separate from the 
FIU. There is agreement on that as in the UK, today. Now, we are going to have an agency 
under the Bill and then a Board, two other bodies. I forgot to bring his speech, but when the 
Minister made his speech, he said our law is strong on corruption and money laundering, but 
weak on fraud. Therefore, he announced that we are going to amend the legislation to provide 
under our legislation for fraud to be well targetted and he announced another body, an Anti-
Fraud Unit. 

Tomorrow,  when  I  hope  we  vote  the  new  Declaration  of  Assets  Act,  there  will  be 
another body responsible to receive the declaration of assets, keep them and do whatever the 
law provides that it must do with them. So, we are having a multiplication of institutions and 
I think the time will come when we consider the Financial Crime Commission, we all agree 
on that, then we can sort it out, because all this costs money also. I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister realises, we are going to create a new agency, we are going to create a new Board, 
permanent people and all this costs money. 

Therefore, I appeal to Government that as soon as possible because that also in your 
absence, Rt. hon Prime Minister, we agreed that this Financial Crime Commission will be a 
vital institution; it won’t be simple to work it out, but we all agree that it should be done as 
soon as possible. 

I end, Madam Speaker, by saying the real test, according to me - because today we are 
going to amend the Constitution and there is before us, the Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting  Bill.  We  are  targetting  the  assets,  ill-gotten  assets,  unexplained  wealth.  How  do 
things get started? This agency - we are just looking at how big a car, how big a house and so 
on. I believe that the real test will be when we do adopt – and I hope we do adopt – a new 
Declaration of Assets Act that will be made public. Government has a commitment to do that 
and I hope it will provide for prison sentences if the people concerned by the Declaration of 
Assets Act lie or hide things, then this will be the real test. We can vote what we are called 
upon to vote these days and if we don’t vote this new Declaration of Assets Act, we won’t 
progress really. Therefore, I think this will be the real test. But also, the Party Financial Bill, 
because  otherwise  we  are  going  to  have  either:  “This  is  not  my  money,  that’s  my  party’s 
money.” It is like that across the world. 

Therefore,  to  complete  the  panoply  to  really  combat  unexplained  wealth,  ill-gotten 
wealth, we need that amendment to the Constitution, we are for it in its amended version. We 

 

28 

need a much improved Good Governance and  Integrity Reporting Bill, but we need also a 
new Declaration of Assets Act and a law controlling party finances in general. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. François! 

(12.44 p.m.) 

Mr  F.  François  (First  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, today, there is a good call for the right step in the right direction for the 
proposed constitutional amendment for taking possesion of property by way of confiscation. 

One  will  agree  with  me  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  acquiring  property  and 
improving  the  material  well-being  by  any  person  and  that  is  well-protected  in  our 
Constitution  as  per  section  8.  However,  this  must  be  done  legally  and  lawfully.  This 
protection does not include property acquired by illicit enrichment or unlawfully. 

Madam Speaker, I am not a learned lawyer neither constitutional one. However, my 
contribution today, will focus on the philosophy behind the constitutional concerns and its 
impact on our fragile democratic society. My position towards the Bill is not how I interpret 
the amendment, rather it will be how we all shall commit ourselves to make this legislation 
work as being proposed in the best interests of one and all without any contentions and being 
consistent with our societal values, human dignity and liberty. 

Madam Speaker, I have read so many articles in the presss, various reports, listening 
to debates on radios on this moving Constitution (Amendment) Bill and associated Bill. One 
common thing, I have noted and experienced once the Bill was made public is that a majority 
of people out there want a clean society for our republic, but they are rather skeptical of how 
to get it done. Others are arguing about the dangers and political vengeance by politicians. I, 
myself, have been pressured as a Member of the OPR party from Rodrigues forming part of 
Government, but it is quite interesting. 

Madam Speaker, allow me before going further to seize this opportunity to reiterate in 
this  august  Assembly  the  fundamental  freedom  of  OPR  party  in  the  context  of  national 
political arena. 

Since 1976, OPR party under the leadership of Mr Serge Clair, who is my leader, has 
always  taken  the  position  that  OPR  never  contracts  any  alliance  with  any  political  party 
which sits for national elections in the 21 constituencies of our Republic. OPR has always 

 

29 

been driven by the fact that when we are in power in Rodrigues, OPR will always work with 
the  Government  of  the  day  at  national  level  and  I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  this  is  not 
conditional. Throughout its 39 years of existence, OPR supports what is in the interest of our 
Republic and what is in the interest of Rodrigues as well. 

 Madame la présidente, pour ceux qui ont critiqué notre positionnement stratégique de 
garder le silence durant ces dernières semaines, je voudrais leur dire ceci: que le silence est 
une parole. Il n’y a pas de concession pour notre liberté de pensée et d’action. Et en fonction 
de notre conscience de soi, c’est-à-dire mon collègue, l’honorable Léopold, et moi-même au 
niveau  de  l’OPR,  nous  savons  très  bien  notre  responsabilité,  notre  mission  et  action 
idéologique dans la construction de notre société républicaine étant très consciencieuse de la 
cause et spécificité de Rodrigues. 

Permettez-moi, Madame la présidente, de rappeler à la Chambre que le peuple à qui je 
suis redevable est plus grand que celui qui gouverne notre société. Je suis un mandataire de 
ce peuple admirable. 

Madame la présidente, je voudrais aussi exprimer haut et fort ici que l’enrichissement 
illicite, unexplained wealth, pe pourri et ruine nou société et ça c’est dangereux pour l’avenir. 
C’est maintenant qu’il faut agir pour combattre ce mal. Mais la question reste comment agir. 
Est-ce agir avec fermeté ou agir en mode mollo mollo ?  

(Interruptions) 

C’est  ce  point  fondamental  qui  nous  interpelle  tous  ici  aujourd’hui  dans  notre  société 
républicaine métamorphosée et qui est en décomposition et en recomposition. 

Madam Speaker, coming back to the constitutional amendment itself, it is clear that 
the amendment reveals some factors that require our attention in as far as its relevancy for 
sufficient importance to justify constitutionally the protected right of property of any person 
to achieve the objectives of the constitutional amendment together with associated Bills as 
debated or to be debated. 

We are now debating on the constitutional amendment, section 8 - to provide for the 
taking of possession of property by way of confiscation, to deal with ownership, possession, 
custody or control of property that cannot be reasonably explained in relation to a person’s 
lawful income or emoluments.  

30 

 
Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  strong,  courageous  and  moving  decision  by 
Government  to  make  things  happen  for  our  society!  However,  how  is  our  society  deeply 
viewing this move at the present material time that I am addressing this House?  

Madam  Speaker,  the  proposed  constitutional  amendment  is,  in  fact,  a  vital  and 
powerful tool to target and disrupt unexplained wealth, including any property as described in 
the amendment. One fundamental principle I believe in is that any constitutional amendment 
shall not only shape the outcomes in the interest of whoever is in power, but shall be rather in 
the interest of the whole nation as rightly pointed out by the hon. Prime Minister.  That is 
difficult when political parties, within our country, have different views on an issue that binds 
us all.  

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that Government is here to promote greater 
stability  and  efficiency  of  institutions,  strengthening  elements  of  our  democracy  while 
defining what type of society we want to live in and legate to our future generations. I have to 
question: shall the amendment we are debating today be subject to any controversy and of 
high contentions?  Madam Speaker, any constitutional amendment should not be of general 
controversy. It should bear the character of unanimity or large consensus of most Members as 
we  have  witnessed  down  the  track  of  history  of  various  constitutional  amendments.  For 
example, amendment to  the Constitution of Mauritius, section 75, so  as  to provide for the 
establishment of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, passed in this august Assembly on 20 
November 2001 unanimously. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  has  been  so  long  since  I  heard  the  buzz  words  that:  ena  trop 
boucou l’argent sale ek l’argent mal gagner pe circuler dans nou République.  We all know 
how  detrimental  l’argent  sale  can  be  transcribed  in  acquiring  property  and  assets  in  our 
society. I have always asked myself: how do we get rid of this monster from our society? 
What is required is that all our citizens need to be disciplined and shall enjoy a living through 
honest and hard work and not through magouille, corruption and criminal activity. 

Madam  Speaker,  allowing  people  to  create  enormous  unexplained  wealth  is  a  very 
dangerous thing. When wealth creation by any means becomes the norms of a society, my 
question  is:  should  any  person  with  clean  hands,  deep  sense  of  morality  and  integrity  feel 
afraid of this constitutional amendment? My answer is “no”. 

31 

 
Madam  Speaker,  although  there  are  the  protections  of  property  rights  in  our 
Constitution, it is important to note that such protections are not absolute. Allow me to refer, 
Madam Speaker, to a study made by the Council of Europe on the Impact of Civil Forfeiture 
in March 2015 prepared within the framework of Criminal Assets Recovery Project in Serbia. 
It was reported, and I quote -  

“The  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  and  many  other  States’  Constitutions  that 
permit  civil  forfeiture  consider  that  civil  forfeiture  is  compatible  with  property 
protection  and  the  right  to  own  property  contained  in  their  Constitutions  and  with 
Human Rights laws, the right to property on the basis that the right is a restricted, not 
absolute  right  and  is  capable  of  being  subject  to  interference  provided  such 
interference  is  provided  by  law,  that  is,  legally,  pursues  a  legitimate  aim  that  is 
necessary and proportionate.” 

This is the essence of what we are debating right now. 

Madam Speaker, in Ontario, Canada in 2005, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice 
revealed that there was a consulted constitutional challenge for in rem proceedings, that civil 
forfeiture does not infringe the Charter of Rights and Freedom. And the outcome was that the 
challenge was dismissed. This is encouraging for us to benchmark on international trends as 
well, as rightly pointed out by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, our country needs innovative and up to standard new legislations to 
face the demons of our society. As the constitutional amendment provides for confiscation of 
property, I think it is a legitimate aim and it is in the interest of the general public for any 
person to be deprived of any illegitimate property. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  a  few  words  concerning  Rodrigues.  There  are  fishy 
enrichment or unexplained property transactions. Pou bizin met l’ordre contre banne requins 
deux la tête ki croire zotte l’intérêt conquiz et capav fair seki zot envi. 

(Interruptions) 

It is worth noting that I have put questions in this House in the past to request a Commission 
of Inquiry in Rodrigues or to send the former Officer of Good Governance there with regard 
to certain situations prevailing - especially for the period between 2006 and 2012 - to raise 

 

32 

public  concerns  on  certain  malpractices  and  suspected  illegal  enrichment,  transactions  in 
property.  

(Interruptions) 

With  this  present  legislation,  people  in  Rodrigues  will  be  able  to  watch  a  happy 
ending of the too many stories that are on the lips of many Rodriguans being amazed by the 
state  of  luxury  in  the  life  of  certain  persons  in  Rodrigues,  disproportionate  to  their 
emoluments and other incomes! 

(Interruptions) 

How did they attain their wealth in a short period of time, disproportionate to their salary?  
One will agree that in the local context, it is not selling on a small scale, agricultural products, 
in addition to one normal salary that one can acquire considerate disproportionate amount of 
wealth.   

Madam Speaker, with  the coming into force of this Constitution (Amendment) Bill 
together with associated laws, those who have their property, worth a few millions of rupees, 
which are proportionate to their emoluments and income will have to explain and account for.   

For  my  part,  I  am  confident  that  this  legislation  will  serve  its  purpose  for  our 
Republic.  As in my party, the OPR, we want to see a clean Republic and a clean autonomous 
Rodrigues society as well.   

To  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  unexplained  wealth  is  a  national  problem.    This 
Constitutional amendment will provide a consistent legislation to disrupt enrichment through 
unexplained wealth.  I congratulate Government, in particular, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in 
bringing this legislation forward.  It is a step in the right direction for a cleaner society and I 
do support the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill (No. XXIX of 2015). 

I thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 12.58 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.09 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
 

33 

 
Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Madam Speaker,  I was thinking very deeply  and hard at  all those issues pertaining to this 
constitutional  amendment  being  proposed.    I  must  say  that  it  has  been  -  I  will  not  say 
haunting my mind – on my mind for quite a while. This morning, as soon as I came in, I said 
to myself, I will start on a lighter note.  I think that this is the right attitude because this has 
nothing to do with any party politics as far as we are concerned on this side.  I am sure it 
should  not  be  that  on  the  other  side.    I  am  so  happy  to  have  come  in  today  to  see  that 
Members of the Government are wearing red; that is what I wanted to say.  You are wearing 
the colour of our party and I feel so happy about that.  Congratulations! 

So, let us start on that lighter note.  It is sad though that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
does not do it, but again, I must say that it would suit his complexion, the colour red.  So, 
having said that, let us break the ice and start with this whole process. 

Madam Speaker, I was trying to think what would be our position with regard to this 
particular piece of legislation.  It is not every day that one comes ahead with amendments to 
the Constitution and whenever one comes with such amendments, one cannot take it lightly. I 
understand for sure. This is why the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has, without any doubt, asked 
and required with reason that all Members of the Government should be present at the time 
when this matter is going to be voted because it is not only important, in terms of figures as 
provided for by the Constitution, but also because it goes without saying that it concerns the 
very  fundamental  issue  in  the  Constitution  and  it  concerns  the  future  direction  that  this 
country  will take.  By  ensuring that  everyone is  present,  you  ensure that there is  collective 
responsibility outside the parameters of Cabinet also, which is very fair. 

If we are to invite someone - let me use this parallel - at home and very often that 
happens when you have a wedding. You invite people to a wedding and all of a sudden you 
open  the  door  and  you  let  people  in,  but  if  you  see  someone  who  is  not  welcome,  for 
whatever  reasons,  the  first  thing  you  should  do  is  close  the  door  and  not  let  it  open.  The 
reason why this constitutional amendment provision is being proposed, Madam Speaker, is 
precisely  to  open  the  door  to  a  guest  that  Government  wants  to  invite  in.  Let  me  use  this 
parallel. So, the guest they want to invite in is no ordinary guest, it is a guest that is being 
called the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting (GGIR) Bill. So, that is the guest that 
Government  wants  to  allow  in.    La  raison  pour  laquelle  there  is  this  constitutional 
amendment being proposed is precisely, as I say again - let us use the parallel - opening the 
door through the Constitution to ensure that this guest is welcome in. Non pas par – as we 

 

34 

say  in  Creole  –  l’imposte,  but  by  the  open  door,  the  front  door.  Not  the  backdoor  as  hon. 
Ganoo rightly said. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea has got some experience that we should always allow things from the front 
door and not from the backdoor. 

So, what I am saying is the following: why do we leave a door open?  I am getting to 
what the hon. Leader of the Opposition has said. That the position of the MMM has been that 
they  will  vote  the  constitutional  amendments.  He  has  strong  reservations  with  regard  to 
proposals  in  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill.  So,  if  I  have  strong 
reservations with regard to the guest or the uninvited guest or that the person is not proper 
and I do not want to welcome him in my home, I shut the door.  That is precisely what is 
going in my mind.  I cannot and we cannot reasonably accept to open the door, hold it wide 
open and let something in that should not be allowed in.  So, if we are to accept to vote this 
provision,  then  what  we  are  doing  is  allowing  an  unwelcome  guest  in.    That  is  what  we 
cannot stand for.   

As I have said, at the very outset, Madam Speaker, it is not solely for political reasons 
and let me go further not for political reasons at all. Because for one thing, all four Members 
present  here  from  the  Labour  Party,  we  sat  down  and  thought  very  carefully.  We  said  to 
ourselves,  let  us  analyse  what  exactly  is  in  there  that  we  are  not  compatible  with  because 
whatever we do today has repercussions tomorrow. I remember, as soon as the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister was talking about the constitutional provision that he made amendments to, be it in 
1983 or 1986 or even that the laws pertaining to dangerous drugs that were amended at some 
point in time under his Prime Ministership, the intention there was undoubtedly good in those 
days. The intention was what? In order to curb the scourge of drug traffickers or to curb the 
scourge of proliferation of drugs, we all remember - and I will get into that in a few moments, 
Madam Speaker - is whenever we want to do something and our intention is right, we have to 
ensure and this is where  I join the hon.  Leader  of the Opposition. We have to ensure that 
whatever we do brings results and whatever we do is not simply as a matter of process but not 
dans le fond; there can be issues that can be challenged, and whatever we would have done 
here  would  be  to  no  avail  and  finally  we  would  be  taking  a  few  steps  or  several  steps 
backwards instead of moving forward. 

So, let me, therefore, add that the Mauritius Labour Party and more so all of us here 
representatives,  Members  of  Parliament  of  that  party,  we  are  all  for  the  fight  against 
corruption, we are all for measures that have to be taken in order to curb the scourge, we are 

 

35 

all for constitutional amendments that take into consideration very important remarks of Law 
Lords of the Privy Council, of Supreme Court Judges, precedents that show us the way and 
that also show us that this will not be the way.  We are all for it.  And what we are saying 
here  today  and  what  I  will  try  to  demonstrate  is  the  reason  why  we  believe  that  what  is 
provided  for  in  the  Constitution  itself  not  only  makes  it  that  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity Reporting Bill will be challenged without any doubt successfully in Courts, but even 
the Constitution itself, the proposals, the amendments, unfortunately, hold certain lacuna that 
I will draw the attention of the House to, Madam Speaker. 

My intervention will be centred solely on legal issues, and what I would also like to 
say before I embark upon that is the following: people have said that if you are not scared you 
have no reason not to vote the law. 

Let me also say, I personally and all of us here in this august Assembly representing 
our  party,  have  nothing  to  fear.    Not  at  all!    But  we  are  duty-bound  to  address  certain 
important legal issues. I have heard the hon. Leader of the Opposition say that it would be 
better that all of us achieve consensus on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill and the Good 
Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill.    But  then,  when  I’ve  gone  through  all  the 
judgements of the Supreme Court, I’ve gone through all the judgements of the Privy Council, 
the  judgements  of  Australia,  the  judgements  in  the  United  States  of  America,  what  I  have 
found is that even Judges of those institutions do not necessarily come to a consensus. This is 
what we call dissenting judgements. 

So, the whole thing is that you can always pretend to be right about what you want to 
do.  Intentions may be good, Madam Speaker, but what I would like to pray for today is to 
ensure that there is no window that we keep open that makes this whole process caduque, 
simply because the Court turns it down when we can and should avoid that a Supreme Court 
or  a  Privy  Council  turns  it  down.  So,  let  us  try  together,  draw  our  minds  and  bring  our 
attention to all those possibilities.  And if we are to address our minds to it, I say at the outset 
there would be no reason why we cannot reach consensus, because this is what we want. 

The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  will  recall  that,  not  very  far  back,  I,  myself,  as 
representative  of  the  Mauritius  Labour  Party,  did  speak  to  him  about  this  provision  in  the 
Constitution. I spoke to him about the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.  What I 
wanted is only one thing and what we want is only one thing:  that we try to rough out the 
edges with one objective; that there is consensus and that, as one nation, we achieve a great 

 

36 

victory against this scourge that we all want to fight. As far as this objective is concerned, 
there is consensus, but the methodology of reaching there is where we differ, and I am of the 
humble view, Madam Speaker, that we can find common ground provided those issues are 
looked into very carefully. 

Let me address some very important points: first, the concept of separation of powers 
and second, the concept of the right of silence.  Is what is provided for by this Constitution 
opening the door to civil process or is it a disguised way to cover up the criminal process? 
What  about  the  right  of  silence,  as  I  have  said?  What  about  the  reversal  of  the  burden  of 
proof? What about this agency? Can it impose punishment? Those are issues that I believe we 
should address, and I will address.  

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that we, Members of the Opposition, should assume 
our responsibility. I am in total agreement with him. Assuming one’s responsibility does not 
necessarily mean we have to agree, Madam Speaker. Assuming one’s responsibility means 
that we are duty-bound, if we honestly believe so, and I do believe so, to draw the attention of 
Government  to  certain  issues  and  this  is  what  I  am  trying  to  do,  and  this  is  for  us  also 
assuming our responsibility in a constructive manner. 

I  am  obliged,  therefore,  to  go  also  to  what  the  Bill  that  has  to  come  afterwards 
provides, because as I have said it is opening the door to this Bill; one is connected to the 
other. Before I go to the Bill, let me talk about what is provided for in the Constitution itself. 
I  believe  that  there  are  certain  amendments  that  should  have  been  brought  in  to  the 
Constitution but that are not there. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill in itself talks about certain issues of utmost importance. Let 
me talk about clause 12. Clause 12 of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill talks 
about privilege.  It says here that – 

 “(1) The  Agency  may,  before submitting a report to the  Board under section 5(2), 
inscribe a privilege in favour of the Government on the property in respect of which 
the person is unable to give a satisfactory account of his unexplained wealth”. 

This  clause  in  itself  raises  two  issues.    One  issue  that  it  raises  is  that  the  Agency, 
which is a body that is created by the Executive - that is a fact - will be a body without any 
judicial function.  This will be a body devoid of any judicial discretion; this will be a body 
that is devoid of even any quasi-judicial powers, but this will be a body that will be allowed 

 

37 

to  inscribe  a  privilege  in  favour  of  Government.  Now,  some  people  may  say  that  this  is 
neither here nor there because this is done by other authorities such as the Mauritius Revenue 
Authority.    But  the  fact  remains  that,  for  any  one  moment,  for  any  one  second,  for  any 
moment in time when such an authority that is not empowered by law to act quasi judicially 
or  otherwise  can  inscribe  a  privilege  in  favour  of  Government,  it  is  tantamount  to  this 
organisation  punishing.    This  is  punishment,  and  such  a  punishment,  in  my  humble  view, 
cannot be in the hands of an organisation that is not empowered to do so by law. That is one 
thing. 

I  have  come  across  a  certain  ouvrage  and  the  title  here  is  ‘The  Compatibility  of 
Unexplained  Wealth  Provisions  and  ‘Civil’  Forfeiture  Regimes  With  Kable’,  written  by 
Anthony Gray and dates back to 2012. In that document, Madam Speaker, I have come across 
very interesting notes and I shall refer to that. I read here in that document, I quote – 

 “There  are  numerous  examples  where,  in  applying  these  types  of  principles,  the 
United States Supreme Court has determined that civil forfeiture provisions were in 
substance criminal in nature”. 

So, that’s what it brings me to here: is this criminal in nature or civil in nature? But 
the Supreme Court in the United States has determined that civil forfeiture that is provided 
here under this piece of legislation that we have to debate upon later on, was in substance 
criminal  in  nature.  And  there  is  a  case  that  is  referred  to  here,  the  case  of  Calero-Toledo 
versus Pearson Yacht Leasing.  The Court found that civil forfeiture provisions proceedings 
considered in that case fostered the purposes served by the underlined criminal statutes, both 
by preventing further illicit use of the things seized and by imposing an economic penalty, 
and  in  the  case  of  Boyd  versus  the  United  States,  the  Court  was  adamant,  proceedings 
instituted for the purpose of declaring the forfeiture of a man’s property by reason of offences 
committed by him, though they may be civil in form, are in their nature criminal. So, here, 
there is judicial precedent to establish that we may call something civil, we may call it not 
criminal in order to avoid issues such as the burden of proof, the standard of burden of proof 
beyond reasonable doubt, we can call it civil simply to reduce the burden of proof; we can, 
through the back door, as certain hon. Members referred to, try to introduce some facility in 
order to achieve the objective, but, as I have seen here in that very document which I will  
quote - 

 

38 

 “The fact that the only penalty is a financial one does not preclude a finding that the 
provision  is  punitive  in  nature.  Courts  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  have 
considered the purpose of the legislation.” 

Same  as  here,  Madam  Speaker!  Courts  in  United  States  and  Europe  have  considered  this 
whole element of civil forfeiture.  And I go on - 

“If legislation serves a remedial purpose (…)” 

I repeat - 

“If  legislation  serves  a  remedial  purpose  only,  it  is  more  likely  to  be  truly  civil  in 
character.” 

And that is where it is important.  

“However, where it truly serves retributive or deterrent purposes, it is more likely to 
be  seen  as  criminal  in  nature.  An  important  consideration  here  is  whether  the  fine 
imposed (or confiscation of property) is done with the intended purpose of returning it 
to its rightful owner.”  

Here,  the  purpose  of  this  law,  that  we  want  to  open  the  door  to  allow  in,  is  not  to 
return the property to its rightful owner, but, had it been to return the property to the rightful 
owner, Madam Speaker, then it would have been civil in nature. The very fact that it is not 
the  case  is  described  therefore  in  judicial  authorities  and  precedence,  both  in  the  United 
States and Europe, as being criminal in nature and not civil. 

(Interruptions) 

Criminal! It is not because you say it is civil that it is civil. Judges have the right to look into 
it, they have looked into it, they have analysed it and they have defined it very clearly. It is 
not civil simply because you call it civil, it is criminal in nature, and if it is criminal in nature, 
the burden of proof should be therefore beyond reasonable doubt and no other way.  

“Sometimes (…).” - I read here.  

“(…) Government has argued that the laws (…)”. 

And finally, here, Madam Speaker, it is exactly as we are having it in Mauritius and 
this  is  not  a  criticism  that  I  am  laying  at  the  footsteps  of  Government,  this  is  only  a 

 

39 

constructive assessment with a view to trying to block all the loopholes and getting to a law 
that cannot be challenged. So, it says here - 

“Government  has  argued  that  the  laws  were  passed  for  a  preventative,  rather  than 
punitive purpose.”  

I  have  heard  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms out in public, even at the Bar Council, on television - I have followed him with a lot 
of interest and I am sure he has followed my remarks with interest as well - and that is the 
whole purpose of a democracy. He has said that the whole purpose is not to punish a person. 
He has said it! He has very clearly defended his brief, that it is not punitive, but when you 
look at it very carefully, in spite of what he says, and I re-join what the author says here - 

“The water is somewhat muddy here, given that both criminal and civil remedies can 
have the purpose of ‘deterrence’, (…).”  

Clearly! 

Madam Speaker: Hon.  Mohamed, can  I just interrupt  you to tell  you that for sure 
there is an overlapping in the two Bills. We are now debating the Constitution (Amendment) 
Bill and you will have the opportunity to go in-depth in what you are proposing at the level of 
the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill; you will go in-depth. You can, from time 
to time, when referring to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, refer to the other Bill briefly, 
but not in-depth as you are doing, because when you start talking about civil and criminal, 
then, obviously, it comes to the analysis of the other Bill. Please! 

Mr Mohamed: I stand guided by the Chair and I also appreciate that you understand 
that  they  are  inextricably  linked,  but  allow  me  to  go  further.  I  can  assure  you,  Madam 
Speaker, I am trying to be very, very limitative, otherwise I would have gone for ten hours, 
but I am trying to limit it.  

Now,  let  me  come  back  to  what  I  was  talking  about.  When  one  looks  at  this 
Constitution - and I say it again what it is opening the door to - it reminds me, and here, I 
pick up where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself referred to a  speech that he, himself, had 
made  in  this  august  Assembly  and  he  talked  about  Hansard  of  December  1991  where  he 
quoted his own speech, he said - 

 

40 

“Mr Speaker, Sir, the opportunity has also been taken to make some amendments to 
the  Constitution.  Members  of  the  House  will  recall  that  a  number  of  legislative 
measures have been introduced over the past twelve months in order to consolidate 
the democratic foundations of our society.  

Today, we are taking that exercise a little further. The present Government also wants 
to establish firmly the democratic basis of our Constitution by making it practically 
impossible to amend section 1 of the Constitution.” 

He also referred to the intervention of the then hon. Attorney General and, in that particular 
case, those were the words that were referred to by Lord Steyn in a very important case that 
was  heard  at  the  Privy  Council  that  moved  from  the  Supreme  Court  and  went  over  to  the 
Privy  Council  and  there  is  also  another  good  case  of  the  Public  Prosecutions  of  Jamaica 
versus Mollison of 2002 to appeal cases 411.  

Now,  this  all  starts,  and  it  is  important  here  to  talk  about  the  separation  of  powers 
once  again,  because  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  rightly  said  that.  This  Constitution  is 
allowing a piece of legislation in, but the piece of legislation, as I said just now, it is as I have 
explained, criminal in nature, not simply civil but the separation of powers is important here, 
because it talks about another important element of clause 16.  

Whatever you may do to change section 8 of the Constitution, Madam Speaker, you 
have to be very careful because what you are allowing, in fact, is that the legislature, through 
a decision of the Executive, is making the same mistake that it had done in the past.  You will 
recall at the time when, as I said, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister leading a Government, wanted 
to curb the scourge of drug traffickers and drugs, came up with legislation that said that while 
you are on bail for drug-related matters, you shall not be given bail for whatever reason. This 
was turned down by the Privy Council and the Supreme Court as being unconstitutional. So, 
the intention, as I said, may be good, the intention must be right but what the Law Lords of 
the Privy Council said and the Supreme Court Judges is that the legislature cannot come and 
tell the Judges what exactly they should do. Discretion should always be left to the Judges of 
the  Supreme  Court,  our  Courts  -  precisely  the  concept  of  separation  of  powers  that  I  had 
referred to earlier. 

Now,  this  constitutional  amendment  does  not  make  provision  for  the  separation  of 
powers concept. I will explain.  Because clause 16 of the other Bill, basically, does not give 

 

41 

the  discretion  to  a  Judge  in  Chambers  what  to  do  when  there  is  an  application  for  an 
Unexplained Wealth Order.  What to do?  Normally, when you go to a Judge in Chambers, 
the Judge in Chambers can make the order that is prayed for and all Solicitors, Attorneys at 
Law and Lawyers present would realise that there is also the possibility for a Judge in the 
Supreme Court to decide not only to allow the prayer that  you have asked for or deny the 
prayer  or  turn  it  down,  but  also  to  make  such  order  as  he  deems  appropriate  in  the 
circumstances; to make any such order that he decides to be appropriate in the circumstances.  
C’est cela avoir un respect pour l’indépendance du judiciaire.  C’est cela que le conseil privé 
de la reine avait condamné dans le jugement où ils ont dit que la section 5 était au fait in 
violation of the relevant sections of our Constitution.  But this is precisely what we are doing 
again and what this constitutional amendment has forgotten to take on board because when 
one reads clause 16 of the Bill which is connected to the constitutional amendment, it clearly 
says  here  that  if  the  Judge  is  satisfied,  he  shall  have  only  one  option  and  this  is  what  the 
legislature is imposing on him - one option - to make an Unexplained Wealth Order.  

(Interruptions) 

That is important! This is not something which we can ignore.  Ce n’est pas un respect de la 
séparation des pouvoirs when you say that you have only one option. The Judge should be 
given the discretion and what I would prefer to see here - and then it would be in line with the 
constitutional provisions - is  give the discretion  any  other such order  as  the learned Judge 
deems appropriate in the circumstances, not only that you shall, because here the words are: 
‘you shall mandatorily come up with an Unexplained Wealth Order.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Ça c’est imposer cela, when you look, that is clause 16. 

Clause 16 (2) talks about that – 

“Where  the  Judge  in  Chambers  considers  that  an  application  for  an  Unexplained 
Wealth Order cannot be granted on the basis of affidavit evidence, he shall refer the 
matter to the Supreme Court.” 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Mohamed,  you  are  going  again  in-depth  into  the  other  Bill.  
Please, you can refer to it.  You can make your comment briefly on it, but you can’t go in-
depth in the other Bill.  You will have ample time to talk on the other Bill.  Your name is 
already on the list.  You can refer to it, but please, be brief when you refer to the other Bill. 

 

42 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. So, as I was saying, it is very 
important for us to realise that it is not simply a question of coming up to vote a constitutional 
amendment  because  that  constitutional  amendment  addresses  and  opens  the  door  to 
fundamental issues, in the other piece of legislation, that are in violation of the fundamental 
principles  and  protection  afforded  under  our  Constitution:  separation  of  powers,  as  I  have 
said and explained, right of silence because we shall no more have a right of silence because 
it is said - and I am going on it briefly, Madam Speaker - that this constitutional amendment 
will open the door to a situation that a Bill will come in where if you do not make an affidavit 
to explain yourself devant le Juge en Chambre, if you don’t make that affidavit, everything 
will  be  allowed  in  against  you  and  it  will  be  deemed  as  unrebutted  and  unchallenged 
whatever the agency says. Therefore, you have to make an affidavit, otherwise you will lose 
your case. So, this is something else that the constitutional amendment is allowing in.  

It also, therefore, Madam Speaker, allows the possibility where no longer do you have 
the protection under the Constitution that talks about the burden of proof where now you will 
have to come and justify yourself. This constitutional amendment, Madam Speaker, allows 
something  else  in;  a  situation  where  you  are  obliged  to  swear  an  affidavit  to  explain  your 
wealth,  but,  at  the  same  time,  this  document  can  be  communicated  to  other  agencies,  this 
document  which  is  before  the  Judge  in  Chambers  can  be  communicated  and  once  it  is 
communicated, other agencies can make use of that against you in a Court of Law, whereas 
the right of silence, in fact, does not and would not allow them to do that. Yes, through the 
backdoor, Madam Speaker, this constitutional amendment is allowing a lot of violations of 
the sacrosanct principles and protection that the citizen of this country is afforded under our 
Constitution.  

Now,  how  can  we,  therefore,  allow  such  an  issue?  How  can  we  vote  a  piece  of 
legislation that allows such violations to come in? My plea, today, Madam Speaker, to hon. 
Members of this National Assembly, as I said at the outset and you would have noted the tone 
and tenor of my intervention; it is vraiment apolitique.  It is not adversarial. It is not, in any 
way,  adversarial.    It  is  very  simply  me  drawing  the  attention  of  all  hon.  Members  of  this 
National  Assembly,  Madam  Speaker,  that  if  you  vote  this  constitutional  amendment,  what 
you are unknowingly maybe allowing in, are a series of violations of constitutional principles 
and  freedom  and  protection  that  you  should  always  try  to  preserve  for  the  citizens  of  this 
country. Not because you are scared or you have anything to hide, simply because when we 
come to this august Assembly, we swear on the Constitution to uphold it. So, if we are to 

 

43 

swear that we are going to uphold the Constitution, it is, Madam Speaker, that we are going 
to uphold each and every  protection  and freedom that is provided for in that Constitution. 
Because if you, Members of this National Assembly, go against this oath that you have taken, 
it is not done méchamment, I am sure; it is done maybe because you honestly believe, Madam 
Speaker, that this is something right. The intention is right, but the results will not be. Just 
like the Privy Council turned down the excellent intention of the hon. Prime Minister to fight 
the  scourge  against  drugs,  that  law  was  turned  down.  It  was  done  in  order  to  ensure  that 
people could not keep on being bailed out when there were continuing to commit drug-related 
offences. The Court said that it was wrong according to the Constitution.  

So, l’intention pourrait être bien, but the end result is what?  Do we want to be in a 
situation, Madam Speaker - and this is a message through you that I send to each Member of 
this august Assembly - where we come with the law, l’intention est bonne and in two, three 
months, six months down the line, we find ourselves in a situation where the Privy Council or 
the Supreme Court turns it down?  We can easily turn round and say: “yes, but let the Court 
decide!”  But the problem is we would have been losing six months of valuable time to fight 
against the scourge and how do you believe we could really put – if we don’t put our minds 
together to address those issues, we would be doing wrong to the country. So, I am praying.  

I,  myself,  remember,  as  backbencher  here  between  2005  and  2010,  the  then  Deputy 
Prime Minister and some former colleagues of mine would remember, when the Road Traffic 
(Amendment)  Bill  was  brought  here  to  this  august  Assembly  by  former  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, Dr. Beebeejaun, where he had made provision, in those days, that a Police Officer 
could suspend the driving licence of someone pending the determination of the matter before 
a Court of Law. He had brought this to this august Assembly that the Police could suspend 
the driving licence before the Court had decided, pending the determination.  

A  Police  Officer  does  not  have  the  right  to  suspend  and  inflict  any  punishment.  An 
agency  does  not  have  the  right  to  freeze  even  for  one  second  because  it  is  the  right  of  a 
judicial body. What happened? I stood up in this august Assembly, and I was criticised then, I 
was  criticised  and  Members  from  my  party,  Government  was  not  happy  because  I  was  a 
backbencher who stood up and even went against the proposal of the then Government that I 
belong to. I said: “No, this will be turned down in a Court of Law. The Supreme Court will 
turn it down. Let us not be embarrassed! Let us do things right! Let us ensure that this does 
not blow up in our face. Let us ensure that we do not waste time!” And this is exactly what 

 

44 

happened; it was turned down.  The Supreme Court decided that it was wrong.  Hon. Ganoo 
said that I was right in those days.  He also spoke in that direction. So, once again, we meet à 
la croisée des chemins.  What we do?  Intention, there is consensus on it.   

So,  what  I  am  asking  in  conclusion  is  the  following:  let  us  not  for  once,  if  that  is 
possible  – and this is not what I am saying, everyone else is doing, Madam speaker – but let 
us put the result in priority. What do we want to achieve? If we want to achieve it, we can 
stand together, but not at any price because I do not have a crystal ball, I cannot read in the 
future, I am no soothsayer, but, in my experience as a lawyer, I have said it before in this 
Assembly, between 2005 and 2010, when there is something that I believe could happen at 
the Supreme Court, it happened and it was quite embarassing. 

This Government is at the beginning of its mandate, soon it will be one year. It can 
avoid  any  embarassment  by  putting  aside  political  issues  and  address  those  issues.  So,  we 
cannot, therefore, vote for a constitutional amendment if this opens the door to issues of such 
vital importance that could eventually, highly probable be turned down as unconstitutional by 
our Courts. It is not a solution to simply get three-quarters because some friends, on the other 
side, have said that to me: “But no, we will get three-quarters and it cannot be challenged in a 
Court.”  Wrong!  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  said  that  and  thought:  “No,  it  is  not 
because  simply  you  get  three-quarters  that  it  cannot  be  challenged  in  a  Court.”  If  it  is  in 
fundamental opposition to section 1 of the Constitution, a democratic and sovereign State, 
you still can challenge it before a Court of law and it stands the chance of success, and if it 
does succeed, let avoid the embarassment. That is what I am asking for. So, we will not vote 
that amendment because we are assuming our responsibility… 

We will not vote that amendment… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

… because we believe that there are ways to easily correct those things. I join the hon. Leader 
of  the  Opposition  to  say  that  those  things  that  can  be  corrected  doivent  être  faits  à  tête 
reposée, et on peut le faire. The ideal situaiton will be that we do put our minds together to 
continue the working sessions in order to find ways that it cannot be contested in Court and 
we act as one man, as one woman, as one nation. We can do it and I only pray that we do it. 
Now, I will not say that those who believe I am wrong, criticising me and laughing at what I 
am saying are simply doing it because they are scared of what I am saying. 

 

45 

(Interruptions) 

I respect their views. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Mohamed: I have respect for their point of view and I am humbly saying that I 

may not hold the monopoly of knowledge, but I am only making a humble proposal. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! 

 (2.50 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, let 
me, first of all, say that I need to express to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the appreciation of 
Government and of the House at large for bringing this Constitution (Amendment) Bill for us 
to debate on and for us to vote on later today. 

 “The object of this Bill is to amend the Constitution to provide for the taking 
of possession of property –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

under the ownership of a person to an extent which is disproportionate 
to his emoluments and other income; 

the  ownership,  possession  custody  or  control  of  which  cannot  be 
satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  the  person  who  owns,  possesses,  has 
custody or control of the property; or  

held  by  a  person  for  another  person  to  an  extent  which  is 
disproportionate  to  the  emoluments  or  other  income  of  that  other 
person, 

by way of confiscation.” 

Let me say, right at the outset, Madam Speaker, that no Government, whether this one or any 
other  Government,  will  legislate  in  vain.  A  Government  brings  a  Bill  to  the  House  after 
having ensured that all the constitutional provisions and all the legal provisions have been 
looked at and addressed before the Bill is finalised and comes to the House. 

46 

 
I am very happy that the Leader of the Opposition mentioned that in the Government 
of 2000-2005, lots of decisions were taken with regard to the dismantling of corruption and 
other  frauds.  There  was  the  FIAMLA  that  was  passed,  the  PoCA  and  we  also  had  the 
Terrorism Bill, etc., and it was all with a view to ensuring that the Constitution remains the 
citadel for the rule of law and for all fundamental rights and freedom. 

I have said that no Government legislates in vain, but we are also conscious of the fact 
that when a constitutional amendment is brought to the House, it is not a simple matter. We 
do not amend the Constitution at any stage. We amend a Constitution because there is need 
and there is urgency in amending the Constitution. We are not the only country in the world 
to amend the Constitution.  

Constitutions  exist  all  over  the  world  and  they  are  amended  as  and  when  they  are 
required. We, ourselves, have had lots of amendments and it is to the credit of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister that he has been the trigger for many constitutional amendments which have 
moved the country forward, which have consolidated democracy and which have ensured that 
the rule of law prevails at all times. 

We have heard hon. Mohamed speak about criminal law and how we are undermining 
the fabric of the Constitution. One thing we need to remember, Madam Speaker, is that this 
Bill is inevitably connected with the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill that will 
be debated later today, hopefully. But we must bear in mind that when we are looking at the 
Constitution, there are certain fundamental requirements that we need to observe and when 
we are looking at the other Bill, we have to look at it that way. But to say that when we are 
amending the Constitution, we are opening the door to an abuse of constitutional provisions, 
that is going too far and it is not right. 

What the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill is saying is that if you have 
unexplained wealth and it looks like it is disproportionate to your emoluments, then there is a 
duty to explain. It is an action which goes against the property of the person, not against the 
person. No person is being taken to Court as an accused party. It is an action in rem, not an 
action in personam. So, all the other provisions in the Constitution, for example, section 10 of 
the Constitution which deals with provisions to secure protection of the law - 

“(1)  Where any person is charged with a criminal offence, then, unless the charge 

is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a fair hearing (…).” 

 

47 

There are other rights which are mentioned in the Constitution like presumption of innocence, 
the right to be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands 
and,  in  detail  the  nature  of  the  offence,  to  be  given  adequate  time  and  facilities  for  the 
preparation of his defence, etc. But we are not in that situation at all. We are in a situation of 
civil confiscation and we are in a situation where after this amendment to the Constitution is 
passed  and  after  the  other  Bill  is  passed,  somebody  is  found  in  possession  of  unexplained 
wealth, he must account for it. There are procedures which have been set out in the other Bill 
which, I think, guarantees to any person who has unexplained wealth, the protection of the 
Judiciary. 

We have heard about the separation of powers. Of course, we have the separation of 
powers.  Of  course,  we  have  the  Judiciary  which  is  independent,  not  only  do  we  have  a 
Judiciary which is independent in Mauritius, but we also have the highest Court to appeal for 
Mauritius, the Privy Council which always scrutinises whatever the Supreme Court does and 
probe whatever will be challenged should somebody decide to challenge this Constitution or 
whatever.  

But what is important, Madam Speaker, is to say that we have in the other Bill set out 
the Integrity Reporting Services Agency which reports to the Integrity Reporting Board and 
then a decision is taken, either by the Board to reject or to refer to the Judge in Chambers. So, 
the Judiciary is at the centre of the whole process. We are not denying to the Judiciary the 
right that it has and that it should have. 

In fact, we, in Government, are very jealous of the prerogatives of all the institutions 
in this country. We believe in institutions. We believe that institutions must be allowed to 
work  and  to  work  independently  because  that  is  the  way  freedom  is  preserved  and  that  is 
what makes the rule of law. It is not the rule of men. We want the rule of law to prevail at all 
times. And should the Judge in Chambers decide that he cannot address the issue, then, he 
can refer the matter to the Open Court and there is the appeal procedure and all that. 

When  we  hear  that  what  we  are  trying  to  do  is  akin  to  a  situation  where  we  are 
reversing the burden of proof, this is a disguised way of bringing the criminal law into the 
civil  law  or  the  right  to  silence  is  being  adversely  affected.  All  this,  Madam  Speaker,  is 
neither here nor there regarding what is being proposed in the amendment to this Bill. In fact, 
this  Government  has  been  open.  In  the  first  version  of  the  Bill  there  were  safeguards. 
Although I consider that the additional amendment which has been proposed by the Rt. hon. 

 

48 

Prime Minister goes to buttress even more the safeguards in the Constitution, still we must 
not forget that section 1 of the Constitution remains the foundation of democracy. And this 
has been the subject of lots of pronouncements in our Courts and also in the Privy Council in 
the case referred to by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and also by hon. Mohamed, the case of 
The State v. Khoyratty which is the Privy Council Judgment No. 13 of 2006. 

One thing I must say, at the outset, is that this is a criminal case. The pronouncements 
that are made here relate to the right to deny bail to a person who is charged with an offence 
and  the  Privy  Council  looked  at  the  issue  and  asked  the  question:  should  this  right  be 
removed from the Judiciary and be vested in the Executive? That was a different situation. 
But, still, the Privy Council looked at section 1 of the Constitution and made the following 
remarks, and I quote from paragraph 24 –  

“The State of Mauritius shall be a sovereign democratic State which shall be 
known as the Republic of Mauritius.” 

And then, after the amendment, at the same time, by section 9 of the 1991 Act, the Assembly 
amended  section  47(3)  of  the  Constitution  by  inserting  a  reference  to  section  1.    Thus, 
amended  section  47(3),  Madam  Speaker,  deals  with  the  mode  of  amendment  of  the 
Constitution.  

Since  we  are  dealing  with  the  Constitution,  you  will  allow  me  to  refer  to  the 
Constitution.  Section  47  deals  with  the  alteration  of  the  Constitution.  There  are  various 
majorities  provided  for  altering  various  sections  of  the  Constitution.  But  with  regard  to 
section 1, the Privy Council spoke about a degree of entrenchment which is unmatched in 
other Constitutions and the effect of that amendment in 1991 of the Constitution. Hon. Ganoo 
was the Attorney General then, it said that –  

“The effect is to entrench section 1 very deeply indeed.” 

Whatever we do in this House, whatever law is passed, must be subjected to the test 
of section 1 of the Constitution. Section 1 is the major section in the Constitution. That is 
why I say that although the amendment brings another safeguard - the amendment proposed 
by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  -  I  still  think  that  section  1  of  the  Constitution  is 
something that one should never forget. This is why I say that not only are we enacting this 
piece of legislation in the light of the pronouncements of the Privy Council, but we are also 
aware  that  whatever  we  do  in  this  country,  we  have  to  remember  that  we  are  being 

 

49 

scrutinised, we are being observed not only by our people here, but by the whole world. In 
this digital age, whatever we do is known all over the world. And, as a Government which 
wants to attract investment, that wants to be a model of democracy, we are not going to do 
something which is going to damage our image and our reputation. I think this is something 
that we must always bear in mind that we need to give to our democracy the content that it 
deserves and that it has. 

In fact, if I refer again to that judgment of The State v. Khoyratty, Madam Speaker, 

and I quote from paragraph 29 –  

“Giving content to the term “democratic state” in section 1 is part of the task of judges 
who are called upon to interpret the Constitution.  Garrioch SPJ, giving the judgment 
of the Supreme Court recognised this, for instance, in Vallet v Ramgoolam [1973] MR 
29, 40.  Having regard, in particular, to the specially entrenched status of section 1, in 
my view it would be wrong to say that the concept of the democratic state to be found 
there  means  nothing  more  than  the  sum  of  the  provisions  in  the  rest  of  the 
Constitution, whatever they may be at any given moment.  Rather, section 1 contains 
a separate, substantial, guarantee.  On the other hand, what matters is the content of 
the  concept  of  a  democratic  state  as  that  term  as  used  in  section  1  and  not  just 
generally.  That said, the Constitution is not to be interpreted in a vacuum, without 
any regard to thinking in other countries sharing similar values.  Equally, experience 
in Mauritius is likely to prove of value to courts elsewhere.  Therefore, the decisions 
cited by Lord Steyn do indeed “help to give important colour” to the guarantee that 
Mauritius is to be a democratic state.  In particular, it is a hallmark of the modern idea 
of  a  democratic  state  that  there  should  be  a  separation  of  powers  between  the 
legislature and the executive, on the one hand, and the judiciary, on the other.” 
 
Now, interpreting Constitutions is something which is known to Judges. They do it 
every day and I myself, I think, in this House, I must be the one barrister who has taken more 
constitutional challenges to the Supreme Court than anyone else. And, in fact, I was the one 
who took the National Residential Property Tax (NRPT) while some people stated it is the 
Navin Ramgoolam Property Tax. 

(Interruptions) 

 

50 

We challenged it in the Supreme Court. We lost in the Supreme Court.  We went to the Privy 
Council and then, fortunately, we got what we were looking for at the Privy Council. 

So,  we  have  a  system  of  law.  When  we  say  a  system  of  law,  Madam  Speaker, 
anybody who considers that a constitutional wrong is being done to that person, that person 
has a constitutional right to seek the help and to seek a remedy from the Supreme Court. Let 
me refer, Madam Speaker, to section 17 of the Constitution. Section 17 is the enforcement of 
protective provisions. I am referring to this because the amendment that we are making is to 
section 8 which is under chapter 2 and which deals with fundamental rights and freedoms. If 
somebody who is taken to task or who is called upon to explain unexplained wealth under the 
Good Governance and  Integrity Reporting Bill, that person has a right under section 17 to 
claim enforcement of the rights. Let me quote from section 17 (1) –  

 “Where any person alleges that any of the sections 3 to 16 has been, is being likely to 
be  contravened  in  relation  to  him,  then,  without  prejudice  to  any  other  action  with 
respect  to  the  same  matter  that  is  lawfully  available,  that  person  may  apply  to  the 
Supreme Court for redress.” 

Then we have section 17 (2) –  

“The  Supreme  Court  shall  have  original  jurisdiction  to  hear  and  determine  any 
application  made  by  any  person  in  pursuance  of  subsection  1,  and  may  make  such 
orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the 
purpose of enforcing, or securing the enforcement of, any of the sections 3 to 16 to the 
protection of which the person concerned is entitled:” 

But, of course, there is a proviso under section 17 (3) that if he has other means of redress, 
that is, something else - 

“The  Supreme  Court  shall  have  such  powers  in  addition  to  those  conferred  by  this 
section  as  may  be  prescribed  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  that  court  to  exercise  the 
jurisdiction conferred upon it by this section more effectively”. 

This provision in the Constitution, which guarantees to any person the right to seek a 
remedy in the Supreme Court is not being removed and is not being amended at all. So, any 
person  who  has  unexplained  wealth  and  who  has  a  sense  of  grievance,  he  can  always  go 
under section 17. He will have to show how the Act that is being done or the thing that is 

 

51 

being done has been, is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him. So, he has the 
burden  of  establishing  that  whatever  is  being  done  is  something  in  contravention  of  the 
Constitution.  This  is  something  that  the  Judges  have  been  doing  all  the  time.  They  are 
interpreting Constitutions. We have a lot of cases where the Judges have been interpreting 
Constitutions. The challenge will be under section 1 even if other avenues are closed. 

This is not something new, but what we need to bear in mind, Madam Speaker, is that 
when we speak about the separation of powers, we must always bear in mind that the Judges 
are independent. They have security of tenure. No one can give them orders or no one can 
direct them to decide one way or the other. I think the concept of the independence of the 
Judiciary is a concept that transcends the edifice of the Constitution. It is the very foundation 
of democracy because ultimately any person who has a grievance must go to the Courts that 
are  the  guardians  of  the  Constitution.  They  are  the  guardians  of  the  freedom  of  the 
individuals. They are the ones that spell out whether the Executive or the Government has 
acted in conformity with the Constitution or outside the Constitution. 

The rule of law is central to this constitutional protection. It is the Judiciary that is 
entrusted with the task of keeping every organ of the State within the law and they are the 
ones that give meaningful content to the rule of law. The Judiciary stands between the citizen 
and the State and should there be any excess use of power or abuse of power, the Judiciary 
will always be there to set it right. In fact, we have seen recently in Mauritius, people have 
been  arrested  or  detained  then  the  Courts  come  in  and  say:  “No,  please  release  under 
conditions”. This is what the Judiciary is all about. Whatever Judiciary we have, must always 
be jealous of the powers that it has under the Constitution. This is necessary for everybody, 
for you, Madam Speaker, for us in Government today and maybe in some other capacity, but 
this  is  something  that  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  there  should  be  no  pressure,  no 
influence of any kind brought upon the Judiciary, they should be free to decide without fear 
or  favour.  Of  course,  when  we  take  a  decision  in  Government,  the  right  to  challenge  will 
always be there. When you go to Court, you always say that we run the risk of losing 50% 
because somebody has to win and somebody has to lose. Most of the constitutional cases are 
cases  which  address  the  fundamentals  of  rights  and  freedoms.  This  is  why  I  say  that  we 
should never do anything or say anything regarding the institutions in this country because 
then we are destroying the architecture of democratic scheme and system. 

52 

 
Let  me  say,  Madam  Speaker,  and  I  will  quote  from  Lord  Wilberforce  who  was  a 
famous  Judge  in  the  UK.  I  am  saying  this  regarding  the  interpretation  of  the  Constitution 
because whatever we write today in the law, whatever we vote today will be interpreted by 
the Judges. This is what he said – 

“A Constitution is a legal instrument; its language must be respected.  If the 
language used by the Constitution is ignored in favour of a general resort to 
values, the result is not interpretation, but divination.” 

So, when we say that the Supreme Court or the Privy Council or whatever judicial body will 
be called upon to look at these things, we have to remember that there are safeguards being 
provided in the Bill that is in front of us. 

Apart from the safeguards in the Constitution, in sections 1, 17 and 8 itself in this Bill, 
Madam Speaker, we have provided for the disproportionate nature of the wealth with regard 
to emoluments.  And who is in a better position to decide whether the explanation is right or 
not or who can give the explanation?  It is the person in possession of the unexplained wealth. 
But then it goes on, apart from the safeguards I mentioned, even this section – and this has 
been  taken  on  board  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  –  said  that  after  the  word 
‘confiscation’ we should add ‘except so far as that provision or as the case may be the thing 
done under its authority is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.’ I 
think  this  is  an  additional  safeguard.  With  this  safeguard,  any  person  who  has  a  sense  of 
grievance can go to Court and ask them to decide whether what is being done, whether the 
provision itself or the law itself or the thing done under the authority of that law is reasonably 
justifiable in a democratic society. So, the first test for the Court will be the reasonableness. 
So, the test of reasonableness will be there. 

Then, there is the test of justification and then there is a third test of democracy. So, 
before  anything  is  done  against  anybody,  these  are  the  safeguards  already  provided  in  the 
law, already existing in the Constitution, but additional safeguards are being brought to give 
more  protection  to  anybody  who  claims  its  protection  because  the  Constitution  is  the 
fundamental foundation for the rule of law and for the protection of anybody. So, when I hear 
hon. Mohamed speaking about his qualms and all these, I am really at a loss to understand 
what is the problem. 

53 

 
Madam Speaker, there is a book in Sanskrit which speaks about fish justice. What fish 
justice means is that the big fish will eat the small fish. That is what happens in the ocean. 
We are not in that situation. We are in a system of laws, system of procedures and system of 
guarantees. We are speaking about the rights of individuals. We are talking of an amendment 
which  is  going  to  attack  not  the  individuals,  but  the  property,  the  assets,  the  unexplained 
wealth and then we hear that this is punishment. This is punishment. This is criminal. But, 
Madam Speaker, my understanding of criminal is that you are accused; you are arrested; you 
are taken to Court. A charge is being brought against you. Then, a case has to be established 
against you. This is not what is happening. This is a case of civil proceeding and this is why it 
goes before the Judge in Chambers. 

So, I would like to say that we have seen, Madam Speaker, the excessive wealth of 
some people. In fact, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister quoted from Sir Victor Glover who said that 
sometimes looking at neighbours or looking at anybody, questions can be asked about how 
come this person has so much of assets and legitimate questions must be asked.   

According to a study  carried out by  the  United  Nations, the  amount of  money that 
goes into corruption represents about 20% or 30% of any project. That is a huge amount of 
money.    But  hon.  Mohamed  asked  whether  the  money  that  you  are  going  to  confiscate  is 
going  to  be  returned  to  the  rightful  owners.  Of  course,  it  will  be  returned  to  the  rightful 
owner.  The  rightful  owner  will  be  the  State  because  we  are  talking  of  corruption.  We  are 
talking about unexplained wealth.   

If you can explain your wealth, then there is nothing to worry about, but if you cannot 
explain  it,  then  you  must  have  got  it  somewhere,  unless  somebody  were  to  get  the  lottery 
every month or every week.  But that is also an explanation! As long as somebody has an 
explanation, nothing will happen to that wealth. It is only with regard to unexplained wealth 
that  the  confiscation  procedure  will  step  in.    So,  I  fail  to  understand  why  anybody  in  this 
House could be against  a piece of legislation, a constitutional amendment which goes in the 
direction of cleaning up the country, ensuring that all Mauritians will live according to norms 
of probity and integrity. I fail to understand why anybody would not vote for this law. 

This  is  why,  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  want  to  travel  outside  the  Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill.  I am sure my colleague, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good 
Governance and Institutional Reforms, will be addressing some of the issues, but as far as I 

 

54 

am concerned, this is something which is very important and it is timely that this Bill has 
come to this House. 

Thank you. 

 (3.15 p.m.) 

Mr A. Duval (First Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Madam Speaker, first of 
all, let me say I am deeply honoured as the youngest Member of Parliament of this august 
Assembly  to  contribute  myself  to  the  debate  today,  which  touches  at  the  backbone  of  the 
country, that is, our Constitution. I will mainly focuss on the Constitution for now and then, 
later on, debate on the Bill itself, which the hon. Minister is bringing. 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill will enable for a stronger legislation to combat 
possession and custody of property derived from unlawful means. Madam Speaker, we are 
putting the country first, indeed, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said earlier, and we support 
this Bill. We support it because, firstly, there is a real fléau in our society today, there is an 
upsurge of white collar crimes, which is difficult to investigate, to prosecute under the present 
state of law and let alone to confiscate when these are derived from unlawful activities.  And 
Parliament is, today, coming to the nitty-gritty of this issue, to put a stop to illicit enrichment 
qui gangrène notre société. 

I  will  refer  to  the  mischief  rule,  that  is,  that  the  legislator  may  legislate  where  a 
mischief has not been dealt with so far and which allows us to make exceptional legislation to 
address this particular mischief, in that case wealth which has been obtained and kept secret 
and which cannot be explained satisfactorily. In French, we say ‘ce qui est inavoué et qui est 
inavouable sera passible d’être attaqué sous cette loi’.  It is, therefore, Madam Speaker, a 
major step forward for our country in addressing the issue of unexplained enrichment in a 
manner that has never been done before in Mauritius.  

Secondly,  we  also  see  -  as  my  friend,  hon.  Minister  Gayan,  has  said  -  the  last 
paragraph in the Bill, the reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.  I  have a Supreme 
Court  judgement  actually  which  defines  this.    It  is  the  judgement  of  Madhewoo  M. v  The 
State of Mauritius and Anor of 2015. It is a very recent judgement and it defines reasonably 
justifiable in a democratic society as follows – 

55 

 
“An interference will be considered necessary in a democratic society for a legitimate 
aim if it answers a pressing social need and in particular if it is proportionate to the 
legitimate aim pursued and if the reason adduced by the national authorities to justify 
it are relevant and sufficient”. 

Therefore, the greater good of society shall always prevail over the interest of one person and 
it is, in our view, reasonably justifiable and necessary in helping the fight against unlawful 
enrichment. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  say  that  my  party,  the  PMSD,  has  always  been  at  the 
forefront whenever there has been a necessary amendment to be brought to the Constitution 
for the good of the people. Comme Jules Koenig, comme Sir Gaëtan Duval à l’époque, nous 
apportons aujourd’hui, nous aussi, notre pierre à l’édifice qui est notre Constitution”. 

The Bill, Madam Speaker, to conclude on this, is necessary and unobjectionable. We 
have a crime to fight.  It is, however, our only issue and will always be the civil liberties. We 
should never forget that one of the greatest assets that this country has is freedom and the 
right to property. How we pursue this valid good of combating unlawfully acquired wealth 
should  be  in  line  with  the  protection  of  our  civil  liberties.  The  law  that  will  put  this 
constitutional  amendment,  that  is,  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill,  in 
practice must contain sufficient safeguards, and I have to say that we are happy that a number 
of our suggestions have now been taken on board. I will elaborate on this later on, Madam 
Speaker. 

Thank you. 

(3.22 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Madam  Speaker,  I 
thank you for being able to intervene on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill which is before 
the House today. 

Madam Speaker, I will try to refrain from repeating what has already been said in the 
course of the debates. This Bill proposes to amend the fundamental right enshrined in our 
Constitution. So fundamental is it that all States with written Constitutions invariably protect 
property rights and prohibit the State from interfering with those rights, and so do the various 

 

56 

international  instruments  such  as  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  and  other 
international instruments. 

In  fact,  there  is  no  democracy  anywhere  in  the  world  where,  as  a  matter  of 
constitutional law or practice, the right to property is not recognised and respected. Article 1 
of Protocol No. 1 of the European Convention provides for a general protection, prohibiting 
the  State  from  interfering  with  all  rights.    I  think  someone  before  me  had  reminded  us, 
Madam Speaker, that even though the right of property is enshrined in all our Constitutions - 
Article  8  talks  about  protection  from  deprivation  of  property  -  we  all  know  that  these 
protections are not absolute. Written Constitutions, international instruments, all qualify that 
right, so that these protections afforded in our Constitutions are not absolute. The Article to 
which I have just referred reads as follows – 

“Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possession. 
No one shall be deprived of his possession except in the public interest and subject to 
conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law”. 

This right to property, Madam Speaker, is essentially the right in a democracy which 
allows us to march forward. Property is necessary for the subsistance and well-being of man 
and no one would become a member of a community in which he would not enjoy the fruits 
of his honest labour and industry. This is why the preservation and security of property is one 
of the primary objects of the social compact that induce man to unite in different societies. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  right  to  property  has  existed  since  the  Magna  Carta  in  1215, 
since the French Declaration of the Rights of Man in 1789, since the U.S. Bill of Rights in 
1791 and, as we all know, the more recent conventions, the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, have inspired the drafting of the fundamental rights in our Constitution, 
hence  Article  8,  which  we  are  amending  today  and  which  provides  this  protection  from 
deprivation  of  property.    But,  as  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  when  a  general  protection  to 
property rights is guaranteed, it is subject to certain conditions which we are all familiar with 
when we read section 8 of our Constitution, when we go through the certain derogations, the 
compulsory acquisition possibilities, for example, the payment of taxes, penalties for breach 
of the law, etc.  

This particular section in our Constitution, section 8, Madam Speaker, was amended 
on two occasions since independence in 1983 and in 1986 when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

 

57 

was  himself  occupying  the  seat  of  Prime  Minister.    And,  in  1986,  we  will  remember  that 
when the Dangerous Drugs Act was introduced in this House and for the first time provided 
for the forfeiture of ill-gotten gains of the drug traffickers and those indulging in fraud and 
corruption,  Section  8  of  our  Constitution  was  also  amended  by  Act  No.  33  to  ensure  the 
compliance of the 1986 Dangerous Drugs Act with Section 8 of our Constitution. This is why 
in 1986, section 8 of the Constitution was amended and this was just referred to and I will 
come to that particular provision in a few minutes.  

So, we are today, in fact, following the same pattern and we are being guided by the 
same reasoning in further amending today section 8(4) of our Constitution to ensure that the 
Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, which will be debated later in this House, is 
compliant with the constitutional provisions with regard to property rights. Therefore, as the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister explained, Madam Speaker, the exercise that we are doing today falls 
on all fours with what happened in 1986. I repeat, the Dangerous Drugs Act was introduced 
in the House; this Act provided for the forfeiture of ill-gotten gains of the drug traffickers 
and, therefore, in order that this law should pass the test of constitutionality in those days, in 
1986, section 8 of the Constitution was therefore amended and this is what was introduced in 
the Constitution at that time, that is, nothing contained in or done under the authority of any 
law shall be held to be inconsistent with section 8(1), to the extent that the law in question 
makes provision for the taking or possession or acquisition of property by way of penalty for 
breach of the law, etc., or in consequence of the inability of a drug trafficker or a person who 
has  enriched  himself  by  fraudulent  and/or  corrupt  means  to  show  that  he  has  acquired  the 
property by lawful means.  

So, therefore, there are derogations to the right to property, Madam Speaker, and one 
of  these  was  introduced  in  1986,  which  I  have  just  mentioned.  Today,  therefore,  the 
amendment before us is proposing the confiscation of property in the possession or under the 
ownership or in the custody or control of somebody who cannot satisfactorily account for that 
property in view of his disproportionate emoluments and income. The issue, therefore, before 
us which we are all debating around is whether this Bill, which is plainly a civil forfeiture law 
and which allows forfeiture of suspected proceeds, would be inconsistent with section 8 of 
our Constitution had we not brought this very amendment before the House today, Madam 
Speaker. 

 

58 

I  would,  therefore,  answer  this  question  by  reminding  the  House,  Madam  Speaker, 
that the European Court of Human Rights has a rich jurisprudence with regard to forfeiture 
laws created by Statutes in the different European countries. The approach of this Court in 
determining the constitutional compliance of these forfeiture laws has been to apply the test 
of  the  lawfulness  of  the  measure,  the  legitimacy  of  the  aim  of  the  Statute  and  the 
proportionality of the measure and the jurisprudence has been that forfeiture of proceeds or 
instrumentalities is legitimately directed towards the legitimate aim of crime prevention. The 
Court,  ECHR  has  applied  this  test  and  held  that  assets,  forfeiture  laws  are  in  general 
compliant with Article 1 which deals with property rights.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when we analyse the proposal before this House today, 
the  proposed  amendment,  especially  the  new  provision  which  has  been  added,  the  new 
amendment  which  will  be  moved  at  Committee  Stage  which  provides  that  the  law  to  be 
reasonably  justifiable  in  a  democratic  society,  to  my  mind,  this  is  another  very  pertinent 
safeguard.  True  it  is,  Madam  Speaker,  the  question  has  been  raised  outside  this  House 
recently,  whether  there  was  need,  in  fact,  for  this  present  amendment.  I  have  read  a  few 
articles, a few commentators who have some lawyers who had even gone as far as saying that 
there  was  no  need  for  the  Government  to  even  come  before  this  House  and  bring  this 
amendment  in  view  of  the  already  existing  provisions  in  our  Constitution.  Firstly,  the  one 
which I have just read to the House, which was introduced in 1986, and which I repeat - 

“(…)  in  consequence  of  the  inability  of  a  person  who  has  enriched  himself  by 
fraudulent and/or corrupt means to show that he has acquired the property by lawful 
means.”  

This is already in our Constitution, but there is more than this one, Madam Speaker. In our 
Constitution, section 8 (4) (iv) also talks about, I read - 

“Nothing  contained  in  or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of Section 8 (1) (a) to the extent that the law in 
question makes provision for the taking of possession or acquisition of property - (iv) 
in the execution of judgements or orders of courts;”  

So, if it is in the case of executing a judgement or guided by an order of the court, the 
law cannot be held to be inconsistent with the provisions of section 8 of the Constitution if 

 

59 

the law in question has made provision for the taking of possession of the property by virtue 
of an order of the court.  

Now, what is the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill proposing, Madam 
Speaker? What is the essence of this Bill? I am sure on this we are all agreed, there is no 
difference  of  opinion  although  we  might  have  different  views  on  the  Bill  which  will  be 
debated in a few hours, but what does the law essentially say? Clause 16 of the Bill reads as 
follows - 

“Where the Agency makes an application for an Unexplained Wealth Order and the 
Judge in Chambers is satisfied that the respondent has unexplained wealth, the judge 
shall make an Unexplained Wealth Order.”  

This is an order of the court.  

So, this is the first scenario, the first option when the agency has applied for a UWO, it 
goes before the Judge in Chambers, the Judge is satisfied that the respondent has unexplained 
wealth,  the  Judge  makes  an  order  and  this  is  what  precisely  the  Constitution  talks  in  the 
execution of judgments or orders of court.  

Now, suppose the Bill provides also where the Judge in Chambers considers that the 
application for the UWO cannot be granted on the basis of the affidavit evidence which is 
before him, the Judge then refers the matter to the Supreme Court. Then, it will be up to the 
Supreme Court to decide whether to issue the UWO or not. This is my understanding of the 
Bill as it is. So, suppose it is not the Judge in Chambers who issues the UWO and the Judge 
considers the application cannot be granted and refers the matter to the Supreme Court, it will 
be up to the Supreme Court to decide whether to grant or not. So, when the Supreme Court 
grants  the  order,  it  is  a  court  order.    It  is  a  UWO  which  fits  in  precisely  with  what  this 
provision in our Constitution is providing for, that anything done under the law shall be held 
to  be  consistent  with  section  8  of  our  Constitution  provided  this  has  been  done  in  the 
execution of a judgement or an order of the court.  

So, probably those who have been canvassing the fact that we should not have amended 
our Constitution today are right in their proposals. But, of course, Madam Speaker, it would 
be up one day for the competent court or the Supreme Court to decide whether, in fact, this 
amendment was necessary or whether it is a mere surplusage.   

 

60 

Madam Speaker, in spite of what I have said, in spite of what I have reiterated, I have 
repeated, in spite of the fact that I have reproduced the arguments of certain commentators, 
we must admit also that the objective of the present constitutional amendment is to introduce 
in our Constitution the new concept of property confiscation of unexplained wealth which I 
think  is  different  from  what  already  exists  in  our  Constitution.  So,  in  proposing  this 
constitutional amendment, in fact, the Government is playing safe, is ensuring that this law 
will pass the test of constitutionality because when the debate will take place in a few hours 
regarding the other Bill, we will then go through the debates in more details about this new 
concept of civil forfeiture, illicit enrichment and whether, in fact, what the Bill is proposing, 
the process is by way of civil proceedings or not.  

 I do not intend to go in this debate at this stage, Madam Speaker, but what is true is 
that  the  concept  that  we  are  introducing  in  the  Constitution  by  way  of  this  constitutional 
amendment  is  a  novelty.  It  is  a  different  matter  altogether  to  what  is  to  be  found  in  our 
Constitution  when  the  Constitution  was  amended  in  1986  to  cater  for  drug  traffickers,  ill-
gotten  gains  or  corrupt  means  to  show  that  somebody  has  acquired  property  by  unlawful 
means. So, this is why I say in spite of some people arguing that there was no need to come 
with this present constitutional amendment, I think Government has rightly taken the decision 
to  present  this  constitutional  amendment,  since  the  objective  of  this  Bill  is,  as  I  said, 
introducing  in  our  Constitution  a  novel,  a  new  concept,  that  of  property  confiscation  of 
unexplained wealth by way of civil proceedings. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  section  8  has  been  properly  amended, 
Government has played safe; in spite of what already existed in our Constitution that by an 
order of the court, property could be taken possession of; in spite of the fact that in 1986 the 
then Government introduced an amendment with regard to taking possession of the property 
of drug traffickers or a person who had enriched himself by corruption; in spite of the fact 
that  Government  has  taken  up  on  board  the  proposal  made  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition about this question of reasonable, justifiable in a democratic society; we all know 
that this Bill, when it will be adopted by the House - can be and will be probably, I don’t 
know  -  could  be  challenged  before  the  Supreme  Court  because  we  are  a  democratic  State 
where the rule of law prevails.  

The  Government  cannot  prevent  anybody  from  going  to  the  Supreme  Court  and 
challenge  this  Bill  and  if  this  will  be  done,  it  will  certainly  be  done  on  this  question  of 

 

61 

whether  this  Bill  is,  in  fact,  compliant  with  section  1  of  the  Constitution.  Mauritius  is  a 
democratic sovereign State and many hon. friends have referred to the famous judgement of 
Khoyratty v The State where excerpts of the speeches made by the hon. Prime Minister and 
of my speech, when we amended the Constitution in 1991, that was Act 48 of 1991 to make 
of Mauritius a Republic and we amended certain important clauses of our Constitution, for 
example, section 1 and section 47 which have just been referred to by hon. Gayan and other 
friends.   

So,  la  question  reste  posée,  Madam  Speaker,  whether  this  Bill  is  challengeable  by 
virtue of the contents of section 1 of the Constitution. The question that the Supreme Court 
will have to answer is that: ‘Are we - by way of this constitutional amendment that we are 
proposing  to  the  House  today  or  even  by  way  of  the  new  Bill,  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity Reporting Bill - undermining the democratic nature of our State which Mauritius is 
a  sovereign  and  democratic  State  according  to  Article  1  of  the  Constitution?    Are  we 
undermining, transforming essentially the democratic nature of our State? Is this amendment 
that we  are proposing violating in  any  way the  principles of separation  of powers, thus in 
opposition  to  section  1  of  the  Constitution?’  These  are  the  questions  that  one  day  the 
Supreme Court will have to answer, will have to rule upon, Madam Speaker.  

Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  benefits  of  the  law  against  illicit  enrichment  for  curbing 
corruption,  for  thwarting  corruption  have  been  criticised,  Madam  Speaker,  in  other 
jurisdictions  although  laws  against  illicit  enrichment  have  yielded  many  benefits  for  the 
different authorities in the different countries in terms of curbing corruption. These laws have 
also  been  criticised  for  violating  fundamental  rights,  for  infringing  human  rights  and  the 
debates, the case laws, the authorities, the jurisprudence exist in all these countries, Madam 
Speaker.  

In fact, what we are doing today and what we’ll be doing in a few hours, we will be 
examining  the  dynamics  between  corruption  and  human  rights  with  this  new  mechanism, 
Civil  Forfeiture,  Non-Conviction  Based  Forfeiture,  Madam  Speaker,  in  other  countries.    I 
have  addressed  the  question,  the  obstacle  of  the  different  agencies  and  authorities  in 
combatting corruption.  In fact, somebody has talked of corruption in terms of the paradox of 
corruption,  Madam  Speaker.  Corruption  is  universally  disapproved,  but  it  is  universally 
prevalent  because  it  is  an  issue  of  complex  crime  which  is  difficult  to  uncover,  as  we  all 

 

62 

know.  This is why this new mechanism of Civil Forfeiture to combat illicit enrichment is 
now being proposed in this Bill which we are going to debate in a few hours. 

I will end by saying, Madam Speaker, that, to me, in my humble opinion, I will repeat 
what  I  have  said,  I  think  that  the  Government  has  done  the  right  thing  by  proposing  this 
amendment  today,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  there  is  an  argument  to  the  effect  that  the 
Constitution already catered for the situation we are talking about today - illicit enrichment, 
but  the  stronger  argument,  according  to  me,  is  that  this  is  a  new  concept,  the  concept  of 
unexplained wealth, the concept of illicit enrichment which is, in fact, a new concept. Madam 
Speaker, when we will debate the other Bill in a few hours, I am sure, we will discuss how 
new, relatively new, is this concept which has been adopted by a few countries and which has 
worked  well  in  some  countries,  less  well  in  other  countries;  which  has  known  a  relative 
success in some of the other countries, but which has been an effective instrument in other 
countries. To me, Madam Speaker, I think the right thing has been done, the right safeguard 
has been introduced in our Constitution by this proposed amendment today and this is why 
we are going to vote for this constitutional amendment.  

Thank you.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

 (3.49 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance,  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam 
Speaker, let me first start by showing my appreciation to the views of hon. Ganoo. I believe 
he has rightly understood, not only the spirit behind the Bill, but everything that we are doing 
in  terms  of  the  amendment  to  the  Constitution  which  relates  to  that  Bill  as  well.  He  has 
clearly  explained that what this constitutional amendment is doing, Madam Speaker, is, in 
fact, empowering the Judiciary. That’s all. 

If we look at the Explanatory Memorandum – 

“The object of this Bill is to amend the Constitution to provide for the taking 
of possession of property (…) by way of confiscation.” 

By whom? By a Judge of the Supreme Court! Therefore, what this constitutional amendment 
is doing is it is giving further judicial powers to a Judge in Chambers and if he so chooses to 
refer the matter to the competent Court, to the Supreme Court. This is why I strongly disagree 

 

63 

with my friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, because everything he has said is in relation to what 
he believes would be powers in the hands of the Executive. 

This  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  is  not  giving  any  power  whatsoever  to  the 
Executive. He mentioned the inscription. The only thing that the Agency can do under the 
Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill which can, let’s say, affect the life of a citizen 
of  this  country,  is  to  write  a  letter  and  to  ask  for  explanations  on  suspected  unexplained 
wealth within 21 days or such number of days as may be determined and that person may 
reply by way of an affidavit or he may choose not to reply by way of an affidavit also, in 
which  case,  the  Agency  will  then  apply  for  a  Disclosure  Order,  again,  from  the Judiciary, 
from the Judge in Chambers. The Judge in Chambers, in his wisdom, will decide whether to 
grant that Disclosure Order or not. 

The second thing that the Agency can do is to put an inscription on that property and 
the amendments which are being brought to the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Bill specifically states that within six weeks from the date that the Agency has reported the 
matter to the Board, that inscription will automatically lapse. When we will come to that Bill, 
I will also explain that the Agency, having inscribed a property, shall without delay report the 
matter  to  the  Board  so  that  within  six  weeks  that  inscription  lapses.  That’s  all,  Madam 
Speaker, in terms of the Executive’s powers. 

Now,  when  we  come  to  the  Board,  what  can  the  Board  do,  chaired  by  this 
Commonwealth Judge or ex-retired Judge with the Assessors? The Board can only ask for 
exchange of information from other organisations, institutions and also ask for production of 
documents. No coercive powers whatsoever! Then, the Board decides whether an application 
should  be  made  to  the  Judge  in  Chambers  for  an  Unexplained  Wealth  Order.  This  is  the 
process.  There  are  no  coercive  powers  whatsoever  in  the  hands  of  the  Executive,  either 
through  this  Constitutional  (Amendment)  Bill  which  is  proposed  or  the  next  Bill  which  is 
going  to  come  -  the  subordinate  legislation  which  is  going  to  give  effect  to  this  supreme 
legislation - the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. It is high time that we set the 
parameters so that the debates can be confined to what these two amendments are in truth. 
Everything else est de la pure démagogie, Madame la présidente! 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I now go back to the speech that I had prepared.  

64 

 
Madam Speaker, the Constitution of Mauritius was originally published as a Schedule 
to an Order in Council of Her Majesty the Queen in the Mauritius Independence Order GN 54 
of 1968. It is stated, Madam Speaker, I quote – 

THE MAURITIUS INDEPENDENCE ORDER 1968 

AT THE COURT AT BUCKINGHAM PALACE 

The 4th day of March 1968 

Present, 

THE QUEEN'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY IN COUNCIL 

Her Majesty, by virtue and in exercise of the powers enabling Her in that behalf, is pleased, 
by and with the advice of Her Privy Council, to order, and it is hereby ordered, as follows – 

(1)  This Order may be cited as the Mauritius Independence Order 1968. 

(2)  This Order shall be published in the Gazette and shall come into force on the day on 

which it is so published: 

Section 2 subsection (1) then states, Madam Speaker – 

In this Order – 

“  the Constitution" means the Constitution of Mauritius set out in the 

schedule to this Order; 

"  the appointed day" means 12th March 1968;” 

Madam  Speaker,  it  appears  that  our  then  rulers  had  little  choice  in  accepting  this 
Schedule  which  was  attached  to  an  Order  in  Council  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  as  our 
supreme  law.  Nevertheless,  this  Constitution  has  been  a  document  of  admiration  and 
reverence over the last five decades. Both its letter and spirit have stood the test of time. 

Madam Speaker, the great Greek Philosopher, Aristotle, stated 350 years BC, and I 

quote – 

“Constitutions  which  aim  at  the  common  advantage  are  correct  and  just 
without qualification, whereas those which aim only at the advantage of the 
rulers  are  deviant  and  unjust,  because  they  involve  despotic  rule  which  is 
inappropriate for a community of free persons.” 

65 

 
Madam  Speaker,  on  each  occasion  that  our  Constitution  has  been  amended,  it  has 
been for the greater good of our society. Chapter 2 which deals with our fundamental rights 
has  been  amended  on  not  less  than  7  occasions  in  order  to,  inter  alia, restrict  the  right  of 
liberty  of  drug  traffickers  and  terrorists,  forfeit  property  of  drug  traffickers  and  other 
criminals, allow for the compulsory acquisition of property for the social as well as the public 
benefit and to enhance gender equality in our society. 

It is commonly believed, Madam Speaker, that the spirit of our Constitution prevents 

its letter to be altered when the interests of the people are not best served. 

Indeed, when the previous Prime Minister tempted fate by attempting to become an 
all-powerful  President  with  executive  powers,  immune  from  investigation,  prosecution, 
public scrutiny and accountability even from this Parliament, his proposal was rejected - Vox 
populi, vox Dei.  

The sacrosanct principles of our Constitution, which are closely connected with the 
deeply  entrenched  values  of  our  society,  can  only  be  altered  with  the  support  at  the  final 
voting of this august Assembly by not less than three quarters, by all the Members, in other 
words, Madam Speaker, only when the wish of the people is fulfilled. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  Age  of  Reason,  Thomas  Paine  refers  to  the  Athenian 
statesman  and  lawmaker,  Solon,  who  is  remembered  for  his  efforts  to  legislate  against 
political, economic and moral decline in Athens.  He was asked the question, and I quote –  

“Which is the most perfect popular government?” 

To which he replied, and I quote –  

“Where the least injury done to the meanest individual is considered as an insult on 
the whole Constitution.” 

This answer, Madam Speaker, regarded as a maxim of political morality is as relevant 
today  as  it  was  500  years  BC.  However,  shameless  display  of  unexplained  wealth  and 
baffling opulence by a few at the expense of the many who are striving hard to make both 
ends meet can never be reasonably justifiable in any democratic society, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker, this august Assembly is being called upon to entrench a new norm, a 
new principle, a new value in our Constitution to reflect the needs of the Mauritian society 
today.  Zero  tolerance  for  unexplained  wealth  and  unjust  enrichment!  This  Government, 

 

66 

elected by the people, for the people, is fulfilling its promise to clean up a system which has 
decayed over the last decade of Labour maja caro governance. 

Madam Speaker, the fight against unexplained wealth proposed by this Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill will set the stage to define a clean, transparent and ethical platform for the 
next generation of young Mauritians to thrive and to prosper by restoring faith in a culture of 
hard work, discipline and integrity, in short, Madam Speaker, a new culture of righteousness 
and good governance. 

Madam Speaker, the objective of this Constitution (Amendment) Bill is to introduce a 
new section 8 (4) (aa) in our Constitution to provide for the taking of possession of property 
in cases of unexplained wealth which will now read as follows –  

“section 8 (4) –  

Nothing  contained  in  or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1)” 

Which creates the general provision that no person shall be deprived of his property or any 
other provision of Chapter II of the Constitution – 

“to the extent that the law in question makes provision for the taking of possession of 

property –  

(i)  under the ownership of a person to an extent which is disproportionate to his 

emoluments and other income; 

(ii) the ownership, possession, custody or control of which cannot be satisfactorily 
accounted for by the person who owns, possesses, has custody or control of 
the property; or 

(iii)held by a person for another person to an extent which is  

disproportionate to the emoluments or other income of that other person, 

by way of confiscation, 

except  so  far  as  that  provision  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  thing  done  under  its 
authority is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or”.  

67 

 
Madam Speaker, hon. Ganoo asked the question and I am asking the question again: 
why is there a need for our Constitution to be amended today? He referred to the Government 
playing safe. I don’t think it is as simple as that. We are not playing safe! We are doing it 
because we have to make sure that the constitutional amendment reflects the whole concept 
of unexplained wealth. 

Madam Speaker, the right to protection from deprivation of property is provided for 
under  Part  II  of  the  Constitution, more  particularly,  under  sections  3  (c)  and  8  (1).  I  shall 
firstly deal with section 3 (c). Section 3 (c) provides for - 

 “the  right  of  the  individual  to  protection  for  (…)  deprivation  of  property  without 
compensation, subject to limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of those 
rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of 
others or the public interest.”  

The words ‘without compensation’ are very important, Madam Speaker, and I will come to 
that in a minute. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  manner  in  which  section  8,  on  the  other  hand,  is  drafted  is 
inspired from the drafting of several articles of the European Convention on Human Rights of 
1950. The right of a citizen is first defined and then a derogation to that right follows. So, 
when  we  look  at  section  8  (1),  it  provides  that  no  property  of  any  description  shall  be 
compulsorily taken possession of, except where three conditions are satisfied. And what are 
these three conditions? 

“(a) the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary or expedient in the interests of 
the  defence,  public  safety,  public  order,  public  morality,  public  health,  town  and 
country planning (…)” 

And it goes on.   

So, you can take property when it is on grounds of public safety, public order, public 

morality and so on. However, you must satisfy section (b) as well. And section (b) says –  

“there is reasonable justification for the causing of any hardship that may result to any 
person having an interest in or right over the property”. 

And then you have to satisfy section 8 (1) (c) –  

 
“provision is made by a law (…)” 

68 

Like we have the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill coming today –  

“(…) to that taking of possession or acquisition” 

And then it goes on to say –  

“(i) for the payment of adequate compensation”. 

So, if we were to go down that route, if we were to say okay, fair enough, there is a 
general  principle  that  no  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  property  but  then,  there  are 
derogations under section 8 (1) (a), (b) and (c) which say that on ground of public morality, 
public  order,  public  safety,  you  can  actually  do  that,  you  would  have  to  pay  adequate 
compensation. And that would have resulted in an absurdity, Madam Speaker, because when 
somebody  has  got  unexplained  wealth  which  is  defined  as  being  disproportionate  with  his 
emoluments and other income, you can’t go and pay adequate compensation when you are 
taking that property! So, that section 8 (1) (a) which would not apply in this case, which then 
takes us, Madam Speaker, to section 8 (4) (a) where there are other derogations. 

In section 8 (4) (a) of  course, the  general principle is there that no person shall be 

deprived of his property, but then it goes on to say that -  

“Nothing  contained  in  or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1)” 

- 

the general principle.  

 “to the extent that the law in question makes provision for the taking of possession or 
acquisition of property.” 

Now,  this  is  referred  generally  on  old  textbooks  on  Constitution  as  the  legality 
principle. So, you have a law. If  you are going to derive from the general principle which 
says you can’t take the property of somebody, then you must have a law which allows that 
and this is why you have the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. But let us go 
through it to see if that would have worked! 

So, the first test, Madam Speaker, is commonly referred to as the legality principle. It 
is apposite to note that the wording ‘nothing contained in or done under the authority of any 

 

69 

law’ is used in the Mauritian Constitution whereas by way of comparison when we look at 
the  protocol  on  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR),  the  words  used  are 
‘except such as is in accordance with the law’. Be that as it may, this means that there must 
be a law in place which allows an institution of the State to deprive a citizen of his property. 
Okay! Let’s say we have a law and it is there. That derogation continues and it goes on to say 
that - like hon. Ganoo has already listed - you have certain situations where you can actually 
take that property. For instance, if you are asking somebody to pay tax, which is a derogation, 
that person can’t go to Court and say I have been deprived of my property because I had to 
pay tax.  

They can have their properties forfeited and when they enriched themselves whether 
by  fraudulent  or  corrupt  means  then  basically  that  can  be  taken.    That  is  very  interesting 
because this concept of enrichment in section 8 (4) (a) (ii), which is the amendment brought 
in  1986  already  recognises  the  concept  of  unexplained  wealth  because  it  is  talking  about 
enrichment. The problem there, Madam Speaker, is a conviction based on recovery process. 
We have all the debates last week or on a couple of weeks ago on the Asset Recovery Act.  
When we are talking about drug traffickers, when does somebody become a drug trafficker? 
When he has been convicted by a court of law for having been trafficking in drugs! When 
you  talk  about  somebody  who  is  fraudulent  or  corrupt,  he  must  have  been  found  to  be  a 
fraudulent person or a corrupt person. So, we could not rely on this as well because here that 
would work for the Asset Recovery Act, but it does not work for the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill because you need a conviction first. 

Now, when we look at section 8 (4) (a) (ii), we have other derogations which do not 
apply, but then there is a third principle. So, you have the legality principle, you must have 
the law. You have a legitimacy principle, where it is legitimate to take the money of drug 
traffickers when they have been found to be drug traffickers. But then there is a third test 
which  is  the  proportionality  test.  This  is  where  we  have  the  words  ‘except  insofar  as  it  is 
justifiable in a democratic society,’ so all of this is in section 8 (4) (a). Everybody has been 
talking about cases going to court. The way I have been listening to them, as a Barrister at 
law, the first thing I was taught was never to prejudge the decision of a court of law. But I 
have heard everybody who has been talking today saying there will be challenges to this law, 
it  will  not  be  successful  and  it  will  fail  going  forward.  If  a  court  is  to  interpret  the 
Constitution  in  section  8,  it  will  have  to  go  in  that  same  process.  Look  at  the  legality 

 

70 

principle,  look  at  the  legitimacy  principle,  look  at  the  proportionality  principle  and  then 
determine whether there is some kind of infringement.  

But we have found that we cannot go under section 8 (1) (a), grants of public morality 
and what not because you have to pay adequate compensation. If you go under section 8 (4) 
(a) and you can deprive property without paying compensation, then you would fall foul of 
the fact that section 8 (4) (a) (ii) requires a conviction. That is why, Madam Speaker, we have 
come to this Constitution (Amendment) Bill, which now includes section 8 (4) (aa). 

However, when we did insert it in our Constitution after section 8 (4) (a) and we lose 
one of the test which was there, that is, the proportionality test, where it states ‘except insofar 
as it is justifiable in a democratic society’. Now, when the Bill was first proposed, we did not 
have these words there. However, the hon. Leader of the Opposition suggested that this test 
should  also  be  included  in  section  8  (4)  (aa)  to  provide  a  protection  that  if  tomorrow 
somebody wants to go and challenge this concept under Article 1 of the Constitution which 
says that ‘Mauritius is a sovereign democratic State’ then he can do so because other than the 
proportionality test, there is also the whole concept of Mauritius being a democratic society, 
which is protected under Article 1. Hon. Gayan has explained how this Article 1 is now fully 
entrenched  in  our  Constitution  and  cannot  be  derogated  from  after  the  judgement  of 
Khoyratty by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that protection always remains. I 
was also taught when I was doing my pupillage with Mr Guy Ollivry Q.C. that Article 1 is 
the Constitution itself. It cannot be derogated from. 

We decided to go along with that. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the team who were 
working  on  it,  we  decided  to  take  on  board  the  suggestion  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition because it was a valid one and it makes sense and also because it afforded that 
protection which was not there when the first draft was circulated. And for that, I would like 
to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for his input because this is of national interest. 
This  is  not  party  politics.  This  is  not  la  loi  Bhadain.  This  is  certainly  something  which  is 
going to help society going forward.  

I must say - hon. Shakeel Mohamed is not here - Madam Speaker, that it is a matter of 
regret  that  the  Mauritius  Labour  Party  chose  not  to  vote  for  the  anti-corruption  law,  the 
Prevention of Corruption Act in 2002. The Mauritius Labour Party chose not to vote the anti-
money laundering law, the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act in 2002. 
And, today, the Mauritius Labour Party is refusing to vote for the Constitution (Amendment) 

 

71 

Bill, which is bringing the whole concept of unexplained wealth into our supreme law and 
this is for obvious reasons, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I would like also to refer to a couple of issues. One is 
in relation to the words ‘any other provisional of Chapter II of the Constitution’ to the extent 
which is including the amendment and which is at the beginning of the amendment. In fact, 
the reason why this is there is because you cannot actually challenge by way of section 17 as 
was mentioned before. You cannot because Chapter II includes section 17. 

Also, Madam Speaker, in relation to the point which was raised by the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition on section 8 (4) (a), true it is that in 1983 that section was introduced in our 
Constitution.  Section 8 (4) (a) - for other reasons, nothing to do with unexplained wealth in 
those days, I think to do with nationalisation and other issues probably – says – 

“Notwithstanding  subsection  1(c),  section  17  or  any  other  provisions  of  the 
Constitution (…)” 

 And that is very wide, Madam Speaker.  

“(…) no law relating to the compulsory acquisition or taking of possession of 
any property shall be called in question in any Court. If it has been supported 
at the final voting in the Assembly by the votes of not less than three quarters 
of all the Members of the Assembly”.  

Here, I must say that I have a small difference with what the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
has stated before by saying that we try to rely on that as if we were not transparent on that 
issue.  But section 8 (4) (a) has always been there in the Constitution since 1983. This is not 
us  who  are  introducing  that  section,  it  is  there.  So,  today  when  we  are  coming  with  this 
amendment, when  you read it in context with section 8 (4) (a), at a first reading, it would 
appear  that  when  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  goes  through,  with  a 
75% majority, then it cannot be called into question in any court of law. I disagree with that 
and that is my personal opinion, Madam Speaker. I disagree with that because when it says 
that  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  Constitution,  you  cannot  derogate  from 
Article  1.  You  cannot!  That  is  what  Khoyratty  says.  Article  1  is  now  entrenched  when 

 

72 

Mauritius  became  a  Republic;  it  is  entrenched  in  our  Constitution.  So,  you  cannot  say 
regardless of any other provision of this Constitution when a law is voted with three-quarter 
majority, you cannot go to Court. True it is that this has never been challenged before our 
Courts or before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, but one day it will and on the 
basis of the reading that  I have, it does not become a  relevant issue. This is why  I  would 
make an appeal to the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  If this is one of the contentions for not 
voting the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, then I believe that this contention 
is not ... 

(Interruptions) 

At least, now I know that this is not the reason as to why the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
has decided not to vote for the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.  But, at least, 
we are on the same wavelength on this issue as well; that this is not a prohibiting provision 
which would prevent the GGIR from being challenged in Court one day.  It’s not; it cannot 
be. 

Madam Speaker, our Constitution dates back to 1968, but Mauritius cannot be trapped 
in a time warp. We can’t basically be stuck in time. The future depends on how this august 
Assembly chooses to amend the Constitution and make a clean break from the past when we 
need to do it, especially to provide for new ideas, new concepts, new methodologies, new 
laws and a new way of doing things in our country, and this is being done, Madam Speaker, 
for the Mauritius of tomorrow, recognising unexplained wealth in our Constitution. Not only 
unexplained wealth, there is something which probably  everybody  or we have missed out. 
We are actually recognising prête-nom in our Constitution. Now, when you hold assets on 
behalf  of  somebody  else  and  it  is  disproportionate  with  the  income  or  emoluments  of  that 
person or it cannot be satisfactorily accounted for, then that prête-nom will have to answer. 
But it is an action against property; it is not an action against persons. 

So, this Constitution (Amendment) Bill and its proposal with regard to unexplained 
wealth  is  defining  yet  another  moment  in  Mauritian  history,  which  will  pave  the  way  for 
future prosperity in a transparent environment designed to sustain future economic growth, 
Madam Speaker. This is what this Government, led by the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is 
all about. 

Madam Speaker, let me end by quoting John F. Kennedy – 

73 

 
“The problems of the world cannot possibly be solved by skeptics or cynics whose 
horizons are limited by the obvious realities. We need men who can dream of things 
that never were”. 

As far as I know, Madam Speaker - and I will finish with these words - there is only 
one man who has been born in Mauritius who can bring those changes and he is sitting there. 

Thank you. 

 (4.19 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, during the debates on the Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill in 2012, I advocated 
criminalising  illicit  enrichment,  and  today  I  stand  by  every  word  that  I  stated  then.  If  you 
can’t  explain the legitimate source of  your wealth, if  you  can’t demonstrate that  you have 
acquired wealth by legal means, then you have to pay for it. We have always been in favour 
of  confiscating  ill-gotten  wealth,  we  have  always  maintained  that  a  criminal  should  not 
benefit  from  his  crime;  we  have  always  fought  for  public  officials  to  be  accountable  for 
wealth which they have accumulated and which they cannot justify. 

Madam Speaker, we have not changed our stance. In fact, Madam Speaker, Mauritius 
has  taken  a  commitment  to  combat  illicit  enrichment.  Mauritius  is  signatory  to  the  United 
Nations Convention against Corruption which came into force on 15 December 2005. Article 
20 of that Convention reads as follows – 

“Article 20.  Illicit enrichment 

Subject  to  its  constitution  and  the  fundamental  principles  of  its  legal  system,  each 
State  party  shall  consider  adopting  such  legislative  and  other  measures  as  may  be 
necessary  to  establish  as  a  criminal  offence,  when  committed  intentionally,  illicit 
enrichment, that is, a significant increase in the assets of a public official that he or 
she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her lawful income.” 

The purpose of this Article 20 was clearly to provide an effective weapon in the fight 
against corruption by making public officials accountable for any accumulated wealth which 
he did not acquire through lawful means. 

74 

 
Madam Speaker, it is difficult to prove corruption because it is an offence both to give 
and take bribe. So, perpetrators and victims very  rarely would come forward because they 
would be self-incriminating themselves. However, sign of corruption can be manifested when 
a  public  official  lives  beyond  his  means,  where  his  assets  are  disproportionate  to  his 
emolument and other legitimate income. 

As a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, there is already a provision in our law which 
deals with possession of unexplained wealth.  Section 84 of the Prevention of Corruption Act 
2002 already gives power to ICAC to investigate public officials who maintain a standard of 
living which is not commensurate with their emolument, to investigate public officers who 
control property to an extent which is disproportionate to their income or public official who 
holds  property  for  himself  or  his  relative  or  his  associate  and  is  unable  to  satisfactorily 
account as to how he came into the ownership, possession, custody or control. So, it’s already 
in our law, in section 84 of the Prevention of Corruption Act. However, this section 84 of 
PoCA does not go far enough; it does not make it a corruption offence to possess unexplained 
wealth.  Unexplained  wealth  is  only  evidence  to  corroborate  other  evidence  relating  to 
corruption offence. 

Then, there is  another provision in the Prevention of Corruption  Act which is very 

interesting; section 82, sub-section (4), which reads – 

“Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act, the Court may, in addition 
to any penalty imposed, order the forfeiture of the property, the subject matter of the 
offence”. 

So, we already have in our law powers given to the Courts to seize, to forfeit assets 
which  are  unexplained  wealth  in  the  context  of  the  corruption  charge  involving  public 
officials. But what we have relates to public officials, relates to corruption offence. What is 
proposed  today  by  this  amendment  to  the  Constitution  is  to  create  a  new  creature, 
constitutional derogation, which would allow the State to confiscate, to deprive an individual 
of  property  in  three  specific  circumstances.  The  first  one  being  where  that  person  has 
property which is disproportionate to his salary, to his income; the second one is where the 
person  owns,  possesses,  has  in  his  custody  and  control  property  which  he  cannot 
satisfactorily account for, and the third case is where a person holds property on behalf of 
another, as a nominee for another person, and that other person can’t explain the source of his 
revenue and wealth. 

75 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  amendment  to  the  Constitution  does  not  distinguish  between 
public  official  and  the  ordinary  citizen.  The  proposed  amendment  does  not  distinguish 
between ordinary citizens and criminals and this is the reason why when the two Bills were 
circulated in the public, there was such an outcry, because the ordinary citizens of Mauritius 
are  at  risk.  This  law  can  be  used  against  any  citizen;  it  is  not  aimed  towards  only  public 
officials who are corrupt, it is not aimed only towards criminals. Every citizen of Mauritius 
who cannot reasonably, satisfactorily account for his wealth can be subject to a confiscation 
order. 

The  next  thing  which  this  amendment  does  to  the  Constitution,  which  is  again  a 
source of great concern to the ordinary citizen, is that it allows confiscation of property, of 
wealth  without  having,  at  any  point,  to  establish  that  the  wealth  has  been  acquired, 
accumulated through unlawful means. 

The concept of legality or unlawfulness is not there in the proposed amendment and 
this  is  very  different  to  the  other  countries  which  have  adopted  legislation  to  combat 
unexplained wealth.  For example, in Australia, the Court can only make a confiscation order 
if  it  is  satisfied  that  a  person’s  total  wealth  is  greater  than  his  lawfully  acquired  wealth. 
Therefore, in Australia, for example, it is sufficient for an individual to prove that his wealth 
was acquired by legal means and he is off the hook, but not here.  

Here, with this amendment, even if you can prove that your wealth is not tainted with 
any illegality, there is no crime involved, you can be caught as long as you cannot provide a 
satisfactory justification, you cannot satisfactorily account for your wealth and this is creating 
concern in many respect. For example, if  you have received a  gift, if  you have received a 
donation, if you have received an inheritance, it is not sufficient for you to show that you are 
not a criminal.  You have to now establish that the person who gave you, who donated you 
this money, this gift or your parents from whom you inherited, that the wealth, the property 
was  acquired  through  emoluments  and  income.  So,  you  have  to  now  justify  the  source  of 
income of the person who has given you, who has left that property for you and that is why 
people in Mauritius are very concerned.  

The hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
mentioned the Asset Recovery Act. Last week, we dealt with the amendment to that Asset 
Recovery Act. There is already a section in the Asset Recovery Act of 2011.  In fact, that was 
an amendment proposed in 2012 in section 3 subsection 2 (A) which reads as follows - 

 

76 

 “where it is found that a person was in possession of any property or has derived a 
benefit from an unlawful activity, and that he did not have the legitimate source of 
income sufficient to justify his interest in the property or the benefit derived by him, 
the  onus  shall,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  lie  on  that  person  to  show  that  the 
property was not obtained or the benefit was not derived from an unlawful activity.” 

So, we already have a legislation which puts the burden on a person to show that the 
property  that  he  has  is  not  derived  from  unlawful  activity.  With  this  legislation,  the  key 
element of unlawful activity is missing and this is why we have to come with this amendment 
to  the  Constitution  because,  for  the  first  time,  we  are  going  to  introduce  the  notion  of 
confiscation which is not related at all to the notion of ill-gotten wealth, of illicit enrichment 
because this element of unlawfulness, of illegality is not entrenched in the proposed Bill. This 
is  why  ordinary  citizens  of  this  country  are  worried,  because  if  you  cannot  explain 
satisfactorily  where  you  got  the  property,  then  the  property  can  be  confiscated  even  if  the 
property is not derived from an unlawful activity.  

Madam Speaker, there would be, of course, no need to make any amendment to the 
Constitution if the aim of the Bill was merely to seize unlawfully acquired wealth. I listened 
to several Members of this House, especially on the Government side, whether intervening on 
this  Bill  or  on  the  radio,  and  I  cannot  but  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  must  have 
overlooked a very important provision of our Constitution, which has been referred to by hon. 
Ganoo  and  by  the  hon.  Minister  in  their  interventions.  I  am  talking  about  section  8, 
subsection 4 (c) (ii) of the Constitution which reads as follows - 

 “Nothing  contained  in  or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
inconsistent with or in contravention with subsection (1) - 

(a)  to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision  for  the  taking  of 

possession or acquisition of property - 

(ii) by way of penalty for breach of law or forfeiture in consequence of a 

breach of law (…).”  

So, you are seizing the property if it is a breach of law, then you can do it, but more 

interestingly the section goes on to say - 

 

77 

“(…) or in consequence of the inability of a drug trafficker or a person who has 
enriched himself by fraudulent and/or corrupt means to show that he has acquired 
the property by lawful means;” 

So, we already have in our Constitution a derogation for a law which would provide 
for the seizure of property in consequence of the inability of a drug trafficker or a person who 
has  enriched  himself  by  fraudulent  and/or  corrupt  means  to  show  that  he  has  acquired  the 
property by lawful means. So, if the aim of today’s amendment - and the Bill that is going to 
come afterwards, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill - was only to seize the 
properties of drug traffickers or persons who have enriched themselves by fraudulent and/or 
corrupt  means,  we  would  not  need  to  have  any  amendment,  but  clearly  when  we  read  the 
amendment that is being proposed, this element of acquisition by unlawful means is not there.  

So, it is not innocent. It is not as hon. Ganoo thinks, maybe to clarify things. No! It is 
a deliberate amendment because this provision of confiscation without a crime, without the 
element  of  unlawful  means  of  acquisition  of  that  property  is  not  provided  today  in  our 
Constitution.  It is because of this absence of the element of unlawfulness that the ordinary 
citizens of Mauritius are worried about this law. Madam Speaker, it is to meet this legitimate 
concern of the ordinary citizens who are afraid that their properties would be seized even if 
they are not criminals, even if the properties are not derived from a crime, it is for this reason 
that  the  MMM,  at  the  first  available  opportunity  after  we  had  taken  cognizance  of  the 
Constitution (Amendment) Bill, that, in a press conference, we urged Government to amend 
the amendment to the Constitution of section 8 (a) to make it subject to the proviso that it has 
to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society, and we are grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  for  having  agreed  to  insert  this  caveat,  this  proviso  in  the  Bill  for  we  should  not 
forget, Madam Speaker, that any amendment to the Constitution has to be read, subject to the 
overriding provision of section 1 of the Constitution which provides that Mauritius shall be a 
sovereign democratic State which shall be known as the Republic of Mauritius.  

Hon. Members before me have mentioned the case of Khoyratty and the State which 
is  now  well-established  law  that  even  a  proposed  amendment  to  the  Constitution,  even  an 
amendment voted to the Constitution can be ruled out to be anti-constitutional in breach of 
section 1.  

Suffice  it  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that,  in  our  opinion,  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity Reporting  Bill, as currently drafted, would not pass this constitutional hurdle, we 

 

78 

cannot vote it because it would not pass this threshold of being  reasonably justifiable in a 
democratic society.   

Madam  Speaker,  we  will  vote  in  favour  of  the  proposed  amendment  to  the 
Constitution,  because  we  are  in  favour  of  confiscation  of  ill-gotten  wealth  and  illicit 
enrichment, and we do so with the comfort that any law which provides for confiscation of 
unexplained  wealth  will  first  have  to  pass  the  test  of  being  reasonably  justifiable  in  a 
democratic society.   

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

(4.36 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank all the hon. 
Members who have participated in the debate on this important constitutional amendment.  I 
am glad to note the general consensus that gathered around this Bill, with the exception of a 
few  who  have  made  remarks  concerning  certain  reserves,  but,  more  particularly,  the 
exception is hon. Mohamed who has completely derailed and given me the impression that 
sometimes  legal  minds  go  topsy-turvy.    He  based  all  his  arguments  on  the  basis  that  the 
whole  proceedings  are  going  to  be  criminal,  therefore  he  spoke  on  independence  of  the 
Judiciary, separation of powers, right to silence, burden of proof and what not.  All this is 
irrelevant in this debate because, in fact, it is not going to be criminal proceedings. It is going 
to  be  civil  and  I  am  afraid  to  say  that  some  members  of  the  Bar  Council  also  have  got 
confused and have argued in the same way as hon. Mohamed.   

But after having said this, Madam Speaker, the Government is waging a war on grand 
corruption.    The  measures  that  we  are  introducing  through  the  present  constitutional 
amendment are bold and historical and mark a watershed in our approach to fight fraud and 
corruption  in  this  country.  The  aim  is  to  check  accumulation  of  wealth  through  backdoor 
mechanisms and thus preventing unscrupulous persons from distorting the playing field. 

Madam Speaker, much stress has been laid on the fact that section 1 of our Constitution 
speaks of Mauritius as being a democratic State and sovereign.   Of course, we are sovereign, 
but aren’t we democratic?  I can assure this House that I am a firm believer in our democratic 
system.  I have always defended our democratic system of Government. It is not now that I 

 

79 

am going to do anything to harm our democracy, as I said, in the playing field, particularly in 
the property market.   

This Bill is in the interest of the country and goes to the heart of the type of society we 

want to bequeath to our children.   

Madam Speaker, we are today making history.  However, it is a matter of regret that 
some hon. Members are trying to stop the march of history.  I find their hypocrisy on such an 
important issue most regrettable, to say the least.  When one intends to do good, one does not 
just speak about it, one has to act.  

We have all been talking a lot on how to curb fraud and corruption.  It is now time to 
walk  the  talk.    This  is  precisely  what  we  are  doing.  But,  of  course,  I  can  understand  hon. 
Mohamed  when  I  remember  the  former  Prime  Minister  recently  having  made  public 
statement; in that statement, he has stated: “Mo pou guetté kisanla pou vote ça Bill-là, ça la 
loi-là.” 

Besides, this initiative is only part of a wider spectrum of legal and institutional reforms 
that  we  are  introducing  to  enhance  the  overall  integrity  and  governance  framework  in  our 
country.    We  would  be  coming  with  the  other  measures  which  we  have  announced  in  the 
Government Programme 2015-2019 and which have been mentioned by the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition, namely, the enactment of a new Declaration of Assets Act and a Financing of 
Political Parties Act and the establishing of the Financial Crime Commission, amongst others.  
This, I must assure the House that I am going to do it because I want to leave in honour.  I 
must add that we have already started working on these proposed pieces of legislation and I 
wish to reassure the House that we are going to stand by our commitment. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XXIX  of  2015)  is  also  an 
expression of our deeply held values – the values of honesty and integrity. This is, therefore, 
an opportunity to demonstrate the values and principles that we stand for.  The scourge that 
this  Bill  seeks  to  address  is  a  matter  that  touches  upon  the  fundamental  values  of  our 
democracy.  This is, therefore, no time for demagogy and petty politics. This is no time to 
hide behind lame excuses. Higher and loftier objectives and ideals should always prevail over 
other considerations. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  again  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  sole  aim  of  the  proposed 
constitutional  amendment  is  to  track  down  massive  unexplained  wealth  accumulated  by 

 

80 

certain people through illicit dealings and on the back of honest and hardworking people.  We 
have no hidden agenda.  We are not targeting any individual, but only ill-gotten wealth. 

Besides,  in  order  to  show  our  good  faith,  we  have,  after  wide  and  extensive 
consultations, brought some substantive amendments to this Bill which should now allay the 
fears  expressed  in  some  quarters.    I  also  wish  to  underline  that  we  are  not  in  any  way 
undermining the basic tenets of our Constitution, that is, the rule of law, the separation of 
powers or the powers of the Judiciary, as highlighted by hon. Gayan, following the misguided 
comments by hon. Mohamed.  

Some people think that people will contest and will go to the Supreme Court and even 
perhaps to the Privy Council.  But this is a right which is there in the Constitution, any citizen 
can contest the constitutionality of any law and it is open to him to go to the Supreme Court, 
and  if  he  is  not  satisfied  with  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court,  he  even  appeals  to  the 
Privy Council.  As I have been given to understand after hearing some arguments that the 
Court may find because of section 1 of our Constitution that we cannot contest or do anything 
about illegal wealth.  Well, if the Court is going to interpret section 1 in that way, it means 
the Court is saying that we must allow corrupt people to enrich themselves, have ill-gotten 
wealth and enjoy themselves.   

Well, if that is so, then it is the end of this country and we will go to doom. I cannot 
understand why the Labour party is refusing to vote this amendment and is hiding behind the 
defence of high-minded principles.  They perhaps have good reasons to be worried by such 
legislation  in  our  Statute  books.  No  doubt  why  under  their  reign,  malpractices,  grand 
corruption  had  become  entrenched  to  a  most  alarming  degree  and  was  paralysing  the 
development of this country. 

Madam Speaker, the people of this country are very much aware of the real reasons 
behind their stand.  By refusing to vote this Bill, they are actually going against the wish of 
the majority of the population.  I must also highlight that all the hue and cry over this Bill is 
not from the ordinary, hardworking and law-abiding citizens.  They are all in favour of the 
measures we are introducing, as rightly pointed out by hon. François. 

The  people  are  well  aware  that  fraud  and  corruption  in  this  country  has  grown 
exponentially  in  the  last  decade  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  we  have  several  institutions  and 
legislation  to  check  such  malpractices.    You  will  recall  that  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition 

 

81 

questioned the need to create a new agency under a new law to tackle unexplained wealth.  
He suggested that the existing laws and institutions be reviewed instead. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  about  civil  proceedings  which  introduce  a  new 
concept to deal with unexplained wealth from unjust enrichment and this cannot fall under 
the  ambit  of  other  laws,  and  this  is  why  also  we  have  had  to  amend  section  8  of  our 
Constitution. 

The  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  not  only  addresses  the  issue  of 
unexplained  wealth,  but  also  introduces  the  concept  of  positive  reporting  of  acts  of  good 
governance, integrity reporting campaigns as well as a reward system. 

These require a new law and a new agency which will ultimately fall under the ambit 
of  the  Financial  Crime  Commission,  just  other  institutions  such  as  ICAC,  FIU,  Asset 
Recovery  Investigative Division, to create an apex body to fight financial crime in a more 
efficient manner. 

Madam Speaker, people are shocked by the scale and scope of corruption which have 
been  uncovered  in  recent  months.  This  is  the  reason  why  they  have,  in  a  large  majority, 
expressed their support for this revolutionary measure which we are introducing to clean up 
the Augean stable. Exceptional circumstances call for exceptional measures.  It is time to live 
up to the expectations of the people of this country. 

The choice before us is, therefore, very clear and that is to put the country first and be 
on  the  right  side  of  history.    I,  therefore,  call  upon  every  hon.  Member  to  fulfill  his  duty 
towards the nation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XXIX of 2015) 

Clause 1 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 
Clause 2 (Section 8 of Constitution amended) 

82 

Motion made and question proposed:  “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

The Prime Minister:  I move that clause 2 be amended as follows -  

 “In the proposed paragraph (aa) –  
(a)  

(b)  

by deleting the words “to the extent” and replacing them by the words “or any 
other provision of Chapter II of the Constitution, to the extent”;  
by inserting, after the word “confiscation”, the words “, except so far as that 
provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under its authority is shown 
not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society”.”  

 Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 2, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XXIX  of 

2015) was read the third time. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for a division of votes. 
Madam Speaker: I allow the division of votes. 

(Division Bells were rung) 

On question put, the House divided. 

AYES 

Hon. M. R. C. Uteem 

Hon. K. Teeluckdharry 

Hon. K. Tarolah 

Hon. Dr. M. R. Sorefan 

Hon. Ms M. Sewocksingh 

83 

 

Hon. D. Sesungkur 

Hon. Mrs M. D. Selvon 

Hon. S. Rughoobur 

Hon. K. Ramano 

Hon. J. P. F. Quirin 

Hon. G. Oree 

Hon. Mrs M. C. J. Monty 

Hon. G. P. Lesjongard 

Hon. J. C. G. Lepoigneur 

Hon. J. B. Leopold 

Hon. P. Jugnauth 

Dr. the Hon. Z. H. I. Joomaye 

Hon. A. B. Jahangeer 

Hon. M. Gobin 

Hon. A. Ganoo 

Hon. S. Fowdar 

Hon. J. C. Barbier 

Hon. V. V. Baloomoody 

Hon. P. K. Armance 

Hon. S. M. A. Ameer Meea 

Hon. J. N. A. Aliphon 

Hon. R. Rampertab 

Hon. S. Ramkaun 

Hon. T. Benydin 

Hon. Mrs D. Boygah 

Hon. M. S. Abbas-Mamode 

84 

 

Hon. J. C. S. Toussaint 

Hon. Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus 

Hon. J. F. François 

Hon. M. C. E. Boissézon 

Hon. J. H. T. Henry 

Hon. S. Rutnah 

 

Hon. S. Hurreeram  

Hon. R. Bhagwan 

Hon. P. Jhugroo 

Hon. A. C. Duval 

Hon. P. R. Bérenger 

Hon. S. Callichurn 

Hon. M. R. A. Wong Yen Cheong 

Hon. J. R. Dayal 

Hon. P. Koonjoo 

Hon. Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. S. Bholah 

Hon. S. Bhadain 

Hon. Mrs M. A. M. J. Perraud 

Hon. A. K. Gungah 

Hon. S. Baboo 

Hon. M. Seeruttun 

Hon. M. J. N. E. Sinatambou 

Hon. P. Roopun 

Dr. the hon. A. Husnoo 

Hon. A. Gayan 

 

Hon. Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun 

85 

Hon. N. Bodha 

Hon Y. Sawmynaden  

Hon. S. Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Hon. I. Collendavelloo 

Hon. S. Soodhun 

Hon. Xavier-Luc Duval 

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister 

NOES 

Hon. D. Ramful 

Hon. S. A. Y. A. R. Mohamed 

Hon. M. O. C. Mahomed 

Hon. E. S. Jhuboo 

Madam Speaker: The Ayes have it. Hon. Members, the results of the division are as 

follows –  

Ayes: 65 

Noes: 4 

Abstention: Nil 

Absence: Nil 

I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XXIX  of 
2015) has, on final voting, obtained 65 votes, that is, has been supported by a three-quarter 
majority, as required by section 47 (2) of the Constitution. I declare that the Bill has been 
read the third time and passed.  

The Bill was read a third time and passed. 

At 5.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.40 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INTEGRITY REPORTING BILL 

(NO. XXX OF 2015) 

Order for second reading read. 

86 

 
The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam 
Speaker, I beg to move that the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 
2015) be read a second time. 

Madam Speaker, the first question to ask ourselves is whether our society needs such 
a legislation as the proposed Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill and I shall firstly 
start with the factual background.  

Madam Speaker, this Government has been in power for nearly a year now and has 
taken the destiny of our country in its hands on the back of an overwhelming mandate from 
the people on two fronts: that of cleaning up this country and bringing a second economic 
miracle. 

As from December 2014, we took stock of the prevailing situation at the level of my 
newly formed Ministry with a portfolio for good governance and institutional reforms. We 
were shocked beyond belief by the staggering proportion of fraud and dishonesty that had 
prevailed  over  the  past  decade  under  the  Labour  reign;  a  decade  of  shams,  pretences  and 
deceptions where white-collar crimes and malpractices of breathtaking magnitude had been 
eating  away  this  country  like  a  termite.  Monies  derived  from  such  grotesque  abuses  were 
given  lustre  as  if  gained  from  heroic  feats  under  the  Labour  Government.  Others  closely 
associated with that power base also benefited massively and our youth who had perceived 
these deceptive role models as people of inspiration simply lost faith in the good. 

Madam Speaker, opulence and unexplained wealth was promoted and legitimised as a 
normal  way  of  life  and  the  moral  fabric  of  society  was  flawed.  The  income  disparity  gap 
widened at an alarming pace as some were adding to their exceedingly high levels of wealth 
whilst others, lower down the social ladder, were getting even more deprived. 

From day one, Madam Speaker, we rolled up our sleeves and worked day in day out 
unearthing the most visible and detectable scams. From the BAI scandal involving sums in 
excess of Rs25 billion, deceiving over 14,000 citizens who invested in the Super Cash Back 
Gold Scheme and putting 160,000 policyholders at risk or the award of the Betamax contract 
to a close family member of a then Labour Minister and other dubious contracts with regard 
to  Bagatelle  Dam,  the    airport  in  Plaisance,  Terre  Rouge-Verdun,  Melrose  prison,  Jin  Fei, 
Neotown,  the  audacious  purchase  of  six  Airbuses,  airplanes,  or  even  the  infamous  métro 
léger  project.  7,000  Microsoft  licences  purchased  from  an  IT  company  which  were  never 

 

87 

used  and  the  same  State-owned  bank  paying  over  Rs5  billion  to  an  overseas  IT  company, 
Rs1.2  billion  paid  for  ID  Cards,  the  unexplained  millions  invested  in  Airway  Coffee  and 
hundreds of millions being carried in suitcases by a mere driver of a parastatal body who has 
turned into a property tycoon, are amongst the legacy left behind by the Labour party. 

In the meantime, Madam Speaker, white-collar criminals were having a free ride and 
coming up with all sorts of fraudulent Ponzi schemes which are still being investigated by the 
Police, the likes of Sunkai, Whitedot, Je T’aime Marketing, Westminster Financial Ltd. now 
the recent case of Vacoas Multi-Purpose Cooperative Society. Billions of rupees! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, can I just interrupt you?  

Mr Bhadain: Yes. 

Madam Speaker: Please sit down for a minute! You are now opening the door for 
debates  on  issues  which  do  not  fall  within  the  parameters  of  the  Bill,  but  just  outside  the 
parameters of the Bill. So, if you open the door for these sorts of debates, then I will have no 
other alternative than to allow Members of the Opposition to reply! 

Mr Bhadain: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was merely… 

(Interruptions) 

I was merely explaining, Madam Speaker, why there is a need today in society for such a 
Bill, the Good Governance and  Integrity Reporting Bill. And, of course, in a legal context 
when we look at the whole concept of proportionality which has been mentioned before as to 
whether this is justifiable in a democratic society or not, it is in light of everything which has 
happened and why we need to bring this legislation now. 

(Interruptions) 

But,  anyway,  I  will  keep  it  simple,  Madam  Speaker.  The  point  is  all  this  money, 
everything  that  we  have  seen  happening  in  a  Mauritian  context,  even  in  relation  to  drug 
trafficking,  Ponzi  schemes  and  what  not,  where  does  the  money  go?  That  is  the  question. 
Where is all this money and unexplained wealth kept?  The obvious answer is that it finds its 
way into property, whether it is in land, buildings, boats, luxury cars, shares or other property 
probably visible to the naked eye, but yet untouchable and certainly not recoverable under the 
present legislation.  

88 

 
We have had debates about the Asset Recovery Act. I mentioned during both debates 
that the Asset Recovery Agency has recovered Rs9 m. since its existence and Rs1.8 m. this 
year and Rs6 m. has gone into the Consolidated Budget since 2012. Why? Because it is based 
on  a  criminal  system  where  you  need  to  have  a  conviction,  you  need  to  have  criminal 
proceedings.  There  was  a  figure  which  was  mentioned  in  the  communiqué,  at  that  time, 
which was published, stating that Rs290 m. had been seized and subject to freezing orders. I 
explained to the House that it will take at least 10 years to get that Rs290 m. because both 
cases are still under investigation at the level of the Police, then it has to go to the Director of 
Public Prosecutions for a decision to be taken to prosecute or not. If it is not to prosecute, 
then you have to restitute those funds. But if it goes further to the Intermediate Court, then 
you will have to wait for three or four years before trial is over. Then it goes to the Supreme 
Court  and  from  there  you  have  the  appeal  process  which  can  go  all  the  way  to  the  Privy 
Council.  It is only then  that  you  are in  a position to recover from a criminal proceeding’s 
point of view under the Asset Recovery Act. 

Now, I also mention that in the UK, the Asset Recovery Agency had cost about £60 
m. to set up, but they had recovered only about £8 m., which basically shows that the system 
does  not  work,  not  only  in  Mauritius,  but  also  in  the  UK.  It  is  no  surprise  that  the  UK 
themselves are coming up with their own system which is being proposed for civil orders and 
unexplained wealth orders. I am quoting from the ‘Telegraph’ newspaper with the heading 
‘Suspiciously rich could be ordered to surrender their wealth’, Sir Eric Pickles says – 

“Sir  Eric,  the  Government’s  anti-corruption  champion  said  he  was  attracted  to  the 
‘simplicity’ of “unexplained wealth orders” to force potential criminals to show where 
their wealth comes from.” 

It goes on to say, Madam Speaker, that – 

“The  initiative  comes  after  Mr  Cameron,  the  Prime  Minister,  unveiled  proposals  to 
unmask the owners of British homes bought through foreign companies in order to 
flush out criminals.” 

The UK is going down that road.  

I also mention, Madam Speaker, that we have, unfortunately over the years had the 
habit of copying legislations in other countries. This morning, I heard the hon. Prime Minister 
again  mention  that  we  should  follow  what  has  been  done  in  Australia  or  in  Ireland.  Now, 

 

89 

these countries have their own models based on the needs of their type of society and how 
they operate. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Did the hon. Prime Minister mention that? 

Mr Bhadain: No, I am sorry I did not say… 

(Interruptions) 

If that is the case it will be unexplained! 

Well,  Madam  Speaker,  just  to  go  back  to  what  I  was  saying.  True  it  is  that  these 
countries have their own models which they have developed. Unexplained wealth orders are 
being  used  in  Australia  and  in  Ireland.  I  understand  from  Mr  Michael  Comer,  who  is  the 
expert who helped us work on this piece of legislation and who is present in this House today, 
that there are 14 countries in total which have actually  come up with this concept of civil 
orders,  unexplained  wealth  orders,  but  in  different  types  which  have  been  introduced  in 
different societies. 

Now, in Mauritius what this Government has decided, is that in the light of everything 
that we have seen happening - and when we look at the amount of unexplained wealth, which 
is circulating in the economy and the damage that this is doing to society, we have decided to 
go for a particular type of civil order, which will be issued by a Judge of the Supreme Court, 
a Judge in Chambers. If he feels that there is not enough evidence before him whether in the 
form of affidavit or otherwise, then he basically can refer the matter to the Supreme Court 
and it will be a full hearing before the Supreme Court of Mauritius. So, I say it again - I said 
it  during  the  debate  on  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  -  in  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  no 
power whatsoever is being conferred upon the Executive which can, in fact, affect the life of 
a normal citizen in Mauritius.  

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill which basically defines unexplained wealth and 
also  introduces  the  concept  of  nominees’  prête-noms  and  explains  that  you  can  confiscate 
property when it is unexplained wealth, is, in fact, empowering the Judiciary. Now, when we 
look  at  this  legislation,  it  starts  with  a  system  where  an  Agency,  the  Integrity  Reporting 
Services  Agency  receives  reports.  Those  reports  could  be  positive  ones,  procedures  which 
have been put in place in organisation to promote good governance, integrity and these will 

 

90 

be rewarded. We have such events which take place in the private sector every year where 
you  have  the  10  best  companies  which  are  actually  moving  in  line  with  transparency  and 
good governance and which are basically rewarded. So, that is the positive side. But then you 
can also have reports of malpractices.  You can also have reports which basically would be 
dealing with unexplained wealth. 

Now, once a report is received, what happens? Let us understand the process. Once 
that report is received, the Agency will process it, will check databases like the Registrar of 
Mortgages,  the  Registrar  of  Companies,  gather  information  and  once  it  has  sufficient 
information  to  establish  whether  there  is  -  if  we  take  unexplained  wealth  -  a  case  of 
unexplained wealth, then it has one specific power under this law, to contact that person in 
writing and ask him within 21 days or whatever number of days which may be determined 
depending on whether the person is in hospital or is abroad to provide explanations. Now, let 
us stop there for a minute! What can that person do when he receives that letter?  

First, let us take the case of politicians because so much has been said about this law 
potentially  being  used  as  a  political  tool.  Any  politician  who  receives  a  letter,  let’s  say, 
myself, what would I do? We all know that we have by law to declare our assets and this is 
done  under  oath  and  that  declaration  of  assets  is  filed  currently  with  the  Independent 
Commission Against Corruption. So, if I receive such a letter, I would normally photocopy 
my declaration of assets, which I have already done, file with ICAC and I will send it over 
there.  This  is  everything  that  I  have.  My  wealth  is  explained.  Now,  we  are  coming  with 
amendments to the Declaration of Assets Act which is going to provide even more details as 
to what is currently in the declaration which is filed with ICAC. So, that will become even 
easier going forward for politicians. 

Now,  whether  we  are  talking  about  people  in  this  House  today,  Government  or 
Opposition Members or even people who have been here before and who are not here today 
because they also had to declare their assets. So, simple as that, a photocopy of a piece of 
paper which is sent to the Agency! Now,  for any  other citizen it is also very simple. You 
receive that letter, the law says that you have to reply and we have introduced an amendment 
to  the  initial  Bill  where  before  it  stated  that  if  you  do  not  reply,  then  basically  there  is  a 
potential  criminal  offence  that  you  are  committing  where  you  can  be  called  upon  to  pay 
Rs50,000 fine or a maximum sentence of one year imprisonment. That was originally in the 
legislation to protect the process of that Agency working because if everybody who receives 

 

91 

a letter, decides to take it, put it in the dustbin and not reply, then the process will not work. It 
would amount to an offence if you were not to reply. 

But then, during the debates - and I will talk about the debates that we have opened up 
at a later stage - where we invited people to come and give their views, it was rightly put that 
this  might  be  construed  as  you  compelling  somebody  to  give  an  explanation,  which  was 
certainly not the case, Madam Speaker, because replying to the letter basically meant sending 
an answer to say: “Look, if the person wished to do that, he could have said: ‘I don’t want to 
tell you anything. I am not prepared to disclose my assets to you.  Do what you want’”. That 
would have sufficed in the sense that the reply was made. 

The point I am making, Madam Speaker, is that there was nothing in the legislation to 
compel  somebody  to  give  explanations  in  terms  of  the  content  of  what  that  letter  would 
contain.  But,  anyway,  we’ve  decided  to  alleviate  those  fears  and  we  have  said  that  this 
particular section which says that it is an offence, if you don’t reply, is taken out.  So, that 
will be in the amendments which have been circulated.  

There was so much which was said, trying to scare people off, especially the people 
who are at the lower ladder in society, marchands dhol puri and what not, saying that ‘ah! if 
you  were  selling  dhol  puri  on  a  bicycle  and  you’ve  managed  to  get  some  money  and 
purchased a van, then, now, you might be called upon to explain where did the money come 
from to purchase that van because it has become a van acquired with unexplained wealth. But 
that also, in any reasonable person’s mind, would be complete nonsense, with great respect, 
Madam Speaker. Why? Because, at the end of the day, it goes before a judge, and it is the 
judge who decides who is a wealthy person and who is not a wealthy person in society. Any 
judge would definitely not say that, for somebody who is selling dhol puri and has bought a 
van, this is unexplained wealth and he is issuing a confiscation order for that van. 

But, anyway, again, we decided to alleviate those fears and we said: ‘ok, fair enough, 
we are going to introduce a threshold’. So, we introduced a threshold of Rs10 m. to say that 
anything which falls under that threshold would now not be the subject of an application for 
an unexplained wealth order before a Judge in Chambers.  We started having other critics, 
which basically started saying: ‘Ah, what if it is Rs9.9 m.?’  Some other people saying: ‘Ah, 
you  are  protecting  criminals  now;  criminals  who  have  been  selling  drugs  under  Rs10  m. 
would not be subject of unexplained wealth orders’.  We dealt with those critics as well.  We 
explained that no, if it is under Rs10 m., the Agency or the Board can well refer the matter  - 

 

92 

if it is drug trafficking - to ADSU or to MRA or to ICAC or to whatever, the Police probably, 
so  that  these  institutions  would  do  their  job  as  they  normally  do.  But  for  the  unexplained 
wealth order, for confiscation of property, the Board would not apply to a Judge in Chambers 
for an order if it is under Rs10 m. So, we have alleviated those fears as well. 

Then, because we have introduced that threshold of Rs10 m., on the other hand, when 
we remove the criminal offence for somebody who has not replied within 21 days, we said 
‘ok, we are talking about people who have at least Rs10 m. of unexplained wealth.  So, they 
can  go  and  do  an  affidavit  in  reply’.  So,  we’ve  replaced  that  criminal  offence,  which  was 
there in the law, by the requirement of doing an affidavit. Now, this is even better for this law 
because we are actually making the law work in a much better way. Why?  Because when 
somebody has to do an affidavit now, that person cannot lie or he might decide to do so, but 
then  he  would  face  the  potential  situation  of  having  sworn  a  false  affidavit.  So,  when  the 
Agency  writes  to  that  person,  that  person  does  the  affidavit  and  files  it  with  the  Agency. 
Now, if that person is going to lie by saying: ‘I have been betting in a casino; I was walking 
down the street and I have found a Louis Vuitton suitcase full of cash’, I mean that would not 
hold water anymore because it is an affidavit.  If it is proved to be false, then you commit an 
offence. So, no criminal offence requirement for an affidavit! 

Then, the third issue was, of course, this whole hue and cry about nomination. I have 
gone in different forums, Madam Speaker, to explain to different types of people in society 
what this law is  all about and why Mauritius needs this legislation and how it is  going to 
benefit  our  society  going  forward.  It  started  in  Ébène  with  the  civil  society,  university 
students  and  public  officials,  NGOs,  and  then,  of  course,  we  went  all  the  way  to  the  Bar 
Council to speak to all the lawyers, we’ve been on television with the Attorney General and 
MP hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus. Then, of course, on ‘Radio Plus’, on so many occasions, and 
the last one was on Saturday against Jack Bizlall, which was very entertaining, I must say, 
Madam Speaker, and especially the book he has written about the Second Constitution, as he 
calls it, in a Second Republic context, which is good reading I must say.  

Now, we have done all of that, we have talked to all these people.  Then, I realised 
that there is a problem in Mauritius. The problem in Mauritius is that every time you have to 
appoint somebody on a board or in an organisation, you have people coming and saying: ‘Ah, 
we have to look at the transparency process involved in that nomination process.’ But when I 
look at the law, I try to understand where does that all come from, because a Government is 

 

93 

elected by the people, has a mandate for five years, and that Government has to deliver within 
those five years, we have Cabinet working, Ministers having their portfolio doing their jobs, 
and then you have people who are appointed as Chairpersons of Boards and other members 
and then people who are running those organisations as Executives.  So, I tried to understand 
that  concept.  What  is  happening  in  Mauritius?  Why  every  time  somebody  is  appointed, 
people have to come and say: ‘no it is not transparent; no, there is a system of favouring X or 
Y, and this is being done because  you want to use this as a political tool because  you are 
going to use that against your political opponent’, and so on and so forth? Where does that all 
come from? Then I realised that, if we go back to our Constitution – probably, I don’t know, 
this is my opinion - I believe that the makers of our Constitution at that time believed that, 
with all the context which was prevailing in Mauritius, if you have a Hindu Prime Minister, 
he  would  appoint  all  Hindus.  Then,  you  must  have  some  kind  of  checks  and  balances 
mechanism, and this is why appointment processes in the Constitution basically have that. I 
don’t know, this is my personal opinion. 

However, what I do know and what is a fact - and this is not my opinion - is that so 
many legislations have come afterwards, which basically dictates appointment processes to 
be  in  consultation  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  or  basically  by  the  President  under 
advice  of  the  Prime  Minister  or  sometimes  even  Ministers  appointing.  But  what  I  have 
realised is that, at the end of the day, when a Government gets elected in a Mauritian context, 
in our system, there is only one person who has all the powers, and that is the Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

But it is like that!  We agree that it is like that today! 

(Interruptions) 

No, I know that there were certain... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, please address the Chair! 

like 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. I do know that there are certain positions in the Constitution like 
the  Electoral  Commissioner, 
the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  which  are 
constitutionally protected, and there is a process over there.  But what I am saying is that all 
these legislations which have come afterwards basically talk about consultation or under the 
advice of.  Then, I went to the Constitution - and I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
will agree with me on that - and I looked at section 113 of the Constitution.  That section says 
- and it was introduced some time, I believe, after 1982 - that, after a general election, any 

 

94 

person  who  has  been  appointed  with  that  process  of  consultation,  under  the  advice  of  the 
Leader of Opposition, of the Prime Minister, Minister and all that, ‘political nominees’, can 
all be kicked out.  And the Constitution provides that.  So, when I looked at all of that, I said 
ok, but then, we are in a system like in America.  When an administration comes in, it has the 
constitutional power to remove all the people who have been appointed politically, political 
appointees,  and  replace  them  by  new  political  appointees  who  probably  are  going  to  get 
kicked out when another Government is going to come. That is what our Constitution does.  

So, this whole debate, I was trying to understand, now, why are people always saying 
that this whole process, this Bill will be flawed only with appointing somebody where the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister is acting on his own volition or he is consulting or he is giving advice. I 
still can’t understand, Madam Speaker. I believe, as the Minister of Good Governance, that 
when  you  talk  about  transparency  and  good  governance,  it  must  be  real transparency,  real 
governance et non pas un semblant, and I believe that our legislations, which have been voted 
over the years in this House, have created a semblant of transparency through a consultation 
process or through giving advice because, at the end of the day, power remains in the hands 
of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister under our current system. That is how it is.  

Now, to alleviate those fears like we have done with the threshold of Rs10 m. and all 
of that, we decided, fair enough, we are going to have a system where the President is going 
to appoint for all four positions: the Chairman of the Board, the two Assessors and also the 
Director of the Agency. The President is going to appoint under the advice of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, and we felt, okay, that 
should  satisfy  all  the  fears  that  have  been  alleviated.  The  reason  why  I  say  that,  Madam 
Speaker, is because when we look at an appointment process - we have been talking about 
proportionality  today  in  this  House  -  it  must  be  proportional  to  the  power  which  can  be 
exercised by that person.  

Now, if we look at the Chief Justice of Mauritius, for instance, he is appointed by the 

President under the advice of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain, please! Don’t engage in cross-talking!  

(Interruptions) 

 

95 

Mr Bhadain: Well, it does not matter, Madam Speaker. But whatever process there 
is, it is not more stringent - I will certainly check that and come back - than what is being 
included  in  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill,  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister advises the President after having consulted the Leader of the Opposition. Now, this 
has been done. The hon. Leader of the Opposition made a suggestion which was considered. 
That suggestion was that for the Chairperson of the Integrity Reporting Board, why not have 
the  President  appointing,  in  consultation  with  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition - after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition.  

Madam Speaker, after due consideration was given, it was decided that we could not 
go for that because you would be giving powers to the President in a case where that person 
does not do anything except for making a decision whether to send a case to Court or not. 
That is all he does.  So, these were the three amendments which I have been talking about: 
the threshold of Rs10 m., the nomination process and the elimination of that criminal offence.  

One  other  change  we  made,  Madam  Speaker,  was  in  relation  to  the  seven  years 
retroactivity.  Now,  the  way  the  law  was  drafted,  before  it  was  seven  years  prior  to  the 
commencement of this Act and seven  years prior to the commencement of this Act would 
make it, if we talk about 2016, 2009. But the explanations which were provided by the State 
Law Office and by the Consultant Sir Victor Glover, ex-Chief Justice, who worked on the 
law, was that it should be in line with the Banking Act because when you ask somebody for 
records,  somebody  has  to  give  an  explanation  and  if  he  does  not  have  records  available 
through  his  bank,  then  basically  he  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  answer.  Therefore,  that 
change has been made to make it seven years. It will always be seven years. So, you lose one 
year when you would move forward one year. So, in 2020, it will be 2013; in 2050, it will be 
2043. That was another change that we have brought.  

Then, another major change again.  We were listening to what everybody was saying, 
whether it is to be people in the Bar Council.  Hon. Ganoo has very positively contributed, I 
must say, to a number of suggestions; the hon. Leader of the Opposition and also people from 
civil society.  An issue arose as to what do you do when you have a property which is partly 
financed by unexplained wealth and partly financed by explained wealth, and we decided to 
bring  an amendment to say that when  you make that, when the Judge in Chambers or the 
Supreme  Court  makes  that  Unexplained  Wealth  Order,  he  also  has  the  discretion  -  if  he 
wishes to do so - to make an equivalent order for the monetary equivalent of that unexplained 

 

96 

wealth and that would solve these situations. So, if you have a plot of land as inheritance, but 
a mansion has been built on it and that is unexplained wealth, then you cannot go and seize 
the plot of land and the mansion as well, and that is in the light of what was said by hon. 
Shakeel  Mohamed  earlier  today.    It  is  not  true  to  say  that  the  Judge  can  only  make  an 
Unexplained  Wealth  Order.  There  is  an  amendment  which  has  been  brought  to  that,  the 
monetary  equivalent in the amendments which have been  circulated. So, that was the fifth 
one, Madam Speaker.  

And then, of course, another suggestion that we have taken from hon. Ganoo was in 
relation to action in rem, as compared to action in personam, and I am not going to go into a 
great deal of explanation on that because the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, himself, has explained 
during  the  debates  on  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  that  we  are  not  talking  about 
criminal proceedings, we are talking about civil proceedings and it is not an action against a 
person, it is an action against property. That property might be held by a criminal or it might 
be held by a person, who is a non-criminal, on behalf of a criminal or you can have somebody 
who, at the end of the day, is not a criminal at  all but he has a lot of unexplained wealth 
which he basically has to explain.   

The reason why this is so is because I can go into scenarios and scenarios as to how 
somebody  can  sell  drugs  and  buy  land  for,  I  don’t  know,  Rs20  m.  and  then  sell  it  to 
somebody else for Rs17 m. and that person who is buying is not a criminal and he is buying it 
for cheaper and then he is reselling it, and he is creating more unexplained wealth. We can go 
into so many scenarios, but the whole concept of having a civil order based system is because 
it is an action against that property in rem. It is not an action against any person and that is 
why  I  explained to the  Bar Council - hon. Mohamed was there  - that everything which is 
being talked about in terms of the right to silence, in terms of the presumption of innocence, 
in terms of Section 10 of the Constitution, whether somebody is being cautioned when he is 
giving his version and so on, it does not apply at all because it is not a criminal system. It is a 
civil  system  and  why  is  it  a  civil  system  is  because  asset  recovery  within  criminal 
proceedings, which is based on criminal proceedings, does not work  and this is what hon. 
Shakeel Mohamed was telling us today in terms of the American judgements that he had been 
citing  to  this  House,  that  even  if  you  do  it  the  civil  way,  it  might  still  be  construed  to  be 
criminal. But here, we have Parliament voting, amending the Constitution - which has already 
been done now - and our Constitution, as I speak right now, recognises unexplained wealth, 

 

97 

recognises prête-noms and recognises the fact that unexplained wealth can be confiscated if it 
is disproportionate.  

 (Interruptions) 

Well, it will soon be. 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: It is going to come. Yes! You take judicial notice of that. So, basically, 
this  is  in  our  Constitution.  I  mean,  how  can  we  come  and  say  now  that  this  is  something 
which can be construed as being criminal. It is not. We have already voted. The Constitution 
is there and at the end of this whole process, Madam Speaker, it is a policy decision. It is a 
decision as to whether Mauritian society needs to have a civil based recovery system where 
unexplained  wealth  can  be  confiscated  following  an  order  of  a  Judge  in  Chambers  by  the 
Judiciary exercising its power. 

Nothing! Nothing whatsoever to do with the Executive!  I told all the lawyers at the Bar 
Council to tell me how tomorrow this law can be used against me, a politician, as a political 
tool.  How can it be used against me?  And I am still waiting for the answer.  Not one single 
lawyer, Barrister in the Bar Council has been able to answer that question to me. I have asked 
that same question to Trade Union guys, to Mr Bizlall on national radio, on ‘Radio Plus’.  I 
have put that question to reporters, to journalists who have been talking to me and until today 
I don’t have one person coming and showing me how this can be used as a political tool, un 
outil  de  persécution,  whether  it  is  against  a  political  opponent  or  whether  it  is  against 
anybody else. 

Now, some people have said, the closest they have come to, and I will say this, Madam 
Speaker,  is:  ‘Forget  about  what  you  can  do  against  somebody,  let’s  look  at  how  you  can 
protect somebody. You nominate the person, he is sitting in the Agency or the Board and he 
can choose not to do something against a Member of Government.’ And when they say that, I 
said: “That’s a good point.” Does the law deal with this? Then, I realised how are you going 
to legislate against that?  ICAC operates with anonymous complaints or on its own initiative. 
The Asset Recovery Unit is doing its work. The Police every day start investigations. How do 
you ensure that there is a law which prevents somebody from not doing his job?  How do you 

 

98 

do that?  I will tell you honestly, Madam Speaker, we couldn’t find the answer. We couldn’t! 
But one thing I said to these people who raised those qualms was: ‘You know in a small place 
like  Mauritius,  whenever  somebody  writes  a  complaint,  he  copies  it  to  ‘Defi  Plus’,  to 
‘l’Express’, to ‘Radio Plus’, to ‘Radio One’.” I said people go on radio every day, ‘Xplik ou 
Cas’, it’s called and they say whatever they want.   

Now,  if  somebody  was  going  to  report  a  Member  of  Government  for  having 
unexplained wealth to an agency by way of a letter or whatever it is, I am dead sure that if 
nothing  happens,  that  person  will  use  our  friends  in  the  press  to  go  and  say:  “Look,  this 
agency  is  not  working!    This  agency  is  not  doing  its  job!”    I  believe  even  that  is  a  futile 
argument, Madam Speaker. I still can’t understand how this law can be used as a political 
tool against anybody and this is why I totally agree with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister when he 
says in his speech on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill: “If you have nothing to fear, it does 
not concern you at all.” You don’t have unexplained wealth.  Hon. Mohamed was saying the 
same thing twice. We don’t fear anything! We don’t fear this law! 

(Interruptions) 

But I would have expected, if you don’t fear the law, you vote for it! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please don’t interfere! 

Mr Bhadain:  If you don’t vote for it, it means that there is something wrong. What is 
wrong?  I have heard the hon. Leader of the Opposition also this morning mentioning that he 
is not voting for this legislation.  In the press yesterday, ‘la loi Bhadain’, he says with great 
respect.  I actually like it when they say ‘la loi Bhadain’, I must say. 

(Interruptions) 

But he is saying he is not voting because of two things: firstly - and I agree with him on that – 
is section 8 4A probably the wording of it might be construed as ‘you want to be able to go to 
any court of law to call in question whatever is in this law because you are prevented by that 
particular section of the Constitution.’  That’s not my reading! But okay, fair enough!  It is a 
good point because it has never been decided by a court of law. Never interpreted! 

 

99 

However, when we come to the other Bill, what is wrong with the Good Governance 
and  Integrity Reporting  Bill?  I haven’t heard one single argument being put to this House 
today whether it is by the hon. Leader of the Opposition or anybody else as to why this law 
has flaws.  Why this law contains issues which are dangerous?  I can’t understand because, 
Madam Speaker, going back to the process, at the end of everything, when everything has 
been said and done, we are left with only one very simple situation; the Agency reports to the 
Board, the Board decides to send a case to the Judge in Chambers and everything which can 
happen in terms of confiscation will happen there.  

The Judge in Chambers on the basis of affidavits, and this is full transparency, no ex 
parte applications, inter partes the Judge in Chambers can reject the application of the Board, 
this  is  in  the  law,  or  he  can  refer  it  to  the  Supreme  Court  because  there  is  not  sufficient 
evidence and now basically there is a hearing which is going to take place or it can grant the 
order. When it goes to the Supreme Court, if there is a hearing, the Supreme Court can reject 
the application or the Supreme Court can grant the Unexplained Wealth Order and, in any 
case, if an order is issued by the Judge in Chambers or by the Supreme Court after a hearing, 
that particular person can go to the Court of Appeal and challenge that decision, and if he is 
not satisfied of that decision of the Court of Appeal, he can still go to the Privy Council in the 
UK to challenge that decision.  

There  are at least five safeguards. You  give the explanation by  way of  affidavit; the 
agency finds it okay, it stops there. The agency does not find it to be okay, sends it to the 
Board, the Board chaired by a Commonwealth Judge and two assessors; they will look at it 
and they will decide whether to stop it there or whether to go to Court. That’s the second 
safeguard. The Judge in Chambers is the third safeguard.  The Court of Civil Appeal is the 
fourth  safeguard.  The  Privy  Council  in  the  UK  is  the  fifth  safeguard  before  asset  is 
confiscated  and we cannot say that this is an abusive system. We cannot say that it is not 
justifiable in any democratic society and anybody who has said that just by walking into the 
Supreme Court of Mauritius, you will have this law turned down, I challenge them to go. 

Now, Madam Speaker, so much has also been said in terms of… 

(Interruptions) 

They are waiting for the end, the finale! 

(Interruptions) 

 

100 

Now, Madam Speaker, it is a simple law. Very simple! There is no complexity about it. 
There is nothing which should make people, who don’t have unexplained wealth, afraid in 
any  way,  shape  or  form.    It  is  well  in  line  with  our  supreme  law  of  the  Constitution  now 
because it is recognised in the Constitution and, at the end of the day, the Agency which is 
going to be created will have a Director and that person will be an independent person, an 
impartial person and we will see when the person is appointed soon. We will see! And all 
these  fears  that  are  being  expressed  will  be  dispelled  in  the  matter  of  no  time.  The 
Commonwealth Judge who is going to chair the Board will be somebody who is also very 
independent and impartial and the two assessors who are there and, in any case, they can’t do 
anything against anybody. They can’t! The law does not empower them. It is as simple as 
that.  

So, I am not going to go into details, into all the sections of the Bill. I am sure that 
everybody has read it. Everybody will have an opportunity to talk about it. We have 30 odd 
MPs who are going to talk. I will, if need be, in my summing up, bring all the other issues 
which  probably  I  have  missed  out  now  and  I  would  very  much  want  to  say  this,  Madam 
Speaker: this law – I have been saying it in various forums - will change Mauritius. It will 
certainly change Mauritius. I have explained that everything that this Government intends to 
do in terms of Smart Cities, in terms of the Heritage City which is being done in Ébène, there 
are  apartments  which  are  going  to  be  constructed  and  sold.  We  don’t  want  people  with 
unexplained  wealth  to  go  and  benefit  from  all  the  economic  development  that  this 
Government intends to bring.  

We  want  to  create  that  platform  so  that  it  is  just,  fair,  equitable  for  everybody  in 
society. We want the youths of today to be able to secure a position where they can really 
benefit  from  their  hard  work,  from  their  integrity  and  they  don’t  sit  in  their  houses  to  see 
other people who are selling drugs or other people who are taking bribes or other people who 
are committing fraud and Ponzi schemes and all other people who are cheating on taxes, who 
basically are benefiting whilst they are stuck. That law changes society.  

There is another point  which was raised within Government itself,  I  must say, in all 
transparency  as  to  whether  for  undeclared  income  -  people  who  have  not  committed  any 
criminal activity, but they have undeclared income which goes well above Rs10 m. and they 
use that money to enrich themselves even more by doing other business, by buying land, by 
doing other things and re-selling – these people should be exempted.  

 

101 

I  was  asked  to  see  whether  there  was  a  possibility  of  introducing  a  clause  in  that 
particular legislation and I said: “No, you can’t because you will defeat the whole purpose of 
the  legislation,  especially  that  unexplained  wealth  is  defined  in  the  Constitution  as  being 
disproportionate with income and emoluments.” 

Somebody  told  me:  “But  you  can  have  an  honest  person  who  has  been  cheating  so 
much on his tax and he has bought property and he has been doing property development.” I 
was amazed, I said: “You know from where I come from, this is called dishonesty and you 
can’t  have  such  a  provision  in  that  law  which  will  change  society  by  including  an  escape 
route for people who don’t declare taxes. How can you do that?” And this proposal was not 
accepted, Madam Speaker. 

I  must  say  there  were  other  proposals  like  that  which  came  from  different  parts  of 
society,  we  have  sat  down,  we  have  considered,  but  we  found  it  to  be  unacceptable,  not 
because we just wanted to disappoint the people who were raising those issues. No! Because 
they would not fit into what we are trying to achieve for society through this legislation. 

On a last note, Madam Speaker, I must say that it has been very tiring the last six weeks 
to go and open up a debate on a piece of legislation after First Reading to have the whole 
society participating in that. I thought I should do it because we needed to have a transparent 
system. 

If I am the Minister of Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and I am bringing 
as mover of the Bill to this House such a legislation which is going to radically affect the 
functioning  of  society  going  forward  in  a  good  way,  then  I  might  as  well  go  and  meet 
everybody,  talk  to  journalists,  talk  to  civil  society,  meet  the  Bar  Council.  It  was  not  easy, 
Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  to  walk  into  the  Bar  Council  when  you  have  most  of  these 
lawyers there from the Labour party sitting and watching you. 

It was not easy. 

Hon. Mohamed was there. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t interrupt! Hon. Bhadain, please, address the Chair! 
Mr Bhadain: The point I am making is this. This is the very first time probably that 
we’ve managed to have such debates in this House and also out there so that everybody could 
come and give their views. I very much believe that it is a good process which must still be 
done for many other things. We have talked about Declaration of Assets Act as to whether it 

 

102 

should be in public or not. We have talked about the FCC. We have talked about financing of 
political parties. This is the way forward. This is the transparent way forward. This is the way 
which is going to show to everybody that Mauritius is indeed a sovereign democratic State as 
Article 1 of the Constitution says. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 
 (6.30 p.m.) 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, we have just heard 

an awful speech and a lot of constitutional rubbish and I will prove that in a minute. 

In a way, I am very sad. What we have just heard, the level that this debate starts on is 
in  such  stark  contrast  to  what  took  place  when  we  discussed  the  Asset  Recovery 
(Amendment) Bill and even the level of the debate this morning compared to what we have 
just heard. I feel very sad and I hope that the debate come back to fundamentals. 

We voted an amendment to the Constitution a few hours ago, the fundamental law of 
the  country.  It  is  a  solemn  moment  when  we  amend  the  Constitution.  I  consider  we  did  a 
great job doing that. As the amendment to the Constitution provided that we must now come 
with the Bill to implement, to put into action the constitutional provision that we put in, that 
is, allowing for confiscation of unexplained, illicit, ill-gotten gains and property. This is what 
we  are  doing  as  a  follow-up  to  the  amendment  that  has  been  approved  with  the  required 
majority, Madam Speaker. 

As I said this morning, we are fully satisfied with what we voted, the amendment to the 
Constitution, but we are still not satisfied with this piece of legislation. Although we have 
travelled  a  long  way,  I  am  very  sad  listening  to  the  hon.  Minister.  How  grudgingly  he 
acknowledged amendments, as if there was no need, but, in his generosity, grudging all the 
way.  When  you  accept  amendments,  do  it  with  a  smile,  do  it  because  it  was  worth 
considering those amendments and not grudgingly. That’s what we have just heard.  It is a 
shame. It was not warranted; it’s not justified both on the constitutional amendments and now 
we put our heads together and we agree on amendments which we feel are necessary for the 
country. This is what we did on the Constitution and this is partly what we have done, but 
even with the amendments, we are not fully satisfied. We have progressed as I said the other 
day. 

The two main points which I am going to take today is the amendment very grudgingly 
acknowledged – the change as far as the requirement to provide information at the request of 

 

103 

the Director of the Agency. This is the first. That was fundamental. It was awful - and I don’t 
know  how  Government  agreed  to  that  –  to  put  in  our  legislation  that  the  Director  of  the 
Agency that we are going to set up, to create in the law, writes and ‘shall write’ the wording 
of  the  previous  amendment,  of  the  first  amendment.  The  Director  ‘shall  write’,  not  ‘may 
write’. When we look at the first version of the Bill, it is not at all as the Minister tried to give 
the impression. You don’t want to reply, you don’t reply, that’s it! Finished! Bye bye! We go 
to sleep! Not at all! 

As  I  said,  the  legislation  at  first  provided  that  the  Agency  ‘shall  write’  to  request 

information. And then, the next paragraph (b) -  

“(b)  Every person to whom a request has been made pursuant to paragraph 
(a) shall comply with the request within 21 working days of the date of 
its issue or any longer period which the Director may determine.” 

‘Shall reply’. 

And then subsection 8 – 
 “(8) 

Any person who contravenes subsection (1) (b) shall commit an offence and 
shall,  on  conviction,  be  liable  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  50,000  rupees  and  to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.” 

So, don’t give the impression that okay, there was no mauvaise intention: ‘You don’t 
want to reply, you don’t reply, bye bye, you go to the seaside’. No, you could end up in jail as 
it  was  before  without  further  process  except  when  the  case  goes  to  Court  but  then  the 
Magistrate will have the law in front of her or him. So, don’t give that impression that, in 
fact,  the  change  is  not  important.  It  is  fundamental  and  I  am  happy  with  it.  Instead  of 
acknowledging it, of being all happy together, he acknowledges the amendment grudgingly 
as it does not change anything. 

(Interruptions) 

This is what we have just heard earlier on, Madam Speaker, grudgingly. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mr Bérenger: And if I have a stronger word, I’ll use the stronger word. Now, it is 
something completely different. The Minister has agreed to something completely different.  
Now, the Director asks for information, he does not get the information, he goes to the Judge 
for  an  order.  This,  we  fully  agree  with,  as  I  said  this  morning!  So,  this  is  a  fundamental 
amendment, it is not en passant like that. We should acknowledge it and we should be proud 

 

104 

of it and we agree fully with that amendment which was the most dangerous.  I use the word 
‘dangerous’ - part of the first version of the Bill. 

The  second  thing  which  I  have  heard  and  which  made  me  –  the  hon.  Minister 
genuinely  thinks he knows everything. You listen to him and the amount of constitutional 
rubbish which we have just heard!  So, from his weak knowledge of the Constitution, it is as 
if the framers of the Constitution, les pères de la Constitution provided for everything and so 
on and so on. He is not aware at all of what changes we have brought! The Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister,  in  past  Governments,  recently,  since  we  became  a  Republic  especially,  we  have 
brought a lot of amendments where the President has more and more power to appoint. The 
impression he gives is that generally the Prime Minister does what he wants, all the powers. 
No!  This  used  to  be  the  case  before  we  became  a  Republic!  And  we,  together  or  in 
Opposition… 

(Interruptions) 

…we have changed that over the years and I am proud of that and I am sure the hon. Prime 
Minister  is  proud  of  it.  And  he  says:  what  was  the  use  of  the  President  appointing  after 
consultation?  He  does  not  even  know  who  appoints  the  Chief  Justice?  Appointed  by  the 
President! 

Not the advice of the Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, you don’t even know the difference. It is not at all the same! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, can I ask that there should be no 

cross talking between a sitting Member and yourself?  

Mr Bérenger: Yes, but especially no rubbish!  

Madam Speaker: Please don’t reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Yes. But, Madam, this shows that he does not know anything about the 
Constitution! He might know a lot about corruption, but nothing about the Constitution. He 

 

105 

does not even know that when we say that the Chief Justice is appointed by the President 
after consultation and so on, that is one thing. It is the President who appoints. When we say: 
on  the  advice  of  -  clearly,  he  does  not  know  his  Constitution!  If  he  goes  to  section  64: 
Exercise of President’s functions, it is absolutely clear.  Can I read the paragraph - 

“In  the  exercise  of  his  functions  under  this  Constitution  or  any  other  law,  the 
President shall act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or of a Minister (…).” 

He shall act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or of a Minister. 

“…  acting  under  the  general  authority  of  the  Cabinet  except  in  cases  where  he  is 
required  by  this  Constitution  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of,  or  after 
consultation  with,  any  person  or  authority  other  than  the  Cabinet  or  in  his  own 
deliberate judgement.” 

And,  what  I  was  saying  is  that  since  we  have  become  a  Republic,  especially  the 
number  of  cases  where  the  President  appoints  in  his/her  discretion,  numerous  cases! 
Coincidence, I have before me, I am being consulted as the Leader of the Opposition. The 
Chief  Justice  is  an  example  where  the  President  appoints,  after  consultation,  but  it  is  the 
President. It is the same thing for the PSC, the Public Service Commission, again, appointed 
by the President. There is a long list! Clearly the Minister is not aware of it. But since we 
have become a Republic, there is a long list of cases. The Electoral Commissioner - that is 
even  better  -  is  appointed  by  the  President  after  the  President  has  consulted  the  Prime 
Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and any other leader whom he deems fit to consult, 
any other political leader in Parliament. This is even better! 

But, Madam… 

Shut up!  

Constitutional post … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain! 

Mr Bérenger:  Imbecile! You don’t know, shut up! 

 
Madam Speaker: Please don’t interrupt. You will have the opportunity  to reply in 

106 

your winding up speech. Please! 

Mr Bérenger: Let me teach him a little lesson! In front of me, appointment of the 
Ombudsperson  for  Children!  The  idea  for  an  Ombudsperson  for  Children  was  my  idea  in 
Government. Sweden introduced that and  we  followed.  You want to know who  appoints, 
Madam? The Ombudsman shall be appointed by the President of the Republic acting after 
consultation  with  the  Prime  Minister,  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  the  Minister  and  such 
other persons as he considers appropriate. This is just one example! The list is very long and 
clearly the Minister is not aware of it at all. Mais il n’est jamais trop tard pour apprendre, 
Madam  Speaker!  Jamais  trop  tard  pour  apprendre!  And  I  say  that  for  myself  and  for 
everybody. We should not have the attitude that we know everything including constitutional 
matters,  how  the  Constitution  was  created,  how  the  Chief  Justice  is  appointed.  We  know 
everything and we are wrong all the way, Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

So, I come back to this idea. It makes me very sad to hear this kind of rubbish that this 
cannot be used. I was Leader of the Opposition under the previous Prime Minister and there 
is  a  case  which  the  hon.  Minister  congratulated  me  for.  I  stopped  persecution  of  a 
businessman, I won’t say by whom! By a person in authority! I think very close to the hon. 
Prime Minister, that businessman. I don’t accept persecution. I don’t accept injustice under 
any Prime Minister and anybody concerned, an MSM sympathizer, Labour party or MMM, I 
don’t accept! And in that case, do you know how damaged his business was? Because the 
hon. Minister says you can’t do anything, if you pick somebody like it was done, persecute 
and  then,  of  course,  you  leak  it  in  the  Press.  You  leak  it  in  the  Press  that  the  agency  has 
opened an inquiry on so-and-so. Like it was done in the case I mentioned. That businessman 
close to the MSM, his business has been terribly damaged because it was leaked in the Press 
that an inquiry is being opened and this is one of the dangers in this agency business. 

How the Director is going to be appointed? How independent is it really going to be? 
Otherwise, it is going to be manipulated as in the case which I have just mentioned. And, of 
course, finally, nothing happened legally! But he was persecuted that businessman! He lost a 
lot of good business and he is still losing! So, don’t tell me that institutions like that cannot be 
abused,  cannot  be  used.  If  you  don’t  know,  don’t  speak!  But  this  has  happened  under  the 

 

107 

previous Prime Minister and  I  don’t want to be party to the setting up  of any  agency that 
could be in a position to do that kind of thing. 

So,  my  point  is  that  the  Director  of  this  agency  should  be  not  only  apolitical, 
independent. But perception in cases like that is as important as reality! He must be perceived 
as being independent, apolitical and for that to happen, the way he is appointed is crucial - 
both the Director of the agency  and the  Board that is going to control that agency; that is 
going to be on top of that agency. I am not satisfied at all with the amendment. Okay, when 
you  start  on  your  knees,  when  you  stand  up,  you  are  a  giant!  So,  when  we  started,  the 
Director was going to be appointed by the Minister himself, in the first draft which is being 
amended  with  the  green  light  of  the  Prime  Minister.  But  chosen  and  appointed  by  the 
Minister  and  the  Board,  including  the  Chairperson,  by  the  Prime  Minister.  This  is  not 
acceptable! 

This was awful and it has been dropped. Bon, we are progressing, but not much in this 
case.  We  have  well  progressed  in  the  case  of  this  compulsory  response  to  a  request  for 
information. Okay,  I  am satisfied, but in this case, no. Because as  I have quoted from the 
Constitution when we say that the Director, the Board, will be appointed by the President on 
the advice of, constitutionally it means what it means, that is, it is the Prime Minister who is 
choosing. Constitutionally this is as simple as that and it is bad for the country. It is bad for 
any Prime Minister of the country. I insist that we should amend this.  

At  first,  I  suggested  that  the  Director,  if  we  want  him  to  be  really  perceived  as 
apolitical,  above  Board  independent,  why  not  being  appointed  by  the  Legal  and  Judicial 
Service Commission! If we do not do that, okay, but let him and the Board be appointed by 
the President of the Republic after the President has consulted the Prime Minister, the Leader 
of the Opposition and whoever else as has been the case of the Ombudsman for children. We 
have provided for that. In the case of the Ombudsman, which is a very important job, why the 
hon. Minister was giving the impression that it is only State jobs. No! It is generalised now. 
So, I insist that this is required to avoid the perception that it is a political appointee, Madam 
Speaker. These are the two main points of disagreement with the Bill that we are considering 
now.  

We have progressed on a lot of other things, but there are lots of secondary things that 
I  will  call,  certainly  not  minor,  but  important  things,  which  are  among  the  top  priorities, 
which I have in mind and other Members who will speak on that.  

108 

 
I  said  this  morning;  the  Bar  Council  has  worked  under  pressure.  When  they  come 
with their suggestions, they should be considered carefully as well. I am sure Members from 
the  Opposition  side  will  come  with  suggestions.  That  is  why  I  suggested  that  we  vote  the 
amendment to the Constitution and we have done so. We have done a good job earlier in the 
day. What does it change, if we had postponed the debate on the Bill, taken time to consider, 
especially on this matter of how the Agency and the Board will be appointed?  I mean what is 
the rush.  Le Père Noël va nous gronder! What is the rush to do this before… 

(Interruptions) 

I am not talking about le père Bhadain.  I am talking about le Père Noël.   

Okay, Government wants to rush ahead, rush ahead! There will be danger in that case 
of  challenge  before  the  Supreme  Court.  I  am  sure  of  that.  The  first  case  that  comes  up  is 
going to go to the Supreme Court. I do not think it will have to go further than the Supreme 
Court.  Why  ‘alle  gratte  lédos  malheur;  as  we  say  in  our  national  language.    But,  okay, 
Government wants to rush ahead. I believe that it was worth taking time to consider the other 
comments that we will meet here in the House and the comments that have been made by the 
Bar Council. 

Now, it will be interesting to see whether when we are done with the debates, whether 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  going  to  move  for  a  division.  Because  as  I  have  said  this 
morning, we have the other clause, section 8 (4)(a) of the Constitution, that if a law dealing 
with property acquisition or compulsory acquisition is voted by a three-quarter, it cannot be 
challenged in court. I won’t go into the debate. I think that it could be challenged anyway. It 
has never been challenged, but it could be. I will request Government, if you have a majority, 
do not ask a division. If you ask a division, it means that you have this clause in mind and 
you want to get a three-quarter majority. I’m trying to use a word that will not hurt, not to 
hide and take protection behind this clause of the Bill. It would be very, very bad.  

So, I hope that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not move for a division on that. We 
moved  for  a  division  this  morning  and  there  was  a  three-quarter  majority  -  much  above  a 
three-quarter majority. In that case, I would appeal to Government not to move for a division. 
You have majority. You want to go ahead. You don’t think it is worth postponing the debate, 
considering  further  different  amendments,  especially  the  way  the  Board  and  Agency  are 
going to be appointed. Okay, you have a majority. You want to rush ahead, rush ahead, but 

 

109 

do  not  use  that  clause  of  the  Constitution  because  it  would  send  the  wrong  signal  to  the 
country. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me, hon. Minister, the Deputy Speaker will now take the 

Chair. 

At this stage, the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

(6.54 p.m.)  

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting Bill which concerns both the public and the private sectors, is one of its kinds. The 
very  purpose  of  this  Bill  is  laudable.  It  is  indeed  a  great  innovation  for  Mauritius  in  its 
crusade to fight rampant malpractices and to ensure transparency at all levels and in all fields. 
I believe that this Bill is the launching pad, which will undoubtedly propel Mauritius to one 
of  the  highest  ranks  on  the  international  integrity  ladder.  It  is  intended  to  promote  in 
Mauritius a culture of good governance and integrity through positive reporting. 

One of the observations of law-enforcement agencies across the globe is that the best 
method of dealing with serious organised crimes is to target the asset rather than the person. 
This has indeed proved to be an efficient method. There are some people who do earn money 
from criminal activity. However, due to a lack of proximity to the offence committed, these 
people cannot be prosecuted. Thus, unexplained wealth provisions serve as a valuable tool to 
trace illegal gains.  

This  Bill,  the  disclosure  of  malpractices  and  the  recovery  of  unexplained  wealth 
should have long been on the Government agenda. It is good that we are coming with it and I 
commend  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms to have brought forward this innovation on our table today. 

This  is  one  of  those  Bills  which  attract  significant  public  debates.  One  can  clearly 
realise  how  the  general  population  can  actually  participate  indirectly  in  the  legislative 
procedures and contribute by providing their productive opinions and constructive views.  

110 

 
Members of the public have indeed been able to participate through various means. It 
cannot be denied that this Bill has, indeed, elicited comments from all fronts. The views and 
comments of the public have been taken into account before the submission of this piece of 
legislation before the House. Various debates have been organised with a view to explaining 
the spirit of the Bill.  Recommendations from various authorities have been welcomed. 

The hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
has been all ears to all stakeholders. I am personally pleased to note how the hon. Minister 
has  considered  the  various  different  views  to  bring  about  amendments  to  the  Bill  so  as  to 
ensure that this Bill reflects the necessity of the present conditions of the Mauritian society. 

The Bill does not provide for a restriction on the right of property of the citizens, as 
guaranteed under section 8 of the Constitution. We should not forget that whilst many will 
think that civil forfeiture under this Bill will impinge on the rights to property of people, yet 
they should be reminded that in so many countries like Canada, Ireland and Australia such 
civil forfeitures have been cast as a marginal interference. Public interest takes precedence 
over this interference in the balance. 

In the fight against corruption and malpractices, the public interest will always weigh 

heavier in the balance. 

Private individuals should be prepared to subject themselves to the test in the interest 

of the general public. 

I wish to take the example of Australia, which has adopted unexplained wealth laws. 
For the Australian authorities, unexplained wealth laws represent a highly effective tool in 
their fight against serious and organised crimes. If these laws are correctly and successfully 
applied, they ensure the removal of the financial incentive to commit crimes. The Australian 
authorities  are  very  much  alive  to  the  fact  that  tainted  wealth  could  be  the  only  means  to 
successfully detect criminal entrepreneurs whose participation in organised crimes is usually 
an indirect one. Civil forfeiture is thus considered as a useful civil tool in addition to classical 
criminal law instruments, which are traditionally dependent on criminal convictions. 

In  Canada,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  civil  forfeiture  law  is  also  considered  as 
legislative machinery which creates authority in rem to seize property shown on a balance of 
probabilities to be tainted. The proceeds obtained as a result of these forfeitures are thereafter 
used to compensate victims and thus remedy the negative effects of criminality on society. 

 
One cannot, therefore, venture to say that this Bill is depriving people of their assets. 

111 

It is indeed for the benefit of the people. 

Let me also consider the example of Ireland which adopted civil forfeiture legislation 
in the aftermath of the murders of detective McCabe and the investigative journalist Guerin. 
It was imperative to enact these laws as a response in the battle against organised crimes. It 
was a means for Ireland to hit back at such criminality. The same applies for Italy where the 
process has been very effective in the prevention of crime. It is of no doubt that unexplained 
wealth provisions contribute to measures aimed at prevention. 

Likewise,  this  present  Bill  is  no  doubt  well-intended.  Those  people  who  purport  to 
own property to an extent which is disproportionate to their emoluments and other income 
should  be  called  upon  to  explain  the  source  of  their  income  in  the  fight  against  corrupt 
practices. Our Government has reiterated its relentless fight against corruption and this Bill is 
indeed a contributing factor. 

We are not creating a criminal offence.  Here, we are only for the institution of civil 
proceedings whereby obviously the onus should be on the respondent citizen to establish on a 
lower  standard  of  proof,  that  is,  on  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  property  is  not  an 
unexplained wealth. 

I need to add that this innovative Bill comprises a particular provision, namely clause 
11. This clause provides that the Integrity Reporting Services Agency, when established, will 
set  up  and  oversee  good  governance  and  integrity  reporting  campaigns  with  a  view  to 
enhancing  the  standard  of  Mauritius  as  an  international  financial  centre  of  excellence,  of 
integrity, with the object of attracting investment. 

What  is  marvellous  about  this  is  the  fact  that  the  Bill  not  only  aims  at  eradicating 
malpractices, but is also looking forward. A country depends heavily on its economic pillar. 
This Bill does not turn a blind eye to the need for Mauritius to attract investment by creating 
a  captivating  platform  where  potential  investors  will  be  guided  by  good  business  ethics  in 
their dealings. 

Therefore, the spirit of this Bill is far-reaching. Mauritius will one day be commended 
in the international business world for having come up with the provisions of the Bill. The 
confidence of the people will be boosted and so will the economy of Mauritius. 

112 

 
Across the globe, the dreadful truth is that ill-gotten gains are the cause of so many 
heinous crimes. The civil forfeiture provided in this Bill targets those ill-gotten gains. This 
civil forfeiture is expected to create the desired  domino effect in Mauritius. Promoting the 
right  standard  of  behaviour  in  society,  disrupting  established  criminal  networks,  deterring 
corruption  and  other  harmful  activities  are  all  but  a  few  most  obvious  benefits  that  are 
expected  to  be  earned  from  the  applications  of  the  provisions  of  this  Bill.    Having  a  civil 
forfeiture process in itself ensures a better, a more expedient and more efficient system of 
recovery than the usual cumbersome criminal asset recovery mechanism. 

We are here preventing the seeds from developing into a full-fledged criminal plant. 

Very often, we hear the distressful stories of victims of crimes about how they have 
lost their hard-earned properties, and we are minded to think that justice delayed is justice 
denied. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Bill will be the light at the end of the tunnel for those 
victims.  One  of  the  main  objects  of  this  Bill  is  to  protect  and  reward  persons  by 
compensation. It is indeed a paradigm shift. It is also to be noted that the provisions of this 
Bill make it clear that before an unexplained wealth order is ultimately imposed on a person, 
a  comprehensive  sort  of  investigation  is  carried  out  with  the  collaboration  of  the  person 
concerned. An in-depth analysis is carried out with a view to creating a complete picture of 
all the property that the person purports to own or control. It is necessary to investigate the 
person’s working life and related activities. It is only after this process is completed and it is 
only where there is sufficient evidence for unexplained wealth that an order should be sought 
from the Court, that an application for an order will be made. 

If a person can justify his earnings, I do not know how and why he should not be able 
to explain his wealth! I believe the majority of the people will easily be able to explain the 
source of their earnings! 

This Bill should not be looked up as a standalone unexplained wealth legislation. It 
has resulted in some amendments in existing legislation, and I personally believe that there 
would be further legislation that would be designed in the future to complement the present 
Bill in the fight against malpractices and in the promotion of a culture of integrity reporting 
across the island. This new piece of unexplained wealth legislation is a key addition to the 
existing criminal asset regime and it represents a great leap in law enforcement strategy. 

 

113 

With appropriate safeguards, it is a reasonable and proportionate response to the threat 

of surging number of malpractices.  

Indeed, our vision is to make of Mauritius a paragon of integrity where people really 
want to live. I, once again, express my deep appreciation to the hon. Minister of Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms for this Bill. 

With these words, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I highly commend this Bill to the House.  

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

 (7.07 p.m.) 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, for giving me the floor to participate into such debates and I won’t be long. It is good to 
hear that the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
has said in his opening speech that the law is very simple. We are governed by a Government 
-  there  is  a  Government  here  -  and  I  think  in  this  Government  they  are  social  Democrats.  
When they make law, laws are supposed to be simple to understand, easy to understand, easy 
to apply and that protect people and protect the country.  But I am asking myself: “Is this law 
doing all that?” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  we  are  referring  to  good  governance  and  integrity, 
words like ‘accountability’ and ‘transparency’ come up all the time.  Therefore, this Bill is 
about tackling corruption. 

Corruption  is  a  phenomenon  which  is  difficult  to  tackle  and,  at  the  same  time,  we 

cannot afford to ignore. 

Almost  all  the  people  living  in  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  believe  or  have  the 
perception  that  the  level  of  corruption  in  Mauritius  for  the  past  few  years  is  increasing. 
Therefore, it is not a surprise that fighting corruption has become a priority for politicians and 
now this law is bringing all that good intention on the way for the concrete results. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Bill is bringing the necessary legal instruments for the 
prevention and fight against corruption, but it has to be vigorously enforced and that one has 

 

114 

to  find  the  examples  of  how  systemic  problems  related  to  corruption  are  being  tackled 
effectively. 

This Bill is an additional tool in helping Mauritius to achieve the second economic 
miracle.  Good  governance  is  increasingly  important  in  promoting  economic  stability.  This 
law is not just to tackle corruption. I think it is a sound economic policy as well. 

Adverse economic effects of poor governance on economic performance are losses in 
Government  revenues,  low  quality  of  public  investment  and  public  services,  and  reduced 
private investment, and loss of public confidence in Government. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  achieving  the  second  economic  miracle  is  achieving 
economic  success  -  transparency  and  good  governance  is  central  in  achieving  economic 
success. With poor governance, domestic investment and growth suffer. 

Now,  how  good  governance  is  to  be  promoted  by  this  law?  Surely  not  by 
systematically  seeking  out  all  cases  of  corruption  in  Mauritius,  but  by  improving  the 
management of public resources, establishing stable and transparent regulatory environment 
thus improving economic efficiency and in turn eradicating corruption. 

This  law  will  also  help  to  improve  Government  revenues  and  Government 
expenditures. Those savings can effectively be used on primary health care, basic education, 
vocational training and essential infrastructure. 

An example of bad governance is a country in our region. Nigeria, for example, rich 
in resources, in occurrence crude oil, but confronted to all sorts of conflicts. Bad governance 
in Nigeria has given rise to civilian leadership, governance failure and widespread poverty - 
things which we don’t want to happen in our Republic. It would be good to examine how 
wealth has been used in Nigeria or inappropriately used to negate sustainable development. 
That wealth could be used for the welfare of their people and tackle the security challenge 
that they are facing, like ethno sectarian violence and inter religion violence. 

Having said that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me come back to Mauritius! With the 
fall of the last Government in Mauritius, there have been so many arrests; still so many are 
being  interrogated.  Most  of  the  cases,  as  reported  by  the  Police  and  the  media,  entail 
corruption and that include - 

•  acceptance of money or other rewards for awarding contracts; 

 

115 

•  violation of procedures to enhance personal interest, including kickbacks 

from development programmes, and 

•  diversion  of  public  resources  for  private  uses  and  also  included  are 
nepotism,  common  theft,  overpricing  and  establishing  of  non-existent 
projects amongst others. 

Is it not time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to start asking why all these are happening in 
Mauritius? Is this not having a link to how political parties are funded? Government integrity 
demands more than an expression of goodwill.  Will this law bring supportive structures to 
enhance transparency and accountability in the way political parties are funded?  

Is it not time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that financing of political parties become more 
formalised  and  to  disclose  it  to  the  public  so  as  to  show  the  transparent  operation  on  our 
electoral  system.  Public  confidence  is  the  integrity  of  our  democracy.  The  full  and  timely 
disclosure  of  donations  to  election  candidates  and  political  parties  can  address  all  those 
concerns on allegation of corruption, which is happening right now in our country. 

Coming  back  to  the  Bill,  I  think  one  of  the  important  steps  in  fighting  corruption 
within an organisation or institution is the disclosure of malpractices by members within the 
organisation itself. 

If we are admitting that corruption exists in Mauritius, if there are so many alleged 
cases of corruption in Mauritius recently, there must be someone somewhere who is aware 
that a colleague, an employer, an employee, a consultant or a contractor is doing something 
wrong. In so many situations most people will turn a blind eye on it and not get involved. But 
there are a very few who are courageous enough to take a stand and report what they have 
seen. 

The application of this law will depend on whistle blowers so as to alert malfeasance 
of corruption. Therefore, in this law, there must be an effective scheme which will encourage 
individuals to come forward and blow the whistle. Those people - the genuine ones - should 
be protected. They should not have to risk their careers  and to compromise their safety in 
doing the right things.  

We all know about the BAI saga, the Ponzi scheme. If there were whistle blowers and 
those whistle blowers were not to have to fear of retaliation or reprisal, the problem of the 
BAI saga would have not come to such a level of crisis.  

 

116 

It  is  very  important  that  whistle  blowers  be  fully  protected  and  when  I  say  whistle 
blowers,  I  am  referring  to  the  genuine  ones,  not  those  who  are  involved  in  corruption 
searching for immunity. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as I have said earlier on,… 

(Interruptions) 

… fighting corruption is not just morally right, but it is economically right too.  If you see the 
result of Singapore, the effort of Lee Kwan Yew in tackling corruption had helped to give 
people confidence to invest in Singapore and make Singapore so successful. 

It is, therefore, very important that the law of Good Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Bill be applied so as to get all the wealth and money that had vanished by corruption and to 
siphon back all the goods into the system for proper use. 

With these words, I thank you for your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

(7.17 p.m.) 

Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes): M. le président, 
le projet de loi qui est présenté au Parlement revêt une importance particulière dans tout ce 
que  les  mauriciens  attachent  comme  importance  notamment  dans  la  gestion  du  patrimoine 
personnel ou familial ou encore créer une culture de good governance et d’intégrité à tous les 
échelons de la société mauricienne. Une question pertinente demeure quant à la responsabilité 
du  citoyen  d’assurer  une  certaine  transparence  dans  la  gestion  de  son  patrimoine,  d’être 
redevable  vis-à-vis  de  l’État  quant  à  sa  contribution  aux  impôts,  d’accepter  de  renforcir 
l’arsenal répressif de l’État vis-à-vis des contrevenants et doter une agence ministérielle d’un 
pouvoir de confiscation de biens en cas d’activités licites ou illicites. 

M. le président, je souhaite que le débat soit fait d’une façon dépassionnée et objective.  
Notre  souci  c’est  avant  tout  de  s’assurer  qu’il  y  ait  une  adhésion  de  la  population,  une 
protection des droits fondamentaux de cette même population et une assurance que cette loi 
passe l’épreuve du temps, test of time comme dit l’anglais, et ce quel que soit le ministre en 
place ou le gouvernement en place. Être pour ou contre le projet de loi ne peut être interprété 

 

117 

comme un choix du camp des bons ou des méchants de la société. Il faut savoir écouter et 
analyser la pertinence des arguments. 

Dans  un  premier  temps  je  commenterai  la  situation  actuelle  des  lois  et  ensuite  je 

commenterai spécifiquement les provisions de la loi. 

M. le président, je souhaite, à ce stade de mon intervention, faire un bref relevé des lois 
existantes où il existe une procédure de saisie et de confiscation des biens qui ont été acquis 
d’une façon illicite. Quand on parle d’illicite, on a en tête les acquis effectués des revenus des 
trafics de drogue, de blanchiment d’argent ou encore des Ponzi schemes. Des lois existantes 
du  pays  permettent  déjà  la  confiscation  des  biens.    Je  cite  la  Dangerous  Drugs  Act,  le 
Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act et le Prevention of Corruption Act ou 
encore l’Asset Recovery Act. 

Il est important de rappeler encore une fois que l’arsenal répressif existe déjà quant à la 
procédure de saisie et de confiscation de biens des personnes mêlées à des activités illicites. 
Le Good Governance and Integrity Bill n’est pas et ne doit pas être considéré comme cette loi 
s’apparentant au jugement dernier. Les pour ou contre au projet de loi ne sont pas les bons ou 
les méchants de la société car la société mauricienne a déjà accepté des lois répressives et des 
confiscations des biens dérivés des activités illicites. La société mauricienne a déjà accepté 
une logique, une norme légale pour dire que les biens acquis des activités illicites courent le 
risque d’une saisie ou d’une confiscation. 

De plus, M. le président, la Présidente de la République de Maurice est partie prenante 
des conventions internationales où la question de confiscation des biens est prévue, je cite la 
United  Nations  Convention  against  Illicit  Traffic  in  Narcotic  Drugs  and  Psychotropic 
Substances  de  1988, 
la  UN  Convention  against  Transnational  Organised  Crime, 
l’International Convention for the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism ou encore la UN 
Convention against Corruption.  

Les  lois  existantes  à  Maurice,  la  Dangerous  Drugs  Act,  la  FIAMLA  ou  encore  la 
Prevention of Corruption Act et les conventions internationales que je viens de citer ont pour 
but de combattre le crime. 

A part de combattre le crime, je parle d’activités illicites, ces mêmes lois prévoient le 
reversal of the burden of proof.  Le devoir de qualification du Criminal Nature des Assets 
n’est pas seulement sur l’Enforcement Authority mais aussi sur l’accusé de venir prouver que 

 

118 

ses  assets  ne  sont  pas  des  proceeds  of  crime.  La  Cour  déterminera  la  pertinence  d’un 
Confiscation Order sur un balance of probabilities. 

Autre fait existant une procédure civile pour une offense criminelle. 

Autre sujet de discussion est la question de l’exception à la question de rétroactivité. 
Cela, M. le président, bien qu’étant un garde-fou aux respects des droits fondamentaux des 
citoyens dans les poursuites criminelles, des exceptions ont été permises, à titre d’exemple, 
dans l’Asset Recovery Act où la rétroactivité est de 10 ans. Bien que l’exception ne doit pas 
devenir la règle, la question de rétroactivité est encore prévue dans le Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill - là je dois dire d’une façon ambiguë et j’aurai l’occasion d’y revenir 
dans mon intervention. 

M. le président, il convient de rappeler que la procédure de saisie diffère selon qu’il y a 
eu une condamnation ou il n’y a pas eu de condamnation.  Le ‘conviction based forfeiture’, 
c’est-à-dire qu’on a bien entendu le ‘in personam order’ ou encore l’action contre la personne 
ou bien le ‘non-conviction based asset forfeiture’ aussi  appelé le ‘civil forfeiture’ qui est une 
action  ‘in  rem’.    C’est  une  procédure  différente  des  criminal  proceedings  et  nécessite 
seulement  de  prouver  que  le  bien  provient  d’un  crime.  Et  là,  même  s’il  n’y  a  pas  eu  de 
poursuite  au  criminel  d’une  personne,  la  saisie  sera  basée  sur  une  question  de  ‘balance  of 
probabilities’ et que le bien en question ne provient pas d'une activité illégale d'un crime. 

Ceci  dit,  M.  le  président,  il  est  important  de  comprendre  et  de  reconnaître  que  la 
présente loi sous le couvert du Good Governance à un champ d’application très large et grave 
incluant non seulement des activités illicites mais aussi des activités licites. Permettez-moi de 
préciser que cette loi concerne tout aussi bien des biens acquis des activités tout à fait légales. 
Le mot magique, M. le président, est le ‘Unexplained Wealth’. 

M.  le  président,  prenons  un  cas  de  figure.  Un  self-employed,  un  professionnel,  un 
médecin,  un  agent  immobilier,  un  homme  d’affaires,  un  homme  de  loi,  un  comptable,  un 
contracteur, un planteur, un boutiquier et pourquoi pas un marchand ambulant décide après 5, 
10 ou 15 ans d’acheter un bien immobilier ou se trouve avec une certaine somme d’argent en 
banque  ou  en  investissement.  Ces  personnes  exercent  des  activités  tout  à  fait  légales  et 
moralement  acceptables  dans  une  société  telle  que  la  nôtre.  Vous  remarquerez  ici,  M.  le 
président,  que  je  ne  fais  aucune  mention  d’un  bien  de  plus  de  R  10  millions  parce  que  je 
considère que cela relève d’une manœuvre purement politicienne, le souci de rallier la cause 

 

119 

d’une majorité de la population pour qui la loi ‘pou casse les reins ça banne capitalistes-là’. 
D’où le soutien surprenant de ‘Rezistans ek Alternativ’. Comme quoi un enregistrement de 
plus R 10 millions est acceptable alors que dépassé R 10 millions, vous ne justifiez pas, on 
saisit votre bien. Dieu nous garde que la protection des droits fondamentaux en cours n’est 
pas limitée à une question de millions de roupies. 

Ces  self-employed  exerçant  des  activités  tout  à  fait  légales  en  achetant  un  bien  sont 
répertoriés dans leur case hypothécaire au bureau de l’enregistrement. La MRA demande des 
explications quant aux revenus justifiant des acquisitions. En l’absence de justifications, en 
l’absence  des  fameux  reçus  de  ces  self-employed    que  j’ai  mentionnés,  la  MRA  décide  de 
faire un blind assessment comme c’est la pratique pour dire que votre revenu échelonné sur X 
période est de tel montant prenant en considération la nature de votre activité professionnelle 
et la valeur de votre acquisition.  

Après discussion avec la MRA comme un bon citoyen on décide de payer la somme 
convenue ou même avec une pénalité de 15%. Dans une société civilisée telle que la nôtre 
cette  démarche  est  tout  à  fait  louable  et  acceptable  et  même  recommandable.  Le  self-
employed a rempli ses dettes vis-à-vis des autorités, vis-à-vis de la société. C’est une norme 
légale et sociale tout à fait acceptable. A l’état actuel des choses, le souci du self-employed 
qui fait des activités tout à fait légales s’arrête là. 

Mais, malheureusement, M. le président, avec la nouvelle loi, le calvaire du bon self-
employed ne s’arrête pas là parce qu’il est un client potentiel du fameux unexplained wealth. 
Le Bill vise tous les cas où le patrimoine d’un individu quelconque excéderait sa déclaration 
des revenus. L’individu visé n’est pas un criminel, il n’est pas non plus suspecté d’en être un. 
Le bien de l’individu pourra être confisqué parce qu’il ne pourra pas prouver devant une Cour 
de justice selon la nouvelle loi que son patrimoine est proportionnel à ses revenus déclarés. 
Mon appel aujourd’hui est au ministre, au gouvernement, à cette majorité gouvernementale 
c’est de faire preuve pas seulement de la compassion mais aussi de la raison pour ces self-
employed qui ne sont pas suspectés d’activités illégales, qui ne font pas l’objet d’une charge 
criminelle, qui n’ont pas été condamnés d’une offense criminelle et qui, M. le président, sont 
tout  à  fait  d’accord  de  s’acquitter  de  leurs  dettes  vis-à-vis  de  la  MRA  et  de  l’État.  Ces 
personnes-là, M. le président, ne peuvent pas et ne doivent pas avoir leurs biens confisqués 
sous l’Unexplained Wealth. 

120 

 
Je  fais  une  parenthèse  ici,  M.  le  président.  Dans  la  logique  des  choses,  sous  la 
nouvelle loi tous les assessments, je dis bien une bonne centaine d’assessments que fait la 
MRA  chaque  année  sont  qualifiés  pour  être  référés  à  des  Unexplained  Wealth  Orders.  La 
section 9(1) du Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill préconise un Duty to Report -  

(1)  ‘Notwithstanding  any  other  enactment,  where,  in  the  exercise  of  his 
functions,  the  Director-General  of  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  has 
reasonable  ground  to  suspect  that  a  person  has  acquired  unexplained 
wealth, he shall make a written report of the matter to the Agency.’ 

La situation est d’autant plus aberrante, M. le président, que le gouvernement a prévu une 
amnistie sur deux années consécutives pour ceux qui sont volontiers à déclarer leurs revenus, 
à s’acquitter de leur dette vis-à-vis de la MRA. 

M. le président, il est beaucoup question ces temps-ci de faire référence aux pays où il 
existe des traditions démocratiques ; des pays où il existe des lois qui permettent au judiciaire 
de confisquer des biens dans le cadre d’une procédure civile où la personne visée a acquis des 
biens  qui  sont  disproportionnés  à  ses  revenus.  L’onus  of  proof,  la  charge  de  la  preuve  est 
renversée. Il a une obligation de justification même s’il n’a pas été préalablement condamné 
au pénal. Référence est faite beaucoup à l’Irlande et à l’Australie. Les orateurs précédents ont 
beaucoup parlé d’Irlande et d’Australie. 

Madame la Présidente, il convient de reconnaitre que le Proceeds of Crime Act 1996 
en  Irlande,  le  Proceeds  of  Crime  Act  de  2002  en  Australie  parlent  d’Unexplained  Wealth 
Orders dans la lutte contre le crime organisé. Les suspects sont dans l’obligation de prouver 
que leurs biens n’ont pas été acquis par des revenus générés par des activités illicites car il y a 
une  présomption  que  ces  revenus  proviennent  des  activités  illégales.  Cela  est  tout  à  fait 
justifié  d’exproprier  des  criminels  des  biens  acquis  grâce  à  des  activités  criminelles.  Ces 
criminels ne peuvent en profiter et ne peuvent se servir de ces moyens pour poursuivre leurs 
activités  criminelles.  Dans  sa  forme  actuelle,  le  présent  projet  de  loi  permet  d’exproprier 
toute personne qui n’aurait pas déclaré des revenus mêmes générés par des activités légales. 

M. le président, toujours dans ce même raisonnement, je me réfère ici à la section 16 

relative au Unexplained Wealth Order - 

“16.   Unexplained Wealth Order  

(1)   Where  the  Agency  makes  an  application  for  an  Unexplained 
Wealth Order and the Judge in Chambers is satisfied that the 

 

121 

respondent  has  unexplained  wealth,  he  shall  make  an 
Unexplained Wealth Order or an Order for the payment of its 
monetary equivalent.  

(2)   Where the Judge is not satisfied, he shall refer the matter to the 

Supreme Court.” 

M. le président, nous parlons ici d’une sanction pénale qu’est l’Unexplained 
Wealth Order. J’ai soulevé plus tôt, M. le président, le cas des personnes qui font des 
activités tout à fait légales mais qui n’arrivent pas à justifier leurs revenus et envers 
qui  nous  appliquons  une  sanction  pénale  qui  est  la  confiscation  de  leurs  biens  à 
travers  l’Unexplained  Wealth  Order.  Il  se  pose  une  règle  d’or  du  droit  qui  est  la 
question  de  proportionnalité  de 
la 
proportionnalité  de  la  sanction  face  à  l’offense  commise  qui  est  ici,  dans  ce  cas 
présent, la non justification des revenus pour  ceux qui font des activités tout à fait 
légales.  

la  confiscation  d’un  bien.  Je  parle  de 

Venez dire maintenant aux professionnels ou aux self-employed qui font des 
activités tout à fait légales, qui ont fait l’objet d’un assessment de la MRA et qui ont 
payé  avec  une  pénalité  de  15% ;  qu’ils  auront  ces  biens  saisis  ou  il  leur  faut 
maintenant payer le monetary  equivalent pour un explained wealth, M. le président, 
c’est  un  cas  flagrant  de  double  jeopardy.  Cela  équivaut  à  pénaliser  une  même 
personne deux fois pour la même offense, c’est-à-dire, n’avoir pas déclaré ses revenus 
et ne pouvoir justifier ses acquisitions. Je me pose la question, M. le président : est-ce 
que  l’incapacité  d’un  professionnel  ou  d’un  self-employed  qui  a  fait  une  activité 
légale, qui ne peut justifier les moyens de ses acquisitions, fait de lui un hors-la-loi 
qui mérite une sanction pénale. 
M.  le  président,  permettez-moi  de  considérer  ici  le  pouvoir  de  l’Agency  de 
 
prendre  une  inscription  de  privilège  sur  les  biens  d’une  personne  sur  qui  pèse  une 
enquête  relative  au  Unexplained  Wealth  Order.    La  question  d’inscription  est  une 
question très grave et je souhaite que cela ait toute l’attention du gouvernement. 

Suite aux protestations soulevées quant aux inconvénients faits à une personne 
chez  qui  pèse  une  inscription,  le  ministre  est  venu  dire  que  pour  soulager  de  tels 
inconvénients  la  durée  de  l’inscription  prise  par  l’Agency  sera  de  six  semaines 
seulement afin d’assurer que personne ne soit pénalisé injustement. Maintenant que 
l’amendement  a  été  circulé,  nous  voyons  étrangement  que  les  42  jours  ne  courent 
qu’après réception du rapport par le Board. Je m’explique, M. le président. Si on veut 

 

122 

s’assurer que les droits ne soient pas lésés, comment se fait-il qu’il n’y a aucun délai 
entre la prise d’inscription par l’Agency et la soumission du rapport au Board.  

M. le président, il est faux de dire en vérité à partir de la date de l’inscription 
par  l’Agency  que  la  durée  de  l’inscription  est  indéterminée  parce  qu’il  faut  bien 
reconnaître que la durée de l’inscription ne court qu’après réception par le Board du 
rapport de l’Agency. On est en droit de dire qu’une fois l’inscription est prise contre 
une personne que financièrement et civilement le citoyen concerné est paralysé dans 
tous ses droits à partir de la date de l’inscription. Nous savons tous qu’une inscription 
interdit  une  personne  de  contracter  un  emprunt.  Une  inscription  empêche  une 
personne  de  procéder  à  un  partage  ou  encore  de  transférer  ses  biens  même  à  ses 
enfants.  

M. le président, il est un principe reconnu du droit qu’une fois une enquête est 
ouverte contre une personne, cette dernière doit bénéficier d’un fair justice; doit être 
assuré que ses droits soient protégés et respectés.  

M. le président, il est primordial que la question de la durée soit un élément 
déterminant dans le Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. Je ne parle pas, 
bien sûr, du délai de 21 jours pour toute personne de répondre par voie d’affidavit 
mais bien du délai dans lequel l’Agency doit soumettre son rapport au Board; du délai 
aussi dans lequel le Board shall direct the Agency to a Judge in Chambers parce que, 
une fois que l’inscription est prise par l’Agency, l’Agency peut prendre un mois, six 
mois, une année, deux années ou trois années ; il n’y a aucun délai qui est prévu pour 
que  le  rapport  soit  soumis  au  Board.    Pendant  tout  ce  temps,  l’inscription  est  déjà 
prise  contre  la  personne  concernée.  Donc,  le  délai  de  42  jours  ne  court  qu’après 
réception du rapport par le Board. 

Ce délai, M. le président, doit aussi s’appliquer quand le Board directs the Agency to 
apply to a Judge in Chambers for an Unexplained Wealth Order. M. le président, la durée est 
un élément fondamental pour prévenir toute action abusive et, bien sûr, pour protéger tout 
citoyen dans ses droits. 

M. le président, je propose que la section 5 (2) concernant Powers of the Agency et la 
section  14  concernant  Application  for  Unexplained  Wealth  Order  soient  amendées  pour 
qu’une période définie soit stipulée pour l’Agency de soumettre son rapport au Board et d’une 
date déterminée pour l’inscription et pour faire une application d’Unexplained Wealth Order. 
M.  le  président,  nous  connaissons  tous  qu’il  existe  bon  nombre  de  cas  à  Maurice  où  la 

 

123 

question  de  durée  a  été  considérée  comme  un  élément  déterminant  dans  la  protection  des 
droits des citoyens. 

M. le président, je souhaite ici, toujours en ce qui concerne l’inscription, aborder un 
autre aspect du droit qui est la nature de l’inscription d’une part et le privilège d’autre part 
vis-à-vis des institutions créancières - banques ou assurances. 

Toute  institution  créancière  en  contrepartie  d’un  crédit  exige  des  sûretés  dans  les 
formes  de  sûretés  fixes,  flottantes  ou  d’hypothèques.  En  cas  de  non-respect  des  termes  de 
l’acte de prêt, l’institution créancière peut demander la vente de ces biens devant la Master’s 
Court de la Cour Suprême. Suivant la vente à la barre, le proceeds of sale est partagé selon 
les dispositions de l’Insolvency Act dans un ordre de priorité clairement établi par la loi. 

M. le président, malheureusement, il convient de se rendre à l’évidence que le présent 
projet  de  loi  est  silencieux  quant  au  rang  qu’aura  l’inscription  du  privilège  sur  les  autres 
inscriptions déjà existantes. Y aura-t-il une primauté sur les autres ou si on se fie à la section 
12 (4) where a privilege is inscribed under the section it shall take effect from the date of the 
inscription. Il est clair, M. le président, qu’une réponse claire est nécessaire du ministre. 

En  cas  de  primauté,  M.  le  président,  la  situation  risque  d’être  catastrophique  pour 
l’emprunteur car toutes les institutions créancières du pays exigent le first rank inscription 
comme  sûretés  pour  les  facilités  de  crédit.  En  cas  de  perte  de  ce  first  rank  mortgage 
inscription, M. le président, dans la pratique les institutions bancaires ont le droit d’exiger le 
paiement  immédiat  de  la  facilité  bancaire  comme  stipulé  dans  le  contrat  de  prêt.  Et  nous 
savons tous ce que cela représente pour le pauvre emprunteur. La situation est d’autant plus 
ambiguë et cornélienne pour le vendeur d’un bien immobilier. Le vendeur qui fait une vente à 
crédit à un acheteur, dans le jargon notarial, on appelle cela une vente avec solde de prix. 
C’est-à-dire, qu’il y a une vente, la vente est conclue, la vente est enregistrée mais dans le 
contrat de vente c’est convenu en ce qui concerne le prix, une partie du prix a été payée et la 
différence sera payable dans tels délais. Pour garantir cette différence de paiement, il y a une 
inscription de privilège qui est prise sur le bien en faveur du vendeur contre l’acheteur. 

La question se pose, M. le président, si un Unexplained Wealth Order est émis contre 
l’acheteur après la conclusion de la vente, après l’enregistrement du contrat de vente, est-ce 
que le vendeur pourra demander la résolution du contrat de vente comme lui permet le Code 
Civil  Mauricien  ou  perd-t-il  tout  simplement  son  droit ?  La  question  se  pose.  Mais  il  est 

 

124 

évident qu’on se trouve dans un cas de deprivation de propriété. Je suis sûr que les ministres 
jadis membres de la profession légale sont interpellés par cette question et là aussi j’aurais 
souhaité avoir une réponse du ministre. 

M. le président, toujours en ce qui concerne l’inscription de privilège, il convient de 
préciser  que  la  loi  est  assez  ambiguë  car  une  inscription  de  privilège  reconnaît  l’existence 
d’une sûreté en faveur de l’Integrity Reporting Services Agency. La publicité de l’inscription 
est faite au bureau de l’Enregistrement à l’égard des tiers créanciers et le public en général. Et 
la nature de ce privilège donne une certaine primauté à l’égard des autres inscriptions. Dans 
le cours normal des choses pour le sale by levy, par exemple, une fois un bien est saisi sous le 
Sales  of  Immovable  Property  Act  et  vendu  au  Master’s  Court,  le  proceeds  of  the  sale  est 
distribué  selon  un  ordre  établi  par  L’Insolvency  Act.  Après  la  satisfaction  des  inscribed 
creditors qui sont colloqués selon la date de leur inscription le montant restant est retourné au 
débiteur dont le bien a été saisi et vendu à la barre.  

Et là, M. le président, à la section 17 du projet de loi –  

“Realisation of Property; where an Unexplained Wealth Order is made and the order 
is not subject to an appeal, nor discharged, that property recovered and confiscated 
shall  vest  in  the  Agency.  The  Agency  shall  appoint  a  liquidator  to  realize  any 
confiscated property.”  

Dans  ce  nouveau  projet  de  loi,  M.  le  président,  le  bien  confisqué  échappe 
complètement au Sales of Immovable Property Act et il est clair qu’aucune autre institution 
créancière même les inscribed creditors ne pourront être colloqués, ne pourront être payés. 
Encore moins le remboursement de la somme restante au débiteur ! Je considère là aussi que 
c’est un cas flagrant de deprivation of property.  

Il  nous  suffit,  M.  le  président,  de  nous  inspirer  des  sections  25  et  26  de  l’Asset 

Recovery Act où sous l’item Realisation of Property il est clairement mentionné – 

“If, after full payment of the amount payable under the Confiscation Order, any sums 
referred  to  in  subsection  (1)  remain  in  the  hands  of  a  Trustee,  the  Trustee  shall 
distribute those sums among such of those persons who held property (…) and in such 
proportions  as  the  Court  directs,  after  giving  a  reasonable  opportunity  for  those 
persons to make representations to the Court.”  

 

La provision légale existe déjà, M. le président. 

125 

M. le président, il est important qu’une telle disposition soit prévue dans le projet de 
loi afin que les autres créanciers ne soient pas injustement pénalisés. Au cas contraire, cela 
constituerait un cas flagrant de deprivation of property - je me répète ici - et les débiteurs 
seront  toujours  à  la  merci  des  institutions  créancières  qui,  même  si  leurs  recours  seront 
moindres, exigeront le remboursement immédiat des dettes. Je considère qu’on tombe dans la 
démagogie un peu si on considère qu’il appartient aux créanciers de vérifier la provenance de 
tel ou tel bien dans la pratique. C’est presque inexistant et c’est presque impossible, M. le 
président. Donc, il convient de se rendre à l’évidence qu’il existe des propositions de loi et il 
nous appartient aussi en tant que législateurs d’assurer la protection des autres créanciers. 

M. le président, prenant en considération les points que je viens de soulever, il y a un 
autre grand absent sous l’item d’inscription, c’est l’absence d’un montant déterminé lors de la 
prise de l’inscription. Qui dit inscription dit dette. Et la dette doit être clairement stipulée.  

L’Article 2196 et L’Article 2171-1 du Code Civil Mauricien stipulent clairement que 
l’inscription doit être prise pour une somme déterminée et sur un bien déterminé. Il en est de 
même dans l’Inscription of Privileges and Mortgages Act qui stipule, et je cite à la section 3 –  

“Procedure for Inscription: any creditor applying for the inscription of a privilege or 
mortgage shall, inter alia, in respect of each creditor (…).” 

Entre autres items, indiquer –  

“(…)  the  amount  of  the  claim  in  principal  and  accessories  and  the  date  when  it 
becomes due.” 

Dans le présent projet de loi à la section 12, c’est mentionné que – 

“The  Agency  shall  deposit  with  the  conservator  of  mortgage  two  identical 
memoranda in such form as may be prescribed.” 

C’est-à-dire, selon l’inscription of Privileges and Mortgages Act, la question que je me pose, 
M. le président, à défaut d’un montant, l’inscription n’est pas valable.  

M.  le  président,  il  est  clair  ici  que  nous  avons  un  manquement  qui  mérite  d’être 
corrigé d’un point de vue légal et procédural, bien sûr, mais aussi dans un souci de protection 
des autres créanciers qui ont déjà des inscriptions sur les biens de la personne concernée. 

126 

 
M. le président, il y a un autre intérêt sur lequel j’insiste et qui mérite d’être protégé 
car il faut bien le souligner. Le présent Unexplained Wealth Order s’applique pour les biens 
acquis  des  activités  licites  et  illicites.  Une  fois que  le    montant  de  la  dette  est  stipulé,  par 
exemple, pour celui qui pratique une activité tout à fait licite, un self-employed, doit avoir la 
possibilité, une fois sa dette ou son amende payée, de préserver son logement principal ou 
même l’immeuble abritant son business qui a fait l’objet d’une acquisition tout à fait légale. 

Il y a un autre aspect de la loi qui n’a pas été suffisamment travaillé, M. le président. 
Les différentes institutions publiques telles que la MRA ou les différentes municipalités, les 
différentes  institutions  publiques  qui  ont  le  droit  de  prendre  des  inscriptions  légales  sur  le 
Code Civil Mauricien. Toutes ces institutions publiques, en ce qui concerne les redevances 
publiques,  peuvent  prendre  une  inscription  sur  bien  et  c’est  toujours  pour  une  somme 
déterminée, M. le président. 

M.  le  président,  dans  le  Criminal  Property  Confiscation  Act  de  2000  Western 
Australia, il existe un concept qu’on appelle le crime used property substitution où le DPP de 
là-bas  peut  faire  une  application  de  crime  used  property  substitution  ou  le  crime  used 
property  n’est  pas  disponible  pour  une  confiscation  ou  a  été  déjà  vendu  ou  qui  sert  de 
logement  principal  où  les  enfants,  la  personne  concernée  ont  des  dependants  qui  sont 
autrement  capables.    Ce  concept  de  property  substitution  existe  au  niveau  de  la  loi  en 
Australie et cette loi a été mentionnée par plusieurs orateurs. 

Ce concept de property substitution, comme je l’ai souligné, M. le président, aurait pu 
être utilisé dans un premier temps où des unexplained wealth orders ont été émis contre des 
personnes qui ne peuvent justifier leurs acquisitions de biens, mais qui exercent des activités 
tout à fait légales ou encore qui ne font l’objet d’aucune enquête criminelle, d’aucune charge 
criminelle et n’ont pas été condamnées pour une activité criminelle. 

Ces cas d’exceptions sont tout à fait justifiés lorsqu’on parle de logement principal 
d’une  famille,  où  la  famille  concernée  a  sous  sa  responsabilité  des  personnes  autrement 
capables,  je  l’ai  mentionné,  ou  encore  le  bien  en  question  est  son  lieu  d’activité 
professionnelle tout à fait légale. L’activité professionnelle est légale, l’acquisition a été faite 
d’une façon tout à fait légale. 

M. le président, j’aborde ici un aspect de la loi concernant les non-citizens. La section 
3 du projet de loi stipule that this Act shall apply to the property of citizens of Mauritius.  Les 

 

127 

non-citizens ne sont pas concernés. Bien qu’il existe aujourd’hui de nombreuses situations où 
les  étrangers  sont  autorisés  à  acquérir  des  biens  à  Maurice  sous  le  Property  Development 
Scheme, la nouvelle loi avant c’était l’IRS, le RES ou bien même sous l’Investment Promotion 
Act.  Des  cas  d’exception,  des  cas  qui  sont  prévus  par  la  loi  pour  permettre  aux  étrangers 
d’acheter des biens à Maurice. Les objectifs de la présente loi sont pourtant clairs. C’est-à-
dire - 

(i) 

(ii) 

promote a culture of good governance and integrity reporting in 
Mauritius, and 
disclose malpractices and recover unexplained wealth. 

Quelle est aujourd’hui la raison d’exempter les non-citizens de ce projet de loi où bon nombre 
d’entre eux sont détenteurs d’un occupational permit ou encore permanent residence permit, 
et jouissent des mêmes droits fonciers que les mauriciens, ont les mêmes droits d’acquérir des 
biens immobiliers à Maurice. Pourquoi cette discrimination, cette ségrégation légale contre 
les mauriciens? 

Dans un souci de combattre le transnational crime et confisquer les biens mal acquis, 
le  législateur  est  venu  de  l’avant  avec  l’Asset  Recovery  Act.  Aucune  distinction  n’est  faite 
entre le citizen et le non-citizen sous l’Asset Recovery Act. Bien au contraire, dans la partie 6 
de l’Asset Recovery Act, mention est faite de International Co-operation , toute une section 
de  la  loi  est  prévue  visant  directement  les  property  believed  to  be  proceeds,  an 
instrumentality or terrorist property ».  ‘Instrumentality’ est défini comme any property used 
or intended to be used in any manner in connection to an unlawful activity. Cette section de 
la loi parle de – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

International Co-operation agreements; 
Foreign request in connection with civil asset recovery; 
Foreign request for enforcement of foreign restriction or Recovery Order, and 
Foreign request for the location of tainted property. 

Tout un arsenal légal est prévu pour connaître la provenance de l’argent, M. le président. Et 
pourquoi cette discrimination ? 

Il en est de même naturellement dans d’autres dispositions de la loi où la question de 
property  est  soulevée  où  aucune  distinction  n’est  faite  entre  mauriciens  et  non  mauriciens 
notamment  dans  la  Dangerous  Drugs  Act,  la  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money 

 

128 

Laundering Act ou encore la Prevention of Corruption Act ou des dispositions pour permettre 
des procédures de saisie vis-à-vis des non-citizens. 

La situation est d’autant plus aberrante, M. le président, lorsque ces  non-citizens font 
du business à Maurice, sont détenteurs de permis, acquièrent des biens, sont des taxpayers, 
font  des  returns  à  la  MRA  mauricienne,  mais  ne  sont  pas  answerable  sous  le  Good 
Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill.    Pourquoi  ce  paradis  pour  les  malpractices  des 
étrangers, M. le président? 

La situation est d’autant plus cocasse car nous savons tous qu’il existe bon nombre de 
partenariats  entre  les  mauriciens  et  les  non-citizens  ou  encore  des  compagnies  avec  des 
actionnaires mauriciens et étrangers et trouver que seul le mauricien est concerné sous cette 
loi.  Je  considère  que  c’est  une  aberration,  M.  le  président.  Je  ne  connais  pas  beaucoup 
d’étrangers qui seront très emballés d’avoir des partenaires mauriciens dans de tels cas, M. le 
président. 

Autre situation cocasse, M. le président où un mauricien est marié à un étranger sous 
le régime de la communauté des biens et qu’ils sont conjointement autorisés à acheter un bien 
immobilier sous le Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act. Comment faire cette distinction, 
contre qui appliquer l’Unexplained Wealth Order, M. le président. 

Dans une des déclarations faites par le ministre, mention est faite de la nécessité de 
rétablir l’imbalance dans le prix de l’immobilier parce qu’il y a trop d’Unexplained Wealth 
Order à l’île Maurice. Nous savons tous que dans le secteur de l’immobilier le plus grand 
imbalance  a  été  créé  par  les  étrangers  qui  ont  créé  une  véritable  spéculation  de  prix.  La 
logique d’exempter les étrangers ne tient pas la route dans cette démarche, M. le président.  

Pourquoi  cette  ségrégation  alors  que  dans  un  récent  guideline  émis  par  le  Prime 
Minister’s Office, M. le président, relatif au Permanent Residence Permit, mention est faite 
de la nécessité d’un certificat of income from the Mauritius Revenue Authority covering the 
last three years.  Il existe déjà une provision légale pour pouvoir retracer la source de revenus 
des étrangers, M. le président. 

 In  case  of  Retired  non-citizens,  il  faut  qu’il  y  ait  des  preuves  of  transfer  of  USD 
40,000 chaque année et la Banque de Maurice,  nous savons tous, exige déjà the source of 
funds pour toute somme dépassant les USD30,000. Pourquoi cette distinction? Pourquoi cette 

 

129 

discrimination des  mauriciens  étrangers,  M.  le  président,  car  il  existe  déjà  des  provisions 
légales pour retracer the source of funds et les moyens pour acquérir un bien immobilier? 

Je souhaite ici aborder un autre aspect, M. le président. J’aimerai ici faire référence à 
un  excellent  article  du  Professor  Anthony  Gray  du  USQ  Law  School  ayant  pour  titre:The 
compatibility  of  unexplained  wealth  provisions  and  civil  forfeiture  regime  que  je 
recommande  vivement  aux  analystes  du  droit  constitutionnel  et  même  aux  législateurs  en 
général.  

Plusieurs questions sont posées dans cet article, M. le président. Y a-t-il un risque où 
une enquête au criminel a été instituée et que l’on voit que le standard of proof, le burden of 
proof sont insuffisants pour prouver la culpabilité d’une personne, l’Agency entre alors en jeu 
avec  un  niveau  de  preuve  plus  bas  où  le  balance  of  probabilities  prévaut ?  Il  faut  bien  le 
souligner  qu’il  existe  insuffisamment  de  preuve  ou  pas  de  preuve  contre  une  personne 
accusée de blanchiment d’argent ou soit trouvée innocente par une cour de justice, mais il 
faut bien le reconnaître, l’Unexplained Wealth Order pourra toujours s’appliquer même vis-à-
vis  de  cette  personne  qui  a  été  trouvée  innocente  par  une  cour  de  justice.  Bien  que  le 
législateur ait prévu une procédure civile pour une sanction pénale, il faut bien le reconnaître 
qu’il existe bon nombre de décisions de justice en Australie ou aux États-Unis, où la Cour 
Suprême  a  déclaré  qu’elle  n’est  aucunement  liée  à  la  procédure  civile  que  le  législateur  a 
imposée  si  elle  considère  que  la  finalité  relève  d’une  sanction  pénale.  De  facto,  la  cour 
appliquera les mêmes règles de base du criminal law que sont le standard of proof, le beyond 
reasonable doubt ou encore le non-reversal du burden of proof. 

Bien que la procédure soit in rem, c’est-à-dire, contre les biens qui font l’objet d’une 
confiscation,  la  stigmatisation  qui  s’ensuit  est  considérée  comme  étant  de  nature  pénale, 
c’est-à-dire, contre la personne, et il convient alors d’appliquer les procédures, les standards 
du droit pénal. La séparation des pouvoirs entre le judiciaire, le législatif et l’exécutif est une 
règle  d’ordre  de  notre  démocratie.  Il  convient  que  la  souveraineté  du  judiciaire  soit 
pleinement respectée. 

M.  le  président,  dans  cette  même  ligne  de  pensée,  j’ai  de  sérieuses  réserves  qu’on 
puisse dicter à la Cour Suprême - je pose la question et j’aurais souhaité être éclairé là-dessus 
- une sanction imposée, be it confiscation order or monetary equivalent. On a beau dire que la 
procédure est civile, mais il faut le reconnaître que la sanction est ici pénale.  

130 

 
M. le président, il y a une section de la présente loi qui mérite toute notre attention. 
Les  institutions  du  pays  symbolisent  notre  tradition  démocratique.  Il  convient  de  s’assurer 
qu’elle soit protégée, bien sûr, mais aussi qu’elle puisse jouer pleinement son rôle. Toute loi, 
je l’ai dit, doit pouvoir passer l’épreuve du temps, quel que soit le ministre et quel que soit le 
gouvernement en place. C’est une section de la loi qui m’interpelle et qui mérite à mon avis 
toute notre considération. Je parle ici, M. le président, de la section 8 (2) du projet de loi – 
Functions of Board. 

A la sous-section 2, il est stipulé – 

 “Notwithstanding any other enactment, the Board – 

(a)  

shall, in case of concurrent jurisdiction with an enforcement authority, prevail 
in relation to any action relating to the confiscation of property;”. 

Quand  on  parle  d’enforcement  authority,  M.  le  président,  j’ai  en  tête  la  police, 
l’ICAC,  la  MRA,  l’Asset  Recovery  Unit,  une  institution  publique  qui  a  pris  une  inscription 
pour  une  redevance  non  payée.  Quelle  est  la  raison,  M.  le  président,  de  cette  supériorité 
d’action et de pouvoir ? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Member, I am sorry. 

Mr Ramano: J’ai seulement encore une feuille. 

The Deputy Speaker: May you finish. Thank you. 

Mr Ramano: La question que je me pose, M. le président, est : quelle est la raison de 
cette supériorité d’action et de pouvoir ? Le projet de loi va encore plus loin. La sous-section 
(4) stipule – 

“(4)   Where  an  enforcement  authority  has  already  instituted  any  proceedings  in 
connection with the confiscation of property, the Board may, (…) – 

(a) request the enforcement authority to stay action;”. 

M. le président, ça va encore plus loin. 

“5(b)  Where  the  Board  determines  that  the  Agency  shall  initiate  action  on  the 
complaint, no further action for the confiscation of property shall be taken thereon by 
an enforcement authority”. 

131 

 
M. le président, sommes-nous en train de créer  une super police avec des pouvoirs 
d’inscription,  de  confiscation,  de  sanction  pénale  avec  des  procédures  civiles ?  Une 
institution  dont  le  recrutement  du  personnel  voit  le  budget  dépendre  d’un  ministre,  d’un 
ministère, d’un gouvernement et un Agency qui a des pouvoirs de ‘supersede’, d’avoir une 
priorité d’action qui peut dicter d’autres enforcement agencies to stay action. Il faut bien le 
préciser,  M.  le  président,  il  est  question  ici  de  confiscation  des  biens.  Mais  il  y  a  des 
proceedings, il y a des enquêtes dans la pratique - nous le savons tous. Dans la pratique, des 
proceedings,  des  enquêtes  visant  la  confiscation  des  properties  qui  sont  aiguillées  par  la 
police,  par  le  DPP,  qui  mènent  à  la  confiscation  des  biens.  Des  institutions  dont 
l’indépendance  est  garantie  par  la  Constitution.  Pourquoi  cette  supériorité  d’action,  cette 
primauté de l’Agency face à ces autres enforcement agencies, M. le président ? Je me pose la 
question et j’aurais souhaité avoir une réponse. 

Cette provision, M. le président, fait peur. Je le reconnais et je dois l’avouer. Que cela 
fasse peur aux criminels, à ceux qui se sont enrichis par des moyens illicites est le dernier de 
mes soucis. Mais cette provision me fait peur, fait peur à notre État de droit. Je la considère 
même dangereuse et je pense que cela mérite d’être précisé. 

M. le président, il est important, dans un souci de transparence, que l’indépendance de 
l’Agency  ou  du  Board  soit  garantie  et  reflétée  dans  la  nomination.  Nous  saluons 
l’amendement  qui  a  été  fait,  même  si  nous  considérons  que  la  possibilité  aurait  dû  être 
donnée au président directement. Il faut qu’il y ait cette perception d’indépendance pour qu’il 
y ait la confiance de la population et qu’il n’y ait pas une perception d’interférence. 

La section 4(7) contredit cela malheureusement – 

“The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister, make use of the services of an 
officer of the Ministry, to assist the Agency (…)”. 

Pourquoi une telle perception quand la même section 4(6) donne déjà le pouvoir à l’Agency – 

“(…)  to  employ  such  employees  and  consultants  on  such  contractual  terms  and 
conditions as it may determine”. 

La confiance dépend aussi de l’intégrité des membres de l’Agency et du Board. Il est 
essentiel  que  tous  les  membres,  que  ce  soit  de  l’Agency  ou  du  Board,  soient  assujettis  au 
Declaration of Assets Act.  La présente loi est silencieuse à ce niveau, M. le président. 

132 

 
M. le président, nous sommes mis en présence d’un Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting Bill aux plusieurs interrogations, et je souhaite vivement que nous soyons éclairés 
dans  le  cours  du  débat,  parce  que  la  lutte  contre  la  corruption  est  l’affaire  de  tous.  Nous 
sommes tous pour une société meilleure, mais je pense qu’il est de notre devoir, en tant que 
législateur, que nous soyons assurés que nous sommes en train d’adopter la bonne loi, avec 
les bons paramètres, pour qu’on puisse protéger les droits de tout un chacun comme il se doit. 

Je vous remercie, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: We will now break for dinner for one hour. 

At 8.04 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 9.20 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Please, be seated! Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, I stand before the 
House, a very proud Member of this Government - a Government, Madam Speaker, which 
has  kept  its  promise  to  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  to  make  the  fight  against 
corruption and corrupt practices its priority.  

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  gouvernement  avait  promis  d’assainir  le  pays  et  tient  sa 
promesse  aujourd’hui  en  apportant  au  Parlement  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity 
Reporting  Bill.  Madam  Speaker,  I  must,  at  the  very  outset,  congratulate  my  colleague 
Minister Bhadain not only for the presentation of this Bill but also for having gone the extra 
mile out to explain to the various segments of the population, to different stakeholders, the 
essence  of  the  Bill.  He  has  gone  as  far  as  bringing  amendments  so  as  to  allay  the 
apprehensions of some people.  

Madam Speaker, I have also taken time to go through some of the apprehensions, the 
criticisms,  the  objections  expressed  from  different  quarters.  Everybody  expects  systems, 
institutions  and  persons  to  reflect  a  high  degree  of  integrity  in  their  several  dealings.  The 
move  globally  today  is  for  more  openness  in  society  and  open  societies  thrive  on  the 
establishment  of  mechanisms,  the  formulation  of  laws  and  regulations  for  investigating 
possible breaches of ethical conduct.  

 

133 

The time has, indeed, come for Mauritius to have such an enabling legislation.  And 
what  does  this  legislation  propose?  What  it  proposes,  Madam  Speaker,  is  something  very 
straightforward.  In the first place, the  Integrity Reporting Services Agency  with the power 
invested  in  it  will  request  explanations  regarding  the  ownership  of  property,  the  source  of 
funds,  and  thus,  at  this  very  first  point,  there  are  already  two  safeguards  that  need  to  be 
stressed and are inbuilt in the Bill.  

Safeguard No. 1: 

This  request  will  only  apply  to  those  persons  having  wealth  or  property  that  is 
disproportionate  to  their  emoluments  and  other  income  and  whose  source  cannot  be 
satisfactorily accounted for.  

Any  person  who  can  explain  the  source  that  may  well  be  legitimate  -  through 

inheritance and other means - has absolutely nothing to worry about.  

This Bill will not affect people who have worked hard, often over a lifetime and have 

acquired property in a manner that is quite legitimate. 

 Nor should we forget to remind ourselves of the threshold of Rs10 m. set by the hon. 

Minister, again, to allay the fears of people.  

Évidemment,  une  personne  qui  a  la  conscience  tranquille,  qui  a  la  capacité  de 
justifier ses excédents ne devrait pas s’inquiéter parce que cette loi ne l’inquiétera nullement.  

Safeguard No. 2: 

 Madam Speaker, the person from whom explanations are being sought will have 21 
days within which to comply. And the onus is on the person to provide these explanations by 
way of an affidavit.  

It  is  only  in  a  case  where  there  is  no  reply  at  all  that  a  Disclosure  Order  can  be 
resorted to - I need hardly state that it would be preferable for anyone to give the reply rather 
than to wait for a Disclosure Order and to forward a response - any response for that matter, 
Madam Speaker.  

It is only after all inquiries will have been completed by the Agency that it reports the 

matter to the Integrity Reporting Board which then gets into play.  

 

Safeguard No. 3: 

134 

The  Integrity  Reporting  Board  will  have  a  Chairperson  who  will  be  no  less  than  a 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court from the Commonwealth, and then we come to the crux 
of the matter: it is only after the Chairperson of the Board along with his two other members 
or  assessors  will  have  decided  that  an  application  for  an  Unexplained  Wealth  Order  is 
needed, then only would the Agency be allowed to apply to the Judge in Chambers for this 
Order and it is only when the Judge in Chambers is satisfied that wealth is unexplained, then 
only will such an Order be issued.  

What we need to retain here is that the Board is not mandated to apply any sanctions 

whatsoever; it will leave it to the Supreme Court to decide on the ultimate sanctions.  

Madam Speaker, that is what this Bill is all about.   Disons-le tout de suite, il n’y a 
aucune  mainmise  du  gouvernement  dans  le  processus.  L’Éxécutif  n’a  rien  à  faire  avec  le 
processus.  Le gouvernement n’est pas non plus avide de saisir les biens d’autrui. Il s’agit 
encore  moins  de  ‘vendetta  politique’  comme  certains  voudraient  le  faire  croire.  Et,  fort 
heureusement, notre système judiciaire est toujours perçu comme étant non-arbitraire et jouit 
toujours de la confiance de la population.   Les gens honnêtes avec des biens légitimement 
acquis  n’ont  absolument  rien  à  craindre,  Madame  la  présidente.  Tout  se  fera  dans  la 
transparence et au niveau légal.  

Cette  auguste  assemblée  aura  également  constaté  qu’à  aucun  moment,  la  personne 
appelée à soumettre des explications, ne passe par un interrogatoire comme c’est le cas pour 
la  PoCA.    Il  n’y  a  pas  d’emprisonnement  pour  celui  qui  refuse  de  fournir  les  explications 
recherchées  et  ces  explications,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  viens  de  le  dire,  doivent  être 
formellement rédigées by way of an affidavit.  Et c’est tout!  À aucun moment, cette personne 
ne sera appelée à fournir des explications de vive voix. À aucun moment, cette personne ne 
sera interrogée. Cela parce que le tout passera par l’aspect civil de la loi et non par la partie 
criminelle. 

Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  bien  de  noter  aussi  que  même  s’il  arrive  à  être  prouvé 
qu’une personne détient des biens non expliqués, la personne ne risque pas la prison. It is 
simply a case of civil confiscation - confiscation of ill-gotten wealth and, at times, it will also 
be  possible  for  them  to  give  the  monetary  equivalence.    It  is  an  action,  Madam  Speaker, 
against ill-gotten property and not against the person.   

 

135 

Madam  Speaker,  we  all  know  there  exists  a  powerful  correlation  between  bad 
governance  and  corruption.  Transparency  International’s  Annual  reports  consistently  show 
that the most corrupt countries are those that lack sound institutional governance capacity.  

Obviously,  different  countries  have  their  several  ways  of  working  out  their  good 
governance  and  transparency  policies.  For  example,  in  Morocco  in  2007,  the  Government 
established  a  new  Financial  Investigation  Unit  answerable  to  the  Office  of  the  Prime 
Minister. It had the mandate to receive, analyse and disseminate information on suspicious 
transactions and collect data on money-laundering operations.  

Other  countries  have  laws  and,  to  address  money-laundering,  decrees,  to  establish 
agencies to track down corruption cases and many other ways. But we should not, therefore, 
be surprised that even the Sustainable Development Goals to which the Global community 
has subscribed in September last, the Global Sustainable Development Goals formulate a new 
development  paradigm  that  focuses,  inter  alia,  on  accountability.    We  thus  now  have  a 
premium that has been placed on a standalone Goal 6, that of ‘Governance’ which reads thus 
– 

“Promote  peaceful  and  inclusive  societies  for  sustainable  development,  provide 
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at 
all levels.” 

 
It has also major indicators relating to the reduction of illicit financial flows, the reduction of 
corruption and bribery in all their forms and the development of effective, accountable and 
transparent institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I will now view this Bill from a different lens -. I will look at it from 
the  perspective  of  education.  The  Ministry  of  Education  has  been  vested  with  the 
responsibility to, among other things, promote a value-based education. We have not simply 
to cater for the cognitive development of our children, but also their overall development. We 
want them to claim their legitimate place in society as tomorrow’s adults with a sound moral 
compass. 

Education,  Madam  Speaker,  is  expected  to  inculcate  in  our  children  and  youth  a 
mindset  change,  a  culture  that  extols  meritocracy,  work  ethics  and  selflessness  as  basic  to 
flourishing life chances.  

 

136 

Le but premier de l’éducation, Madame la présidente, c’est effectivement d’inculquer 
chez nos apprenants et nos jeunes une nouvelle façon de voir les choses.  C’est également 
d’inculquer un état d’esprit, une culture qui prône la méritocratie, un sens d’éthique et encore, 
un altruisme pour un mieux-être et un mieux-vivre.  

C’est une nouvelle mentalité que nous nous devons d’instaurer dans cette jeunesse qui 

est à la recherche de ses repères, d’un code de conduite sain pour animer son existence.  

We want them to grow as persons instilled with the positive values of hard work and 

rewards obtained at the cost of ‘sweat of the brow’.  

We  encourage  learners  to  recognise  and  appreciate  the  virtue  of  patience  and  results 
obtained  through  sheer  dint  of  effort.  However,  Madam  Speaker,  over  the  last  decade  or 
more, our youth have been made to believe that easy wins are a normal part of the game, that 
values and integrity play second fiddle to these quick gains. The model that they have been 
exposed to is that the end justifies the means, even if the means are foul. Our young people 
have, in short, lost their moral bearings.  Ils ont perdu leurs repères, Madame la présidente.   

The situation does not apply to the youth alone. People have been exposed to a major 
contradiction, particularly unveiled over the past years. It has been the contradiction between 
discourse and action. It has been the contradiction between professed intents and promises 
and actual reality and practices. Thus, on one side, people have been sloganeered and fed on 
such  diets  as  those  notorious  equality  of  opportunities,  democratisation  of  the  economy  of 
this and that, and yet what did they get on the other hand? Nothing!   

On  the  other  hand,  Madam  Speaker,  and  in  actual  practice,  cronyism,  nepotism  and 
favouritism have been blatantly rearing the hydra heads.  They dictated who derived wealth 
from private and nebulous, mostly illicit, sources and who made ostentatious display of same.  
Certains, Madame la présidente, sont devenus milliardaires en quelques mois.  

The larger interests of the nation were sacrificed at the altar of the personal interests of 

a privileged few. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  come  to  a  major  turning  point  in  our  history.  Ours  is  an 
educated  population  that  now  demands  greater  accountability  from  all  those  placed  in  a 
position of importance and power. The greatest risk lies in the temptation to make an abuse of 

 

137 

the power and position vested by society as it has been in the last regime. Such a risk has to 
be curtailed. I must say should be eliminated.  

This  Bill  will  provide  a  mechanism  by  which  these  errors  might  be  eliminated.  I 

believe, Madam Speaker, it would be wrong to say that this Bill goes against…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Soodhun, sorry!  You are just interrupting the lady! Please! 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  … the interests of the people or that it will be used as a 
political tool. After all, even we, hon. Members of this National Assembly, will be subjected 
to this Bill, to this law, when this Act becomes a law.  And you will agree that we are not 
likely  to  vote  for  a  Bill  that  will  hold  a  jeopardy  against  us.  This  Bill  keeps  all  these 
dimensions in view. It aims at cracking down on those who have vitiated the system in the 
past  by  going  back  to  the  preceding  seven  years  and  forestalls  and  nips  in  the  bud  any 
temptation that might arise to vitiate the system.   

Madam Speaker, those who have been abusing the system, making it suit their own 

convenience; those who have gathered illicit, ill-gotten wealth are those who need to fear. 

This piece of legislation will help us write the wrongs that have prevailed so far. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Constitution  guarantees  the  right  of  people  to  property.  This 
right is being maintained. We are nowhere trying to undermine entrepreneurship and profit 
motive. Nobody is being discouraged from taking risks. Indeed, we should not be risk averse, 
economies  thrive  on  such  risk  taking,  but  there  is  one  crucial  and  ethical  conditionality. 
People have to learn, to operate within the confines of clear, legal parameters and norms. 

Madame  la  présidente,  en  décembre  de  l’année  dernière,  ce  gouvernement  a  eu  un 
mandat  clair  et  explicit d’assainir,  d’épurer  le  pays.  Depuis,  on  se  donne  constamment  les 
moyens  de  le  faire.  Ce  projet  de  loi  va  effectivement  et  aussi  dans  cette  direction.  Bien 
entendu, on peut comprendre que cela pose problème pour certains, que cela engendre des 
appréhensions. C’est effectivement la raison des garde-fous préconisés par le projet de loi. 

Madame la présidente, on juge une société de par sa capacité de mettre en exergue la 
bonne gouvernance. Celle-ci devient une marque, une caractéristique démontrant le niveau de 
développement  qu’on  a  atteint.  L’inverse,  c’est-à-dire  la  mauvaise  gouvernance  nous 

 

138 

mènerait vers des précipices à la Enron, à la Mart,  beaucoup plus proche de nous à la Sunkai, 
Whitedot et la BAI. 

Nous devons comprendre que nous avons un devoir, un devoir de faire comprendre 
aux gens qu’on ne peut plus accepter ou trouver acceptable des gens qui refusent de payer 
leur taxe. Faudrait comprendre qu’on ne peut plus se permettre d’exhiber, de montrer d’une 
façon shameful, comme on le dit, des biens mal acquis. Et là, je voudrais faire allusion à ce 
qu’avait dit l’honorable Ramano au cours de son intervention. Il a cité plusieurs points très 
valables, mais quand il vient nous dire qu’il trouve normal que quelqu’un qui a pu accumuler 
des richesses parce que tout simplement il avait oublié ou il n’a pas pu payer sa taxe, que la 
personne - puisque cela se fait d’après les lois de la MRA – puisse négocier avec la MRA et 
par la suite payer la taxe qu’il devait même au prix d’une pénalité, que ce sont des choses 
acceptables.  Non!  Quand  l’honorable  Ramano  vient  nous  dire  que  le  self-employed  or  the 
professional, the doctor, the lawyer who has failed to pay his tax could eventually pay it and 
pays penalty if it is needed, does he not think about le malheureux salarié qui, lui, n’a pas 
d’autre option que de payer sa taxe. Il nous faut changer de mentalité. Il nous faut apprendre 
que  nous  devons  vivre  d’après  les  paramètres  de  la  loi  et  que  payer  sa  taxe  n’a  rien  de 
terrible, c’est un devoir et on doit le faire. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  pense  qu’il  est  temps  que  la  mentalité  change  dans  notre 
pays. Il est temps qu’on donne les repères à nos jeunes, il nous faut être des modèles pour ces 
jeunes. Il nous faut, nous autres, au Parlement, arriver à mettre sur pied des mécanismes, à 
venir  avec  des  projets  de  loi  pour  assainir  la  situation  et  donner  des  repères  à  nos  jeunes. 
Nous avons une responsabilité, un devoir de reddition des comptes aux générations qui nous 
suivent. Assumons cette responsabilité et soyons dignes et fiers de le faire ! 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

 (9.41 p.m.) 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madame  la 
présidente, j’ai entendu l’honorable ministre, Roshi Bhadain, dire sur une radio privée que ses 
lois,  dont  le  projet  qui  est  devant  nous  en  ce  moment,  sont  celles  qui  ont  été  les  plus 
débattues. Je ne sais pas si c’est rigoureusement exact sur le plan historique, mais je le félicite 
pour  avoir  débattu  personnellement,  en  long  et  en  large,  sur  la  place  publique,  avec  ses 
critiques  les  plus  féroces,  les  trois  lois  proposées  pour  des  changements  au  droit 
constitutionnel des mauriciens à la propriété. 

139 

 
L’histoire  retiendra  que  le  ministre  a  également  écouté  avec  beaucoup  d’attention, 
dans  cette  auguste  Chambre,  tous  les  orateurs,  y  compris  le  Leader  de  l’Opposition, 
notamment l’intervention qu’il a trouvé excellente, d’ailleurs, de l’honorable Paul Bérenger, 
Leader  de  l’Opposition,  la  semaine  dernière,  le  félicitant  chaleureusement  à  plusieurs 
reprises. Et aujourd’hui, il est clair que le ministre a fait un effort considérable pour venir de 
l’avant  avec  environ  une  douzaine  de  retouches  à  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity 
Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015). J’avais raison d’avoir dit que le Bill devrait être amendé et 
n’avait pas, au début, été suffisamment discuté. 

Madame la présidente, il est clair que l’ensemble des amendements proposés au projet 
de loi originel, constitue un changement positif et salutaire tant dans l’approche que dans le 
fond.  J’avais  voulu,  d’abord,  que  le  ministre,  dans  son  discours  devant  cette  Chambre, 
confirme  que  l’intention  du  législateur  est  de  remettre  entre  les  mains  du  judiciaire  toute 
décision  affectant  le  droit  constitutionnel  des  mauriciens  à  la  propriété,  et  il  l’a  fait  d’une 
manière très consciencieuse. 

La raison en est simple: en droit, les Cours de justice se réfèrent de temps à autre, 
surtout  en  appel,  à  l’intention  du  législateur  exprimée  lors  des  débats  parlementaires,  pour 
décider  de  l’interprétation  d’une  loi.  C’est  ce  qu’on  appelle  le  ‘legislative  intent’  ou 
‘legislative purpose’. 

The  more  debated  a  Bill  has  been,  the  clearer  will  be  the  legislative  intent  to  a 
reviewing  Court.  Il  est  aujourd’hui  évident  que  le  législateur,  personnifié  par  l’honorable 
Bhadain, insiste sur le rôle du Juge en Chambre comme celui qui aura le contrôle de toute 
décision concernant le droit de propriété par rapport à des dénonciations qui pourraient être 
soit justifiées, soit sans fondement. J’en suis satisfaite du fait que je crois dans l’intégrité et 
l’indépendance du judiciaire. 

Madam Speaker, I will now refer to clause 3 subsection 5 of the new legislation. It 

reads – 

“Any application made under this Act shall constitute civil proceedings and the onus 
shall lie on the respondent to establish on a balance of probabilities, that any property 
is not unexplained wealth.” 

Some critics have alleged that the burden of proof should not be reversed towards the accused 
party, as this reversal means removing the presumption of innocence. 

140 

 
In truth, as the Minister has already explained last week, the burden of proof can and 
should be reversed depending on circumstances. The presumption of innocence enjoyed by 
the accused party is thus removed. This reversal has been rightly proposed by hon. Bhadain 
and, according to him, by the DPP also. 

On Monday, 16 March of this year, the Reuters News Agency announced that senior 

bankers in the UK, will, I quote – 

“be presumed guilty until proven innocent under strict new rules proposed by British 
regulators seeking to hold individuals accountable for bank failures.” 

Reuters added, I quote – 

“The  Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA)  on  Monday  announced  details  of  a 
"presumption of responsibility" rule which requires senior managers to demonstrate 
that where a firm is guilty of misconduct they ‘took such steps as a person in their 
position could reasonably be expected to take, to avoid it happening.’ ” 

We are introducing a ‘presumption of responsibility’ on people having unexplained 
wealth and who may be drug traffickers or criminals of various sorts. There is nothing wrong 
in  that  and  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  this  has  been  allowed  in  the  very  European  Nation 
where modern democracy was born and from which Mauritius derives its Constitution and 
democratic  and  legal  traditions.  Some  may  argue  that  this  reversal  of  the  burden  of  proof 
violates  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  but  the  legal  burden  of  proving  a 
defence which is in denial of the claims given by the claimant lies on the defendant.  

With  reference  to  actual  case  law,  in  BHP  Billiton  Petroleum  Ltd  v  Dalmine  SpA 
[2003] BLR 271 the Court of Appeal in the UK confirmed that the burden of proof rests on 
the party who affirms and not on the party who denies. On the facts of the case it was held 
that the burden of proof was on the defendants to prove their affirmations.  

As a matter of fact, the burden of proof can even be shared and, in fact, in criminal 
cases, so as not to violate the presumption of innocence, Courts in the UK apply a European 
Union legal principle that the larger share of the burden of proof remains with the prosecuting 
party while the accused party has a lesser burden. This could happen, and rightly so, under 
the new Bill before us. 

In clause 3(5) of the Bill now before us, Madam Speaker, another sacrosanct principle 
is affirmed: the balance of probabilities. I have already stated, last week, that this principle 

 

141 

being  applied rigorously by the judiciary  will ensure fairness in the process of uncovering 
unexplained wealth. I have also congratulated the Minister for leaving out in his legislation 
the 100,000 or so entrepreneurs of the informal economy who have invested honestly around 
Rs1 billion and who honestly contribute to the national GDP. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  refer,  now,  to  a  third  fundamental  principle  raised  by  the  Bar 
Council.   A  savoir  la  justesse  d'une  loi  qui  a  des  objectifs  du  droit  criminel  à  travers  une 
procédure civile. Cela est contesté par le Bar Council en référence au Good Governance and 
Integrity  Reporting  Bill.  Il  existe  une  étude  sur  ce  type  de  législation  appelée  'hybride' 
combinant le civil et le criminel en droit et qui est utilisé en Irlande pour traquer les biens et 
l'argent mal acquis. Cette étude est intitule: “Using civil processes in pursuit of criminal law 
objectives”, a case study of Non-Conviction Based Asset Forfeiture, by Colin King, Centre 
for  Criminal  Justice  Studies,  School  of  Law,  University  of  Leeds,  publiée  dans  The 
International Journal of Evidence, le 11 février 2015. 

Cette étude conteste ce type de législation hybride et en appelle aux Cours de justice de 
la rejeter afin de préserver intact le système criminel. Ma conclusion, cependant, est que pour 
le moment, il y a aussi beaucoup de légistes en faveur du 'crime control' par des procédures 
civiles.  L'étude  précitée  propose  d'attendre  l'opinion  de  la  Cour  européenne  des  droits  de 
l'Homme, ECHR.  

I am also happy with the other amendments that have served to attenuate the publicly 
perceived  unilateral  executive  powers  that  would  have  excluded  consultations  with  other 
constitutional powers like the President of the Republic and the Leader of the Opposition by 
the Government of the day.  

I would have preferred meaningful consultations with the Leader of the Opposition, 
instead of a simple phone call. We do need a truly meaningful change  from a situation of 
unilateralism,  on  the  part  of  the  executive  in  the  appointment  of  top  public  officials  who 
should not bow to the will, whims and caprices of the Executive, that is, the Government of 
the day, be it this one or any other one. At the end of the day, I wish to point out that it is now 
left to our judiciary to deal with challenges to the legislation if and when the occasion will 
arise.  

With these reservations, Madam Speaker, I have decided to vote for the Bill, while 
awaiting  impatiently  for  the  day  when  executive  unilateralism  at  all  costs  and  in  all 

 

142 

circumstances, will have been replaced by consensuality as far as can be obtained on some 
issues. This should be the case in all matters of such national importance. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given me the floor, and I thank all Members 

for their kind attention. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

(9.52 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, when we look at the different provisions of this Bill and having heard some of the 
Members making reference to the different provisions of this Bill, it is an undisputed fact that 
this  Bill  has  very  far-reaching  consequences.  For  example,  there  are  provisions  relating  to 
Non-Conviction Based  Asset Forfeiture. There are provisions touching  on the fundamental 
rights like the presumption of innocence, the right to silence, the reversal of the burden of 
proof although I accept the principle that even in an ideal democracy there is no such thing as 
an absolute right. Even for rights guaranteed under the Constitution, there are restrictions that 
can be imposed by the State.  

However, the State can only interfere with the rights of the individuals when there is a 
need to do so. It is not a question about if you have nothing to hide, so why don’t you vote. 
This is not the question. The issue is… 

(Interruptions) 

…  balancing  the  public  interest;  the  balancing  between  the  public  interest  of  bringing  this 
piece of legislation with the need to protect the fundamental rights of the individual. 

We don’t legislate in vain. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Don’t  interrupt.  You  have  had  the  opportunity  to  express  your 

views, please! 

Mr Ramful: Well, in fact, hon. Gayan was my pupil master and he himself told me: 
we  don’t  legislate  in  vain  and  this  is  what  Government  is  doing  today.  The  hon.  Prime 
Minister made reference to an article which is titled: Comparative Evaluation of Unexplained 
Wealth Orders by  Booz Allen Hamilton. This was a study that was carried out by the  US 

 

143 

Department  of  Justice.  In  fact,  when  we  read  the  report,  this  is  what  they  say  at  the  last 
paragraph - 

“Unexplained wealth law authorising forfeiture of property acquired through 
unlawful  activities  were  introduced  as  a  result  of  extraordinary  events;  the 
increase  in  crime  and  drug-trafficking  in  the  Irish  and  Australian  societies. 
Additionally, in Ireland, the law was introduced following the murder of two 
public  personers.    A  journalist  and  a  detective  were  murdered  and  that 
outraged  the  entire  society.  A  collective  shock  was  created,  a  unified  and 
conducive environment to enact a far-reaching law that would have otherwise 
been  unacceptable,  without  generating  massive  dissatisfaction  and  major 
opposition. On the contrary, the Australian and Irish citizenry as a whole are 
supportive and in favour of the law. Thus, when enacting unexplained wealth 
orders  legislation,  one  of  the  most  important  objectives  should  be  its 
justification and linkage to solving real or perceived needs in society.” 

This  is  the  point  that  I  want  to  make.  Is  there  a  real  need  and,  if  so,  what  are  the 

justifications for this Bill? 

Do  not  come  with  statements,  citing  the  instances  when  the  CCID  of  Mr  Jangi  is 
calling in members of the Labour party. Do not come with these kinds of statements. Do not 
come  with  statements  about  BAI,  etc.  Come  with  a  study!    Have  we  carried  out  a  study 
explaining to the population what is the level of fraud and corruption in this country? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr  Ramful:  I  have  heard  Members  talking  about  organised  crime.  What  is  the 
definition of ‘organised  crime’? What is the level of organised crime in this country? Has 
there been a serious study that has been carried out by Government to justify bringing this 
piece of legislation? So, this is why, Madam Speaker, I am in the dark. I am waiting. I have 
not heard why the hon. Minister has come up with a piece of legislation … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 
Mr Ramful:  ...without any justification at all, without any justification for coming up 

144 

with this piece of legislation.  

We have also to bear in mind that there are only three countries: Australia, Colombia 
and  Ireland  and,  as  I  have  said,  they  had  their  own  specific  problems.  That  is  why  they 
introduced this type of legislation. There are examples in Mauritius, when the Prevention of 
Corruption Act was passed. There was a need to come up with this legislation and the Vice- 
Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, presided over a Select Committee. There was extensive 
research  and  experts  were  contacted.  There  was  a  detailed  Select  Committee  report. 
Recommendations were made. Then, we came with a piece of legislation. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I will come to this. The Minister said … 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, because the way ECO was dismantled … 

(Interruptions) 

I have to answer to the hon. Minister because he said that the Labour party did not vote. We 
should not forget the way ECO was dismantled. This was the reason why the Labour party 
did not vote. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  No  interruptions,  please!  Usually  when  you  are  intervening,  the 

hon. Member sits silently and does not interrupt anybody. Please, allow him to talk. 

Mr Ramful:  The hon. Minister when making his remarks about the  Labour party, 
forgot  to  mention  that  it  was  the  Labour  party  in  2000  who  came  with  the  first  piece  of 
legislation on economic crimes. He failed to mention this. He failed to mention that when he 
was  Director  of  investigation  under  the  ICAC,  he  proposed  amendments  to  the  then  hon. 
Prime  Minister,  which  were  accepted  and  these  amendments  were  brought.  He  failed  to 
mention … 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, you will have the opportunity to reply to the hon. 

145 

Member during your summing up. 

Mr Bhadain: On a point of order, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ramful:  He failed to mention the Asset Recovery Act in 2012, it was the Labour 
party  who  brought  this  piece  of  legislation.  The  hon.  Minister  should  be  careful  when 
accusing the Labour party for not voting this piece of legislation. 

As I have said, if there is a problem … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please!  I think it is getting late and you should not engage in 

futile discussions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, what kind of statement you are making? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ramful:  I am defending my party. 

So, as I have said, we have to identify the problem. If there is a problem about people 
enriching themselves with drugs money, let us have a look at the drugs legislation. Is there a 
need to consolidate the Dangerous Drugs Act? If there is a problem about people enriching 
themselves with corruption, bribe money, let us have a look at the Prevention of Corruption 
Act. Is there a problem with the provisions there? Is there a problem with financial crime? 
Have  a  look  at  the  FIAMLA.  Do  we  need  to  consolidate  that  piece  of  legislation?  In  any 
event, the hon. Minister is well aware, a few days back, we have voted the Assets Recovery 
(Amendment)  Bill.  There  are  even  more  far-reaching  powers  than  under  this  Act  and  it 
covers  any  criminal  activity.  So,  why  are  we  coming  with  this  legislation?  This  is  my 
question.  What  is  the  objective  behind  this  Act?  If  we  have  so  far-reaching  provisions 
already, is the objective really to combat fraud and corruption?  

I have a lot of doubt, and I have to say so because there are concerns out there... 

...in the public. 

(Interruptions) 

 

146 

(Interruptions) 

If this piece of legislation is going to be used to target political opponents, if the objective 
behind this Bill is politically motivated, then we are setting a very wrong precedent. 

(Interruptions) 

Unfortunately, we have, as the hon. Minister rightly said, the habit, here, in Mauritius 
to copy legislation. We have the habit of cut and paste without really debating whether that 
piece  of  legislation  will  fit  the  Mauritian  context.  This  is  why  I  say  we  need  to  have  a 
justification, a plausible justification for coming up with this piece of legislation. 

I will have to, very briefly, Madam Speaker, refer to some of the objections, some of 
the  clarifications  regarding  some  of  the  provisions  of  this  Bill.  There  have  been  a  lot  of 
debates about whether the confiscation proceedings would be civil or criminal in nature. No 
matter how loud you shout within those four walls, no matter what term you may include in 
this legislation, eventually, it would be for the Court to decide, because we are dealing with a 
judicial  process.  This  is  the  realm  of  the  judiciary,  and  I  would  like  to  refer  to  an  article 
which  was  cited  earlier  on  by  hon.  Mohamed  as  well  as  by  hon.  Ramano,  namely  ‘The 
Compatibility  of  Unexplained  Wealth  Provisions  and  ‘Civil’  Forfeiture  Regimes  With 
Kable’,  by  Anthony  Gray.  The  author  has  made  extensive  research  on  confiscation 
proceedings in different jurisdiction, and this is what he concluded – 

“Conclusion – Forfeiture Provisions Are In Fact Criminal in Nature 

My  conclusion,  having  applied  the  principles  derived  from  North  America  and 
Europe, and having considered relevant High Court of Australia decisions regarding 
forfeiture proceedings, is that such proceedings are in fact criminal in nature. I am not 
alone in reaching this conclusion; academic leaders in this field have made the same 
observation:  

Non-criminal proceedings should not be used to circumvent the criminal trial 
if the outcome can be a significant penalty, especially (but not exclusively) if 
it may entail loss of liberty. 

Civil  forfeiture  as  generally  practised  today  by  the  federal  government  is  in 
fact punishment and thus cannot be imposed separately from and in addition to 
criminal punishment.” 

He went to talk about the problem in Australia and he said – 

147 

 
“The difficulty in Australia with this conclusion, however, is that there is no express 
human rights instrument which can be utilised to strike out such provisions.” 

And here, we have to bear in mind that we have a written Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, when we look at all the research that has been done, I have no doubt 
that the proceedings under this piece of legislation are in substance criminal in nature, and 
this brings on the table all these issues about the reversal of the burden of proof, the right of 
silence, as guaranteed under the Constitution.  

I won’t go into all the various issues; the other Members have already spoken about 
the different provisions. There is one issue, which I would like to bring to the attention of the 
hon. Minister and, maybe, he will, in the course of his summing-up, have the opportunity to 
explain.  There  is  this  provision  about  the  Agency  having  the  powers  to  share  information 
with other enforcement authorities. 

Now, let’s take the scenario where, for example, someone is being investigated under 
the Agency, is being served with a notice, asking him to explain where he has received funds 
to purchase a property which is worth more than Rs10 m.  He collaborates with the authority, 
he decides to explain in an affidavit, and the authority finds out in his explanation that there is 
an  underlying  criminal  offence  and  the  authority  refers  the  matter  to  the  Police,  as  it  is 
empowered  under  the  Act.  The  Police  investigate  and  this  authority,  the  Agency,  has  the 
power to share information with the Police under the Act. Now, what happens to the concept 
of fair hearing? 

(Interruptions) 

Even if it is information!  Even if it is information, the person is being accused of a criminal 
offence by the Police, he has the right, under the Constitution, to remain silent, and the Police 
beforehand are aware of his defence! Where is the concept of fair hearing?  And there have 
been challenges in Australia; there have been challenges before the Supreme Court, and there 
were occasions where the Court asked the authority to give an undertaking that they were not 
going  to  use  any  information  obtained  under  the  disclosure  order  against  the  accused.  So, 
maybe, the hon. Minister should consider looking into this matter. 

There is also the issue about the appointment. True it is, as I have said, the provisions 
under this Act have very  far-reaching consequences. True it is, as pointed out by the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, that there is that perception given that the Director is going to be 
appointed by the President after the advice of the Prime Minister. There is that perception that 

 

148 

the person is going to be a political appointee. The hon. Leader of the Opposition has also 
suggested  that,  maybe,  we  should  remove  the  word  ‘advice’  and  replace  it  by  the  word 
‘consultation’ - after consultation with the Prime Minister. Then, again, I have some doubt. I 
am referring in particular to Article 64 (4) of the Constitution, and also this reminds me of an 
article by late Justice Robert Ahnee. 

He gave an interview in ‘Weekend’ and when he referred to section 64 (4) - and I will 

read it - it says -  

“Where  the  President  is  directed  by  this  Constitution  to  exercise  any  function  after 
consultation  with  any  person  or  authority  other  than  the  Cabinet,  he  shall  not  be 
obliged  to  exercise  that  function  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  that  person  or 
authority.” 

Now, there was an argument and this is what late Justice Robert Ahnee said, that this 
provision, according to subsection (4), it would appear that even when there is consultation, 
the President has no discretion. He or she is obliged to follow the advice or the proposition 
made by the Prime Minister. Now, this is debatable. 

(Interruptions) 

This is why I say the best way is that there is no such perception. Why don’t we, for example, 
appoint the Director by an independent body, the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, 
for example? 

(Interruptions) 

We  are  open  to  any  proposition.  At least,  there  is  no  such  perception.  So,  these  would  be 
basically my intervention except that I will conclude by referring to a press interview given 
by the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and  Institutional Reforms in 
2010. At that time, he was wearing the hat of a barrister in the private practice and he was 
asked in that interview: “Why is it that those in high places seem to have got away in the 
MCB Fraud and Air Mauritius ‘black box’ cases?” And this was his answer, Madam Speaker:  

 “We have to respect the criminal justice system and remember the burden of proof is 
on the prosecution and that economic crimes are sometimes very difficult to prove. 
We should also give due credit to Defence Counsels who work hard to ensure that the 

149 

 
rights  of  their  clients  are  respected  as  required  by  law.  The  system  should  only 
function in this way for the best interests of our society.  

Everyone is presumed innocent until he has pleaded guilty or been proven guilty.” 

(Interruptions) 

He was wearing the hat of a barrister at that time. Now he has changed hats and this is the 
consequence.  We  are  being  asked  to  vote  a  piece  of  legislation  which,  according  to  me, 
according  to  all  the  authors,  all  the  researchers,  the  process  is  criminal  in  nature  and  the 
consequence is that we are reversing the burden of proof. So, these would be what I had to 
say on the Bill. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

(10.20 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on this Bill.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  wanted  to  come  back  on  the  summing-up  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister early on the importance of promoting values in any society without which there is 
neither stability nor progress. The spirit of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill 
is based on value promotion. No progress, no  growth, no development is possible without 
understanding well the importance of - 

1.  Value promotion, and  
2.  Getting your priorities right. 
 

I am going to dwell, Madam Speaker, on three issues very briefly: 

 
1. the issue of unanimity in this House;  
2. what about the preventive strategy, and  
3. the rule of law.  

On this issue of unanimity, Madam Speaker, allow me to express my appreciation for 
the  passion  and  unanimity  that  the  fight  against  unexplained  wealth  has  generated  in  our 
country. I note, therefore, with a sense of great satisfaction that, whether on this side of the 

 

150 

House or the other side, we all want a clean Mauritius. The only difference we share is the 
method of structure we want to put in place.  Many would probably be more in favour of 
consolidating the existing legislations, the MRA,  ICAC or  an eventual Crime Commission 
while we believe in the importance of a standalone legislation to fight unexplained wealth. 

Fundamentally,  therefore,  Madam Speaker, we  have  chosen  to  struggle  in  different 
paths, but our destination is the same. So, Madam Speaker, this unanimity that we have in 
this  House  and  in  the  country  for  having  a  clean  Mauritius,  definitely  gives  us  this, 
encourages the Government to go forward and bring in this legislation, which I mentioned 
earlier, Madam Speaker, it will definitely contribute in bringing growth and progress in the 
country.  

But  coming  back  to  what  I  stated  earlier,  Madam  Speaker,  on  the  importance  of 
having  a  preventive  strategy  in  the  fight  against  illicit  enrichment,  I  have  not  heard  much 
about  the  need  of  having  those  strong  preventive  measures  to  combat  illicit,  unexplained 
wealth. This is where I believe that institutions like the MRA, ICAC, even the FIU, etc., and 
other similar institutions have an important role to play to prevent the accumulation of illicit 
wealth  and  eventually  crack  down  those  who  get  out  of  the  Nets  of  these  institutions  and 
accumulate unexplained wealth.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  my  humble  view  that  these  existing  institutions  can  be 
consolidated,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  many,  but  as  a  preventive  tool,  as  a  preventive 
strategy,  they  should  provide  adequate  safeguards  to  prevent  accumulation  of  illicit 
enrichment. But we would still need a standalone institution to fight against accumulation of 
unexplained  wealth.  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  have  strong 
leadership and effective structures in those existing institutions that will subsequently enable 
us  to  reduce  considerably  the  number  of  cases  that  will  have  to  be  referred  to  the  new 
institutions that the Bill proposes to create.  

I,  therefore,  invite  hon.  Members  to  reflect  on  the  need  to  have  the  existing 
institutions around, consolidated, but with the objective of promoting a preventive strategy 
and  why  not  eventually  even  making  the  institutions  we  are  creating  to  fight  unexplained 
wealth irrelevant.  What I mean by this is that we get few cases, that is, we have a preventive 
strategy by consolidating the existing institutions, making more strong with giving them the 
resources  they  require,  strong  leadership  so  that  once  we  fight  one’s  cases  of  corruption, 
unexplained wealth is fought by these institutions effectively, there is less and less need to 
refer cases to the institutions that we are creating with this new legislation. So, that would be, 
Madam Speaker, the preventive strategy upon which I wanted to emphasise. 

 

151 

Madam Speaker, we are talking of the protection of the rights of individuals since this 
morning.  Allow  me  to  refer  to  the  late  Lee  Kuan  Yew,  the  former  Prime  Minister  of 
Singapore. He stressed on the four factors that enabled his country, Singapore, to move from 
a low-income to a high-income economy. The most important of those four factors, Madam 
Speaker, he stated was the Rule of Law. At a time when we are struggling to bring growth by 
all  means  in  our  country,  it  is  imperative  that  we  ensure  that  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity Reporting Bill in front of this House do promote and consolidate the concept of the 
Rule  of  Law  in  our  country.  The  Rule  of  Law,  Madam  Speaker,  is  generally  defined  as  a 
system in which four universal principles are upheld and they are as follows – 

 

1.  That the Government and its officials and agents as well as individuals and private 
entities  are  accountable  under  the  law.  I  refer  to  the  speech  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  who  rightly  stressed  earlier  on  the  importance  of  this  whole  issue  of 
democracy and separation of powers. 

2.  The  laws  are  clear,  publicised,  stable  and  just  are  allied  evenly  and  protect 

fundamental rights, including the security of people and property. 

3.  The process by which the laws are enacted, administered and enforced is accessible, 

fair and efficient. 

4.  Justice is delivered timely by competent, ethical and independent representatives and 
neutrals, who are of a sufficient number and reflect the make-up of the communities 
they serve. 
Madam Speaker, the main issue, therefore, is to ensure that the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill only adds at consolidating the system of our Rule of Law. This will 
not only be possible with the adequate and effective legal provisions, but also the effective 
operations of all the new institutions being set up following the adoption of the Bill. These 
institutions should ensure that the four universal principles that make up the Rule of Law are 
upheld. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  have  been  a  few  concerns  that  were  expressed  earlier  and 
coming back to the provisions of the Bill, I, myself, expressed a few concerns on the issue of 
inscription of privilege on property by the Agency. As per the amendments being circulated, 
the  42  days  lapse  after  the  submission  of  the  report  by  the  Agency  to  the  Board.  In  his 
summing up, I understand that the hon. Minister will clarify this whole issue of inscription. 

(Interruptions) 

 

152 

One of the other issues mentioned by my hon. friend Ramano is the dangers of tracking 
down people who have even generated wealth by honest means. It is true that the perception 
in  some  quarters  is  that  the  legislation  is  meant  to  target  even  honest  people  -  it  is  a 
perception - who have been working extremely hard but run the risk of failing to explain their 
wealth acquired by legal means. I am sure that the Government will embark on an effective 
communication campaign to dissipate such a perception in the interest of the country at large. 
In my concluding note, Madam Speaker, I will not miss this opportunity to pay tribute 
to  the  large  section  of  our  population  who  are  honest,  working  hard  to  earn  every  single 
penny they earn. It has been the case long before but certainly the case today as well. These 
are people who have made our country stable and prosperous as it is today. It is our duty to 
protect them and ensure that whatever legislation we bring in front of this House, promotes 
the rights and interests of these honest citizens. 

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker.  
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Lesjongard! 

(10.30 p.m.) 

Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River): Merci, Madame 
la présidente. Merci de me donner la parole d’intervenir sur un projet de loi d’une importance 
capitale pour notre pays et notre peuple.   

Permettez-moi, Madame la présidente, de commencer mon discours par ceci et je tiens 
à signaler à la Chambre que je n’ai rien de personnel, je le fait en toute fraternité mais je dois 
dire à la Chambre que j’ai été étonné par la teneur de l’intervention de l’honorable ministre.   

Quand un ministre présente un projet de loi qui suscite la polémique - et ça on l’a vu 
depuis un certain temps - il essaie de chercher le consensus parce que c’est important. On est 
en train de débattre sur un projet de loi, comme je l’ai dit un peu plus tôt, d’une importance 
capitale et il essaie de chercher le consensus, rallier la majorité et il le fait dans l’humilité. A 
mon avis - peut-être je me trompe - dans l’intervention de  l’honorable ministre, on ne sent 
pas  cette  humilité.    Je  pense  que  c’est  important.    Si  je  peux  me  permettre,  Madame  la 
présidente, un conseil d’ami, il ne faut jamais oublier qu’on est le serviteur du peuple de ce 
pays et le peuple apprécie que ses serviteurs soient humbles, Madame la présidente. 

 

153 

Madam Speaker, two key words in this piece of legislation is ‘good Governance’ and 
‘integrity’ and when we have a look at the Explanatory Memorandum of the Bill, when we 
have a look at the main objects of the Bill, we see that part (a) deals with the promotion of a 
culture of good governance and I think, this is the key word in this piece of legislation. True 
it is that this legislation deals with unexplained wealth, but I think the hon. Member who has 
intervened  just  before  me,  he  made  the  same  statement,  that  is,  good  governance  and  the 
promotion of a culture of good governance. 

Now, another word, like I said, is ‘integrity’.  ‘Integrity’, Madam Speaker, refers to a 
system whereas when we talk of ‘good governance’, we refer to a concept and ‘integrity’ is 
defined  as  a  system  that  consists  of  institutions  and  practices  and  together  they  aim  at 
building  transparency  and  accountability.  This  system,  like  I  said,  is  a  mix  of  institutions, 
laws,  regulations,  codes,  policies,  procedures  that  provide  a  framework  of  checks  and 
balances to encourage and promote an environment of high quality decision-making. Integrity 
agencies should operate within such a system and such a system operates to tackle corruption, 
misconduct and maladministration, Madam Speaker. 

Now,  it  has  been  stated  earlier  that  the  answer  to  corruption  does  not  lie  in  a  single 
institution  or  a  single  law.  The  battle  against  corruption  can  be  won  in  the  acquisition  of 
values, behaviours related to integrity through a series of legislation, agencies and code of 
ethics,  and  the  success  of  such  a  system  depends  on  strong  Government  institutions,  an 
independent Judiciary, a public service not politicised, a Parliament not totally subordinated 
to  the  Executive  Government.    But  leadership  is  most  important,  a  leadership  that  sets 
example for all in both personal behaviour and day-to-day running of Government which was 
not the case in the past years. 

Now,  the  good  functioning  of  such  Agencies  depends  on  how  much  control  the 
Central  Government  wish  to  exercise  and  this  is  the  critical  issue  today  in  this  piece  of 
legislation. This has been taken care of by others who have intervened before and I’ll say a 
few  words  later  on  this  important  issue.  But  the  questions  are:  “How  do  we  achieve  that 
stable balance? How do we ensure, Madam Speaker, that on one side there is central, political 
control and on the other side, the autonomy of the Agency and professional independence? 
With the nomination of those who are going to be at the head of that Agency, does this Bill 
achieve that necessary balance? If that balance is not achieved and that form of autonomy is 
not visible, the public at large, Madam Speaker, will feel that Government is manipulating 

 

154 

such an institution. What will happen? The public will lose confidence in such an Agency. I 
am not aware that there is going to be an amendment. It has not been circulated until now. 
The public at large will feel that Government is manipulating such an institution, then, the 
public will lose confidence. 

As it is today, Madam Speaker, the perception is that Government will exercise some 
form of control on this institution. This is the perception outside and I am happy from what I 
heard from the Minister that he is going to bring an amendment to the nomination of those 
people at the head of this institution because the perception is that Government will control 
this institution and Government will deal with its political opponents via that institution. We 
should  ensure  that  that  perception  disappears  otherwise  we  will  not  get  the  support  of  the 
population. 

Madam Speaker, good governance is a good idea. Our aspiration as a nation is that we 
would be better off if public life in our country is conducted within institutions that are fair, 
judicious,  transparent,  accountable  and  efficient.  The  question  is:  “Is  this  the  situation 
today?”  Now,  for  all  those  in  our  country,  who  live  in  conditions  of  public  insecurity, 
instability,  abuse  of  law,  public  service  failure,  poverty,  inequality,  la  bonne  gouvernance 
représente  cette  lueur  d’espoir  qui  peut  changer  leur  vie.  A  cause  de  cela,  Madame  la 
Présidente, la bonne gouvernance est devenue un élément essentiel et un ingrédient majeur 
dans  les  analyses  que  font  les  pays  qui  luttent  pour  leur  développement  économique  et 
politique. 

Many  countries  today  believe  that  to  explore  failures  of  their  institutions  and  the 
constraints related to growth, they should adopt the concept of good governance. Those who 
strongly  defend  the  concept  of  good  governance  have  associated  a  lot  of  issues  to  good 
governance in order to make their country progress. We have also seen that since the year 
2000, many countries have set eye on their agenda: the concept of good governance. Internal 
Development Agencies have created departments of good governance. 

This is where we come to the conclusion that good governance is a good idea which, 
after all, can reasonably defend bad governance. But the problem today is that the popularity 
of this idea has far outpaced its capacity to deliver. The problem today is that, during its brief 
span  of  life,  good  governance  has  muddied  the  waters  of  thinking  about  the  development 
process. Good  governance is the magical word,  but it is not the magic bullet.  It is not the 
solution to all our problems. It is part of the solution. 

155 

 
On the political front - and this is very interesting, Madam Speaker - for those on the 
political  right,  that  is,  the  right-wingers,  good  governance  means  order,  rule  of  law  and 
creating the necessary conditions for free market to flourish. For those on the political left, 
that  is,  the  left-wingers,  good  governance  incorporates  the  notion  of  equity,  fairness, 
protecting the poor, the minorities and the women and, for the rest, it is associated to justice 
and accountability. 

Madam Speaker, when one has a look to that concept, one should be very careful in 
making comparison. I, for one, agree that this concept is a very important concept and has 
given results in many countries, but we should not forget the realities in our world. Let me 
give  us  a  few  examples  that  show  that  we  should  be  very  careful  in  making  statements 
regarding good governance. We say that good governance brings growth in a country - one 
first statement. Now, Madam Speaker, I’ll give an example, a country like Bangladesh having 
virtually  no  Government,  which  is  ranked  among  the  14  lowest  countries  on  a  standard 
governance index of Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, has, for the 
past several years, a rate of growth in excess of 5%. 

On  the  other  hand,  another  example,  the  US,  a  country  which  is  referred  as  an 
example of good governance, its micro-economy is relatively well managed; Government’s 
action is mostly transparent and accountable to its citizens. You will recall, Madam Speaker, 
of a problem that hit the US, that is, hurricane Katrina in 2005. The US failed miserably. It 
was a massive failure of governance. The system put in place to protect the citizens did not 
work.  The  institutions  that  were  supposed  to  allocate  authority  and  responsibility  among 
different levels in the Government did not function. It was a total failure. Let us not forget 
when  we  talk  of  good  governance  and  the  example  I  have  taken.  What  happened  in  our 
country back in 2013, what we called at that time in March 2013 the black Saturday where 11 
of our citizens lost their lives when we were hit by flash floods?  Again, it was a total failure 
of governance, Madam Speaker. That is why I say let us tread carefully when we talk of good 
governance and integrity. 

What  is important  today,  Madam  Speaker,  is:  what  are  the  priorities  of  the  present 
Government  with  regard  to  good  governance?  How  will  our  citizens  benefit  from  good 
governance?  How  do  we  move  forward?  How  do  we  deal  with  institutions  showing  poor 
governance? How do we ensure that jobs are created, that our youngsters will find jobs? How 
will this piece of legislation assure them that they will be treated in a fair manner? These are 
the questions that we need to ask ourselves, Madam Speaker. 

156 

 
Coming  to  this  piece  of  legislation,  at  the  level  of  our  party,  the  Mouvement 
Patriotique, Madam Speaker, we have made a series of proposals. Some of them have been 
accepted and some no. But this is the rule of the game and I take an expression which is very 
familiar and has been used by the Leader of the Opposition in other pieces of legislation, that 
is: qui peut le plus, peut le moins, Madame la présidente.  

We  are  in  favour  of  the  piece  of  legislation  that  promotes  a  culture  of  good 
governance and integrity reporting. We fully support the fight against corruption. However, 
we feel that for a piece of legislation to be effective, it has to be coherent, proportionate, fair, 
relevant and justifiable and it is for these reasons that we have submitted our proposals, one 
that  deals  with  the  nomination  of  people  at  the  head  of  that  institution.  I  understand  that 
further amendments will be brought to reflect the independence of that Agency, that is, the 
nomination will be made by the President of our Republic, in  consultation with the Prime 
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. 

Another section where we have requested amendments and this is what worries us a 
lot - I think hon. Ramano highlighted this – is section 7. In section 7, Madam Speaker, it is 
stated that - 

“The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister, make use of the services of an 
officer of the Ministry to assist the Agency in the discharge of its function.”  

The question is: “Why should the Agency make use of the services of the Ministry?” It is an 
independent agency. This section opens the door to suspicion of political interference. What 
we are proposing is to delete that section to show the neutrality of the Agency and we suggest 
that the Agency has recourse to its own officers, Madam Speaker. 

Another  proposal  was  with  regard  to  section  5.  We  understand  -  and  this  has  been 
circulated  -  that  Government  has  proposed  amendments  to  that  section.  Another  issue  is: 
“Why should explanation be given in writing only? Why can’t the person under investigation 
be given the opportunity to be heard in person?” Given what is at stake, that is, the person’s 
wealth, why can’t a counsel or his accountant accompany him, Madam Speaker? 

Another important section where we have requested amendment is section 8 (2), that 
is, the section that deals with the supremacy of the Board over other enforcement authorities. 
Each enforcement authority should be allowed to play its role fully, Madam Speaker. This 

 

157 

clause brings a lot of confusion among the  enforcement authorities.  It will create  conflicts 
and it will create some form of interference.  

Section 8 (5) (c) again there, we find that this provision can open the door to abuse 
and  suspicion  of  political  interference.  The  Board  must  act  in  consultation  with  other 
agencies. It should provide reasons as to why it should take over an inquiry.  

With regard to section 12, that is, Inscription of Privilege, hon. Ramano has already 
spoken on that and he has also stated that we should come with a time frame with regard to 
section 14 (1).  

Let me conclude on this note, Madam Speaker, having said what I have said. Between 
2000 and 2005, I was given the responsibility of Minister of Housing and Lands after what I 
would call the Choonee scandal. I thought that after that scandal and with the will of the then 
Prime Minister who is Prime Minister again today, that the days of political agents making 
millions of rupees by the sale of State lands was over. What I witnessed between 2005 and 
2014 was incredible! I have in mind that gentleman called Bungalia touring around the world 
with suitcases full of cash, Madam Speaker. I also recall during that period those unsolicited 
bids where promoters handed over suitcases full of cash to political leaders.  

Madam Speaker, if we want to promote a culture of good governance in our country, 
we, as Parliamentarians and Ministers, should set the example. The question today is: “Do 
we,  as  responsible  politicians,  want  to  put  an  end  to  all  that?”  And  the answer  should  be: 
“Yes!” 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

(10.55 p.m.) 

Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on the present Bill. Since the Bill is on 
good governance, I will first have a look at the definition and the concept of good governance 
tout comme mon colistier précédemment pour autant nous ne sommes pas concertés sur le 
sujet. 

Good governance, Madam, is, and I quote –  

158 

 
 “The  capacity  of  a  country  to  elect  accountable  Government,  to  create  and  uphold 
laws, to protect people’s rights, to manage fairly and effectively the resources of the 
State.  

Good governance is about helping to create the conditions in which women and men 
are empowered to participate in the political, social and economic development and in doing 
so,  to  achieve  their  potential.  Good  governance  is  also  to  achieve  proper  mobilisation  and 
allocation  of  public  funds  and  effective  delivery  of  public  service.  Good  governance  is 
ultimately  about  enhancing  people’s  rights,  the  right  to  security,  to  basic  services  such  as 
education, health, the right to vote, to organise freely and to express opinions, to seek, redress 
due  process  of  law.  Good  governance  is  about  a  fair  and  transparent  process  in  selecting, 
appointing public officials and servants. 

Madam Speaker,  I have tried to find out in this Bill, issues, ideas and  propositions 
pertaining to good governance. I have seen none apart from three lines in the Bill, and I quote 
– 

“The main objects of this Bill are to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

promote a culture of good governance and integrity reporting (…); 

stimulate integrity reporting in the public and private sectors, and 

encourage positive reports of acts of good governance and integrity”. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  Singapore,  with  a  strong  political  will  as  the  foundation,  the 
framework of good governance consists of four pillars, the 4As: effective anticorruption law, 
effective  anticorruption  agency,  effective  adjudication  and  effective  government 
administration.  

What we see in this Bill has nothing to do with good governance. I hope that the hon. 
Minister will come up with a statement and a proposal on how he is going to transform this 
country and the projects he has in mind in relation to good governance, whether it is in the 
political arena or in public administration. At all levels, how he is going to articulate a vision 
that will inspire Mauritians and mobilise them to achieve what is best for the country.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill is mainly about the creation of institution and dealing with 
unexplained wealth.  The way this Bill was introduced in Parliament, the initial proposition 

 

159 

by the press has created a lot of confusion and, of course, contradictory interpretations. I had 
mentioned in my first speech at the National Assembly that fighting corruption is an essential 
element of the pursuit of good governance. If we have a look at our legal framework arsenal 
for combating malpractices and corruption, one might say that we should not mix penal with 
civil, but still we have ICAC, MRA, Ombudsman’s Office, National Audit Office, FIU, Asset 
Recovery Unit and the Public Accounts Committee too. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  suis  en  faveur  de  la  consolidation  de  notre  arsenal  légal, 
civil et pénal. Mais, en  parallèle, nous devons  éliminer les institutions qui ne fonctionnent 
pas. Je suis pour la création rapide de la Financial Crime Commission qui englobera toutes 
les institutions qui luttent contre la corruption sous toutes ses formes afin que les juridictions 
des  unes  ne  chevauchent  pas  sur  celles  des  autres  et  que  l’outil  qui  émergera  sera  le  plus 
efficace possible. Je note que les amendements successifs ont été proposés mais je me pose 
toujours  la  question  sur  la  pertinence  de  certains.  Notamment,  je  vous  ai  fait  part  de  la 
conception de la bonne gouvernance. Malheureusement, la bonne gouvernance ne devrait pas 
avoir de seuil. On impose désormais un barème de R 10 m. Pour être français – je crois que 
Corneille était un précurseur de la bonne gouvernance - Corneille disait – 

« de  voleur  à  voleur,  il  y  a  bien  des  degrés.    Les  plus  petits  sont  pendus,  les  plus 

grands sont titrés. » 

Avec cette nouvelle loi, je crois que même Corneille se retourne un peu dans sa tombe parce 
qu’en l’occurrence on voit l’inverse. Les petits sont titrés et les plus grands sont coffrés. 

Il ne doit pas exister de barème dans la lutte contre ce cancer qui est la corruption. Et 
si  on  veut  distiller  une  culture  de  bonne  gouvernance  dans  notre  nation,  on  ne  doit  pas 
sombrer non plus dans les démagogies purement politiciennes. Il existe une culture, il existe 
une pratique dans le pays qui veut que le mauricien, quelle que soit sa profession, marchand 
d’alouda ou de dhol puri ou contracteur ou professeur garde une partie de ses revenus en cash 
et  cela  en  soi  n’est  pas  de  l’unexplained  wealth.  La  provenance  de  cet  argent  peut  être 
expliquée,  mais  elle  n’est  tout  simplement  pas  déclarée  et  cela  concerne  principalement  la 
MRA. 

Donc, ne faisons pas d’amalgame car on ne peut pas mettre sur le même pied d’égalité 
l’argent de la sueur, l’argent du travail et celui de l’argent mal acquis. Le seuil imposé de R 
10 m. cible le politicien corrompu, le haut fonctionnaire véreux, mais passe dans les mailles 

 

160 

du filet tout un pan de l’argent illicite puis du policier ou du fonctionnaire qui s’agrippe à la 
tétine  de  l’argent  facile  sous  le  seuil  de  R  10  m.  Si  nous  voulons  distiller  une  culture 
d’intégrité dans notre société, la lutte contre toute forme de corruption, de la plus petite à la 
plus  grande,  doit  être  sans  faille.  Nous  ne  pouvons  imposer  un  seuil  car  il  est  en  cela 
antinomique, contradictoire avec une culture de transparence, de droit, de bonne gestion. 

Madame la présidente, les hommes sont faillibles, les institutions le sont moins. Elles 
sont certes plus lourdes et le challenge est de les rendre plus efficaces.  Il y a eu certes un 
avancement dans le mode de désignation des officiers qui vont occuper les postes dans ces 
différents  Agencies.  Mais  je  pense  que  ces  nominations  doivent  se  faire  d’une  manière 
indépendante et totalement transparente pour éviter toute personnification du débat ou encore 
l’idée que cette loi est créée pour purement pénaliser les adversaires politiques du jour et en 
cela  la  proposition  du  Leader  de  l’Opposition  de  nommer  ses  différents  assesseurs  par  la 
Présidente de la République est une bonne chose. 

Madame la présidente, les lacunes sont multiples dans cette loi. Je vous épargnerai les 
incohérences identifiées par mes prédécesseurs notamment l’honorable Ramano. Il y a aussi  
une incohérence stratégique, économique. Il y a en ce moment un colloque sur la diaspora 
mauricienne  qui  se  tient,  d’où  l’incohérence  stratégique.  Combien  de  mauriciens  établis  à 
l’étranger ont investi à Maurice pendant les 25 dernières années dans les régions de l’Ouest 
ou du Nord, dans différents campements. Cette loi est en totale contradiction avec la politique 
du  gouvernement  d’attirer  ces  nouveaux  immigrants.  Une  autre  incohérence,  Madame  la 
présidente, le valuation exercise concernant les biens et la méthode selon lesquels ils seront 
effectués. Une deuxième incohérence, l’argent illicite récupéré devra aller au Consolidated 
Fund et non pas au National Recovery Fund sous la tutelle du directeur de l’agence. Cela 
encore est un non-sens. 

En  bref,  Madame  la  présidente,  souvent  les  médicaments  censés  guérir  sont 
potentiellement plus dangereux que la maladie elle-même. C’est pourquoi, nous souhaitons 
que les propositions de tout un chacun soient prises en compte afin de fédérer la Chambre sur 
ce projet.  

Merci. 

 
 

 

(11.05 p.m.) 

161 

Mr  F.  François  (First  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  start  my 
contribution  to  the  debate  on  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  2015  by 
quoting  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP)  in  1997,  the  definition  of 
governance, and I quote – 

“Governance  is  the  exercise  of  economic,  political  and  administrative 
authority  to  manage  the  country’s  affairs  at  all  levels.  It  comprises  the 
mechanisms,  processes  and  institutions  through  which  citizens  and  groups 
articulate their interest, exercise their legal rights, meet their obligations and 
mediate  their  differences  (...).  Governance  encompasses  the  State,  but 
transcends  the  State  by  including  the  private  sector  and  the  civil  society 
organisations.” 

Madam Speaker, the main object of this Bill in the Explanatory Memorandum – 

“(a) is to promote a culture of good governance and integrity reporting 
in Mauritius”. 

Good governance, which is accountable, participatory and transparent. This is the buzzword 
of this Bill despite we have been talking about unexplained wealth and all these things. Good 
governance!  And I totally appreciate the intervention of my predecessor, hon. Lesjongard. It 
is governance to ensure the political and social economic priorities which are based on broad 
consensus in our society. Good governance, Madam Speaker, is simply good economics. 

Madam Speaker, corruption and malpractices in our society have been described as a 
cancer.    It  violates  public  confidence  in  the  State  and  private  sector.  It  endangers  and 
threatens sustainable development of people, stability and security of society. 

Madam Speaker, in the first instance, I have to say, I was a bit perplexed about the 
Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill - you will excuse my words - which I did refer 
as ène la loi un peu bancale, if this expression is acceptable.  This was my first impression. 
However,  having  gone  through  the  various  readings  and  discussions,  I  have  changed  my 
attitude  and  shifted  my  mind.  I  was  relieved  though  by  the  explanation,  during  our 
Parliamentary  meetings,  of  hon.  Bhadain,  as  well  as  by  my  colleague,  hon.  PPS  Jadoo-
Jaunbocus, in a private radio debate together with hon. Mohamed. 

162 

 
Madam Speaker, this Bill has a bearing on our society.  How can a society function 
when some people are recognised by their unexplained wealth, which is a dangerous thing?  I 
remember,  in  an  international  conference  I  attended,  a  foreign  friend  told  me  that,  in  the 
jurisdiction of his country, some Members of Cabinet never deliver infrastructural projects 
unless they are provided with a percentage of the project as commission. Madam Speaker, 
amazingly, last week itself, I have received a mail from a person telling me that a promoter is 
interested  to  implement  a  project  in  Rodrigues,  but  requires  some  information  about 
Rodrigues. He submitted a list of queries and, at the end of the mail, it was written in bold: 
“What commissions expected?” Through a mail addressed to me! Madam Speaker, you will 
realise how such crap will make me react! As if this crooked mind person is considering me 
to be at the same level field of those corrupted people he probably usually meets! Incroyable! 
What commissions are expected? I can tell you that this person is blacklisted in my contact. 

Now,  say  suppose  I  embark  in  this  filthy  reasoning  and  this  sort  of  mafia  together 
with  this  crook,  obtain  the  commission  and  invest  in  any  property.  Is  this  acceptable  and 
reasonable?  No!  Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  refer  to  a  quotation  from  the  former  UN 
Secretary-General,  Kofi  Annan,  in  a  document  from  the  ICGMF  28  International  Training 
Conference in Miami, Florida, from 18 to 23 May 2014, and I quote – 

“Corruption  is  an  insidious  plague  that  has  a  wide  range  of  corrosive  effects  on 
societies.  It undermines democracy and the rule of law, leads to violations of human 
rights,  distorts  markets,  erodes  the  quality  of  life,  and  allows  organised  crime, 
terrorism  and  other  threats  to  human  security  to  flourish. Corruption  hurts  the  poor 
disproportionately  by  diverting  funds  intended  for  development,  undermining  a 
government's ability to  provide basic services,  feeding inequality  and injustice, and 
discouraging  foreign  investment  and  aid.   Corruption  is  a  key  element  in  economic 
under-performance and a major obstacle to poverty alleviation and development”. 

Rightly said so by Kofi Annan! 

Madam  Speaker,  this  proposed  Bill  is  important  and  I  agree  that  confiscation  of 
unexplained wealth is an effective and necessary weapon, through an in rem framework, that 
is,  civil  recovery,  while  respecting  the  criteria  of  legality,  necessity  and  proportionality. 
Madam Speaker, the in rem nature, not in personam, of the proceeding offers a viable device 
to  attack  the  difficult  problems  of  corruption,  unjust  enrichment  to  those  who  profit  at 
society’s  expense.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  persons  to  explain  how  they  came  to 

 

163 

acquire their wealth. If they have done no wrong, there should be no problem for people to 
explain how they got the funds to purchase wealth. 

Madam Speaker, I have also read in the press that a former Minister from Rodrigues 
and his political party, in a press conference, argued that this law will negatively impact and 
is controversial to Rodrigues and the people of Rodrigues. It was reported that hon. Leopold 
and I shall take our responsibility towards this legislation. Madam Speaker, clean hands; we 
need a great clean and prosperous society. I have got nothing to be afraid of. Why are they 
afraid of this legislation, knowing well how Rodriguans behave and cherish the fundamentals 
of their human and societal values? I question! Mo coner bien! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, my political party, OPR, has always taught us to have clean hands in 
politics  and  not  become  automatic  teller  machines  (ATM),  with  corrupted  acts  to  win 
elections or become corrupted at the expense of our society, as rightly referenced also by Lee 
Kuan Yew, former Singaporean politician, in his book entitled ‘From Third World to First’, 
cited also by hon. Leopold and hon. Rughoobur. 

What kind of society do we want to leave as legacy for our children in the next 10, 20, 
30, 40 or 50 years’ time?  Madam Speaker, while scrutinising this Bill, I will not go into its 
technical, legal details, as sufficiently canvassed by lawyers from both sides of the House, but 
I  will  focus  on  a  particular  part  of  the  Bill  which  seeks  to  introduce  the  confiscation  of 
property of a person, that is, property of a person for which that person cannot explain its 
lawful acquisition. 

The Bill seeks to provide a new plan to tackle and explain wealth, as per section 3, 
subsection  (5),  through  civil  proceedings,  and  the  onus  -  well  written  -  shall  lie  on  the 
respondent  to  establish  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  any  property  is  not  unexplained 
wealth.  That  is  clearly  defined.    I  am  not  a  lawyer,  but  I  think  this  is  quite  clear.  Madam 
Speaker, I find this extraordinary where in this unexplained wealth law it is not necessary to 
demonstrate  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  wealth  has  been  obtained  by  criminal 
activity, but instead the State places the onus on an individual to prove that the wealth was 
acquired by legal means.  It’s fantastic. Madam Speaker, this is one way that Government can 
do  something  about  protecting  our  communities  and,  more  importantly,  making  sure  that 

 

164 

people out there, who do the wrong thing, do not get the opportunity to create wealth at the 
expense of other people and they do not keep it. 

In essence, if lawful origins of wealth cannot be established, it can be forfeited to the 
State  through  the  General  Fund  as  established  under  section  18  of  the  Bill,  after  an 
Unexplained  Wealth  Order  is  made  and  if  the  order  is  not  subject  to  an  appeal,  nor 
discharged. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  society  should  be  able  to  trace  where  large  sums  of  money 
invested  in  property  come  from.  If  a  person  cannot  explain  how  he  has  accumulated  his 
wealth, there is obviously some kind of problem in gaining it. 

We all have witnessed how existing law enforcement officials go through a difficult 
exercise of tracing the wealth of suspected persons to its source, which is not an easy task. 
This is often very complex, Madam Speaker, because some of these people are pretty clever, 
‘et en Creole nou dir, zott rusée! Et bien rusée! And they go through all manner of devices to 
try and camouflage the source of that wealth. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  reporting  mechanism  provided  in  the  Bill  allows  to  trace  out 
wealth to its source to establish its unlawful origin.  I think that it is absolutely reasonable and 
I commend the provision of section 14, where the Board has reasonable suspicion to believe 
that  a  person  has  unexplained  wealth,  it  shall  direct  the  Agency  to  apply  to  a  Judge  in 
Chambers for Unexplained Wealth Order to the confiscation of that unexplained wealth. 

We all know how wealth acquired through serious illegal activity, particularly drug-
trafficking  in  this  country,  and  corruption  is  damaging  our  institutions  and  the  state  of 
confidence in our society by our citizens. 

Madam Speaker, the role of FIU, as debated in the previous Asset Recovery Bill, is 
crucial  during  pre-investigative  and  intelligence  gathering  stage  and  their  role  of  interface 
between private sector  and law enforcement authorities and to assist with flow of  relevant 
information and asset tracing is very important. 

Madam  Speaker,  section  16  of  the  Bill  answers  the  genuineness  of  the  Bill,  where 
Unexplained  Wealth  Order  will  be  made  by  the  Judge  in  Chambers  upon  satisfaction  of 
reasonable suspicion of unexplained wealth by a respondent. It is quite important to repeat 
that line.  I quite like it.  This is important to bring  confidence  and positive attitudes in the 

 

165 

legislation.  It  is  only  the  Court  which  can  act  in  that  direction  and  no  one  else.  Et  c’est 
rassurant, que la Cour! 

This present Bill takes asset confiscation laws, as constitutionally voted this morning 
by more than 94%, to another level. It is very much in response to the sophistication of illegal 
activities out there. Everyone knows that. 

Madam Speaker, one fundamental point that I need some clarification though - that 
has just caught my attention - is the mechanism for calculation of unexplained wealth, with 
regard to the threshold of Rs10 m. as proposed. There is a threshold, but the mechanism to 
calculate it is not quite clear for me. 

Madam Speaker, there is established as per section 4, an Integrity Reporting Service 
Agency.    Promoting  integrity  is  partly  about  minimising  fraud  and  misconduct  but, 
ultimately,  it  is  about  the  quality  of  democratic  accountability.  Accountability  with  good 
governance! 

Madam  Speaker,  the  fundamental  of  the  Agency  is  also  about  the  legitimacy  to 
promote effective practices aimed at preventing corruption, reporting of acts of malpractices 
and  unexplained  wealth  with  necessary  independence  and  resources  to  carry  out  their 
functions effectively, free of undue influence, which was also raised this morning by the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, and rightly said so by hon. Lesjongard. 

Again, Madam Speaker, I like the idea for promoting a culture - this is not a small 
word, this is a big word, a culture. Une culture de la bonne gouvernance et de l’intégrité ! Ça 
c’est une valeur fondamentale extraordinaire, surtout pour nous les parlementaires, ici, dans 
cette Chambre. 

I believe that Government shall also go a step further by introducing the concept of a 
‘national  integrity  system’  as  developed  by  Ibrahim  Seushi,  the  President  of  Transparency 
International-Tanzania,  where  he  proposed  the  interconnection  of  independent  institutions 
such  as  the  political  will,  administrative  reforms,  ‘watchdog’  agencies  such  as  Anti-
Corruption  Commission,  Audit  Institution,  Ombuds  Offices,  Parliaments  and  public 
awareness involvement. 

Ibrahim  Seushi,  in  his  analogy,  reported  that  if  any  one  of  these  ‘integrity  pillars’ 
weakens, an increased load is thrown on to the others. If several weaken, their load will tilt, 

 

166 

so that the round ball of ‘sustainable development’ rolls off, and today we all know the world 
we are working, we are debating about moving from MDGs to SDGs for the next 15 years. 
The general equilibrium of these pillars, which I just mentioned, is therefore important and 
Government has an incentive to keep these pillars in balance, and I think that’s what this Bill 
is trying to do. 

Madam  Speaker,  further,  I  cite  Chris  Aulich  from  the  Australia  and  New  Zealand 
School of Government Institute for Governance at the University of Canberra, Australia; he 
reported that ‘in developing an integrity system, the factors that underpin good governance 
and  promote  the  ethical  and  effective  pursuit  of  public  purposes  would  be  diffused 
throughout the social, economic, cultural, legal and political institutions of a nation.’ This is 
what we have to do and this is what we are doing. 

Madam Speaker, the culture of good governance and integrity requires not only a dose 
of confidentiality as per section 21 of the Bill, but also a dose of professionalism in both the 
private and public sector. 

I adhere to what Kenya proposes in section 11 of its Leadership Integrity Bill or Act, 
where, the word ‘professionalism’ is defined in the law mainly for public officers in carrying 
their normal duties in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office. 
I won’t go in any saga out there. 

In  this  Bill,  I  believe  that  the  word  ‘professionalism’  shall  be  applied  to  section  4 
subsections  (5)  and  (6)  for  the  independent  service  provider  and  the  employment  of  such 
employees  and  consultants  respectively.  Why?  This  is  important  to  avoid  that  any 
discrimination arises against any person to bring confidence in this piece of law. 

Madam Speaker, the promotion of good governance and integrity reporting campaign 
also  by  the  Agency,  as  mentioned  in  the  Bill,  shall  become  a  foundational  element  of  our 
society as is the case in Trinidad and Tobago. 

It shall not only, as per section 11 of this Bill, enhance the standing of Mauritius as an 
International  Financial  Centre  of  Excellence  of  unimpeachable  integrity  with  the  object  of 
attracting  investment,  but  shall  also  carry  out  public  education  initiatives  that  foster  an 
understanding of the standards of integrity. 

(Interruptions) 

 

167 

Thank you, hon. Attorney General, if you will do it.  

(Interruptions) 

In the same breath, while fulfilling integrity, I will propose that Government uses this 
opportunity to work out a mechanism to educate our people about laws of our Republic to 
allow  them  to  understand  and  know  their  rights  as  well.  There  is  a  big  lacuna  in  that 
direction, even with interpretation of laws in our Republic. 

Madam Speaker, another issue, despite the declaration of assets for all parliamentarians 
and public officers, I would suggest that after the transitional period of this Bill, it would be 
appropriate for the Act to include the following provisions for politicians and political parties 
in  Parliament  to  be  required  to  detail  all  contributions,  direct  and  indirect,  and  submit  it 
annually  to  what  I  call  ‘an  Integrity  Commission.    We  know  it  is  being  done  under  the 
Declaration of Assets Act, but I mean under an Integrity Commission. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill is about building integrity reporting for the betterment of our 
nation and the society. And we, as responsible parliamentarians, it is imperative that all of us 
have a role to play in this endeavour. 

Madam  Speaker,  to  conclude,  Government’s  move  to  tackle  the  issue  of  good 
governance again is a great and right step in the direction towards combating acquisition of 
unexplained wealth to the detriment of our society. 

The  public  wants  and  expects  a  culture  of  good  governance  and  transparency  in  our 
public  and  private  sectors.  The  success  of  this  legislation  surely  will  depend  on  other 
institutional  arrangements  for  investigation,  the  powers  of  the  investigating  and  reporting 
Agency, the independence, impartiality, the coordination and information flows, and not in 
derogation  to  associated  legislation  such  as  debated  recently;  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  the 
Financial  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act,  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  amongst 
others. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  the  legislation,  this  Bill  a  fruitful  delivery  for  our  society.  I 

congratulate Government, hon. Bhadain for bringing this legislation forward. 

Madam Speaker, with those few words, I am pleased to support the Good Governance 

and Integrity Reporting Bill and I thank you for your kind attention. 

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Fowdar! 

168 

 (11.30 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):  Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.  It  is  getting  late.  There  have  been  extensive  debates,  Madam  Speaker, 
around this Bill in this House and outside as well. 

The  hon.  Minister  has  stood  up  on  several  occasions  to  explain,  to  clarify  issues 
regarding the Bill and I must confess that he has made enormous progress from the day the 
Bill has been presented into the House till to date. I, therefore, do not intend to take the time 
of the House by repeating the same arguments that have already been stated by my colleague 
Members here. 

Madam Speaker, I have been among the first to inquire on several issues relating to the 
Bill and I thank the hon. Minister for taking on board my issues, my request.  But I have to 
confess, Madam Speaker, that there are many issues still unclear to me and there are many 
issues which, I think, need to be polished where I still have some reservations, but I will vote 
for  the  Bill.  I  will  vote  for  the  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  because  I  do  not  want  to  miss  this 
golden opportunity to be part of the fight against fraud and corruption in this country. Should 
there be any teething problem after the presentation of the Bill, we will need to come back 
and do amendments and sort out. But, essentially, I do not understand my good friends on the 
Opposition side why they do not follow my step, even if I do not agree hundred per cent with 
the  Bill,  I  am  voting  for  the  Bill  because  I  feel  this  is  a  major  step  against  fraud  and 
corruption in this country.  

We  can  always  look  at  amendments  afterwards  because  all  the  Bills,  even  the 
Constitution today, have been amended. It is not perfect all the time and I am sure we are 
going  to  amend  the  Constitution  again.  But  the  fight  against  fraud  and  corruption  is  very 
important for this country. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I again repeat, I have reservation, but 
I am not going to miss this golden opportunity to fight against fraud and corruption in this 
country. 

I listened carefully to the speech of my good friend, hon. Ramano and I am sure that the 
officers of the Ministry  of Financial Services, Good Governance and  Institutional Reforms 
have taken good note because he has many pertinent issues and one of them is inscription des 
privilèges, amnesty for taxpayers.  There are lots of pertinent issues that the hon. Member has 

 

169 

raised and I think, in good faith, we have to take all these issues on board so that the Bill 
becomes really effective and efficient. 

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  bottom  line,  this  is  a  courageous  move  against  the 
powerful community of fraudsters and corruptors in this country and this Bill is a necessity. I 
won’t  take  much  time  of  the  House,  Madam  Speaker.  I  am  definitely  voting  for  the  Bill 
because the Bill is of national interest to the country. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Boissézon! 

(11.34 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madam  Speaker, 
thank you for allowing me to intervene on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.  
At start, I shall congratulate the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 
Institutional Reforms for the introduction of the Bill and la patience qu’il a eu pour expliquer 
les tenants et aboutissants du projet de loi.  

La fraude et la corruption sont des problèmes de développement de grande ampleur. On 
estime que le flux transfrontalier total revenant des activités criminelles de la corruption et de 
la fraude fiscale représente entre 1 et 1.6 billion de dollars par an, soit l’équivalent du PIB des 
12 pays les plus pauvres du monde.  Le véritable coût de la corruption dépasse de loin, la 
valeur des biens volés. Elle conduit à la dégradation des institutions publiques et la méfiance 
vis-à-vis d’elles, notamment de celles impliquées dans la gestion des finances publiques et 
dans la gouvernance du secteur financier, l’affaiblissant si ce n’est la destruction du climat de 
l’investissement étranger direct et privé. 

Je  cite  le  précédent  secrétaire  des  Nations  Unies,  M.  Kofi  Annan  qui  définit  la 

corruption – 

« La corruption est un mal insidieux dont les effets sont aussi multiples que délétères. 
Elle sape la démocratie et l’état de droit, entraîne des violations des droits de l’homme, 
fausse  le  jeu  des  marchés,  nuit  à  la  qualité  de  la  vie  et  crée  un  terrain  propice  à  la 
criminalité  organisée,  au 
terrorisme  et  à  d’autres  phénomènes  qui  menacent 
l’humanité. »  

170 

 
A  Maurice,  lors  du  débat  numéro  10  de  2011,  alors  que  le  Leader  de  l’Opposition 
posait sa PNQ sur l’Independent Commission against Corruption, il dit entre autres et je cite 
– 

“Can I ask a general question? Would the hon. Prime Minister agree with me that the 
mood  at  present  in  the  country  is  crying  for  new  measures  to  combat  fraud  and 
corruption  and  doing  what  has  been  mentioned,  what  I  have  proposed  here  would 
send a strong signal?  Would the hon. Prime Minister agree with me?” 

Trois  ans  après,  lors  d’une  autre  PNQ  adressée  au  Premier  ministre,  concernant  la 
Declaration of Assets (Amendment) Bill¸ le  Leader de l’Opposition cite – 

“Sir, one issue that was raised on the two occasions that we last discussed the issue of 
corruption in general, was whether the new legislation will take care of assets being 
held  through  nominees  or  prête-noms.  Is  it  still  the  intention,  therefore,  for  this 
legislation  to  deal  with  this  issue  of  wealth  held  by  Members  of  Parliament  or 
anybody else, but through prête-noms or nominees when the issue arises?” 

The Prime Minister then replied – 

“Yes. That is definitely the case, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, (…).” 

(Interruptions) 

No, I am quoting – 

“(…) because this is one of the problems which we have, it is so easy today to just use 
somebody else’s name and then acquire assets and holdings. This will definitely be in 
the law when we bring it.” 

Mr Bérenger said – 

“Another issue that has been raised is the issue of holding. Somebody holding asset 
disproportionate  to  known  income,  elsewhere  it  has  been  called  signe  extérieur  de 
richesse,  shown  by  either  Members  of  Parliament  or  anybody,  including  civil 
servants. Will that aspect be covered in the new legislation to come?” 

The Prime Minister then replied – 

“That  will  definitely  be  the  case.  Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  nothing  against  people 
being rich, but they have to explain how they became rich.” 

Today, at the request, I can say, of the Leader of the Opposition, that Bill is before us. 

 
Madame la présidente, quelles étaient les interrogations des précédents dirigeants ? 

171 

Premièrement, la population en a marre de la fraude et de la corruption et crie pour 
que  de  nouvelles  mesures  pour  combattre  la  fraude  et  la  corruption  soient  apportées  pour 
combattre ces fléaux. 

La  deuxième  interrogation  est  la  question  de  signe  extérieur  de  richesse,  et  la 
troisième, prête-nom ou nominé.  Aujourd’hui, quels sont les objectifs du projet de loi qui est 
devant  cette  Chambre ?  Elle  est  en  droite  ligne  avec  la  démarche  de  ce  gouvernement 
d’éradiquer la fraude et la corruption ; promouvoir la culture de good governance; stimuler et 
encourager  les  rapports  sur  les  actes  d’intégrité  et  de  bonne  gouvernance ;  protéger  et 
récompenser  les  personnes  qui  rapportent  des  cas  de  fraude  et  de  corruption,  et  surtout 
déceler les cas de malversation et la confiscation des biens non-expliqués. 

Madame la présidente, je ne crois pas qu’il y ait  une seule personne dans ce monde 
qui  ne  soit  d’accord  qu’un  des  objectifs  de  l’humanité  est  de  combattre  la  fraude  et  la 
corruption, le crime organisé, la prolifération des drogues dures et synthétiques, les atrocités 
du  terrorisme  international.  Tout  un  chacun  est  d’accord  que  même  si  beaucoup  a  été  fait 
pour combattre ces fléaux,  nous devons admettre en toute honnêteté et en toute humilité que 
les mesures n’ont pas apporté les résultats escomptés. 

Loin  de  mettre  le  blâme  sur  le  dirigeant  précédent,  nous  devons  concéder  que  les 
dispositions  légales  en  place  ne  facilitent  pas  la  confiscation  des  biens  mal  acquis.  La 
confiscation  pénale  dirigée  in  personam  est  une  action  contre  la  personne.  Elle  exige  un 
procès au pénal et une condamnation, et fait souvent partie du processus de détermination de 
la peine. L’exigence d’une condamnation pénale signifie que le gouvernement doit d’abord 
établir  la  culpabilité  hors  de  tout  doute  raisonnable  ou  de  telle  sorte  que  le  juge  soit 
intimement convaincu. 

Madame la présidente, vous concèderez que tout cela est un processus long and ardu 
dont l’issue est incertaine. Nous savons tous que le complot pour la vente de drogues ou la 
distribution de pots de vin ne se fait pas par des actes notariés et encore moins en public. Le 
système de confiscation du pénal peut être assis sur des affaires de biens; ce qui signifie que 
le ministère public doit prouver que les avoirs en question sont les produits ou instruments 
issus du crime. 

Plusieurs  acquittements  peuvent  être  prononcés  pour  plusieurs  raisons.  La  preuve 
recueillie au cours d’une perquisition illégale peut être déclarée irrecevable. Un témoin peut 

 

172 

se rétracter. Un juge peut orienter un jury à tort. C’est souvent la triste réalité des affaires de 
corruption  et  de  crime  organisés.  Afin  de  contourner  ces  contraintes,  les  Nations  Unies 
préconisent  la  confiscation  des  biens  illégitimement  acquis  en  l’absence  de  condamnation. 
L’Article 54 (1) (c) de la Convention de Nations Unies contre la corruption cite – 

« Elle  engage  les  États  et  les  États  doivent  envisager  de  prendre  les  mesures 
nécessaires pour permettre la confiscation de tel bien en l’absence de condamnation 
pénal lorsque l’auteur de l’infraction ne peut être poursuivi pour cause de décès, de 
fuite ou d’absence ou dans d’autres cas appropriés. » 

La proposition des Nations Unies repose sur un principe unique qui est : ‘Pour être dissuasive 
une sanction doit pouvoir s’accompagner de la privatisation pour les délinquants des profits 
qu’ils ont pu tirer de l’infraction.’ 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  vous  cite  un  cas  qui  est  arrivé  en  Italie.  Lors  d’une 
conversation  entre  deux  mafieux  qui  furent  interceptés,  l’un  deux  sympathisant  avec  une 
famille dont le fils avait été condamné à une longue peine de prison, devait ajouter : « Votre 
fils  est  en  prison,  mais,  nous,  on  nous  a  confisqué  tous  nos  biens »  semblant  dire  que  la 
confiscation était plus importante que la perte d’un fils en prison. 

Madame la présidente, le concept de confiscation sans condamnation date de quelques 
années déjà et est fondé sur l’idée que si une chose viole la loi, elle peut être confisquée au 
profit de la loi. 

La  notion  de  compétence  in  rem,  littéralement  contre  la  chose,  ceci  est  au  courant 
dans le droit maritime afin que le navire soit confisqué et non le capitaine ni l’équipage ou le 
propriétaire. Ce principe avait d’ailleurs été formulé en 2004 dans le rapport Warsmann sur la 
lutte contre le trafic des stupéfiants en France, et je cite – 

«Afin  de  faciliter  le  prononcé  de  ces  mesures  conservatoires  qui,  parce  qu'elles 
amputent  les  profits  issus  des  activités  illicites,  figurent  parmi  les  mesures  les  plus 
efficaces de la lutte contre la criminalité organisée, il paraît nécessaire, ainsi que votre 
rapporteur  l'a  déjà  préconisé  dans  son  rapport  au  ministre  de  l'Intérieur  sur  la  lutte 
contre  les  réseaux  de  trafiquants  de  stupéfiants,  de  créer  une  procédure  pénale 
distincte  permettant  de  prononcer  rapidement  des  mesures  conservatoires  sur  les 
biens.»  

Madame la présidente, un des reproches faits par des opposants à ce projet de loi et le 
fait  qu’il  n’y  ait  une  atteinte  aux  droits  de  propriété.  N’ayant  pas  de  cas  précédent  à  l’île 

 

173 

Maurice pour étayer la justesse de la loi, nous devons nous tourner vers d’autres juridictions. 
Je vous cite le cas d’Abdul Ada v France du 27 novembre 2014. Ce cas parle de ressortissants 
Marocains résidant à Mulhouse qui avaient acquis une maison pour la somme de 246 120 € à 
Mulhouse  et  cette  famille  avait  un  revenu  de  1300  €  par  mois !  Ils  possédaient,  en  effet, 
plusieurs  comptes  en  banque  en  France  et  au  Maroc,  la  maison  sur  laquelle  ils  avaient 
effectué d’importants travaux et neuf voitures immatriculées en leurs noms. 

Le  tribunal  prononça  donc  à  leur  encontre  une  peine  complémentaire  de  saisie,  de 
confiscation des sommes déposées sur leurs comptes en banque et la maison acquise en 2005. 
Cette peine fut confirmée en appel puis par la Chambre criminelle de la Cour de Cassation en 
novembre 2009. Ils référèrent le cas à la Cour Européenne qui elle après son prononcé dit 
ceci : « les autorités ont pu légitimement prononcer des sanctions sévères s’agissant du trafic 
de  grand  ampleur  au  niveau  local.  Tous  les  arguments  des  référents  se  heurtent  aussi  au 
même raisonnement. Le droit de l’État peut parfaitement porter une atteinte grave au droit de 
propriété et au respect de la vie privée lorsqu’il s’agit de lutter efficacement contre le trafic de 
stupéfiants. » 

Madame la présidente, la Cour contrôle donc la proportionnalité de la mesure prise en 
appréciant  à  la  fois  la  nécessité  de  garantir  l’intérêt  général  en  luttant  contre  le  trafic  de 
stupéfiants, la fraude et la corruption et celle de protéger le droit de propriété. Dans ce cas, la 
Cour s’est basée sur une présomption. Les intérêts sont présumés bénéficier en connaissance 
de  cause,  de  ressources  tirées  de  transactions  illicites.  Il  leur  appartient  donc  d’apporter  la 
preuve contraire en démontrant que leurs biens ont une origine licite. 

En  Irlande  du  Nord,  dans  le  cas  de  Walls  v  Director  of  Assets  Recovery,  la  Cour 
d’Appel a déclaré que la procédure de confiscation des avoirs en l’absence de condamnation 
est une forme de procédure civile qui est conforme à la Convention Européenne. Je cite la 
directrice de L’Assets Recovery Agency de l’Irlande du Nord après le prononcé de la sentence 
–  

« This means that the new civil recovery regime has passed another significant legal 
challenge. This Agency is committed to using its power firmly and fairly to recover 
proceeds of crime.” 

Autre point soulevé par les opposants est la protection des personnes qui ont acquis 
des  biens  en  toute  bonne  foi  pour  la  valeur  de  ces  biens.  Dans  l’affaire  Gilbert  v.  United 

 

174 

States, United States v.  Lourenco, la Cour a jugé que l’intérêt du gouvernement remonte au 
moment de l’acte. Et je cite bien, la Cour a jugé que l’intérêt du gouvernement remonte au 
moment  de  l’acte  qui  a  rendu  les  biens  passible  de  confiscation  ajoutant  que  le  congrès  a 
ajouté  une  disposition  afin  d’empêcher  un  accusé  de  chercher  avant  sa  condamnation  à 
transférer le bien à une tierce personne. En permettant ainsi au gouvernement de faire valoir 
intérêts en vertu de la doctrine de rétroactivité - relation back doctrine - cela met en échec les 
revendications d’un propriétaire qui acquiert la propriété de biens soumis à confiscation après 
que l’infraction se soit produite et avant que le jugement de confiscation ait été annoncé.  

Un point a été soulevé concernant les garanties bancaires et je citerai un avocat qui a 

écrit un article dans la presse et il cite - 

 « Un  des  points  qui  a  été  soulevé  est  que  cette  loi  va  troubler  les  inscriptions  des 
privilèges des créanciers sur certaines sûretés. » 

Je cite –  

« Exerçant son pouvoir public et économique, l’État mauricien a décidé de présenter 
un nouveau projet de loi dont le titre fait l’objet du texte. Il attaque de façon détournée 
les biens des gens et les confisque au fis de notre Constitution écrite. S’était-il avisé 
des conséquences collatérales que cela pourrait engendrer pour le banquier ? Ce projet 
de loi risque de troubler les rangs des inscriptions, des privilèges, des créanciers sur 
certaines suretés avec pour risques d’attirer les déconvenues pour les banques voire 
même l’impossibilité de réaliser leur garantie. » 

 Mais  si  ce  même  légiste  avait  pris  compte  du  jugement  dans  l’affaire  Gilbert  v. 
United States, comment un bien qui appartient au gouvernement peut être considéré comme 
un asset comme garantie ?  Je me pose la question, quand un jour cet avocat a pris fait et 
cause pour les pauvres gens dont les biens sont confisqués par les banques quand - en toute 
bonne foi - ils ont garanti une personne qui n’arrive pas à payer sa dette parce qu’il a perdu 
son emploi. On n’a jamais vu ces personnes ! Et aujourd’hui, je me pose la question si ces 
avocats ne sont-ils pas des agents de l’Opposition.  

Mais tout en vantant les principes de ce projet de loi, je demanderai au gouvernement 
de faire attention à un point. La confiscation sans condamnation ne doit pas se substituer aux 
poursuites pénales. Si se dispenser d’une poursuite pénale en faveur d’une Confiscation Sans 
Condamnation  (CSC)  nuit  à  l’efficacité  du  droit  pénal  et  à  la  confiance  des  citoyens  en 

 

175 

application  de  la  loi,  par  conséquent,  bien  que  la  CSC  puisse  être  un  outil  efficace  pour 
récupérer des avoirs liés aux crimes elle ne devrait pas être utilisée comme alternative aux 
poursuites pénales lorsqu’un État a la capacité de poursuivre le contrevenant. 

En  d’autres  termes,  les  criminels  ne  devraient  pas  être  autorisés  à  échapper  à  des 
poursuites  en  s’appuyant  sur  le  régime  CSC  en  tant  que  mécanisme  permettant  d’obtenir 
réparation pour des crimes qui ont été commis, renoncer à une poursuite pénale lorsqu’elle 
est possible en échange d’une procédure de CSC et donne l’impression que le contrevenant 
s’achète un moyen d’arrêter les poursuites. 

La réduction de la criminalité est, en général, aussi garantie par des poursuites pénales 
et des condamnations ainsi que par des confiscations. En conséquence, les poursuites pénales 
doivent être poursuivies chaque fois que possible pour éviter le risque que le procureur, les 
tribunaux et le public considèrent la restitution des biens comme sanction suffisante alors que 
les lois pénales ont été violées. Toutefois, la CSC devait être complémentaire à des poursuites 
et  à  des  condamnations  pénales.  Elle  peut  précéder  une  mise  en  accusation  ou  peut  être 
menée en parallèle à des procédures pénales. 

En outre, les recours à la CSC devraient être préservés dans tous les cas de sorte qu’ils 
puissent être engagés si les poursuites pénales devenaient impossibles ou en cas d’échec de 
ces derniers. Ce principe devrait être affirmé de manière à faire la loi. 

Pour terminer, je dirai aux personnes, aux gens honnêtes de ce pays, qu’ils peuvent 
dormir  sur  leurs  deux  oreilles.  La  loi,  comme  on  dit  entre  parenthèses,  ‘Bhadain’  ne  les 
concernent pas, mais d’autre part de se réjouir que le pays a fait un grand pas dans la lutte 
contre la fraude et la corruption. En fin de compte, je vous dirai - quelqu’un a dit que c’est un 
proverbe  français  rappelé  depuis  le  19ème  siècle  qu’un  bien  mal  acquis  ne  profite  jamais 
encore, fallait-il lui donner force juridique en organisant sa mise en œuvre concrète.  

Merci. 

Mr Teeluckdharry: I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Rutnah rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 
Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

 

176 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Thursday 03 December 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 00.00 hours, the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 03 December 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

