No. 32 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 29 SEPTEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILL (Public) 
ANNOUNCEMENT 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 32 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 29 September 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 
 

 

. 

 

. 

 

. 

 

. 

 

. 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the 
Table. 
A. Office of the Speaker 

The Report of the Select Committee on the Live Broadcasting of the 

Proceedings of the House and Matters Ancillary thereto. 

 

B. Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific Research – 
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements and 
 
the Annual Report of the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre Trust Fund for the year 
ended 31 December 2013. 

C. Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
 
National Agency for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers 
for the year ended December 2014. (In Original). 

D. Ministry of  Local Government  – 

The Municipal Town Council of Curepipe (Fees for Classified Trade) 

 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 181 of 2015).  

E. Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Imports)  (Amendment  No.  4) 

 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 180 of 2015).  

F.  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reform, Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 
The Annual Report 2014 of the Financial Services Commission. 
 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

NATIONAL IDENTITY CARD – LEGISLATION – AMENDMENT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Acting Prime Minister whether, in regard to the new Mauritius National Identity Card, he will 
state – 

(a) 

if,  following  the  Supreme  Court  judgment,  proposed  amendments  to  the 
existing legislation in relation thereto will be introduced, indicating if – 

(i) 

fingerprints are presently being stored pending the delivery of the cards 
after consent is obtained, post-finger print taking; 

(ii) 

fingerprints will be stored on the cards permanently, and 

(iii) 

the cards are the property of the State, and 

(b) 

the sums paid as at to date and due to be paid to the contractor of the project 
therefor, the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise and other partners. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr  E.  Sinatambou):  With  your  permission,  Madam  Speaker,  I  shall  be  replying  to  the 
Private Notice Question of the Leader of the Opposition since I am replacing the substantive 
Minister responsible for the National Identity Card Issue.  I shall also, with your permission, 
reply to PQ B/579 together with the Private Notice Question. 

Following the Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Madhewoo v The State 
of  Mauritius  and  anor  which  was  delivered    on  29  May  2015,  Government  decided  that 
fingerprints will not henceforth be stored in any Database, save and except for the sole and 
strict purpose of producing an Identity Card.  The House may wish to note that, in that case, 
the  Supreme  Court  has  ruled  that  the  law  providing  for  the  storage  and  retention  of 
fingerprints and other personal biometric data regarding the identity of a person is lawful, but 
that provisions in the National Identity Card Act and the Data Protection Act for the storage 
and retention of fingerprints and other personal biometric data collected for the purpose of the 
biometric identity card of a citizen of Mauritius are unconstitutional. 

Subsequently,  Government  caused  all  the  biometric  data  stored  and  retained  to  be 
destroyed in line with its pledge. However, we cannot just cancel the card itself because it has 

 

9 

cost more than Rs1.1 billion. Hence, we are now only storing minutiae on the card which is in 
the sole and permanent custody of the cardholder only. In the current process, the applicant 
gives his or her fingerprints which are converted into minutiae. Out of the minutiae that are 
given, only the four best are recorded on the card. 

In that process, fingerprints and minutiae are stored for a minimum period of one day 
and a maximum period of 7 days, which is perfectly lawful and in line with the Judgment of 
the Supreme Court where it is stated, at page 33, that, I quote – 

“the  law  providing  for  the  storage  and  retention  of  fingerprints  and  other 
personal  biometric  data  regarding  the  identity  of  a  person  constitutes  a 
permissible derogation, in the interests of public order, under section 9 (2) of 
the Constitution of the country.” 

The House may wish to note that Government is, however, not retaining or storing biometric 
data as such, save and except for the strict and sole purpose of producing and printing the 
Identity  Card  and  that,  even  then,  this  is  for  a  limited  period  not  exceeding  seven  days 
whereafter the biometric data is destroyed and permanently erased. 

As regards part (a)(i) of the question, Madam Speaker, the House may wish to note 
that, subsequent to the Supreme Court Judgement, the National Identity Card (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 were made on 11 September 2015. I am advised that the said amendments 
provide  that  fingerprint  minutiae  will  be  processed  and  recorded  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
producing  the  ID  card  of  a  citizen  and  that  any  biometric  information  will  be  erased 
permanently once the identity card has been printed. 

As regards part (a)(ii) of the question, Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House 
that fingerprint images are not stored on the card. The cards are personalised with the four 
best fingerprint minutiae extracted from the fingerprint images which are, as I said earlier, 
permanently destroyed and erased after producing and printing the ID card. 

These fingerprint minutiae will be stored permanently only on the ID card and will be 
used  for  verification  of  the  identity  of  the  cardholder.  It  must  be  highlighted,  Madam 
Speaker,  that  any  minutiae  and  the  identity  card  itself  remain  in  the  sole  custody  of  the 
cardholder. 

As regards part (a)(iii) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am advised that a National 
Identity Card belongs to the cardholder and not to the State.  In fact, I am advised that section 

 

10 

9(1)(f)  of  the  National  Identity  Card  Act  makes  it  an  offence  for  a  person  to  have  in  his 
possession a National Identity Card not belonging to him or her. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
the former Government signed an agreement with the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise on 
17 October 2012 for the implementation of the Mauritius National Identity Scheme Project to 
the tune of SGD 44,326,139 SGD which amounts to about Rs1.152 Billion. 

For  the  implementation  of  the  Project,  the  Government  of  Singapore  designated 
Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise  to  lead  the  project  and  a  Consortium  was  formed  by 
Singapore Cooperation Enterprise with Crimson Logic Pte Ltd and NEC Asia Pacific Pte. Ltd 
as members. 

As at date, an amount of approximately Rs1.143 billion has already been disbursed to 
Singapore Cooperation Enterprise.  An amount of approximately Rs9.35 million representing 
10% retention money has not yet been paid. 

All  payments  are  paid  to  Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise  and  no  payment  is 

effected to subcontractors concerned. 

To  sum  up,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  now  confident  that  the  fear  which  the  public 
could previously legitimately have about the possibility of their personal data being stored 
abusively and/or being misused and/or abused is no more.  The very destruction of the central 
database and the permanent erasure of any biometric data as soon as same has been used for 
the  sole  and  strict  purpose  of  producing  and  printing  an  Identity  Card  is  in  line  with  the 
pledge given by this Government and can only restore public trust that citizens’ rights will be 
respected and upheld in the Republic. 

Mr Bérenger: I think the hon. Minister has not replied directly to my question as to 
whether following the May 2015 Supreme Court judgement, amendments would be brought 
to existing legislation, that is, the NIC Act and the Data Protection Act. Can I interpret that as 
far as Government is concerned, there is no need to bring amendments to these two Acts? 

Mr Sinatambou: As I just said earlier - and I must say that I don’t agree that I did not 
reply to the question - I just explained to the House, Madam Speaker, that subsequent to the 
judgement, the National Identity Card (Amendment) Regulations 2015 have been passed and 
they  entered  into  force  on  11  September  2015.  Those  regulations  provide  that  fingerprint 
minutiae will be processed and recorded only for the purpose of producing an ID card and 
that any biometric information will be erased permanently once the ID card has been printed.  

11 

 
Therefore, as it now stands, whatever illegality  was actually found by the Supreme 
Court in May 2015 in its pronouncement has now been made good by the regulations which 
have been passed. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, we all know what regulations are and what the main 
Act under which regulations are made, what it is. Now, from my reading of the judgement, 
the Supreme Court has found that sections, provisions of the two Acts are unconstitutional. 
Am  I  given  to  understand  that  according  to  Government  the  fact  of  having  published 
regulations and not amending the Act means that there is no need, according to Government, 
to amend those two Acts? 

Mr Sinatambou: I stand to be advised by the State Law Office. But the fact of the 
matter remains that regulations also have the force of law in this country. Therefore, as the 
matter stands, the law stipulates that whatever has been found to be unlawful by the Supreme 
Court has been now rendered lawful, with or without amendment as at now. But I am advised 
that the relevant Ministry is working on amendments to be made to both Acts. 

(Interruptions) 

But, in any event, as the matter stands, the law has been cured and as at today the National 
Identity Cards (NICs) which are being produced and delivered to citizens of this country are 
lawful, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Please, hon. Bhagwan don’t provoke! 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, being given that we are now informed that the two 

Acts will be amended and that the State Law Office is working on them, are the amendments 
ready and will they be circulated as soon as possible? 

Mr Sinatambou: Obviously, once the work is finalised it will be circulated. But the 
point which has to come across very clearly and forcefully, Madam Speaker, is that whatever 
has been declared unlawful is now lawful. The ID cards are lawful, the minutiae are lawful 
and there is no breach of any constitutional right regarding any citizen of this country. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, am I right in saying that before the Supreme Court, 
authorisation has been obtained to  go to the Privy Council? Will those amendments being 
prepared  be  brought  to  the  National  Assembly  whilst  this  is  ongoing  or  will  the  present 

 

12 

Identity  Card  validity  be  extended  until  the  Privy  Council  eventually  has  dealt  with  the 
matter? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  am  informed,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  current  ID  card  has 
already been extended to 31 January 2016 and I am informed that the relevant amendments to 
be  brought  to  the  two  legislations  concerned  will  be  circulated  during  this  session  of  the 
National Assembly. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know what is the stand of the State, that is, the Attorney-General 
and the Solicitor-General as far as this request to appeal to the Privy Council is concerned? 
The Press has reported that the DPP - I tend to think it is not correct as a report - is going to 
take a stand against that permission being granted by the Supreme Court to go to the Privy 
Council. Can I know whether that is correct and what is the stand of the State through the 
Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Of  course,  I  am  only  replacing  the  substantive  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation.  What  I  can  say  to  the  House  is  that  my 
understanding  is  that  the  State  has  not  appealed  and,  as  for  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions,  his  independence  does  not  allow  me  to  give  a  reply  to  that  aspect  of  the 
question. But, to all intents and purposes, it is only the plaintiff in the matter, Dr. Madhewoo 
who is appealing. That is the information that I have. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I have not been told that, but we all know that the 
validity  of  the  card  has  been  extended  once  more  until  the  end  of  the  year.  Can  I  ask  the 
Government… 

(Interruptions) 

Janvier!  Can  I  ask  the  Government  whether  this  is  going  to  be  done  every  three  months?  
How long this will go on? As I said, if the appellants do not obtain the permission of the 
Supreme Court, it is clear that they will go to the Privy Council themselves. Therefore, can I 
again  ask  whether  Government  has  decided  or  should  decide  to  extend  the  validity  of  the 
present cards until the Privy Council – out of  due respect to the Privy Council also - has dealt 
with the issue? 

Mr Sinatambou: I understand that no decision has been taken on this issue yet. 

Mr Bérenger: But then, can I point out that in case it is extended, then we have a 
problem with the youngsters that come of age 18 and that do not have a card at all? So, has 

 

13 

Government  thought  through  that  in  case  it  is  extended  until  the  Privy  Council  gives  a 
judgement, what will happen to the 18 years old who want a card for the first time? They 
don’t hold the present Identity Card. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  My  understanding,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  all  those  who  are 
reaching the age of 18 are already being provided cards and this is why the National Identity 
Card  Regulations  of  2015  were  passed.  It  allows  for  the  production  and  issue  of  National 
Identity  Cards  in  full  and  total  respect  of  the  judgement  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  it  was 
delivered in May 2015. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as the issue of now, at present, fingerprints being taken, I did 
not hear the Minister react to the fact that consent supposedly is being asked, being given the 
interpretation that Government gives of the judgement, why is consent sought? And is it not a 
fact that, in fact, what is happening is that fingerprints are being taken and afterwards consent 
is being asked in English, in confusion? So, is this going to go on? Can the hon. Minister 
clarify the situation? 

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, Madam Speaker, I would respectfully say that there is no 
such confusion. There is no such confusion and if we look at the judgement itself, it is quite 
clear that consent is not required as such but it may have been sought just to make sure that 
tomorrow  someone  does  not  claim  that  his  rights  have  been  infringed.  The  situation,  as 
declared by the Supreme Court, and I need to quote page 33 of the judgement here, is that -  

“ (a) 

the  law  providing  for  the  storage  and  retention  of  fingerprints  and 
other  personal  biometric  data  regarding  the  identity  of  a  person 
constitutes  a  permissible  derogation,  in  the  interests  of  public  order, 
under section 9 (2) of the Constitution;” 

So, this is just to highlight that it is perfectly lawful with or without consent. 

Mr  Bérenger:  My  understanding  is  fingerprint  is  not  required,  but  yet  it  is  being 
taken with a pseudo-consent - consent obtained after fingerprints have been taken. Obviously, 
this is not in order and I appeal to Government to have a fresh look at this at least, Madam 
Speaker.  Well,  Government  has  told  us  that  in  a  maximum  of  seven  days,  the  fingerprint 
taking  is  destroyed  completely.  Why  this  delay  between  one  and  seven  days  and  what 
procedures are followed for that destruction to the satisfaction of the public? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, let me first perhaps respond to this request for a fresh look at 
the procedure. I hope, first of all, that the hon. Leader of the Opposition will agree with me 

 

14 

that prevention is better than cure. So, I believe that when consent was being required, it was 
a precautionary measure worth its salt. However, I am advised that, as from 14 September 
2015, there is no consent form as such.  That is the information I have been given and, as for 
the delay of one to seven days, there is a procedure. I, unfortunately, cannot go into the nitty-
gritty. What I’ve been told is that this is the amount of time that it takes and I believe that we 
must account for not only the fact that there is a decentralised system for people to go to, but 
then there is another place where  all the data are sent for processing. So,  I think that it is 
precautionary to say again up to seven days. If we would have said it takes three days, the 
moment one has taken four days, we would have heard: ‘oh! What a scandal!’ So, that is why 
I believe the one to seven day precautionary step is a step in the right direction. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I’ve  tried  to  listen  carefully  to  the  hon.  Minister  and  from  what  I 
understand,  being  given  Government’s  reading  of  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court, 
fingerprints  and  other  data  are  going  to  be  stored  on  the  Identity  Card  permanently.  Now, 
obviously,  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  that  in  certain  countries  like  Germany, 
fingerprints  are  taken  voluntarily;  if  you  refuse,  you  have  your  card  and  you  have  no 
problem. Therefore, I am sure that those who are going to appeal to the Privy Council will 
refer to Germany and other cases arguing that the putting of the fingerprints etc on the card is 
not acceptable, reasonably justified in a democratic society. So, again I ask the question: until 
the  Privy  Council  has  pronounced  on  this  issue  of  whether  it  is  acceptable  that  the 
fingerprints are put on the card, not in a server, not in a database, but on the card itself, until 
that is commented upon by the Privy Council, what is going to happen? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, until further notice, Madam Speaker, we stand to be guided 

by a decision of the Supreme Court of this country which has declared that, I quote – 

“The  law  providing  for  the  storage  and  retention  of  fingerprints  and  other 
personal  biometric  data  regarding  the  identity  of  a  person  constitutes  a 
permissible derogation under our Constitution.” 

As such, I would say that it is premature to aver that what has happened is to be perceived as 
being unreasonable in a democratic society. Now, further to that, I wish to highlight the fact 
that  fingerprints  are  not,  I  insist,  are  not  stored  on  the  card.  It  is  called  minutiae,  Madam 
Speaker. So, what happens is - I asked because I also did not know - my understanding is that 
you take the fingerprints and the minutia is a rendering of the fingerprint which is not the 
fingerprint.  Now,  it  is  as  if  an  extract;  the  minutiae  are  an  extract  of  the  fingerprint,  the 

 

15 

fingerprint does not appear on the card. Now, even when the minutia is extracted from the 
fingerprint, it does not appear on the card, it is in the chip inside the card. What is also... 

(Interruptions) 

That is not childish – sorry! Madam Speaker, what I am trying to say is that, why we have, 
unfortunately, to disagree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition is that once the minutiae are 
on the ID card, the purpose is to do what? Let us say, for example, the person has to prove his 
or  her  identity  to  obtain  his  or  her  pension.  That  day  the  person  goes  there,  he  or  she  is 
allowed  to  put  his/her  finger  and  immediately  the  card  is  used  to  ascertain  that  this  is the 
identity of the person. Therefore, this is the best possible identification process and this is 
why we have to disagree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: The law, as it stands, from my reading of it - careful reading - does not 
say  whether the card, today or tomorrow, is the property of the individual or of the State. 
Now, in certain countries, for example, from what I understand in Germany, it is spelt out 
that it is a property of the State, like passports, it is spelt out on the passport that the passport 
remains the property of the State. Now, I would like to know whether it is going to be spelt 
out, that it is not the property of the State and whether the State Law Office opinion has been 
sought.  What difference does it make to spell out that, as in Germany, it is the property of the 
State or not? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  as  currently  advised,  I  have  been  told  in  most 
clear terms that the National Identity Card belongs to the cardholder and not to the State. In 
fact, I am further advised that under Section 9, Sub Section (1), Paragraph (f) of the National 
Identity Card Act, it is an offence for a person to have in his possession a National Identity 
Card not belonging to him. I don’t think it can be clearer than that, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Bérenger:  As  far  as  the  financial  aspect  is  concerned,  can  I  know  whether 
Singapore Cooperation Enterprise which has already been paid nearly all the one billion two 
hundred  million  rupees  agreed  upon,  are  still  in  any  way  or  fully  involved  in  this  whole 
identity card issue? Will they be around or are they still involved until the Supreme Court and 
then the Privy Council pronounced on the issue? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  My  understanding  is  that  after  being  paid  approximately 
Rs1,143,000,000 Government would not let them off the hook like that. They have signed.  
There  has  to  be  a  hook,  on  the  contrary.  These  are  people  who  have  been  paid  a  massive 
amount  of  money  to  do  something  which,  in  the  end,  has  turned  out  to  be  unlawful. 

 

16 

Government will not let them go away. We are insisting that they provide the software, to put 
into place a perfectly lawful mechanism this time. So, we cannot let them off the hook. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Wait! There are other people before you. I have got a long list here. 
The privilege is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  After he has put his question, then I 
will ask hon. Dr. Sorefan. Privilege is for the hon.  Leader of the Opposition first. Do  you 
have a question now, hon. Leader of the Opposition?  If you don’t have a last one, then hon. 
Dr. Sorefan. 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister said he  won’t let the 
Singaporean  off  the  hook,  but  this  is  a  contract  worth  Rs1.2  billion  for the  work  that  was 
asked to be done. Now the Government is coming to change, to erase the data. Of course, it is 
additional work. They will come and claim for the money. I want to know - but probably the 
hon.  Minister  does  not  have  the  answer  -  how  much  they  are  going  to  claim.    The  other 
issue… 

Madam Speaker: One question at a time, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  But  my  question  is  coming  on  the  minutiae.  The  hon.  Minister 
mentioned  this  word  and  it  seems  that  many  of  us  don’t  understand  it.  From  my 
understanding, you take four fingerprints… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, ask your question! 

Dr. Sorefan: I have to explain and then come with the question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! Put it in the form of a question! 

Dr. Sorefan: The four fingerprints are converted into figures that are stored in the ID 
card.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether,  if  we  can  convert  the  fingerprints  into 
figures that are stored in the card, can we do it the other way round? Will what is stored in the 
ID card be convertible into fingerprints? 

Mr Sinatambou: True it is that normally additional work implies additional pay, but 
in  this  instance  the  House  will  appreciate  that  Government  has  already  had  to  spend  an 
enormous amount of money for those identity cards. The erasure and removal exercise which 
has  been  done,  for  example,  of  the  database  and  everything  else,  has  apparently  been 
financially substantiated to an amount of Rs23 m. But I understand that the majority of it has 
been drawn from the maintenance component of their contract. So, we are still saying that we 

 

17 

will not let them off the hook as regards further payments. They have been paid more than 
enough. It is believed that this is already scandalously big.  

Now, let me come to the minutiae part of the question. I must, before replying to that 
aspect, insist that the minutiae are in that card which is - I am advised - the ownership of the 
cardholder and is actually only meant to be in his sole custody. However, I am advised that, 
according  to  experts  from  Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise,  the  minutiae  are  irreversible. 
Therefore, they cannot be converted back into fingerprints. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  In  relation  to  part  (b)  of  the  question, 
bearing in mind the Government policy that Government will not let them off the hook, in 
view  of  the  cloud  of  suspicion  which  surrounds  the  whole  ID  Card  Project,  will  the  hon. 
Minister request investigative authorities to initiate thorough enquiry into possible criminal 
offence  or  criminal  offences  that  have  been  committed  in  relation  to  the  allocation  of 
contracts to contractors, then subcontractors, bearing in mind that impression was given that 
this was a Government-to-Government project? 

Mr Sinatambou: I thank the hon. Member for his question. As the Ag. Minister, I 
would not take it upon myself to send for enquiry to the competent authorities, whether the 
Police or ICAC.  But what I will say is that, as the matter currently stands, Madam Speaker, 
everything  is  being  looked  at  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms because we believe in governance. 

Madam  Speaker:  One  question  for  hon.  Baloomoody.  Then,  I  will  pass  on  to  the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition for his last question. 

Mr Baloomoody: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister has referred I think 
three times to part 5 of the conclusion of the judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Dr. Madhewoo. He did not refer to section 6, which says that “the provisions of the National 
Identity Card Act and the Data Protection Act for the storage and retention of fingerprints and 
other personal biometric data collected for the purpose of biometric identity card of a citizen 
of Mauritius are unconstitutional.” This is what part 6 of the conclusion says. Now, in view 
of what section 5 and section 6 say, Dr. Madhewoo is appealing. Can I know why is it that, 
on a matter of such national importance, the  Attorney General is objecting that the matter 
goes to the Privy Council? 

 

18 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  the  reason  for  not  referring  to  part  6  is  quite 
simple. The reading that we make of page 33 of the judgement - the fifth part - is that, indeed, 
under the Constitution, it is perfectly lawful for a law to provide for the storage and retention 
of  fingerprints  and  other  personal  biometric  data.  That  is  perfectly  lawful  in  a  democratic 
society according to the Constitution. However, the way it was being done under those two 
Acts, that is, the National Identity Card Act and the Data Protection Act, was unlawful, which 
is  why  Government  has  passed  those  regulations  and  rendered  the  situation  now  lawful. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I have to come back to this. On 19 October, from what I understand, 
the request to be allowed to appeal, permission to appeal to the Privy Council will be before 
the Supreme Court. I put my question.  What is the stand of the State through the Attorney 
General  and  the  Solicitor  General?  Can  I,  again,  appeal  to  Government?    Leave  it  in  the 
hands of the Court! If that is the intention, why object to the Privy Council having a look at 
this  and  other  legislations  worldwide?  Therefore,  can  I  appeal  to  Government  that,  on  19 
October, the State - not the DPP; the DPP is not the State - should not object to the Court 
granting permission to go to the Privy Council? 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Minister! 

Mr Sinatambou: My understanding is that there are two judgements, first of all. One 
concerning Dr. Madhewoo and one concerning hon. Pravind Jugnauth. There is no appeal in 
the second case. There is an appeal by the gentleman in the first case. Now, I must say that I 
do not know whether the State is objecting in the case of Madhewoo.  What I know, after 
verifying with the State Law Office, is that the State is not appealing. However, a reading of 
page 33 and part 5 of the judgement, as a lawyer, makes it apparent to me that it is lawful in a 
democratic  society  to  have  fingerprints  taken,  but  this  Government  is  not  retaining 
fingerprints.  That  is  the  most  important  thing  to  say  about  this  affair.    It  is  that  the 
Government is not and will not retain fingerprints and has caused all the database of more 
than 900,000 people to be destroyed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ 
No. B/575 in regard to the drafting of the Juvenile Justice Bill will now be replied by the hon. 
Attorney General. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

19 

VACOAS  - METHADONE DISPENSING – COMPLAINTS 

 

(No. B/566) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the dispensing of methadone at the Vacoas 
Police Station, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  complaints  in  relation  thereto  reported  by  the  Municipal 
Council of Vacoas-Phoenix thereto, indicating the remedial measures taken, if any, as at to 
date. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that  a number of verbal complaints have been referred by the Municipal Council of 
Vacoas-Phoenix  to  Vacoas  Police  Station  about  the  nuisance  due  to  noise  and  use  of  foul 
language by the beneficiaries of the Methadone Substitution Therapy (MST) in the Vacoas 
Market building and its vicinity.  This was causing a lot of inconveniences and disturbances 
to stall holders who were feeling insecure. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that MST distribution at Vacoas 
Police Station started on 22 March 2009 and four cases of rogue and vagabond and assault 
involving MST beneficiaries were reported there since February 2012. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  a  result  of  these  complaints,  Police  have  implemented  the 

following measures - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Frequent foot and mobile patrols are being carried out by the personnel of the 
Police  Station,  Divisional  Support  Unit  and  ERS  thereby  reinforcing  Police 
presence in the vicinity of Vacoas Market bus stand, John Kennedy Street to 
discourage  MST  beneficiaries  from  loitering  in  the  vicinity  of  commercial 
buildings and Vacoas Market; 

Frequent sensitisation campaigns are being conducted with shop owners, other 
hawkers and vegetable sellers regarding precautionary measures to be taken in 
respect of MST beneficiaries, and 

(iii)  CID and ADSU teams are detailed to make frequent patrols to prevent them 

from loitering.  

Madam Speaker, additionally Government decided to decentralise the dispensing of 
MST as from January 2015.  Accordingly, as from 14 April 2015, Methadone dispensing in 

 

20 

the region has been extended to Phoenix, Eau Coulée and Curepipe Police Stations, thereby 
reducing the impact at Vacoas. 

However, I understand that there are still verbal complaints which are being received 
by the Municipal Council of Vacoas-Phoenix and the Commissioner of Police has given the 
assurance that all the needful will be done to deal with the situation. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: I got two supplementary questions.  I will start one by one. Is the hon. 
Ag. Prime Minister aware that in the market a lady who was on Methadone undressed herself 
naked and that was taken in the meeting of the Municipal Council?  What action the Police 
Officers took at that time? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  I don’t have action for this particular case, but I did bring 
the hon. Member’s question to the attention of the Commissioner of Police and he gave me 
the assurance this morning that he will step up efforts to deal with this issue of methadone 
users causing disturbance and using foul language. That’s the information I have. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    My  second  question  to  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister.    The  hon.  Ag. 
Prime Minister has mentioned that we are decentralising the Methadone dispensing to Eau 
Coulée  and  still  we  are  having  problem.    So,  we  are  shifting  Vacoas  problem  to  Castel 
because we have got complaints.  Is it not possible for the Government to think about instead 
of  decentralising,  to  distribute  Methadone  at  residence,  because  at  residence  you  get  one 
person who is doing it rather than getting all of them to come to the Police Station where they 
create havoc? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  this  is  more  of  a  question  for  my 
colleague, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life.  I am sure he will take up this 
issue. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, next question!  Hon. Hurreeram! 

Order, please! 

 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

21 

H.E. THE VICE-PRESIDENT  - OFFICIAL RESIDENCE –  RENT 

(No.  B/567)  Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the premises rented to 
serve as official residence for H.E. the Vice-President of the Republic of Mauritius, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to if tender procedures have been followed 
for the renting thereof and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

date the bid therefor was launched;  

name of the bidders therefor, indicating the name of the successful bidder;  

extent thereof, and 

monthly rental thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, a press communiqué was issued by the 
Prime Minister’s Office on 10 January 2008 inviting tenders for the rental of a semi-furnished 
building of approximately 3,000 square feet in Phoenix or Quatre Bornes, preferably in Old 
Quatre Bornes, to accommodate the Office of the Vice-President.   

As at the closing date for the submission of tenders set for 31 January 2008, three bids 

were received from the following bidders, namely - 

(i) 

Mr D. Ramful; 

(ii)  Mrs E. Dhunnoo, and 

(iii)  Mr K. Ragavoodoo. 

A bid evaluation exercise was thereafter conducted by the Office of the Vice-President.  After 
consultations with the Valuation Department and following negotiations on the rental value, 
the bid of Mr Ramful was approved.  The premises comprise two reinforced buildings of a 
total area of 2,645 square feet on a portion of land of approximately 35½ perches situated at 
30 Avenue Farquhar, Quatre Bornes, at a monthly rental of Rs70,000.   

The Lease Agreement between both parties was signed on 28 November 2008.  It has 
been renewed under the same terms and conditions in 2012, 2013 and 2014 and is valid up to 
31 December 2016. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Hurreeram! 

22 

 
Mr Hurreeram: Will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister inform the House if it is proper for 
the Vice-President’s Office to renew this contract on a yearly basis without having recourse 
to a new tender exercise? 

(Interruptions) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I will look up, Madam Speaker.  I don’t have that particular 

information. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No comments, please!  Hon. Hurreeram! 

Mr  Hurreeram:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Given  the  political  connection  of 
those  concerned  with  the  former  Government,  will  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  consider 
requesting the Commissioner of Police to inquire if none was being favoured? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  the  best  I  can  do  is  to  send  it  to  the 
Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms to have a look, 
but I must say that there was a valuation done by the Valuation Department which evaluated 
a monthly rental at Rs60,000.  The original amount of claim was Rs110,000 and then there 
was some negotiation and the Rs60,000 was increased to Rs70,000.  But I am happy to send 
it to the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Hurreeram! 

 

ALLEGED ARM TRAFFICKING NETWORK - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/568)  Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent request made 
to the Government of Mauritius by Mrs K.L.A., Director of the Conflict Awareness Project, 
to re-open the inquiry concerning the alleged arm trafficking network in Mauritius, he will 
state if he will consider acceding thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the 
reply of the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question B/201 at the sitting of 31 
March 2015, wherein he stated, inter alia, that no enquiry had been carried out so far in any 
case of alleged arm trafficking in Mauritius. He also informed the House that a response was 

 

23 

awaited  from  one  Mrs  K.L.A.  who  had  been  contacted  by  the  Police  in  March  2014  and 
requested to inform whether she intended to travel to Mauritius to give a detailed statement 
which would enable the Police to start an investigation into the matter.  

On  10  August  2015,  Mrs  K.L.A.  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
requesting for the reopening of the investigation into an alleged international arm trafficking 
network which might have been operating in Mauritius.   

I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that, following that letter, and on the 
basis of additional information which has come to the knowledge of the Police, the Central 
Crime Investigation Department (CCID) has already initiated an enquiry in that matter since 
24 August 2015. 

Mrs  K.L.A.  has  also  requested  safe  passage  to  and  from  Mauritius  to  provide 
testimony  regarding  these  matters.    The  Police  will  guaranty  her  safe  entry  and  safe  exit 
accordingly and during her stay she will be provided with full Police protection.   

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Hurreeram! 

Mr  Hurreeram:  Will  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  consider  asking  the  ICAC  to 
explain  how  they  managed  to  get  in  the  luggage  of  a  private  lawyer,  to  serve  upon  Mrs 
Austin, a mise en demeure, when the visit was supposed to be confidential to bring further 
enquiry? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I understand that this matter will be taken 

up by the Police in the enquiry. 

Madam Speaker:   One last question on this! 

Mr  Hurreeram:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Will  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister 
inform the House whether there has been an enquiry or will there be an enquiry to see if there 
has been any  link between the Gorah Issac case and this alleged arm trafficking? 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Hurreeram, you have asked the question as to whether they 

will re-open this enquiry.  Don’t put in any cases! Hon. Osman Mahomed!   

Mr Mahomed:  Madam Speaker, thank you.  I will stick myself to the K.L.A case.  
Being given that this issue is being raised this morning and we know that there is a case of 
defamation against Mrs K.L.A and the plaintiff has requested for an early trial, and given that 
Mrs K.L.A. is not willing to be here because she has got other commitment, we, on this side 
of the House, will go even further in asking the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to convey to the Rt. 

 

24 

hon.  Prime  Minister  the  wish  of  this  side  of  the  House  for  a  full-fledged  Commission  of 
Enquiry to be conducted on this whole issue? Can this be considered?  

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I think it would be best to wait for the 
arrival of Mrs K. L. A. and the Police inquiry and then I am sure that needful will be done, if 
it needs to be done, by the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker: One last question! 

Mr Mahomed: But going by Press reports, she has indicated that she is committed 
and she is not able to come here some time soon, in spite of the request for an early trial. So, 
the  request  is:  “Let  us  quash  this  whole  issue  once  and  for  all  by  going  for  a  full-fledged 
Commission of Inquiry. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I understand, Madam Speaker, that in this particular case, 

at least, as in many other cases, we should not go by Press reports. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

 

SALE BY LEVY – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY REPORT – RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/569)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission 
of Inquiry set up on the Sale by Levy, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the main recommendations thereof, indicating the actions that have been 
initiated in relation thereto for the implementation thereof as at to date. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  would  like  to 

reply to PQ B/569 and B/572 together as they relate to the same matter. 

In  regard  to  PQ/572,  I  presume  that  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  two  different 
Commissions of Inquiry.  As a matter of fact, there were two Commissions of Inquiry which 
had  been  set  up  in  May  2012:  one  on  Sale  by  Levy  and  another  one  on  the  System  of 
Acquisitive Prescription. 

I  would  like  to  refer  the  hon.  Members  to  the  replies  made  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister to PQ B/155 and B/158 on 10 March 2015.  The Prime Minister informed that both 
Commissions  of  Inquiry  had  already  completed  their  work  and  submitted  their  respective 

 

25 

reports to the President of the Republic who had in turn referred the reports to the former 
Prime Minister.  However, the reports were untraceable at the Prime Minister’s Office and 
consequently  fresh  copies  had  been  made  available  by  the  Office  of  the  President  on  07 
March 2015, upon request by the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Madam Speaker, the Commission of Inquiry on Sale by Levy has made a number of 
recommendations to alleviate the hardship and prejudice which debtors and former debtors 
are  experiencing.    The  report  has  been  referred  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development for an in-depth examination of the recommendations contained therein.  I am 
informed by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development that a Special Committee 
has been set up, as announced in the Budget Speech 2015-2016, to examine the report of the 
Commission  and  expedite  the  implementation  of  its  recommendations.    The  Special 
Committee will comprise relevant stakeholders namely, Ministries concerned, the Office of 
the Commissioner for the Protection of Borrowers and other institutions such as the Mauritius 
Bankers Association and Consumer Protection Association. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the Commission of Inquiry on the System of Acquisitive 
Prescription,  the  Commission  has  recommended  changes  in  the  procedure  leading  to 
acquisitive prescription so as to afford better protection to lawful owners and significantly 
hinder ill-intentioned people involved in fraudulent appropriation of land belonging to other 
people.    The  Report  of  the  Commission  has  been  referred  to  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and 
Lands for an in-depth examination of the recommendations.  I am informed by the Ministry 
of Housing and Lands that a Committee chaired by the Senior Chief Executive is examining 
the numerous recommendations, including proposed amendments to a number of pieces of 
legislation in order to safeguard the proprietary rights of our citizens.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  comprehensive  submission  will  be  made  to  Cabinet  on  both 
reports once the exercises for the examination of the recommendations are completed.  The 
findings will be made public thereafter. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  Government  Programme  2015-
2019 already provides that the overall procedure of Sale by Levy will be reviewed in order to 
prevent collusion between financial institutions, legal advisors and their agents.  Moreover, 
with a view to protecting financially distressed people, Government has also pledged to enact 
legislation  to  prohibit,  for  a  period  of  two  years,  the  sale  by  levy  of  the  only  house  of  a 

 

26 

worker who has been made redundant on economic grounds.   I would like to reassure the 
House that Government will stand by its commitment. 

Mr Ameer Meea: The Ag. Prime Minister referred to PQ B/155, but the PQ stated 
that the report was being tabled at the Prime Minister’s Office since 07 March 2015, that is, 
more than six months’ time till now. May I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether he will 
table the report and why also this is taking so long for the Committee to act upon, because 
there is a mafia operating around the Sale by Levy as everybody is aware and time is of the 
essence and the report should be made public and also action should be taken? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  firstly,  I  would  like  to  just  remind  the 

House that prescriptions have been suspended for the present.  

As far as the statement by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is concerned, the Government 
policy  is  that  the  report  should  be  examined  first  in  Committee  by  Government  and  then 
published,  but  I  will  ensure  or  at  least  make  sure  that  the  Committees  do  their  work 
diligently. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  stated  that  now  we  are 
going to set up the Committee. So, may I have a time frame as to when this Committee would 
deliver its report?  

As far as prescription is concerned, is he aware that the fact that all procedures for 
prescription  have  been  suspended  is  creating  hardship  to  genuine  cases  of  people  who 
prescribed land for a required number of years? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed that both Committees have 
been set up. As I mentioned, we will do our best with my colleagues to ensure that the reports 
are produced to Cabinet to enable the Commission of Inquiry reports to be published. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  am  sure  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  is  aware  that  in  the  recent  past  a 
mafia, which has been referred to, was present, in fact, in the Supreme Court’s yard, tapeurs 
and gangs who come, terrorise people and so on, dans la cour de la Cour Suprême, dans la 
Cour Suprême elle-même and what causes even more revolting is that he was a foreigner – a 
foreigner at the head of this mafia organising that with, unfortunately, a few Mauritians also, 
lawyers some of them. Can I know whether this has stopped and whether, if it has not, what 
action is going to be taken to stop this? 

27 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have inquired into what the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition has mentioned, but I must reassure the House that Government is taking 
this matter very seriously and that we are concerned with the people who suffer either from 
Sale by Levy or from illegal prescription of their land and that we will do all in our power to 
stop any abuse of both. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, chaque semaine, il y a des ventes qui se font à la 
barre.  Est-ce  que  je  peux  proposer  au  ministre,  tout  comme  les  prescriptions  qui  ont  été 
suspendues, si on peut venir de l’avant pour demander la suspension des ventes à la barre 
jusqu’à ce que les recommandations soient mises en place? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Member is aware of 
the Commissioner for Protection of Borrowers who has been doing his/her work. I will pass 
on the request of the hon. Member as far as the suspension for the present. 

Mr Baloomoody: The Commissioner we know has limited powers when it comes to 
Sale by Levy. Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether, at least, for the NHDC houses, 
that we can suspend the Sale by Levy pending the outcome because there are many houses 
which are the only residence of these people? Can we suspend the Sale of Levy of, at least, 
NHDC houses pending the outcome of the Committee’s report? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I leave it to the good office of the Vice-
Prime Minister Soodhun. But, obviously, there are people who also abuse in the system. So, 
we must be able to separate people who abuse and people who are genuine. I am sure my 
colleague will take care of that. 

Madam  Speaker:  I  have  observed  that  there  are  some  MPs  who  are  insisting  for 
supplementary questions. They should know that there is a time limit for Prime Minister’s 
Question Time also and that I cannot allow a question to become a PNQ. I am giving in turn 
everybody his chance to ask questions, but, at the same time, I think it is a legitimate right of 
each hon. Member as representative of their constituents to be given a fair chance to ask the 
questions which are on the agenda. I am asking for the comprehension of everybody on this 
issue. Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

 

 

 

28 

POUDRE D’OR - FOOTBALL GROUND - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/570) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the construction of a football 
ground at Poudre d’Or, he will state - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the date of award of the contract therefor;  

the date of completion thereof; 

the reasons why the pre-final handing over has not been effected as at to date, 
and 

if consideration will be given for the Senior Chief Executive of his Ministry to 
effect a site visit thereat, together with the hon. Members of Constituency No. 
6, Grand’ Baie and Poudre d’Or. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  NDU  that  the 
contract for the construction of a football ground at Poudre d’Or was awarded on 16 June 
2014 to Best Construct Co. Ltd with a completion date of 27 September 2014 for the sum of 
Rs3,661,578.55, inclusive of VAT. 

The project comprised the following works - 

(i) 

(ii) 

earthworks - cut and fill; 

provision of topsoil and turfing, and 

(iii) 

construction of French drains. 

I am also given to understand that the handing over has not yet been effected given 
that  the  grass  has  not  yet  fully  grown  and  moreover  some  levelling  works  are  still  being 
required.  This is due to the fact that people are having access to the football pitch given that 
it is not fenced.   

The contractor has been requested to carry out  outstanding remedial works, that is, 
turfing and levelling works at some spots and these are expected to be completed within a 
period of 6 to 8 weeks.  The project will be handed over as soon as the grass is fully-grown. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (d) of the question, it is to be noted that at the level of 
the NDU, there is a Parliamentary Private Secretary who has been assigned the responsibility 

 

29 

of overseeing all issues pertaining to NDU projects for Constituency No. 6 and the latter is 
the ‘interface’ between elected Members and the NDU. 

However, I shall be pleased to arrange for a site visit with all the concerned parties so 

that the matter can be dealt with. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Ag. Prime 

Minister when was this project supposed to be handed over? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: The completion date was 27 September 2014, a year ago. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are three or four other projects 
that  are  in  the  same  condition.  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  convey  to  the  Chief 
Executive of the NDU to please look into the issue of the other three projects as well and to 
ensure that those projects are completed quickly? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  is  rightly  concerned 

with delays in the completion of the projects. I have the same issue in my Constituency.  

(Interruptions) 

So, I will certainly help him in that way. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

 

PORT LOUIS SOUTH & PORT LOUIS CENTRAL – NDU PROJECTS 

(No. B/571) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Constituency  No.  2,  Port 
Louis  South  and  Port  Louis  Central,  he  will  state  the  projects  undertaken  thereat  by  the 
National Development Unit, over the period July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each 
case, the –  

(a)  

(b)  

nature thereof, and  

cost thereof. 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am tabling the list of projects awarded 

30 

in Constituency No. 2 during period July 2005 to December 2014. 

Mr Mahomed: May I have an indication from the Ag. Prime Minister of the projects 

that have been allocated for the coming year - 2015 is already late, but for 2016, please? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: This is a different question, Madam Speaker. I don’t have 

that information. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

 

SALE BY LEVY AND PRESCRIPTION - COMMISSION OF INQUIRY - FINDINGS 

(No.  B/572)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 
on  Sale  by  Levy  and  Prescription,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  work  thereof  and  give  an  indication  as  to 
when the findings thereof will be submitted. 

(Vide reply to P.Q. No. B/569) 

 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - POLICE BRUTALITY – COMPLAINTS 

(No. B/573) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Human  Rights 
Commission, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
number  of  complaints  for  Police  brutality  received  thereat,  since  January  2014  to  date, 
indicating  the  number  of  investigations  thereinto  which  have  led  to  the  prosecution  of 
members  of  the  Mauritius  Police  Force  and  the  number  of  convictions  secured  as  a  result 
thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  I  am informed by the National Human 
Rights Commission that from January 2014 to 25 September 2015, 288 complaints of Police 
brutality have been received.  After investigation, 9 cases have been referred to the Director 
of Public Prosecutions in accordance with section 4 of the Protection of Human Rights Act. 

31 

 
I am also informed that the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions is presently 
conducting an in-depth examination of the cases referred to it, to establish as to whether there 
is sufficient evidence to refer the cases to Court.  As such no conviction has been secured to 
date. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister just mentioned out of 288 only 9 have 
been referred to the DPP. Can I know whether the complainants have been informed of the 
reasons why their case has not been sent to the DPP? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware of that. I have to find out. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I know from the hon. Ag. Prime Minister how many people 

are there at the Human Rights Commission to investigate enquiries? What is the staff there? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I don’t have that information unless I get 
notice. I must emphasise though that last week we responded to a question to say that a Police 
Complaints Commission is on the cards, I think, for this year so that we can, in fact, improve 
the system. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  indicate,  whenever 
there  is  an  enquiry  on  a  Police  Officer  by  the  Human  Rights  Commission,  whether  any 
sanction is taken against the suspect, whether he is suspended or otherwise? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am sorry, Madam, I do not have that information. 

 

POLICE FORCE - VACANCIES 

(No. B/574) Mr  A. Ameer  Meea  (Second Member for  Port Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the vacancies 
which presently exist in each of the grade of Men and Women Police Constable to Deputy 
Commissioner of Police, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner 
of Police, information as to the number thereof, in each grade, indicating – 

(a)   when they will be filled, and  

(b)  

the number thereof that will be filled. 

32 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police  that  there  is  a  total  of  2,381  vacancies  in  the  grades  ranking  from  Police 
Constable/Woman Police Constable to Deputy Commissioner of Police, details of which are 
being tabled. 

As  regards  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  also  informed  that  financial 
provision exists in respect of 1,753 of these vacancies. So, we have funded 1,753 vacancies 
which will be filled within the current financial year, subject to candidates being eligible and 
suitably qualified. 

 

JUVENILE JUSTICE BILL - DRAFTING 

(No.  B/575)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the drafting of the proposed 
Juvenile Justice Bill, he will state where matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

PRISONERS - ELECTRONIC BRACELETS SYSTEMS  

(No.  B/576)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether, 
the  proposed 
implementation of the Electronic Bracelets Systems for the tracking of prisoners, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to where 
matters stand. 

in  regard 

to 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-
2019, Government has announced its intention to introduce electronic monitoring bracelets as 
an alternative to detention for certain types of suspects who have been released on bail with a 
view to better managing the prison population. 

Consultations on the modalities for the implementation of this project have been held 
at the level of the Prime Minister’s Office with all stakeholders, including the Police Force 
and the Attorney-General’s Office.  The Police have highlighted important issues with regard 
to the economic and operational feasibility of this project.   

33 

 
In view of the high capital investment and recurrent cost implications of the system, 
the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the Police Department have been 
requested to carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the proposed project. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  A  decision  on  the  implementation  of  the  project  will  be 

taken in the light of this analysis. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Do we have an indication of the cost of 

the project? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam, it is a very expensive project. It could cost in the 

region of Rs250,000 per bracelet. 

It is valuable and… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, order! Please! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: In addition to that, we will require additional Police cars, 

the maintenance of a computer system and GPS system. So, it is a very expensive… 

(Interruptions) 

system and also it is very fragile. So, it is being looked at to see whether it is feasible. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  I  know  whether  there  has  been  a 

tender procedure for the purchase of these bracelets? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: No tender procedure. We have not purchased them. What 

has happened is that a consultant was appointed to look at the feasibility of the project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

34 

 
Mr Lesjongard: Can the Ag. Prime Minister confirm, if he says that there has not 
been  any  tender  procedure,  whether  quotations  have  been  requested  to  potential  suppliers 
from the Police Force? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  what  the  Police  did  was  to  appoint  a 

consultant and the consultant gave the approximate figure. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Can the Vice-Prime Minister enlighten the House whether the scheme of 

electronic bracelets system is… 

Madam Speaker: The Ag. Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: I am so sorry! Can the Ag. Prime Minister confirm whether the scheme 
of electronic bracelets system is only limited to accused who are on bail or is it going to be 
extended  to  serving  prisoners  who  would  be  released  in  advance  in  order  to  control  the 
population of prison? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  you  will  be  glad  to  know  that  there  is 
plenty of room in our prisons at the moment, about a thousand places are still left to be taken 
up. However, this is something that needs to be studied because, in fact, there does not seem 
to be enough people on remand who would justify having such expensive bracelets. So, for it 
to be feasible, it may have to be extended perhaps to other types of convicted prisoners. But 
that is something that will have to be studied. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary 

Questions No. B/586 and No. B/587 have been withdrawn! Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS PROJECT - CONTRACT 

(No. B/579) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister of 
Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the new National Identity 
Cards Project, he will state the - 

(a)  

(b)  

name of the contractor therefor; 

scope of works thereof;  

35 

contractual cost thereof, and  

contractual completion date thereof. 

 
(c)  

(d)  

(Vide reply to PNQ) 

 

NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY – ASSETS & LIABILITIES 

(No. B/580) Dr. R.  Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National  Insurance 
Company Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom –  

(a)  

a list of the current assets and liabilities thereof, indicating the respective value 
thereof and the monthly revenue/loss thereof, and  

(b)   when the general insurance services will be operational. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, with your permission I will answer to this question.  

The recurring premium business of the ex-BAI Co (Mtius) Ltd has been transferred 
on 07 August 2015 to two companies which are wholly owned by the Government, namely, 
the National Insurance Co. Ltd with respect to the life assurance policies and the NIC General 
Insurance Co. Ltd for the general business.  

These two companies were incorporated on 15 April 2015. I am informed by the FSC 
that the National Insurance Co. Ltd obtained its Long Term Insurance Business Licence on 
05 May 2015 while NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd obtained its General Insurance Licence 
on 24 July 2015.  

With regard to part (a) of the question, the National Insurance Co. Ltd is a Company 
licensed  by  the  Financial  Services  Commission  under  the  Insurance  Act  and  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  that  Commission  to  ensure  that  the  company  is  being  maintained  in  a 
financially sound condition in line with the prescribed Solvency Rules and Capital Adequacy 
Requirements.  

Can  I  draw  the  attention  of  the  hon.  Member  that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to 

disclose commercially sensitive information of the National Insurance Company Ltd.  

 
With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  advised  that  the  general  insurance 
services are already operational under the NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd since 24 July 2015. 

36 

Dr. Sorefan: May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether Government is 
contemplating to have a strategic partner - for example, what I heard from the Press, SICOM 
- to give the noblesse to this insurance Company?  

Mr Collendavelloo: In due course, the matter will be considered, but there has been 

talk of this.  

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister,  with  respect  to  each  of  these  two  companies,  the  amount  of  money  which  the 
Government has capitalised each company to date? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  would  not  know,  but  I  am  sure  that  at  the  Registrar  of 

Companies we are able to see what are the Balance Sheets and what are the accounts. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he will see to it 
that  the  NIC  do  send  a  letter  to  those  who  were  holding  policies  from  the  BAI,  that  their 
policy has been transferred to NIC because there is still some confusion among the public? 
Some are continuing to pay the monthly premium, but they don’t know who is handling their 
policy. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am sure that if notice is given of that question, the substantive 

Minister will be in a better position to answer. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. Minister who is 

the auditor of the National Insurance Company Ltd? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I don’t know this at all. 

Dr. Sorefan: Regarding the bank account of the NIC,  I understand that procedures 
are not being followed to create the NIC bank account. Could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
see to it that all procedures for the creation of new NIC accounts are done at the soonest? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, if they are not being followed, I am sure my colleague will 

see to it that they are followed. 

 

 

 

 
SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - AIRWAY COFFEE - CONTRACT 

37 

(No. B/581) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the allocation of the contract to Airway Coffee Ltd. for the provision of 
catering services at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, allegedly to the 
detriment of Tropical Times, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from Airports of 
Mauritius Ltd., information as to if the case has been referred to the Commissioner of Police 
for inquiry and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof and, if not, why not. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to replies 
made to Parliamentary Question Nos. B/75 and B/76 of 2015 wherein I provided extensive 
details  as  regards  the  allocation  of  a  contract  to  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  for  the  provision  of 
catering services at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport. 

I am informed by the Chief Executive Officer of Airports of Mauritius Co Ltd (AML) 
that  the  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption  (ICAC)  has  started  an  investigation 
into this matter and has taken possession of all relevant files and documents. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  ICAC  that,  on  23  December  2014,  it  has  initiated  an 
investigation  on  the  allocation  of  a  contract  for  the  provision  of  catering  services  at  Sir 
Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International  Airport  to  the  detriment  of  other  bidders  including 
Tropical Times.  

The investigation by ICAC is still ongoing.  The question of referral of the case to the 

Police, therefore, does not arise at present. 

Mr Jhugroo: Would the Ag. Prime Minister agree whether the decision to remove 
the  administrative  control  of  Airports  of  Mauritius  Co  Ltd  from  the  office  of  the  Deputy 
Prime Minister to the PMO in year 2008 does not give the appearance or the perception that 
the former Prime Minister was systematically involved in a number of tainted conduct that 
may amount to breaches of PoCA? 

Madam  Speaker:  I  am  sorry,  hon.  Jhugroo;  I  think  you  are  going  outside  the 

question which has been asked. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  state  whether  it  is  correct  that  the 
former Senior Chief Executive of the PMO, who is an influential Board Member, could chair 
the evaluation? 

38 

 
Mr Mohamed: On a point of order, please. The Standing Orders do not allow any 
Member to ask for their opinion. Is it correct to ask for an opinion? The Standing Orders say 
you cannot ask for an opinion, so the question should not be allowed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I am listening to the question and if there is any 

need I’ll ask the hon. Member not to ask his question. Please proceed! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister … 

Gagne dimal ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  state  whether  it  is  correct  that  the  former  Senior  Chief 
Executive of the PMO’s Office at that time, who was an influential Member of the Board, 
could chair the Evaluation Committee? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: At the time, you mean!  

(Interruptions) 

I don’t have an answer to this question, Madam Speaker, but I will look into you. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Jhugroo,  will  you,  please,  restrain  yourself  to  the  question 

which has been asked and don’t go beyond the ambit of your question, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Mo pas gagne dimal moi! To pe roder, to pu gagner, pas peur toi.  

(Interruptions) 

Does this action of the former Senior Chief Executive chairing the Evaluation Committee … 

Taler to pu koner, pas peur toi ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 

(Interruptions) 

39 

 
Mr Jhugroo: While doing so, does this not constitute an offence under the POCA as 
it gives the perception that she uses her office as Board Member to influence the decision-
making process? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  on  a  point  of  order!  It  is  very  improper  and  this  is 

happening time and time again. Please extend the courtesy of listening! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Would you please allow the hon. Member to make his point! You 

will have the opportunity to make your point as well. 

Mr Rutnah: Madam Speaker, it is happening time and time again, provocation and 

provocation, and whether this kind of… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please sit down! What is the point of order? 

Mr Rutnah: The point of order is whether the behaviour of hon. Mohamed does not 

amount to disorderly conduct under Section 46 of the Standing Orders? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, it is for me to decide! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would ask the House to have faith in 
ICAC  and  to  let  ICAC  do  its  work  in  all  independence  and  we  will  see,  without  fear  or 
prejudice, what the ICAC decides. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo!  

 

PROGUARD LTD  - PUBLIC BODIES – CONTRACTS  

No. B/582) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the contracts 
awarded  to  Proguard  Ltd.,  he  will  give  a  list  thereof,  over  the  period  July  2005  to  10 
December 2014, indicating in each case the - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

awarding body; 

procedures followed for the allocation thereof, and  

total amount of money paid therefor. 

 

40 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, as the request spans over a period of nine 
and a half years and may involve all the 204 Public Bodies falling under the purview of the 
Public Procurement Act, the information is being compiled and will be tabled at the earliest.   

 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - NEW TERMINAL - CONTRACT  

(No. B/583) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  new  terminal  of  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International 
Airport,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd., 
information as to the - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

initial  and  final  contract  value  thereof,  indicating  if  final  payment  has  been 
effected therefor;  

procedures followed for the award of the contract therefor, and  

reported  shortcomings  in  relation  to  the  infrastructural  conditions  thereof, 
since the coming into operation thereof to date. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Airports of Mauritius Co. Ltd that the initial 
contract value for the construction of the new terminal at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam 
International Airport amounts to USD 305,813,752. The final contract value has not yet been 
finalised for the following reasons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

The last remedial works will be completed by end of October 2015, and 

The final accounts will be settled by end of November 2015. 

However,  it  is  currently  estimated  by  the  Engineer,  Louis  Berger  Group,  that  the 
contract value will not exceed USD 306.1 m., that is, approximately 0.098% above the initial 
contract value. The final payment will be effected by end of November 2015. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question I am to inform the House that 
Airport  Terminal  Operations  Ltd,  as  a  private  company,  is  not  governed  by  the  Public 
Procurement Act 2006. Accordingly the following procedures, in line with the requirements 
of EXIM Bank were followed - 

•  EXIM bank has submitted a shortlist of three Chinese contractors, that is - 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

41 

Beijing Construction Engineering Group Company Ltd; 

China International Water & Electric Corporation, and 

(iii)  China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd. 

•  An  invitation  for  bids  was  issued  by  ATOL  on  08  June  2009  and  bids  were 

received on 07 September 2009. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  since  September  2008  the 
responsibility  for  the  Airport  Sector  was  transferred  from  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and 
External Communications to the Prime Minister’s Office. 

•  The  Board  of  ATOL  set  up  a  Monitoring  Committee  and  an  Evaluation 
Committee to evaluate the Bid Proposals. The Evaluation Committee, comprised 
representatives of Aéroports de Paris ingénierie, Louis Berger Group and ATOL. 
The  Evaluation  Committee  recommended  that  two  companies  namely  Beijing 
Construction  Engineering  Group  Company  Ltd  and  China  State  Construction 
Engineering Corporation Ltd had the capacity to perform the Project. 

•  The Financial Proposals of the two companies were opened and were as follows - 

•  China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd = USD 316 m. 
•  Beijing Construction Engineering Group Company Ltd = USD 360 m. 
•  Louis Berger Group carried out the evaluation of the Financial Proposal and 
concluded  that  China  State  Construction  Engineering  Corporation  Ltd  had 
submitted a substantially responsive Financial Proposal. 

•  ATOL, at its 10th Board Meeting of 27 November 2009, approved the award 
of  the  tender  to  China  State  Construction  Engineering  Corporation  Ltd  at  a 
revised  contract  amount  of  USD  305,813,752.  after  a  Value  Engineering 
Exercise. 

•  The EPC Contract between ATOL and China State Construction Engineering 

Corporation Ltd was signed on 30 December 2009. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  a 
comprehensive list of snags was drawn up after the issue of the Taking Over Certificate on 31 
May 2013, and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd was tasked to attend to 
these defects during the Defects Liability Period of two  years. These snags did not have a 

 

42 

direct impact on the overall operation and service quality in the processing of passengers of 
the Terminal at its opening on 12 September 2013. 

On  15  September  2014,  another  list  of  defects  was  brought  to  the  attention  of 

Aéroport de Paris Management requesting for urgent remedial action. 

Madam Speaker, in February 2015, I personally requested ATOL to ask its Engineer 
to submit a report certifying that the foundations, structure and viaduct installations and the 
curtain wall portion of the building have been constructed as per the approved design and are 
functioning well. Louis Berger Group, the Engineer, submitted a report on 26 February 2015 
certifying  that  foundation,  structure  and  roof  of  the  new  terminal  was  successfully  tested 
according to British standards and Centre for Window and Cladding Technology standards. 
Louis Berger Group stated that latent defects associated with skylight installation have been 
identified and are being rectified. I am tabling a copy of the Engineer report, Madam Speaker. 

I am further informed that China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd has 

to date attended to most of the shortcomings, except for the following - 

•  Rusting  and  paint  peeling  on  steelwork  at  passenger  bridges  and  on  viaduct 
balustrade.  This  is  being  attended  to  and  will  be  completed  by  end  of  October 
2015. 

•  Repair of Terracotta Paving both landslide and airside. The remedial works will 

• 

be completed by end of October 2015. 
Intermittent  water  leakage  through  the  roof  system  which  is  requiring  the 
replacement of all the pressure plates on the roof. The works will be completed by 
end of October 2015. 

All  the  remaining  remedial  works  are  being  carried  out  at  no  additional  costs  to 

ATOL. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Being  given  that  ATOL  is  a  private 
company and is not governed by the PPA, can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister confirm whether 
it was AML which is a public company which launched the tendering procedures? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in the answer it would appear that ATOL 
launched  the  tender.  I  am  informed  that  ATOL  launched  the  tender  and  it  was  not  in  the 
public  procurement  regulations.  ATOL  was  not  in  the  Schedule  to  the  regulations.  This  is 
something  that  needs  to  be  looked  at  in  the  future,  Madam  Speaker.  That  there  are  no 

 

43 

loopholes in that respect and all relevant companies including subsidiaries of public owned 
companies are correctly included in that Schedule. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: According to my information, it is AML. Never mind. So,… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: So, can the Ag. Prime Minister confirm whether the reinvestment of the 

loan is done by Airports of Mauritius Ltd. and not by ATOL? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have it here. An invitation for bids was 
issued  by  ATOL  on  08  June  2009.  As  far  as  the  repayment  is  concerned,  I  presume  it  is 
ATOL  that  runs  the  terminal,  but  it  may  also  be  guaranteed  by  Government,  etc.,  if  a 
substantive question is asked, I will reply. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  we  know  for  what  reasons  an  open  international  tender  was  not 

carried out? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  two  ways  to  proceed.  If  the 
funds are being provided at concessionary rate by some State, in this case it is China EXIM 
Bank,  they  may  request  for  special  tender  procedures  for  instance  including  only  their 
nationals. That is obviously a risk that we are taking in that once we are getting cheaper loan 
facilities, the actual cost of the building may be more expensive. That is something in terms 
of good governance that this Government will have to look at, what extent we accept such 
concessionary  loans  and  what  is  the  real  effect,  whether  it  is  in  fact  cheaper  or  more 
expensive at the end of the day. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, last question! 

Mr Jhugroo: Being given that we heard from the Ag. Prime Minister that the repairs 
will be done without any extra cost, can we know whether the materials used are worth for 
the price we paid for? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  have  that  information,  but  I  am  told,  Madam 
Speaker, when Government was being set up in January, we did ask for a full report from the 
independent engineer. The report was provided. I am tabling that report and I can only go by 
the report of the engineer. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hour! 

 

44 

At 1.07 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.40 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

 

PRIME MINISTER (FORMER) - ALLEGED MONEY LAUNDERING & 

FRAUDULENT TRANSACTIONS  

(No. B/584) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Attorney General whether, in regard to the alleged cases of money laundering and 
fraudulent transactions by the former Prime Minister involving Centurion American Express 
credit  cards  and  the  purchase  of  properties  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  will  state  if  the 
National Crime Agency of the United Kingdom has solicited the assistance of his office in 
relation thereto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Madam Speaker,  I wish to inform the House that the information 
requested  is  privileged  pursuant  to  section  20  of  the  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  and 
Related  Matters  Act,  which  provides,  inter  alia,  that  documents  exchanged  between  the 
Central Authority and a foreign State cannot be disclosed. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Jhugroo,  no  supplementary?    Next  question!    Hon. 

Bhagwan! 

 

CASINOS DE MAURICE –  

FINANCIAL, STAFFING & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SITUATIONS 

(No.  B/585)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the casinos, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Casinos de Maurice, information as to 
the financial, staffing and industrial relations situations thereof, indicating if - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

losses are being incurred thereat;  

they are overstaffed; 

a mutually agreed retirement scheme and a 14th Month Bonus Scheme for the 
employees thereof are implemented thereat 

(d) 

arrears disputes are pending thereat, and 

 
(e) 

45 

where matters stand concerning the Grand’ Baie and Flic-en-Flac casinos and 
an eventual strategic partner therefor. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, Mauritius is probably the only country in 
the world where casinos lose money.  It is surprising that the casino business operated by the 
SIC Management Services has been consistently making losses since 2009.  The accumulated 
losses as at 31 July 2015 have reached Rs591 m. Any company in such a critical financial 
situation would have been forced to retrench or close down.  Indeed, under the Companies 
Act, it would have become technically insolvent.  To prevent the closure and protection of 
employment, SIC has had to inject a total amount of Rs700 m. into the casino companies. 

I would like here to ask hon. Members for how long could we continue using public 

funds to finance casino deficits. 

Upon taking office, I gave an additional grace period of six months for the casinos to 
stop making losses and to break-even. Unfortunately, to my disappointment, the casinos are 
still in the red. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (b) of the question, the SICMS is currently managing 
three casinos while it has staff for six casinos.  In fact, the manpower requirement for these 
three casinos is only 300.  But, as at date, casinos employ 850 staff, resulting in an excess of 
550 employees. The forthcoming opening of the Grand’ Baie Casino and the one in the West 
will absorb a maximum of 200 employees and still leaving an excess of some 350 employees.  
It is of utmost urgency that we rightsize the work force to save the business.  Otherwise, there 
would  be  no  alternative  but  to  close  or  dispose  of  the  casinos.    In  fact,  the  previous 
Government intended to sell the casino business.   

In  respect  of  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  Management  has  taken  a 
series  of  cost-cutting  measures  to  improve  the  financial  situation  of  the  casino  business.  
Despite  these  measures,  the  casinos  are  still  facing  financial  difficulties.    Faced  with  this 
situation,  Management  has  come  up  with  a  scheme  for  employees  to  take  voluntary  early 
retirement.    The  scheme  was  offered  to  317  employees  aged  50  and  above.  To  date,  34 
employees have taken advantage of the scheme. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to the 14th Month Bonus for 2014, the cost of which is 
Rs22 m., I am quite surprised that the Union is still insisting on payment of the bonus in such 
a heavily loss making company.  

46 

 
As regards to the total back-pay of Rs50 m. arising from the arbitration award and 
payable  in  five  equal  instalments,  the  first  two  instalments  have  already  been  paid  to  the 
employees in June and September 2014.  A third settlement due in June 2015 has yet to be 
paid.  Management has informed the Union that the company is currently not in a position to 
make payments and the Union is demanding payment in full and immediately.  

With  regard  to  part  (e)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  work  in  respect  of  the 
casino to be located at the Grand’ Baie Conference Centre is in progress.  This casino will be 
managed by a new company, the Grand’ Baie Casino Limited.  The existing staff of casinos, 
especially of beach casinos, will be offered employment in Grand’ Baie Casino Limited on 
new terms and conditions. The objective is to ensure the financial viability of the business. 
The  Union  is  not  agreeable  to  this.  I  must  stress  that  maintaining  existing  terms  and 
conditions,  which  provide  for  payment  of  the  14th  month  bonus  irrespective  of  financial 
situation,  will  impact  negatively  on  the  business.    I  would  be  in  favour  of  rewarding 
employees based on a scheme linked to profitability and performance.  

As  far  as  the  Flic-en-Flac  casino  is  concerned,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that, 
following an expression of interest for a strategic partner, two proposals have been received 
and same are being evaluated.   

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether last year a steering 
committee was set up to analyse the situation in the casinos?  The terms of reference was 
prepared  by  the  Financial  Secretary,  and  even  Mr  Jack  Bizlall  was  a  member  of  that 
committee.  Can  we  know  whether  he  has  received  recommendations  from  that  steering 
committee  for  implementation,  which  would  have  given  a  way  to  redress  the  financial 
situation, and what action has been taken following the steering committee’s report? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I am not aware of this steering committee, but there is an 
inter-ministerial committee, which has been set up by Cabinet, that meets to decide on the 
way forward for the casinos. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the whole problem of 
casinos arose, especially the way one person was appointed, Mr R. P. – I won’t mention the 
name  –  which  has  created  some  unusual  situation  among  the  staff  because  he  was  there 
before  –  I  won’t  go  into  the  problem  he  has  had  –  and  that  appointment  created  lot  of 
problems within the mood itself in the casinos? 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, Mr Raja Pillay, my old friend, a jeté l’éponge.  Il a 

47 

quitté. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether he is satisfied that - 
with regard to the Grand’Baie Casino, the whole refurbishment, the works which had been 
carried out – all the procedures have been followed for the award of contracts, and if there 
have been shortcomings in the award of contracts? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Concerning  Grand’Baie  Casino,  the  project  is  being 
managed by a Project Manager Committee and Project Implementation Committee. Name of 
Project  Manager:  Claude  Wong  So  and  Associates;  Architects:  Lam  Po  Tang  and  Siew 
Architects; MNA Engineer: Profile Ltd; QS: Apex Surveillance Ltd., MNA Services; then, 
there are probably, others also and their job is to ensure that the project goes ahead. Now, has 
there been anything done which is contrary to good governance, I will look into. But I would 
think that with people like Wong So and Siew on the Board, I have been quite satisfied that 
they are following procedures. 

Mr Bhagwan: One question, Madam Speaker, if you will allow me. Human beings 
are human beings. All these people have been working in the casinos and I won’t go into all 
the political appointees. I call it the ‘fat cats’ working there, earning big money while doing 
nothing.  Can  the  hon.  Minister,  at  least,  inform  the  House  whether  he  is  aware  that  two 
employees have passed away, from what we have heard?  Il y a un grave problème au niveau 
des employés, il y a une angoisse; as I said, human beings are human beings. What humane 
attitude the hon. Minister can have to make these employees, at least, not to continue with the 
nightmare? We have been given the figure of some 350 employees, already two have passed 
away with stress. So, what additional measures the hon. Minister intends to take to see to it 
that  the  whole  administration  looks  at  the  problem  of  the  employees  in  a  more  humane 
attitude? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I beg to differ with the hon. Member on this issue, I have to. 
In fact, the situation has been so in the casinos because there have been too many political 
appointees. We all know it, from all sides of the House. Now, how do you manage a group of 
people?  We  have  350  persons  over-employed;  they  do  not  have  a  place  there.  We  have 
suggested VRS to 350 of them, only 36 have accepted and they are insisting for a 14-month 
when  the  company  is  losing  money.  I  take  the  case  of  British  American  Insurance.  The 
employees have accepted reduction in wage just to preserve employment. The same is being 

 

48 

done for Apollo Bramwell also. So, I am quite surprised about the behaviour of the union 
there, No. 1, and No. 2, the fact that we are doing the maximum to save employment. The 
question is not to improve on what they are getting already but to save employment. And I 
am  in  a  situation,  Madam  Speaker,  where  we  will  have  to  thrash  it  out.  The  former 
Government decided to sell the casinos. I have given them six months to break even, they 
could not make it. So, we will reach a point, probably, a breaking point. I wish that we do not 
reach  the  breaking  point  and  that  we  come  to  an  agreement  whereby  we  can  preserve 
employment but, as it is now, we have, I must say, a union that is used to having their own 
way. I have nothing against unions. I have been a unionist myself, but it is just becoming very 
close  to  being  unmanageable,  then  the  Inter-ministerial  Committee  will  have  to  meet  and 
decide on the fate of the casinos. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre qui seront 

les actionnaires de la nouvelle compagnie, Casino Mauritius Ltd? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: La compagnie de Grand’ Baie sera 100%  gouvernementale, 
SIC.  Si  j’ai  bien  vu,  on  a  demandé  à  des  intéressés  s’ils  veulent  bien  s’installer  dans  les 
Plaines Wilhems, Flic-en-Flac et autres, on a eu deux intéressés. Donc, ils travaillent dessus 
actuellement. Mais, en général, nous avons la majorité. Au fait, j’avais insisté en 1984 que le 
gouvernement prenne la majorité des casinos, parce que je pensais que c’était les jeux et qu’il 
fallait donc contrôler. Je le regrette aujourd’hui. Je le regrette parce que, finalement, on a créé 
des  compagnies  où  il  y  a  eu  tellement  d’ingérence  politique  que  je  me  pose  la  question 
aujourd’hui si  le gouvernement doit garder la majorité dans les casinos. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance has told us that there 
have accumulated losses of Rs591 m. and that the casinos are still in the red, without giving 
us figures.  The figure of Rs100 m. losses per year has been published in the press, sans une 
mise au point.  Can we know what is the amount of loss monthly? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  In  2014,  the  casino  has  lost  R140  m.  So,  the  SIC  had  to 
inject more funds. Casinos are presently losing around Rs3 m. per month, mainly due to the 
fact that we have more than doubled the number of workers which we should have normally. 

Mr  Bérenger:  On  this  issue  of  the  strategic  partner,  I  understand  that  there  is  no 
strategic partner elsewhere. There will be no strategic partner at Grand’Baie, the new casino 
in the Conference Centre, but surprise, surprise, there will be a Local Strategic Partner in the 

 

49 

case of Flic-en-Flac. Now, can I know, a Local Strategic Partner, what is he going to bring in 
the business in Flic-en-Flac that cannot be brought in the other casinos? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  This  is  the  information  which  I  have  been  given.  Local 
Strategic Partner would be a local partner, who, according to the old formula, would be 51% 
Government, 49% private sector. I am just putting the question now to the House, I say: how 
long can Government continue using public funds? Government is losing public money to 
finance a casino business. The House would understand that we are in a situation where we 
have  to  take  decisions.  Now,  do  we  need  a  Strategic  Partner  in  a  casino?  This  is  an issue 
which is a policy. But I am very much tempted now to either sell over those casinos to those 
who want to buy or then to allow others who want to buy majority in which the State reduces 
its shareholding of those casinos. It might be a solution. 

Mr Bérenger: A last one, with your permission, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. 
Minister whether the Chairperson of SIC, Mr Nakhuda, has informed him, has given him a 
copy  of  a  letter  received  three  days  ago,  dated  26  September,  signed  by  someone  totally 
genuine, Jack Bizlall, where very serious allegations are made, where he says that, according 
to him, there is a conspiracy to take over pou dipain diber - as he says in the letter… 

(Interruptions) 

To take over pou dipain diber! That  is, a conspiracy to take over  pou dipain diber -  that’s 
dirty  business  -  as  far  as  the  casinos  are  concerned,  and  where  he  requests  a  full  enquiry, 
since  it  is  very  fishy  the  way  this  new  company  is  being  set  up  at  Grand’Baie.  So,  my 
question is: has the hon. Minister been informed by the Chairperson of SIC of that document? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I will ask for a copy of this letter. If the Chairman of 

the SIC has it, we will look into it. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  if  he  has  got  it,  we  will  have  to  look  into  it,  no  doubt.  But,  I  must  say,  again,  they 
informed the House that the union has been behaving in the most improper way all the time 
and it is the union which is pushing the employees just to resist everything. Well, they will 
reach a point where les élastiques se cassent à force de tirer. We are not very far from the 
moment  where  we  will  have  to  decide,  Government  will  have  to  decide  on  the  future  of 
casinos. 

50 

 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Does  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  agree  with  me  that,  one  of  the 
reasons that the business of the Casino de Maurice is being affected, is the opening of casinos 
all over the island? So, would the Minister of Finance consider to stop giving new permits for 
the opening of the casinos all over the island, in a way to prevent our nation to become a 
nation de zougader, as always mentioned by my friend, hon. Rajesh Bhagwan? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  policy  of  Government  is  clear  on  the  question  of 
gaming and betting. We are dead against and we have taken decisions in the Budget.  It was a 
long way into discouraging betting and gaming.  

For  casinos,  as  long  as  they  are  within  the  premises  of  hotels,  that  is,  within  the 
premises of areas where there are hotels, it might be tolerated. But it should never become a 
problem for the country. We don’t want to encourage Mauritians to go and play in casinos. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: One last, Madam Speaker, thank you. The hon. Minister has stated and 
I have stated as well that one of our problems is employees who, without doing anything, 
have been appointed on political grounds. This is one of the faits of the financial mess of the 
casinos.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  since  the  new  Government  has 
taken over, he can order an inquiry to see that there are political agents who have obtained 
promotion and a, b, c, assizer prend casse! I won’t say the other word ‘b’! This is what is 
happening, whether it will… 

Mo pas assizer baise casse mwa! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Can  the  Minister,  at  least,  order  an  inquiry  and  see,  as  stated  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  the  issues  raised  by  Mr  Bizlall;  and  also  political  agents  who  have  been 
appointed? The Government, which is blaming other governments, is taking the same way. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The employees are mostly political employees named by all 

parties here concerned! Now, I am very… 

(Interruptions) 

 

51 

I have again to spell it out I am not looking for a fight! I am just saying that on the other side 
of  the  House  I  know  of  one  person  who,  on  the  eve  of  the  elections  of  2005,  said  “monn 
reussi fonce enkor 8 dimounes dans casinos!” So, let us not look for a fight on this issue.  

I think that all parties which came to power have been misusing the casinos. What is 
funny is that people from the Government’s side would phone me and say: “you know ena 
ene bann MMM pe nommer lot coter.” On the other side, I have friends there also who phone 
me and say: “ena problème cot nou cote la li pe craze nou depi elektions.” So, I think that 
most of us are, in fact, having to deal… 

(Interruptions) 

Non, non! We are having to deal with people and those people have all their own Ministers, 
MLAs and so I would treat this… 

No, I would treat this… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow the Minister to reply! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  would  treat  this  with  a  lot  of  reserve  because  it  again 
proves one thing that we are dealing with the mess which has been created by people in this 
House and before. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question hon. Bhagwan! 

 

MBC – EDITORS/JOURNALISTS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/586)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation    whether,  in  regard  to  the  News 
Department of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a)  

name of the incumbent of the post of Head thereof, indicating the terms and 
conditions of employment thereof, and  

 
(b)  

52 

number  of  Chief  Editors  and  news  editors/journalists  posted 
respectively, indicating in each case, the – 

thereat 

(i)  

names; 

(ii)  

date of appointment, and  

(iii)  

terms and conditions of employment thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MBC - ANIMATORS/PRODUCERS –TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 

(No.  B/587)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation Television, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
over the period January 2015 to date – 

(a)  

(b)  

the  list  of  the  programmes  thereof  which  have  been  cancelled,  indicating  in 
each case, the reasons therefor, and  

information as to the names of the animators or producers whose services have 
been terminated, indicating in each case, the – 

(i)  

date of termination of the contract of appointment, and  

(ii)  

reasons therefor.  

(Withdrawn) 

 

ALBION – CITÉ MARCEL CABON - SEWERAGE  

(No.  B/588)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
Cité  Marcel  Cabon,  in  Albion,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Wastewater Management Authority, information as to where matters stand as to the sewerage 
water overflow problem which is representing serious health hazards thereat, indicating if –  

(a)  

remedial measures will be taken to alleviate the inconveniences being caused 
to the inhabitants of the housing estate found thereat as a result thereof, and  

 
(b)  

53 

the land issue for the provision of a leach field thereat has been resolved and, 
if so, give details thereof.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  is  planning  to 
construct  a  leaching  field  for  which  financial  provision  has  already  been  made  in  the 
2015/2016 Budget.  

In my reply on 10 February, I informed the House that a plot of State land had been 
identified for the construction of the leaching field. My colleague, the Minister of Housing 
and Lands, or at least his Ministry, informed me that the land is leased as a building site but 
the lessee has never occupied the land and has not demonstrated interest to go ahead with any 
building project. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  is  proceeding  with  the 
cancellation of the Lease Agreement and the vesting of the land into my Ministry within a 
fortnight. 

According to the Wastewater Management Authority, the procurement exercise and 
the works will be completed within seven months. To forestall your supplementary question, 
yes, there is being pumping on and off to alleviate the suffering of the people in that area. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can I make a request to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
that at least the officials of the Wastewater Management Authority could have a meeting with 
the inhabitants there – we will brief the people there - but at least to give them some hope that 
the project is going on? There is some PR exercise. It is a small community residing behind 
the Government School - as has been the case with Verger Bissambur where the Wastewater 
Management Authority carried out a PR exercise. At least the people will know that progress 
is coming and work will start soon there.  

Mr Collendavelloo: I will certainly transmit to the Authority, but, in the meantime, 
perhaps the hon. Member would wish to meet the people and tell them what I have said today 
because he meets them very often. 

(Interruptions) 

I  have  also  visited  the  site,  we  all  know.  We  have  common  interest  in  this  matter.  So, 
participate! 

54 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Being  given  that  the  Vice-Prime  Minister  himself  said  that,  we  all 
know that there is a Government School there, when we say regularly - last time the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister gave us a reply that it would be one off, so I am happy to hear that it 
would be on a regular basis. But the difficulties with the Wastewater Management Authority 
are that when the people talk when there are emergencies like when we have the December 
and January rainy season, at least a sort of network could be set up with the people and the 
Wastewater  Management  Authority  as  a  hotline  or  something  like  this  so  that  emergency 
works can be carried out whenever there are emergencies. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, of course, the use of the word ‘regular’ does not mean at 
regular intervals. It means as and when required, in emergency situations. The hon. Member 
has  himself  phoned  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  on  occasion  arising  and  the 
Authority has always been glad to help in this matter, as in other matters. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rutnah! 

 

PORT - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS – STORAGE  

(No.  B/589)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  port  area,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority, information as to if new storage facilities for Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas have been constructed and commissioned thereat, since 2011 to date and, if so, indicate –  

(a)  

(b)  

the name/s of the promoter/s thereof, and  

if same have been  constructed on freehold land  or on land belonging to the 
Authority and, if in the latter case, further indicate the – 

(i)  

extent and location thereof; 

(ii)  

procedures followed and terms and conditions thereof, and  

(iii)  

shareholding of the company/ies at the time of application therefor and 
subsequent thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed by the Director General of the Mauritius Ports Authority (MPA) that since 2011 

 

55 

only  one  company,  namely,  Petredec  (Mauritius)  Ltd  has  constructed  and  commissioned  a 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) storage facility in the Port area. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the storage facility has been constructed over 1.11 

hectares of land at Mer Rouge belonging to the MPA. 

I am also informed that established procedures for land allocation have been followed 
by the MPA and a Lease Agreement was signed on 27 July 2011.  Furthermore, the project 
was approved under the Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act on 05 May 2011.  

Madam Speaker, the rental paid by the lessee is as follows –  

•  For period 24 February 2010 to 31 December 2011, at the time of acceptance of 
the lease, an amount of two million three hundred and seventy thousand and six 
hundred and thirty rupees (Rs2,370,630); 

•  For period 01 January 2012 to 31 December 2014, Rs1,280,000 annually; 
•  For period 01 January 2015 to 31 December 2019, Rs1,600,000 annually; 
•  For period 01 January 2020 to 31 December 2024, Rs2,000,000 annually, and 
•  For period 01 January 2025 to 31 December 2029 Rs2,500,000 annually. 

I am tabling a copy of the lease agreement outlining the other terms and conditions 

thereof. 

I am further informed by the MPA that at the time of application, Petredec (Mauritius) 
Ltd,  a  local  company  incorporated  on  09  April  2009,  was  wholly  owned  by  Petredec 
Investment Ltd, a foreign company incorporated in Cyprus. The ultimate beneficiaries are Mr 
Christopher Stedman, Mr Charles Fearn, Mr Giles Fearn and Mr Richard Fearn for 69.7% of 
the  total  shareholding.  As  regards  the  remaining  30.3%,  the  beneficiary  is  the  National 
Shipping  of  Saudi  Arabia  which  is  quoted  on  the  Saudi  Arabia  Stock  Exchange.  The 
shareholding of Petredec (Mauritius) Ltd has remained unchanged to date.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister enlighten 

the House as to whether this company Petredec was actually given a Freeport licence? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam, Speaker, Petredec Ltd has a Freeport licence but it 

was given derogation to supply the local market for 2 years as from September 2013. 

56 

 
Mr  Rutnah:  If  the  Company  was  given  derogation  not  to  comply  with  the 
requirement  of  the  freeport  licence,  who  and  what  procedures  were  followed  by  whom  to 
give such derogation to a company which was supposed to bring investment into our country 
rather than sending all the profit somewhere to Cyprus or Saudi Arabia. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  the  port  also  has  the 
ambition  to  become  a  regional  port  supplying  petroleum  products.  This  must  be  borne  in 
mind. However, Madam Speaker, it is the BOI that granted the freeport licence and gave the 
derogation. I don’t have the actual information that the hon. Member is seeking. 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you Madam Speaker. Can we know whether tender procedures 
were followed to allocate this contract to Petredec and if so, can we know when tenders were 
launched and, if not…  

(Interruptions) 

contract for the construction of the new storage  LPG  gas to construct there, whether there 
were any tender procedures which were followed and, if yes, when? If not, why there have 
not been any tender procedures before giving it to Petredec? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we are talking about the lease of a land 
and all the appropriate procedures were followed but it is not the practice as for State Land to 
ask for tenders for leasing a land. 

 

UNIVERSITY OF MAURITIUS -VISITOR’S REPORT - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/590) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Visitor’s  Report  dated  25  February  2013  on  the 
‘Restructuring of the University of Mauritius’, she will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the University, information as to if - 

(a)  

the  recommendations  thereof  have  been  approved  by  the  Board  of  the 
University and;  

(i)  

if not, why not and;  

 

(ii)  

57 

if so, indicate where matters stand as to the implementation thereof and 
obtain  copy  of  the  evaluation  report  on  the  results  achieved  as  at  to 
date, if any, and;  

(b)  

consideration  will  be  given  for  the  redefinition  of  the  mission,  vision  and 
objectives  of  the  University  in  the  light  of  the  present  day  socioeconomic 
challenges facing Mauritius. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, the 
University of Mauritius has informed that the then UoM Council unanimously approved the 
visitor’s report in toto in March 2013.  

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  as  at  date,  a  large  number  of  the 
recommendations have either been implemented or are in the process of being implemented. 
A few carry heavy financial implications and will be considered in due course.  

Madam Speaker, the University of Mauritius Council has been closely following up 
the progress of implementation of the recommendations. Five progress reports have already 
been submitted, the next progress report will be submitted during the forthcoming Council 
meeting.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House 
that  the  University  of  Mauritius  launched  its  strategic  plan  for  the  period  2015/2020  in 
January 2015. In the course of the formulation of the plan, extensive consultations had been 
carried out with the relevant stakeholders. In light of the discussions, the earlier visions and 
missions statements were revisited.  

As for the strategic objectives, these have been realigned to more adequately address 
the socio-economic challenges of the country. In this connection, the University of Mauritius 
has identified six strategic directions with clear objectives, key action and key performance 
indicators for each of them. These strategic directions are excellence in teaching and learning, 
excellence in research and innovation, strategic partnership for internationalisation, enriching 
student  experience,  sustainable  community  engagement  and 
lasting  financial 
sustainability. A number of core areas to transform the economy have been identified in the 
economic  mission  statement  vision  2030  presented  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister. 
Interestingly,  some  of  the  ideas  in  the  strategic  plan  of  the  University  closely  parallel  the 
policy directions enunciated in the economic mission statement.  

long 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

58 

 
Mr Rughoobur: Thank you Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just stated that the 
report has been implemented; there were three divisions that were to be created. The planning 
facilities and services and I think there was a third division – academy I think. I would ask 
the  hon.  Minister  to  confirm  that  these  three  divisions  have  actually  been  created  and 
adequately staffed and also to confirm because these days we are speaking about the issue of 
employability.  These  issues  were  addressed  in  that  report  and  the  Vice-Chancellor  lately 
stated that there is no mismatch between what are the courses that are being offered by the 
University and the expectation of the job market. Can she please elaborate on this issue of 
employability? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  To  start  with,  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as 

the 
restructuration is concerned, it is on. The three sections mentioned by the hon. Member are 
the academia, the planning department and the resource department. As for the planning and 
academia, it has already been done. As far as the resource and facilities section is concerned, 
first of all, a Committee of the Council has to sit and prepare a report after which only the 
appointment  of  the  person  concerned  will  be  considered.  As  far  as,  employability  and  the 
courses are concerned, initially it is true that there has been a mismatch in the past but a lot of 
care  is  being  taken  now  to  ensure  that  there  are  consultations  between  the  University  of 
Mauritius,  other  Tertiary  Education  Institutions  and  the  private  sector.  These  consultative 
meetings  have  been  on  since  2013,  but  we  have  had  more  consultations  done  and  what  is 
being done right now is that we are trying to come up with a series of courses which have 
been  proposed  by  the  private  sector  so  as  we  ensure  that  our  students  once  they  leave 
University  are  adequately  equipped  to  enter  the  world  of  work,  thereby  enhancing  their 
employability. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you Madam Speaker. I wanted to ask the hon. Minister whether 
her  Ministry  is  working  together  with  the  HRDC  in  order  to look  into the  issue  of  carrier 
guidance, a major cause of labour mismatch on the job market. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Certainly,  Madam  Speaker.  The  Human  Resource 
Development  Council  is  working  closely  with  the  Ministry  and  with  all  the  Tertiary 
Education Institutions with a view of ensuring that the courses that are being dispensed will 
help students to get employed more easily. Furthermore, a career service centre is being set 

 

59 

up  at  the  Registrar’s  Office  in  the  meantime  the  HRDC,  the  Ministry  and  the  Tertiary 
Education Institutions are working together. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister, while mentioning about the implementation of 
the report, stated that, due to financial constraint, some proposals could not be implemented. 
If you look at the report of the activities for 2013/2014, it is clearly said that the University of 
Mauritius  still  faces  financial  challenges  because  of  the  increasingly  competitive  tertiary 
education environment, reduction in Government grants and rising cost of higher education 
and research. So, can I know, through the hon. Minister, what Government intend to do to 
assist the University of Mauritius? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  First  of  all,  Madam  Speaker,  it  would  be  good  to 
emphasize that the University of Mauritius obtains its funding from the Tertiary Education 
Commission and for the 2015/2016 budget year, they received Rs504 m. Over and above this, 
the University of Mauritius has fee-paying courses from which it obtains funds. There is the 
University of Mauritius Trust from which it obtains further funds for specific projects and 
what is also important is that there is an audit being carried out at the level of the University 
of Mauritius to see where expenses can be cut down and to try to see how more efficiently the 
funds could be made use of. 

Madam Speaker: Last question hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: There has also been another recommendation of the report to set up 
a unit where the private sector may participate along with the University to ensure that the 
issue of mismatch is addressed. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, in my answer earlier I mentioned that, 
as  from  2013  only,  such  consultative  meetings  are  being  held  between  the  University  of 
Mauritius and the private sector. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

SUGAR CANE LAND - GOVERNMENT & MSPA - AGREEMENT  

(No. B/591) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the Agreement 
signed between Government and the Mauritius Sugar Planters Association for the Grant of 
2000 acres of Sugar Cane Land, in April 2008, he will state - 

 
(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

60 

if the procedures for the acquisition of all the 2000 acres of land have been 
completed and, if not, why not;  

the expiry date of the said agreement, and  

if plots of the land so acquired have been allocated and, if so, indicate in the 
case of each beneficiary thereof, the - 

(i)  

names and address thereof;  

(ii)  

extent and location of the plot of land allocated;  

(iii)  

criteria used for the allocation of the plot of land thereto, and  

(iv)  

conditions of the allocation thereto. 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  at the outset,  I wish to inform the House that my 
Ministry has no record of any agreement signed in April 2008 between Government and the 
Mauritius Sugar Planters Association related to the grant of 2000 acres of sugar cane Land. 

However, Government has, in fact, an agreement with the Mauritius Sugar Producers 
Association, most commonly known as the MSPA, which was signed on 22 April 2008 and 
provides, inter alia, for the transfer by the latter to the Government, of 2000 arpents of sugar 
cane lands over a period of ten years. 

It is equally worth to underline, Madam Speaker, that a question on the same matter 
was addressed to me earlier this year by the First Member for Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière, 
hon. Bhagwan, namely PQ No. B/250 and to which I tabled a reply accordingly at the sitting 
of 31 March 2015. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  procedures  regulating 
acquisition of all the 2000 arpents of land have been worked out jointly by my Ministry and 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands. These procedures comprise no less than 10 steps, the key 
ones being, identification of sites, assessment of suitability for specific purpose, preparation 
of formal survey report and finalising deed of sale for each site. The responsibility for all land 
acquisition is vested in the Ministry of Housing and Lands.  

As at to date, 761 arpents have already been acquired and 779 arpents are in process 
of being acquired, which account for a total land area of 1540 arpents representing 77% of 
the lot agreed upon by the said parties. 

 

61 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that out of the 2000 arpents which would 
be  acquired,  1200  arpents  are  earmarked  for  agriculture  and  800  arpents  for  housing  and 
other social infrastructure projects. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Government-MSPA  Agreement  on  the 

2000 arpents will expire on 31 December 2017. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  land  already  acquired  under  the  Government-

MSPA Agreement has been released for the following purposes- 

Purpose 

Agriculture 
Housing  
University Campus 
SME Park   
Other Social Infrastructure 
Total  

Extent 
(Arpents) 
460 
161 
100 
30 
10 
761 

That makes a total of 761 arpents that has already been acquired and vested to the Ministry of 
Housing and Lands and Agriculture. 

Out of the 460 arpents of land acquired and vested in my Ministry for agricultural 
projects,  I  am  informed  that  400  arpents  have  so  far  been  allocated  on  lease  to  52  Co-
operative Societies or Agro-Based Companies. Allocation has been made on the basis of the 
following set of criteria - 

relevance and feasibility of project proposals; 

•  profile of promoter/s; 
•  nature of proposed activities; 
•  experience in proposed area of activity;  
• 
•  place of residence of members of Co-operative Society/Agro-based Company; 
•  export potential; 
•  degree of innovation/modernisation, and  
• 

financial capacity for project implementation. 

 

62 

I am tabling the names of the lessees, the extent and location of land allocated as well as a 
specimen copy of the standard lease agreement embodying all the conditions governing the 
said lease for agricultural purpose. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister has been talking of 
almost 400 arpents of lands that have been allocated for agricultural purposes. May I ask him 
to confirm how much of these lands are actually being utilised for the purpose for which they 
have been allocated, that is agricultural purposes? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, these are questions which myself, I have put to the 
officers of my Ministry to see to it that all the lands that have been vested to the lessees are 
being optimally used, that is, being cultivated.  I have set up a land squad in my Ministry to 
go and look out for all those lands that have been abandoned. So far, I have been told that we 
have  retrieved  some  20  arpents  of  lands  that  are  known  to  be  abandoned  lands,  but  this 
exercise  is  still  ongoing  and  as  and  when  we  see  lands  that  have  been  abandoned;  we  are 
going to retrieve these lands and give them to those who really want to carry out agricultural 
activities. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can I know from the hon. Minister how many arpents of lands have been 
allotted  for  housing  purposes  and  how  many  arpents  have  been  used  so  far  for  the 
construction of social housing? 

Mr Seeruttun: As I mentioned in my reply earlier on, so far within that 761 arpents 
that have already been vested to the Government, 161 arpents have been put for the housing 
project  and  I  believe  these  are  being  used  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for  the 
construction of low-cost housing. 

Mr Rughoobur: Will the hon. Minister, please, ensure that all those lands that have 
been given to the different cooperative societies that are not being used or being abandoned, 
they are all retrieved and there was a proposal for the setting up of a land bank, I would like 
to know the status to date? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, Madam Speaker, at the level of the Ministry, we do have a 
land  bank  whereby  lands  that  are  vested  for  agricultural  purposes  are  being  released  to 
cooperative societies and individuals for the purpose of doing agricultural activities be it for 

 

63 

food crops cultivation or for breeding purposes. So, as and when we have cases where people 
are not using those lands for that particular purpose, they are being retrieved and given back 
to real growers and breeders. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to ask the hon. Minister whether 
he  will  ensure  that  the  land  that  would  be  granted  as  lease  would  be  made  in  a  very 
transparent  manner  to  those  who  want  to  use  it  for  agricultural  purposes  and  furthermore, 
being  given  the  fact  that  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  social  housing,  whether  he  would 
allocate more of the land available for housing purposes rather than for agricultural purposes? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the Government is well conscious 
about the problem of housing and I am sure the Minister concerned is looking after that and 
where the land is being put at the disposal of the Government for that particular purpose are 
being used for that purpose.  

As regards the transparent way in which the lands are being allotted to growers; as I 
mentioned earlier in my reply, we have a sort of criteria set and these are being dealt by a 
Committee which looks after that and I am sure if we apply those criteria, then the exercise 
would be carried out in a proper way. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  I am sure the hon. Minister must be aware of  La Chaumière region 
where we have a very productive cooperative society for vegetables. Can the hon. Minister 
inform  the  House  whether  he  can  look  into  the  file  –  there  was  a  request  from  the  La 
Chaumière  Cooperative  Society  for  additional  land  which  they  have  obtained  in  the  past, 
through Medine Sugar Estate - and within that land which has been reserved for agricultural 
purpose, the request of the La Chaumière Multipurpose Co-operative Society, which is a very 
productive and effective Cooperative Society, can be taken into consideration? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  from  the  list  of  beneficiaries  of  land  for  that 
particular  project,  I  can  find  here  that  we  have  allocated  30  arpents  in  the  region  of  La 
Chaumière  to  different  cooperative  societies.  So,  I  will  take  note  of  the  hon.  Member’s 
request and see to it that those who are really in need of that will be given the plot of land. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

 

 

64 

NATIONAL LOVE BRIDGE PROJECT  

(No.  B/592)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Love Bridge Project being implemented by the Curepipe Starlight Sports Club, he will state if 
Government proposes to inject funds thereinto and, if so, give details of the project, including 
the – 

(a) 

(b) 

amount of funds that will be committed thereto, and  

eligibility criteria to benefit therefrom. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, I wish at the very outset to clarify that the 
National  Love  Bridge  Project  is  not  being  implemented  by  the  Curepipe  Starlight  Sports 
Club, contrary to what it is inferred in the question.  

In the Budget Speech, I announced the concept of parrainage as a new approach for 
empowering vulnerable families and getting them out of the vicious circle of poverty.  Under 
parrainage, when a company takes under its wings a specific forsaken locality, it is accepting 
to take responsibility for accompanying its inhabitants all along until they are able to stand on 
their own feet.  The involvement is generational.  

Following  my  announcement  in  the  Budget  speech,  various  organisations  in  the 
private sector  and civil  society  have expressed  full support in this new  approach.  Among 
them, Mr Harold Mayer submitted the ‘Love Bridge Project’ which is based on the principle 
of ‘Une Famille Accompagnatrice Parraine Une Famille Vulnérable’.  My Ministry along 
with  the  National  CSR  Committee  held  several  consultative  meetings  with  relevant 
stakeholders including high profile representatives of the private sector, NGOs and the Civil 
Society.   

During those meetings, the private sector has pledged to channel part of CSR funds 
towards implementation of the project.  I am informed that a company named Lovebridge Ltd 
is being set up by the Joint Economic Council and the Mauritius Employers’ Federation with 
the participation of various private sector companies to implement the project on a national 
scale.   

In fact, to enlighten hon. Members further, I am, Madam Speaker, circulating a soft 

copy of the presentation of the project.   

65 

 
As  regards  the  amount  of  funds  to  be  provided  by  Government,  it  is  proposed  to 
earmark, as seed capital, an amount of Rs100 m., out of the unspent CSR contributions of 
companies remitted to the MRA so as to kick start this national project. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the project will target poor families living in 
deprived  localities  identified  by  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  and  those  found 
eligible under the Social Register of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the clarification by the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development because we were at a loss about what this Love Bridge 
Project  is.    The  hon.  Minister  Finance  and  Economic  Development  mentioned  that  money 
would be spent out of the CSR fund which is collected by MRA for unspent CSR fund.  So, 
may I know from the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether he has 
received requests from other NGOs to get funds from this unspent CSR fund? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    Madam  Speaker,  yes,  we  have  decided,  in  fact,  that  the 
money paid to MRA which are funds which have to be spent under the CSR scheme, which 
comes to around Rs165 m., this whole money will be channelled back to NGOs.  So, if there 
are NGOs which have applied for, they would be, in principle, eligible. 

Mr Bérenger:  When the hon. Minister presented the Budget in March, the idea was 
parrainage by the big companies, each big company would choose une poche de pauvreté 
and  there  would  be  parrainage  of  that  poche  de  pauvreté  by  the  big  companies  and  I 
remember, theatrically, the hon. Minister saying  - “As soon as  I have finished reading my 
Budget speech, I am meeting these companies and it is on.” So, apart from this company to 
be registered from what I have just understood, a company to be called Love Bridge is going 
to be registered, can I have the list of companies which have agreed to parrainer les poches 
de  pauvreté  and  which  the  hon.  Minister  must  have  met  immediately  after  presenting  the 
Budget? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  But, I always stick to my words.  We have 38 companies 
which have already adopted, mainly, les cités ouvrières and their job is quite tough because 
they are being asked to take care of those poches de pauvreté on the very long term.  You 
cannot  change,  empower  people  overnight  or  just  by  feeding  them  or  by  assisting  them.  
Assistance there is of no use.  So, those companies have accepted to go on a very long-term. 
When I say ‘very long-term’, I mean that it is generational, that, in fact, when they move into 

 

66 

a  poche  de  pauvreté.  I  take  one  company  in  Moka  which  is  investing  in  a  cité  close  to 
Circonstance.  This company will adopt, in fact, the whole cité for years and years to come. 
The ultimate result will be that those who possess in this country will learn to share to those 
who need the most and those who need the most, who are receiving the sharing will have 
more respect also for the other.  I think that this will help into creating a society where there 
is less difference, less prejudice also. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can we have the list of the companies concerned and the poches de 

pauvreté which each one of them is parrainé? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    If  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  comes  with  the 

question, I will give it. No doubt.  But I don’t have it with me. 

(Interruptions) 

You are challenging me on an issue which you know I will win.  I have 38 companies which 
have adopted.  I don’t have the list with me.  If the hon. Leader of the Opposition come with 
a question, I will circulate it. 

(Interruptions) 

Now, he is doing politics with me.  I don’t like it. 

(Interruptions) 

It is done.  The Leader of the Opposition… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can I ask everybody for his or her comprehension and allow the 

hon. Minister to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah:  There is a point of order, Madam Speaker!  

Madam Speaker: What is the point of order! 

Mr  Rutnah:    The  point  of  order  is  whether  the  word  ‘bullshiting’  all  the  time  is 

unparliamentary? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  I will reserve this for later on! 

(Interruptions) 

 

67 

Hon. Minister of Finance, have you finished or do you have anything else to say? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker.  The list will be circulated when the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition will put a question requesting the list.  I don’t have it with me. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, last question! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard the hon. Minister well, he 
said that Rs165 m. was received by the MRA in relation to CSR contribution and that this 
money will be given to NGOs.  Can I ask the hon. Minister how this will be done? On what 
basis? How the amount by each NGO will be given and if he can give the details of how this 
sum of Rs165 m. will be distributed? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, I am not here to give the other reply.  There is a CSR 
Committee chaired by Mrs Wong who is responsible for managing those funds.  So, the CSR 
Committee will look into the request approved or rejected following their own priorities. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem. 

 

BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE – AUDITORS’ REPORT 

(No.  B/593)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
British American Insurance and Company, he will state if any investigation has been carried 
out to ascertain if the auditors thereof for the period 2010 to 2014 had properly carried out 
their duties in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

outcome thereof and  

actions that will be taken against them, if any. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  the  Financial  Reporting  Council  is 
carrying out an investigation under Section 78 of the Financial Reporting Act.  Of course, it is 
premature to anticipate what action will be taken eventually.  

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister talked about 
the  enquiry  by  the  Financial  Reporting  Council.    May  I  know  apart  from  the  Financial 

 

68 

Reporting Council whether there is any other investigation being carried out by the Police, 
ICAC, FSC or any other authorities into the role of the auditors in the BAI scandal? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Not that I am aware. 

Mr  Uteem:    The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  may  be  aware  that  under  the  Financial 
Reporting Council Act, the only sanctions, the only powers which the Financial Reporting 
Council  has,  are  to  give  a  warning  or  to  revoke  the  licence  of  the  auditors.    Yet,  the 
substantial Minister on TV stated that KPMG would be paying fines and penalties.  May I 
know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  under  which  provisions  of  the  law  would  the 
auditors be compelled to pay fines and penalties? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  for  the  moment,  I  am  replying  on  what  the  Financial 
Reporting Council has said.  I am not aware of any fine that has been inflicted.  The hon. 
Member said it was KPMG. Perhaps!   

Mr  Uteem:  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  law  only  gives  power  to  the  Financial 
Reporting Council to revoke licence or suspend or give warning, would the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister  consider  amending  the  law  to  impose  tougher  sanctions  on  auditors  of  especially 
public companies who take public funds and then do not carry out the duty as expected under 
the law? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I take note, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Fowdar:  I  know  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the  substantive  Minister.  Madam 
Speaker,  I  am  really  worried  with  this  issue  of  KPMG,  which  is  one  of  the  Big  Four 
companies internationally, and I anticipate that anything happneing to this firm will have a 
direct impact on the economy of Mauritius directly, because Foreign Direct Investment will 
slow down and investors might be scared to come here. So, I would ask the hon. Minister to 
transmit to the substantive Minister to look at this issue with caution. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I will certainly do that, Madam Speaker. 

 

BAI – LOCAL BANKS - DEBT 

(No.  B/594)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
British American Insurance and Company and the subsidiaries thereof, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to the amount of money that 

 

69 

these  companies  owed  to  the  local  banks,  indicating  the  amount  thereof  that  have  been 
written off, if any, as at to date. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius 
that under section 26 of the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, the Bank is required to maintain the 
confidentiality of information gathered in the performance of its duties. Accordingly, it would 
not be appropriate for the Bank of Mauritius to disclose any information as to the amount of 
money that the British American Insurance Company and its subsidiaries owe to local banks 
or amounts that have been written off as at to date. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I fully appreciate the confidentiality provisions of the 
Banking Act. We are not requiring any disclosure of names of banks. We just want to know 
the aggregate amount of exposure and whether this consitutes a systemic risk to the banking 
sector. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  have  given  the  hon.  Member  the  reply  I  have  from  the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  and  it  stands  good.  Now  the  question  is  whether  without  divulging  the 
names we can give the figures. I can look into it. 

 

SME ONE-STOP SHOP – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/595)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether, in regard to 
the small and medium enterprises, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Small 
and  Medium  Enterprises  Development  Authority,  information  as  to  the  schemes  currently 
administered by the Small and Medium Enterprise One Stop Shop, indicating in each case, 
the number of enterprises registered thereunder, as at to date. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, it was announced in the Budget 
Speech that an SME One-Stop Shop will be set up to provide, under one roof, all the support, 
financing  and  information,  as  well  as  the  delivery  of  all  permits  and  licences  that  SMEs 
require to start and grow their businesses. It was to be located in the SICOM Tower at Ebene, 
but in view of some practical and accessibility problems, especially for those entrepreneurs 
who will have to travel to Ebene by public transport to solicit any assistance from the One-
Stop Shop, my Ministry sought other possible locations. 

70 

 
We  have  now,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, identified the ex-BAI building, which is situated at Pope Hennessy Street, Port 
Louis, for the setting up of the SME One-Stop Shop. Arrangements are being made with all 
stakeholders  for  the  coming  into  operation  of  the  One-Stop  Shop  before  the  end  of 
November,  subject  to  all  clearances  being  received  and  to  the  Lease  Agreement  being 
finalised. 

Madam Speaker, meanwhile I am informed that the Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development  Authority  is  managing  since  July,  this  year,  one  scheme,  namely  the 
‘Participation in International Fairs SME Refund Scheme’. Under this scheme, SMEs benefit 
a grant to finance their participation in international fairs, trade, as well as technology, up to a 
maximum of Rs200,000 yearly. 

Such financial assistance is provided to eligible SMEs to meet the costs of air tickets 
and accommodation and rental of stands. From July 2015 to date, a total amount of Rs6.1 m. 
has been approved to fund the participation of 73 SMEs in International Fairs. As the scheme 
was  previously  managed  by  Enterprise  Mauritius  from  January  to  June,  this  year,  I  am 
informed that, for that period, a total amount of Rs10.8 m. has been approved for 123 SMEs 
for participation in International Fairs. 

Moreover,  SMEDA  has  funded  the  participation  of  62  entrepreneurs  from  the 

Furniture, Plastic and Printing Sectors in Technology Fairs in China and Thailand. 

I am further informed that, as from January 2015 to date, SMEDA has registered a 

number of 1,744 new enterprises. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is also offering two other schemes under the Mauritius 
Business Growth Scheme (MBGS) to entrepreneurs. These are the 90:10 Payback Technical 
Assistance scheme and the Start Ups Entrepreneurship Scheme. 

The  90:10  Payback  Technical  Assistance  Scheme  is  a  business  growth  scheme 
enabling  Mauritian-based  enterprises  to  bring  in  outside  technical  expertise  such  as  the 
services of specialists or consultants in very specific fields, in order to assist them how to 
grow their business and become more globally competitive. Enterprises are given full support 
for  growth,  increased  productivity,  employment  creation  and  competitiveness.  Under  this 
scheme, an enterprise may benefit from financial assistance to the tune of Rs3 m. without any 
collateral and repayable  up to a maximum of 1.4 times after a moratorium period of three 
years. Since January to date, 19 projects have been approved, out of which 14 under SMEs. 

71 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  Start  Ups  Entrepreneurship  Scheme,  which  is  another  scheme 
offered  under  the  Mauritius  Business  Growth  Scheme,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  provides  a 
monthly ‘salary replacement allowance’ of Rs20,000 for a maximum period of one year to 
creative  entrepreneurs  who  may  not  otherwise  have  the  necessary  income  to  launch  an 
innovative business. The beneficiary may have to refund a maximum of 1.2 times the amount 
of the loan obtained should the growth of the enterprise be significant. Since January to date, 
12 projects have been approved under this scheme for a total sum of Rs2.88 m. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the new schemes, which will be available to SMEs once 
the SME One-Stop Shop comes into operation, my Ministry is in the process of finalising 
same, in consultation with all stakeholders. In due course, I will make an announcement on 
the introduction of the new schemes for the SMEs. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that the SMEDA will now 
move to BAI Tower. May I know in terms of rental, whether the amount that is being paid 
now  is  the  same  as  the  amount  that  was  budgeted  when  we  voted  the  budget  for  SICOM 
Tower? 

(Interruptions) 

How does the rental of the new venue which SMEDA is going to pay compare to the agreed 
price?  Because the hon. Minister of Finance said he did a very good deal with them. 

Mr Bholah: Well, this is being looked into now. We are in the process of finalising. 

Mr Uteem: One of the measures announced in the Budget relating to SMEs was that 
SMEs registered on the scheme will be exempted from the payment of corporate tax for a 
period  of  eight  years.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  enterprises  are  now 
eligible for that tax holiday? 

Mr Bholah: As  I said, lately  we had 1,744  enterprises, but we are expecting more 

once the One-Stop Shop is set up. 

I think after June. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Is the hon. Minister saying that all these 1,700 or so new SMEs will have 

a tax holiday of eight years? 

Mr Bholah: If they qualify as SMEs, yes. 

72 

 
Mr  Fowdar:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  seen  in  the  past  that  DBM  loans  given  to 
entrepreneurs mostly have failed because there was no proper guidance. Can I ask the hon. 
Minister whether he is looking into this matter, whether new loans to be granted would be 
given only to feasible projects, guided by the Ministry? 

Mr Bholah: Of course, Madam Speaker. We will look at the bankable projects only. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  There  are  so  many  incentives  for  the  SMEs.  Can  the  hon.  Minister 
inform the House who is heading the SMEDA these days, whether there has been a change in 
the Board and whether he has received representation that the Board is not functioning?  The 
SMEs are having lots of problems. Instead, we must have an institution helping the SMEs, to 
direct  them  when  they  have  problems.  At  least  the  hon.  Minister  can  have  a  look  at  the 
functioning of that organisation and inform us who is actually heading it. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, the Board has just been set up under the Chairmanship 
of  Mr  Valaydon.  In  fact,  we  have  revisited  the  Board,  reduced  the  number  of  members 
thereon,  but  we  have  also  included  in  the  Board  institutions  such  as  the  MCCI,  the  Chief 
Executive of the new MauBank and a member of the BOI. 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, hon. Quirin! 

 

MAURITIUS PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE - CONTRIBUTION 

(No.  B/596)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Professional 
Football League, he will –  

(a)  

for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to when it will 
start the new season thereof, and 

(b)  

state the financial contribution of his Ministry thereto. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Football 
Association (MFA) that the next season of the Mauritius Professional Football League will 
kick start on 18 October 2015 with the Charity Shield.  

The League itself will start on 25 October 2015.   

73 

 
Regarding part (b) of the question, an amount of Rs16 m. has been earmarked under 
the  budget  of  my  Ministry  for  the  current  Financial  Year  for  the  professional  football, 
including female football teams.  

Mr  Quirin:  L’honorable  ministre    peut-il  nous  dire  s’il  a  eu  des  garanties  de  la 
Mauritius Professional Football League que ce présent championnat qui va débuter - comme 
le ministre vient de nous l’affirmer, le 25 octobre - va pouvoir se poursuivre jusqu’au bout en 
dépit des relations difficiles qui existent entre la MFA et la Mauritius Professional Football 
League ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madame la présidente, il n’y a pas de relations difficiles entre la 
MFA et la Mauritius Professional Football League. Monsieur Georges Chung avait demandé 
un Action Plan des dix clubs. Malheureusement, ils n’avaient pas coopéré et c’est pour ça 
que  Monsieur  Georges  Chung  avait  pris  la  décision  d’arrêter  la  Mauritius  Professional 
Football League.  

Après avoir rencontré les différents stakeholders et la MFA, et quand il est venu me 
parler  personnellement,  Monsieur  Georges  Chung  est  revenu  sur  sa  décision  et  he  has  
announced himself in the press that he is going ahead and he is giving the guarantee that he 
is going for the full year.  

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, en ce qui concerne le présent championnat qui va 
avoir lieu très bientôt il n’y a pas de souci. Mais ce qu’on aimerait savoir, surtout le monde 
sportif, ceux qui seront concernés par le football,  c’est si la Mauritius Professional Football 
League a pris des engagements pour que ce championnat professionnel  se déroule dans la 
durée ? Je veux dire pas seulement cette année-ci, mais les années qui vont suivre. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  he  started  last  year  and  this  is  the  second  year. 
Definitely, there are things that we need to reset and I think Mr Georges Chung is determined 
to go ahead with the Mauritius Professional Football League. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary  Question  Nos. 

B/575 and B/612 have been withdrawn. Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 

ATHLETES – DOPING 

(No.  B/597)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to doping, he will state the actions 

 

74 

taken by his Ministry in relation thereto, if any, since the weightlifter P. P. was tested positive 
thereto. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, all adverse analytical finding cases of doping in 
sports,  be  it  in  competitions  or  out  of  competitions,  are  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  the 
World Anti-doping Code of the World Anti-doping Agency (WADA) of which Mauritius is a 
member. 

In line with Article 7 of the Code, the case of weightlifter P.P is being dealt with by 
the  Results  Management  Committee  of  the  National  Anti-Doping  Organisation  (NADO). 
Hearing  is  still  ongoing  before  the  Results  Management  Committee.    The  House  will, 
therefore, appreciate that it would not be appropriate for me at this stage to comment on its 
proceedings. 

 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, ce cas de dopage concerne tout le monde sportif 
local  et  je  crois  qu’il  serait  bon  que  le  ministre  nous  donne  certaines  précisions  en  ce  qui 
concerne ce cas. De ce fait, l’honorable ministre peut-il nous dire quand le ministère a reçu 
les résultats du test de M. Prithipaul, et quand ces mêmes résultats ont été communiqués aux 
personnes concernées, c’est-à-dire l’athlète en question et à la fédération d’haltérophilie ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I think we received, as I was informed, on 08 
August after the Indian Ocean Games and the information was immediately circulated to the 
Federation and to the athlete himself. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, je trouve assez surprenant que les résultats du test 
soient tombés le 11 juin 2015 et que le ministre vient de nous affirmer que ces résultats ont 
été communiqués, je crois, le 08 août, c’est-à-dire deux mois après ! J’aimerais savoir ; que le 
ministre nous explique comment cela puisse être possible. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madame Speaker, the Anti-Doping Unit is found in South Africa. 
The result came out there in June, but was only sent to us on 08 August because it had to 
follow  all  the  procedures  regarding  all  the  international  federations  before  it  reached  the 
Ministry. So, we received it only on  08 August. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, j’aimerais savoir du ministre quand la Fédération 
Internationale d’Haltérophilie, de même que le World Anti-Doping Association (WADA), ont 
été informés de ce cas de dopage, et s’il y a eu des courriers qui ont été échangés entre ces 
deux  organismes  et  l’Anti-Doping  Unit  du  ministère  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports  de  bien 
vouloir déposer copies de ces courriers ? 

75 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, we received the information only 
on 08 August and when they got the first result they had to do a second confirmation. This is 
why it took so long. This is the normal procedure and we need to adapt. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 

MAURITIUS SPORTS COUNCIL – SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE – FEES 

(No.  B/598)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the sports infrastructure, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Sports Council, information as to if 
the  Board  thereof  has  decided  to  increase  all  the  rental  fees  thereof  which  fall  under  the 
management thereof and, if so, give the reasons therefor. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Sports Council 
that its Board has decided to increase the rates payable as from 01 September 2015 as the fees 
collected prior to that date were not even sufficient to cover the overtime payable to handy 
workers in service and the maintenance cost of the infrastructures. 

I am further informed by the MSC that as from 01 September 2015, there will be two 
different rates applicable - one rate for use of the infrastructures before 18h00  and another 
rate after 18h00. The two different categories of rates are being made applicable with a view 
to  covering  partly  the  huge  expenses  incurred  for  payment  of  electricity  bill  as  lighting 
facilities are provided after 18h00. 

I  am  also  informed  by  the  MSC  that  all  National  Sports  Federations  and  their 
affiliated  clubs  as  well  as  their  organisations  promoting  the  development  of  the  respective 
sports  are  granted  the  infrastructures  free  of  charge  everyday  between  15h00    to  18h00, 
Madam Speaker. 

I would like to refer the hon. Member to the reply made to Parliamentary Question 
No. B/503 where the reason justifying the increase in rates applicable by the MSC has been 
clearly explained. It is worth pointing out that in spite of the increase the rates applicable by 
the MSC are still lower than those applicable elsewhere. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  malgré  la  réponse  du  ministre,  j’aimerais  qu’il 
nous  dise  si  cette  augmentation  -  et  dans  certains  cas  je  dois  préciser  que  les  tarifs  ont 

 

76 

pratiquement doublé -  n’est pas une contradiction en elle-même, et un obstacle par rapport à 
la pratique du sport en général? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, yes, I will just give one example. For badminton 
court it was Rs100 per hour per court and today it is Rs150 per hour per court before 18h00. 
Badminton per court is paid by a minimum of two players or four players, which comes to 
Rs75 per player or Rs38 per player. I don’t think it is excessive. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is something I raised at Adjournment 
Time two weeks ago, but the hon. Minister was not present. I asked whether consideration 
could  be  given  at  least  for  students  and  unemployed  people  who  can’t  afford  to  pay  this 
increase in fees, if there could be a scheme put in place for them to benefit from the reduced 
cost. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, in my reply I mentioned that between 15h00  and 

18h00  it is free of charge. This is after school hours. 

Mr Quirin: Une dernière question, Madame la présidente. Le ministre vient de nous 
affirmer,  encore  une  fois,  que  les  infrastructures  sportives,  dont  les  piscines,  sont 
gratuitement offertes aux clubs, aux associations sportives et aux fédérations entre 15 heures 
et  18  heures.  Est-ce  que  le  ministre  peut  nous  confirmer,  en  ce  qui  concerne  les  piscines 
essentiellement,  si  entre  15  heures  et  18  heures,  les  nageurs,  en  particulier  ceux  qui 
appartiennent à des clubs, peuvent pratiquer leur discipline gratuitement ou bien dans leur cas 
ils doivent payer une cotisation à leurs clubs?  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker,  as  I have said, it is free of  charge  from 15.00 

hours to 18.00 hours. So, it is free of charge to everyone. 

 

SAUDI ARABIA – EMBASSY - SETTING UP  

(No.  B/599)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade whether, in regard to Saudi Arabia, he will state where matters stand as to 
the proposed – 

(a)  

setting up of an Embassy thereat, and 

77 

operation of direct flights between Mauritius and Saudi Arabia. 

 
(b)  

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Second Member for Port Louis 
Maritime and Port Louis East for this highly topical parliamentary question and I am going to 
respond thereto in a spirit of full transparency. 

I  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  condolences  to  the  victims  of  the 
stampede  at  the  Holy  City  of  Mecca.  I  also  share  the  pain  and  sorrow  of  those  Mauritian 
families who have not yet got confirmation of the whereabouts of some of our pilgrims and 
pray for their safe return home. 

This  Government,  Madam  Speaker,  and,  in  particular,  my  Ministry  has  been  doing 
whatever is necessary to implement the promise made last year during the electoral campaign 
for the opening of an embassy in the Royal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  

On 20 January of this year, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister officially wrote to His Royal 
Highness  the  King  of  Saudi  Arabia,  Late  Bin  Abdulazziz  AL  SAUD  about  Government’s 
decision to establish a Mauritius Embassy in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 

On  13  March  of  this  year,  the  Ambassador  of  Saudi  Arabia  to  Mauritius  with 
residence in Pretoria paid a Courtesy Call on the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the opening of 
the Mauritius Embassy in Saudi Arabia was raised among other issues. 

As a follow-up to the letter of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, hon. S. Soodhun, the Vice-
Prime Minister and Minister of Housing and Lands met  with the relevant Saudi Authorities 
on 19 March of this year with a view to facilitating the process for the establishment of a 
Mauritius Embassy in Saudi Arabia as soon as possible. 

On  09  April  2015,  my  Ministry  has,  through  our  High  Commission  in  Cairo, 
transmitted, through the diplomatic channel, an official request to the Government of Saudi 
Arabia seeking the latter’s agrément to the proposed opening of the Embassy of Mauritius in 
Saudi Arabia. 

On 20 May 2015, our Embassy in Cairo sent a Diplomatic Note to the Royal Embassy 
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in Egypt requesting the Saudi Authorities to indicate any 
development regarding our request to open an Embassy in Saudi Arabia. 

On 01 June, the Saudi Ambassador in Pretoria informed our Mission in Pretoria that 

he was awaiting a reply from the highest authorities in Saudi Arabia. 

78 

 
On 26 June 2015, my Ministry sent a Diplomatic Note directly to the Embassy of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in South Africa regarding the proposed meeting of the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister and Minister of Housing and Lands, hon. Soodhun, as Special Envoy, to meet 
with the highest Saudi Arabian Authorities in order to discuss in greater detail the modalities 
for the opening of a Mauritius Embassy in Saudi Arabia. 

On 16 July of this year, our Mission in Pretoria informed my Ministry that the Saudi 

Ambassador had not yet received a date for our Special Envoy to travel to Saudi Arabia. 

On 27 July and 05 August of this year, our Mission in Pretoria sent reminders to the 

Saudi Embassy in South Africa. A formal reply from Saudi Arabia is still being awaited. 

On 27 August of this year, the Embassy of Saudi Arabia in South Africa informed our 
Mission that the Saudi Ambassador is still awaiting a reply from Riyadh. It was also pointed 
out that His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia would be on a State Visit to the Unites States 
of America in early September and will thereafter be attending the United Nations General 
Assembly.  Hence,  our  Mission  has  been  requested  to  follow  up  on  this  matter  in  October 
2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  will  continue  to  monitor  this  matter  with  the  Saudi 

Authorities together with our respective Overseas Missions in Cairo and Pretoria.  

In  respect  of  part  (b)  of  this  Parliamentary  Question,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to 
inform the House that all matters relating to National Air Access fall under the purview of the 
Prime Minister’s Office. 

It  may  be  recalled,  in  this  respect,  that  on  25  September  2015,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister replied to Parliamentary Question No. B/476 from the First Member for Port Louis 
South  &  Port  Louis  Central  in  which  he  informed  the  House  that  a  Task  Force  under  the 
Chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service has been tasked with 
the development of a National Air Access policy. That reply has already been tabled. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We also from this side of the House 
present our deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in Saudi Arabia 
and  we  also  pray  that  we  find  the  missing  Mauritians  and  also  missing  Hajjis  there.  This 

 

79 

question  of  opening  of  a  Mauritian  Embassy  in  Saudi  Arabia  has  been  long  on  the  cards. 
Myself, during the precedent mandate, I have come with various PQ’s in the House... 

Madam Speaker: What is the question of the hon. Member? 

Mr Ameer Meea: ... and I thank the hon. Minister for giving us various information. 
May I ask the hon. Minister what is the time frame that he is expecting that all this would 
materialise? 

Mr Sinatambou: As the House will have noticed, Madam Speaker, everything has 
been done on the part of Government and so many diplomatic notes, contacts, verbal, and 
visits have been made. If it were for the Government we would do it tomorrow but we depend 
on  the  Sovereignty  of  Saudi  Arabia  and  we  will  have  to  bear  with  them  and  as  you  will 
appreciate especially with what has happened now, we have to be patient and understanding. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, it is clear that the Ministry is doing whatever they can. 
However,  it  is  also  clear  that  there  seems  to  be  no  hurry,  no  rush  from  the  Saudi  side  to 
accede to our request. May I know from the hon. Minister whether any initiatives have been 
carried out through friendly countries, third party intervention and at least find out why is it 
that Saudi is not responding to all our requests? 

Mr Sinatambou: I would not say, Madam Speaker, that the Saudi Authorities are not 
responding to our request. In fact, I would say that the Saudis are responding to our request. 
The reality is that there are a number of good things happening. Not later than this month 
actually  while  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  in  New  York  at  the  United  Nations  General 
Assembly, the Saudi Government and the Mauritian Government will be signing a General 
Cooperation Agreement.  

Now,  my  feeling  is  that  this  might  well  have  been  a  prerequisite  expected  by  the 
Saudi Authorities although it is not on paper and it is not being said, but clearly, however, I 
will not say that there is a reticence on the part of the Saudi Authorities; I will not say that 
they aren’t in a hurry. I think that there is a certain diplomatic itinerary that they would like to 
follow which is being done just at the precise moment in New York together with the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister. 

Mr Rutnah: Given the national interest raised in this question, can I ask if the hon. 
Minister is aware, firstly, that in 2010, the former Prime Minister promised the opening of an 
Embassy? Secondly, that in 2011, he promised that a high delegation will be led by the then 
Deputy Prime Minister for the setting-up of the Embassy and thirdly, that in 2013, the former 

 

80 

Prime Minister himself took the decision to stop all exercise of opening of an Embassy and 
had an Embassy been opened in Saudi Arabia today, the communication problem that we are 
having with the pilgrims, would not have happened today. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  don’t  know  whether  we  would  not  have  had  communication 
problems because, as a matter of fact, there are very good communications between Saudi 
Arabia  and  Mauritius  in  the  current  crisis.  However,  I  am  afraid  that  to  the  first  three 
questions… 

It is not an own goal; it is an explanation! 

(Interruptions) 

However, the unfortunate fact is that to the first three questions I am afraid that the 

answer is in the affirmative. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I don’t think when we are talking about opening an Embassy in Saudi 
Arabia and after the tragic events that we have just known, it is not a question of marquer des 
points,  but  I  wanted  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  why  at  one  point  in  time  it  is  our 
Embassy in Cairo that stepped in? Clearly, we have wasted some time before it was sorted 
out. Now, it is our High Commission in South Africa that is handling the issue. Can I request 
the hon. Minister to tell us pourquoi ce cafouillage and now, is it clear that it is Ministry to 
Ministry or through their Embassy in South Africa that we will keep on trying? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Now,  in  fact,  to  be  precise  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
there is no cafouillage. What happens is that the Mauritian High Commission in South Africa 
actually communicates with the Saudi Arabian Embassy accredited to Mauritius but located 
in South Africa. So, Pretoria deals with the Saudi Arabian Embassy accredited to Mauritius. 
Cairo is the Mauritian Embassy accredited to Saudi Arabia. So, we are tackling every single 
problem from each angle that we can, not for cafouillage purposes, but to ensure speed in 
delivery and to ensure that we manage to get better results. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just now - and I thank 
him for his very detailed answer - talked about an agreement that was to be signed this month 
between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Mauritius. In the same breath, can he inform the 
House whether it has been possible for our hon. Prime Minister to meet with His Excellency, 

 

81 

the King of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia while in New York since there was advance notice 
from the Embassy and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia that indeed His Royal 
Highness would be in New York. That was, at least, advance notice and a meeting could have 
been organised and has it been organised, and if not, why not? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  will  need  notice  of  this  question  because  that  is  outside  the 
purview of what I am answering. However, what I can say about this General Cooperation 
Agreement, either it has already been signed or it is to be signed. 

(Interruptions) 

I am told that it has been signed already on Sunday, and it is going to pave the way for strong 
and fruitful relationships between the two countries. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, last question on this! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Just regarding the document that has been signed on Sunday, can I 

ask the hon. Minister to make this document public? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I will certainly make it public if I find that it can be made 
public.  As  you  know,  there  are  things  between  States  which  sometimes  have  to  stay 
confidential.  I  can  assure  the  House,  Madam  Speaker,  that  if  that  document  can  be  made 
public, I will certainly make it public. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY - PROJECTS EARMARKED 

(No.  B/600)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the Corporate Social Responsibility, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
information  as  to  the  total  amount  of  money  received  over  the  past  two  financial  years 
thereunder, indicating the - 

(a)  

(b)  

projects earmarked for implementation, and  

guidelines presently applicable therefor. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  CSR  system 
was put in place in 2009 with the objective to address absolute poverty in the country. The 
CSR system has become too rigid and cumbersome with its complicated set of guidelines.  

 

82 

It  was  difficult  for  companies  to  allocate  funds  to  eligible  NGOs.  Accordingly,  we 
removed all the CSR guidelines, but the obligation remains under the  Income Tax Act for 
companies to allocate 2% of their profit after tax towards CSR. 

As I had stated in my reply to PQ B/592, we introduced the concept of parrainage 
over  and  above  the  CSR  to  empower  vulnerable  families  and  get  them  out  of  the  vicious 
circle of poverty in the medium and long terms. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  that  the  2%  CSR  obligations 
amounted to Rs659 m. in 2013 and Rs723 m. in 2014.  The unspent amount remitted to MRA 
was Rs125 m. and Rs149 m. respectively.  

With regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that around 920 
and 1,100 projects had been approved for 2013 and 2014 respectively by the then National 
CSR Committee.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, as explained earlier, there are no guidelines at 

present.  

Mr Bérenger: I don’t know if I heard the hon. Minister rightly, the law provides that 
companies  have  to  spend  2%  of  their  profits;  they  give  assistance  to  NGOs  and  other 
organisations, and, if there is a balance, it is sent to the MRA. Did I hear correctly the hon. 
Minister say that this idea of parrainage is over and above the 2%, that is, the companies that 
agree to parrainer, they must spend a full 2% plus whatever the parrainage costs? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  parrainage  is  inclusive  in  the  2%.  Some  companies 

might go beyond it. 

Yes. This is what I am saying.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No.  Over  and  above  the  CSR.  The  concept  of  parrainage  does  not  go  against  the  CSR 
principle. 

I will just read the paragraph again – as I have stated in my reply to PQ No. B/592, we 

introduced the concept of parrainage over and above the CSR method/system. 

(Interruptions) 

83 

 
Mr  Bérenger:  It  was  not  clear.  So,  I  take  it  that  for  the  companies  that  go  for 
parrainage,  it  will  be  within  their  2%  and  whatever  additional,  whatever  is  left  they  can 
either spend it themselves or as before, send it to the MRA? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he can 
quantify what is the manque à gagner this year as a result of the implementation of the new 
policy for CSR, that is, not implementing a 2% and leaving it optional for the companies to 
contribute? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Je  n’ai  pas  bien  compris.  Can  the  hon.  Member  put  the 

question again? 

Mr Fowdar: Can  I know what is the manque à gagner this  year as a result of the 

implementation of the new policy? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I wish to explain myself once again. Companies have 
got to pay 2% of their profit to contribute to the CSR Fund. Those companies, which can’t 
spend that money, pay it to the MRA. This amount, which is around Rs150 m. is being now 
ploughed back in the CSR system. So, there is no question of loss in revenue with the new 
concept of parrainage being introduced. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, there seems to be a confusion regarding the CSR 
contribution  because  now  that  there  are  no  guidelines,  how  do  you  define  that  a  company 
contributes 2% of its profit to a CSR activity since there are no guidelines, no paramètres 
pour dire dans quelle direction la contribution a eté faite? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  it  is  quite  simple.  Company  A  has  got  Rs100  m.  of 
CSR  money  to  spend;  they  can  spend  it  on  the  parrainage  project  or  they  can  also  help 
NGOs. What I mean is that the parrainage system is not excluding NGOs from applying for 
funds from companies. It still goes on as before. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: May I ask the hon. Minister; in view of the new situation and in view of 
the experience that we have all learned about what has happened since this CSR project has 

 

84 

been implemented by the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development, is it not 
time for Government to come up with a legal framework for the sake of transparency so that 
we know that there is a piece of legislation which set up the CSR Committee, the activities 
that the CSR can look after and also, the Love Bridge Project, for example, so that there is 
more clarity in everything that is happening in this domain? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, maybe we have to communicate more, that’s for sure.  
In my mind, the project is quite simple in the sense that we are giving the freedom now to 
companies to use their funds as they wish to. We can’t direct them to use their funds. We 
have to remind the House that the 2% is above corporate tax of 15%.  It is their money and it 
is for them to decide how they spend it, whether it be in the form of parrainage or whether it 
be by subsidising or helping NGOs. 

Mr Bérenger:  Still it makes me very uneasy to listen to what I have just heard.  So, 
there are no longer any guidelines and the hon. Minister is saying that the companies have to 
calculate  2%  of  their  profits  and  they  are  totally  free  to  spend  that  as  they  wish.  They, 
therefore,  define  what  is  the  CSR  project.    Is  there  any  control?    There  is  no  more  any 
guidelines.  Is there no checking at all on how those companies decide this is a CSR project 
and this is not one?  There is no control at all. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Why should we control? It is not our money. I have to make 
it clear.  If it was 2% out of money that is owed to income tax, we can ask for information. In 
the case of the CSR, it is 2% above the corporate tax of 15%. It is their money. This is why I 
feel that they have to be given the flexibility of spending their money as they want.  What we 
have seen since that decision is that those big companies are now creating foundations.  In 
fact, there are some 18 foundations created. 

(Interruptions) 

But my friend, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is not listening to my reply. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please address the Chair and please proceed!  Have 

you finished? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I have done. 

Madam Speaker:  Okay.  The Table has been advised that PQ B/603, B/604, B/605 

and B/606 have been withdrawn. Time is over!   

85 

 
Hon. Rutnah raised the point of order earlier on a word which he has heard and asked 
whether that word is parliamentary.  I, personally, did not hear the utterance of the word.  I 
am now asking hon. Rutnah whether he insists on the point of order. 

Mr Rutnah:  No.  

Madam Speaker:  The matter is closed. 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  all  the  business  on 
today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

(4.20 p.m) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

SAUDI ARABIA - HAJJ 2015 – INCIDENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, as we are aware, the sad event Hajj 2015 has been marked by a very tragic 
occurrence on Thursday 24 September 2015, with a stampede during one of the last rituals of 
the Hajj, which has killed more than 1000 pilgrims and injured 934 persons in Saudi Arabia. 

The  Saudi  Health  Minister,  in  a  statement,  pointed  out  that  the  crush  happened 
because  many  pilgrims  moved  “without  respecting  the  timetables”  established  by  the 
Authorities. 

Regarding  the  Mauritian  pilgrims,  I  am  informed  that  one  of  the  11  registered 
organisers  did  not  respect  the  time  scheduled  for  the  Mauritian  pilgrims  to  go  to  Jamarat 
Bridge for the ritual. 

86 

 
During the stampede, six Mauritian pilgrims were injured and were admitted to the 
hospital. After receiving the necessary medical treatment, they have been able to return to 
their hotel. 

Immediately after the incident, I instructed Mr Samioullah Lauthan, the Head of Hajj 
Mission,  to  set  up  an  urgent  crisis  meeting  with  the  Mauritian  operators  to  assess  the 
situation. It was found that there were 11 missing among the Mauritian Hajjees.  

The  Hajj  Mission  immediately  started  a  search  campaign.  The  Mauritian  operators 

joined forces to look into the reported missing cases. 

The  Hajj  Mission  also  had  an  urgent  meeting  with  high  officials  of  the  Saudi 

Authorities to seek their assistance. 

In  order  to  mobilise  all  resources,  the  Hajj  Mission  met  with  all  the  operators  in 
Makkah  to  make  a  search  plan  covering  Makkah,  Mina,  Jeddah  and  Tai’f.    I  was  in 
permanent contact with the Hajj Mission to follow up on how the situation was evolving. 

On the evening of the day the stampede occurred, the Hajj Mission was able to trace 
back  three  Mauritian  pilgrims.  Searches  continued  and  on  Friday,  25  September,  another 
three pilgrims were retraced. 

Since  Saturday,  the  Saudi  officials  arranged  for  the  Hajj  Mission  to  inspect  the 
mortuary where photographs of deceased Hajjees are being displayed for identification. Up to 
now, Hajj Mission has verified a total number of 1,190 photos. None of them are Mauritians. 

With  the  help  of  the  operators  and  some  Mauritian  doctors  residing  in  Jeddah,  the 
Hajj Mission searched all the Mina and Makkah hospitals. As part of the search activities, the 
Hajj  Mission  arranged  with  the  Saudi  Authorities  for  the  names  of  the  missing  Mauritian 
Hajjees and their ID details to be loaded into a computer system to help in locating them. 

The situation becomes more difficult as many victims do not have their ID cards on 

them. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  present  situation  is  that  unfortunately,  there  are  still  five 
Mauritian pilgrims missing, who according to the Hajj Mission, were rather close to the area 
where the stampede occurred. 

The  Hajj  Mission  is  actively  pursuing  the  search  to  find  the  missing  Mauritian 
Hajjees. Crisis meetings are being held on a regular basis. The Hadj Mission is also arranging 
with Saudi Authorities so that search is carried out via fingerprints.  

87 

 
Presently,  all  pilgrims  have  already  left  Mina  and  Makkah  for  Madina.  I  am  in 
discussions with Emirates Airlines so that Hajjees affected by the stampede, be able to travel 
to Mauritius as soon as possible. 

I  will  bring  up  the  matter  during  a  meeting  with  the  Senior  Vice-President  of 

Emirates, Mr Orhan Abbas, who will be in Mauritius tomorrow morning. 

I have given clear instructions to the Hajj Mission to stay back in Makkah till they get 

final information about the five missing Hajjees. 

We expect to get exact information in the coming days.  I  am in permanent contact 

with the families of the five missing Hajjees. They are the Jannoo and Nazurally families. 

I am briefing them on a regular basis, about how the situation is evolving. 

I wish to reassure them of our full support in this difficult moment.  Let us all pray for 

the safety and the recovery of all Hajjees who are affected in the accident.   

Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour.  

At 4.25 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.13 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE MAURITIUS RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY BILL 

(No. XI of 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Second Reading of the Mauritius 

Renewable Energy Agency Bill (No. XI of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, I can find no better words to express the importance of renewable energy than those 
of the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon when he said and I quote – 

88 

 
“If energy is the lifeblood of the world economy  - then - renewable  energy 
represents an infusion of humanity.” 

An infusion of humanity, développement à visage humain. 

Madam Speaker, there  was a time where all energy that we were using came from 
renewable sources. We would use wood from forests which were naturally replenished and 
other biomass to make fire and steam. We would use wind power to propel ships over the 
water and turn windmill to crush grains, we would use animal power to till and toil the soil. 
Then, came coal and followed the industrial revolution. Coal is a very efficient, effective and 
reliable source of energy, but is  also very  polluting. Then, in the last  century, we saw the 
advent  of  oil  and  natural  gas.  Again,  fossil  fuel,  harmful  to  the  environment  and  it  has 
resulted in global warming and contributed to the depletion of the ozone layer. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  debating  this  Bill  at  a  time  when  momentum  is  gathered 
around the Conference of Climate Change which will be held later in France. Conference of 
Parties (COP21) will aim to achieve  a legally binding and universal agreement on climate 
with the aim of keeping global warming below 2 degrees Celsius. Why 2 degrees Celsius? 
Simply  because  scientists  have  estimated  this  to  be  the  threshold  beyond  which  global 
warming  will  become  catastrophic  and  irreversible.  But  getting  all  parties  to  agree  on  a 
framework to reduce greenhouse emission within house gas emission is, unfortunately, not 
going to be an easy task. 

Since the adoption of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
in 1992 at the Rio Earth Summit, Government has been unable to agree on action to be taken 
to  avoid  climate  change.  The  US  refused  to  ratify  the  Kyoto  Protocol  in  1997  and  the 
Copenhagen Conference in 2009, is generally regarded as a failure. But there is hope that an 
agreement will be reached in Paris later this year because both the European Union and the 
United States have indicated willingness to cut emission by a certain level compared to what 
they are doing now.  

However, other countries such as  India are  yet to come up with target levels. And, 
quite understandably, before poorer countries commit to emission reduction, they would like 
to  receive  financial  assistance  from  richer  and  more  polluting  countries  to  enable  them  to 
invest in clean energy technology. 

Of course, Madam Speaker, in this global initiative, Mauritius does not want to be left 
behind, and with the introduction of this Bill we are showing our commitment to move away 

 

89 

from  sources  of  energy  that  are  harmful  to  the  environment  and  to  increase  our  share  of 
renewable energy in our overall energy metrics. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  is  also  being  debated  only  a  few  days  after  the 
Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was adopted at the 
opening of the UN Summit for Sustainable Development on 25 September 2015. The post-
2015  Sustainable  Development  Goals  will  now  take  over  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals, and one of the sustainable development goals is precisely to increase substantially the 
share of renewable energy in the global energy mix by 2030. This only goes to show, Madam 
Speaker, how important renewable energy is to sustainable growth. Indeed, renewable energy 
is not only important for environmental reasons but also for economic reasons.  

Fossil fuel such as petroleum products and coal represent our major source of import 
expenditure and we are vulnerable on the volatility of oil prices. Movements in the oil prices 
affect our cost of production. It affects our cost of living, although I must stress that it would 
seem that in Mauritius it is only a one-way traffic because only increases in oil prices and 
coal prices  are passed on to the  consumers. This Government does not  seem to believe in 
passing the benefit of reduction in the price of oil and coal on the world market to consumers, 
as both the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer 
Protection indicated to the House in answers to recent Private Notice Questions. 

Renewable energy, on the other hand, in the long run, provides stable operating costs. 
The sun, the wind, the water, the sea are all free and in abundant supply. So, in the long term, 
it will be more economic for us to use renewable energy. True, renewable energy requires 
substantial  capital  expenditure.  But  with  the  improvement  in  technology  and  thanks  to  the 
mass  production  in  China  of  silicon  cells  using  solar  panels,  the  cost  of  operation  of 
renewable energy is constantly being reduced. 

Madam Speaker, as our standard of living improves, so does our demand for energy. 
Household appliances have invaded our house and our pockets, I dare say, resulting in high 
electricity  bills.  We  tend  to  use  washing  machines  now  instead  of  dhobis.  We  use  kettles, 
irons,  refrigerators,  water  pumps,  TVs,  computers.    The  list  is  long.  We  have  become  so 
dependent on electricity today. We are now all used to air conditioning, which is no longer a 
luxury but very much a key component to ensure a pleasant working environment as well as 
ensuring a pleasant stay for our tourists. 

90 

 
Tourism is probably one of the sectors where considerable efforts are being made to 
increase  the  use  of  renewable  energy,  namely  in  hotels.  I  am  sure  that  with  the  right 
marketing strategy the transition to renewable energy will also attract eco-friendly travellers 
who will be willing to pay a premium to enjoy a sustainable tourist experience. 

Shifting to renewable energy, we also create additional employment opportunities for 
the  installation,  operation  and  maintenance  of  renewable  energy  technologies,  providing 
much-needed jobs for the unemployed. We are already seeing the mushrooming of small and 
medium enterprises involved in solar energy, solar water heaters installation and maintaining 
of solar panels.  

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  talk  about  energy,  unfortunately,  we  tend  only  to  think 
about electricity. But there is also transport. Transport is a huge consumer of energy sources. 
Be  it  Mogas  or  Gas  oil,  our  road  transport  sector  depends  on  petroleum-based  fuel.  A 
significant amount of the petroleum products that we import is used in transport. In addition, 
motor vehicles are a major source of air pollution; they emit greenhouse gas. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  a  little  bit  disappointed  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  has  not  intervened  on  this  Bill,  because  we  would  have 
liked to be enlightened about what measures, if any, will be introduced to encourage the use 
of renewable energy in the transport sector. He could have enlightened as to how successful 
the introduction of carbon tax on motor vehicles has been.  Have the taxes achieved their aim 
of  promoting  fuel  economy  and  reducing  harmful  emission?    Has  the  carbon  tax  actually 
resulted in an increased use of eco-friendly cars?  What is the Government policy as regards 
alternative  fuel  vehicles  which  run  on  fuels  other  than  traditional  petroleum  fuel  such  as 
ethanol and biodiesel?  Is Government going to encourage the use of ethanol and biodiesel 
through  subsidies  and  other  fiscal  incentives?    What  is  the  Government  policy  as  regards 
hybrid electric vehicles? Madam Speaker, all these questions are not answered! 

Madam Speaker, the use of alternative fuel renewable forces in vehicles is very much 
on the agenda following last week’s scandal where Volkswagen admitted that it had rigged 
the proprietary software on millions of its diesel cars around the world, so that they would 
pass emission tests when they were actually spreading smog. This inevitably raises concern 
that diesel-run vehicles are causing more pollution than may have been thought, hence the 
call from environmental groups for the use of alternative fuel and clean energy in transport. 

91 

 
In India, as far back as 1995, an environmental lawyer, M. C. Mehta, filed a public 
interest litigation in the Supreme Court, seeking relief from the serious health risks caused by 
motor vehicle pollution. The Court responded with a series of orders; most notably, the Court 
ordered  the  conversion  of  all  commercial  passenger  vehicles,  be  it  buses,  taxis  and  three-
wheelers  to  compress  natural  gas.  Last  year,  the  National  Green  Tribunal,  India’s 
environment Court, directed that all vehicles older than 15 years be taken off New Delhi’s 
roads and stated, and I quote –  

“It is a constitutional and statutory duty of all the authorities and ministries to 
provide clean air to the people to breathe.” 

Yes, Madam, the right to clean air is a fundamental constitutional right! And, unfortunately, 
as  I  said,  we  have  not  had  the  benefit  of  listening  to  the  hon.  Minister  responsible  for 
transport, and we are left in the dark  as to Government’s policy  with regard to the use of 
renewable energy in the transport sector. 

Madam Speaker, we have understood the importance of renewable energy and its role 
in  sustainable  development  well  before  the  introduction  of  this  Bill  before  the  House.    In 
2008,  the  Maurice  Ile  Durable  initiative  was  launched  with  the  aim  of  lowering  our 
dependency  on  fossil  fuel  through  increased  utilisation  of  renewable  energy  and  energy 
efficiency  measures.  My  friend,  hon.  Osman  Mahomed,  did  provide  a  list  of  initiatives 
undertaken by the MID, which he headed for a while, including the scheme that encouraged 
households to install solar water heating panels. I am aware of the various challenges which 
MID faced, especially in changing mentalities.  We, in this House, have had chances to ask 
questions  to  the  then  Minister  of  Public  Utilities  about  MID.    Certainly,  we  believe  that 
probably more could have been done, more should have been done under this MID initiative.  

Be that as it may, there is one issue on which I hope the hon. Vice-Prime Minister can 
enlighten us during his summing-up, and that concerns the MID Fund. As the House is aware, 
there is a 30 cents levy on each litre of petroleum products, be it Mogas or Gas oil, which is 
supposed  to  go  towards  the  MID  Fund.  I  would  like  to  know  whether,  henceforth,  the 
proceeds of this MID Fund will be transferred to MARENA or will it be sneaked back to the 
Consolidated  Fund  to  finance  general  Government  expenditure  or  will  it  be  abolished 
altogether. 

Madam Speaker, as hon. Members before me have pointed out, renewable energy is 
already being used in Mauritius to generate electricity although, unfortunately, the hon. Vice-

 

92 

Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public utilities did not deem fit to enlighten us on the 
share which each sort of renewable energy contributes to the energy supply.  

Hydropower, this is probably the oldest source of renewable energy which has been 
used in Mauritius to generate electricity. Some of the hydro plants have been operating since 
as  far  back  as  the  1960s,  such  as  Le  Val,  La  Ferme,  Cecile,  Magenta.  However,  it  would 
seem  that  we  do  not  have  sufficiently  high  waterfall  or  sufficiently  high  reservoir/dam  to 
effectively  get  bigger  turbine  to  produce  any  significant  amount  of  electricity  from 
hydropower sources.  

Then, there is solar energy. Under the Small-Scale Distribution Generation Scheme, 
residential and non-residential consumers have been encouraged to produce electricity from 
renewable technology such as solar photovoltaic system to connect with CEB’s low-voltage 
network system up to 2 MW. Saraco PV farm in Bambous is already producing and selling 
electricity to CEB, using again solar photovoltaic system. 

Bioenergy  –  bagasse  is  already  being  used  alone  or  in  combination  with  coal  by 
independent power producers and continuous power producers. Top cane and leaves can also 
be used to produce electricity but, Madam Speaker, we can certainly do more. We can plant 
high-fibre  cane  to  get  more  bagasse.  The  Government  can  come  up  with  a  scheme  to 
encourage energy crops; plants which are produced with the express purpose of using their 
biomass energically. 

There  has  been  discussion  in  the  past  of  growing  what  is  known  scientifically  as 
Arundo donax, but commonly named in Mauritian Creole as ‘fatak’, which is a plant with a 
high source of fibre. But this highly invasive plant will need to be properly monitored if the 
Government decides to encourage the plantation of such Arundo donax plant. 

Domestic wastes - Gamma Covanta had a project to use household wastes to create 
energy. I understand that the project did not go through because of the high costs of sorting 
other waste and the authorities could not agree on pricing, not to mention the protests by local 
inhabitants.  But  using  domestic  waste  to  generate  electricity  is  certainly  one  source  of 
renewable energy which Government will have to look into in going forward. Of course, we 
will need to provide initiative to local authorities to sort out wastes and would need to have a 
proper  sensitisation  campaign  to  educate  consumers/household  to  sort  out  wastes  because 
otherwise we will end up burning plastic which is highly polluting, because plastic is after all 
made up of  fossil fuel. 

93 

 
Landfill - Sotravic is already using landfill gas at Mare Chicose to generate electricity. 
Unfortunately, the landfill gas is limited in supply and will run out in a few years’ time but 
the potential is there, and there are other unexplored renewable sources of renewable energy.  

Wind energy, this already a reality in Rodrigues. In fact, I am told that because of lack 
of energy storage facilities, optimum use is not being made of wind farm in Rodrigues and at 
times they have to be switched off because they produce too much electricity that is required 
and they don’t have storage facilities.  

In Mauritius, a few projects have been announced, namely the wind farm at Plaine 
Sophie, Curepipe Point,  the Aerowatt wind farm at Plaine des Roches but none is operational 
so far. Depending on the cost, we can even think about offshore wind farm in the ocean just 
as we have in Ireland and other countries.  

Ocean Energy. Seawater air-conditioning system is common in several small island 
states. It involves using cold water from ocean depth to provide air- conditioning in building, 
especially in hotels to replace traditional electrical chillers. There was one notorious project 
on the Land-based Oceanic Industry in Mauritius that never took off. But that should not be 
an excuse not to explore the possibility of using this ocean energy. 

Wave energy. We are surrounded by ocean  and in certain regions of the island the 
wave  movements  are  strong  enough  to  produce  energy.  However,  there  is  one  legal  issue 
which  needs  to  be  addressed  before  we  can  fully  exploit  ocean  energy,  it  relates  to  the 
privatisation of the ocean. I understand that legislative change will be required to enable the 
Government  to  lease  to  private  producers  part  of  the  ocean  for  them  to  operate  whatever 
ocean plant they want to do.  

Madam Speaker, if we take away energy produce using biomass, namely bagasse, the 
hard  truth  is  that  today  the  share  of  renewable  energy  in  our  global  energy  mix  is  quite 
negligible.  The  reason  for  that  is  the  presence  of  both  technical  and  economic  barriers. 
Technical barriers – we have knowledge gaps. We do not invest sufficiently in research and 
development.  We  tend  to  borrow  from  what  other  countries  have  developed  but,  Madam 
Speaker,  we  have  our  own  specificities.  We  have  our  own  physical  constraint  but  the 
potential is there, and I hope that Marena will be able to play an important role in research 
and  development  in  devising  educational  programme  and  specialise  training  on  renewable 
energy technologies, no doubt with the help of Arena. 

94 

 
I pause here, Madam Speaker, to note what, in my opinion, appears to be one of the 
major  shortcomings  of  the  Bill.  In  my  opinion,  in  order  for  Marena  to  play  a  key  role  in 
promoting research and development in renewable energy technology, Marena should have 
expressly,  and  I  stress  the  word  ‘expressly’,  been  given  the  power  to  provide  financial 
assistance  for  research  into  renewable  energy  technologies  and  for  the  development, 
demonstration, commercialisation of renewable energy technologies.  

At  Section  6  of  the  Bill,  Marena  is  given  powers  to  receive  grants  and  donation. 
Marena can raise funds but it should also be able to channel those grants, donation and funds 
to  research  institution.  It  should,  for  example,  be  able,  after  receiving  grants  from 
international organisation, to provide funding to the University of Mauritius or even to Ph.D. 
students preparing their thesis on Renewable Energy Technology.  

Apart from the technical barriers, Madam Speaker, cost remains the major barrier to 
the increasing use in renewable energy. Renewable energy technologies are generally more 
expensive  than  energy  generated  from  fossil  fuel.  If  Government  is  truly  committed  to 
increasing  the  share  of  renewable  energy  in  our  global  energy  mix,  then  Government  will 
have to come up with a system of subsidy or fiscal incentive to reduce the cost of production 
of electricity, using renewable energy technology. 

For  those  renewable  energy  which  by  their  very  nature  are  intermittent,  the 
Government would have to come up with a scheme to make the cost of energy storage more 
affordable. But, more importantly, the tariff at which producers of electricity using renewable 
sources can sell their surplus electricity to CEB will have to be carefully planned so that they 
are  set  at  a  level  which  makes  production  of  electricity  using  renewable  energy  source 
become economically viable. 

Madam Speaker, as Members before me have pointed out, the existing power grid of 
the  CEB  today,  cannot  accommodate  much  of  the  energy  produced  by  renewable  sources 
which are variable, which are intermittent. CEB will have to invest not only in new grids but 
also in new digital meter readers which will have to accommodate a two-way reading so that 
only next metering is paid for.  

But,  Madam  Speaker,  the  greatest  barrier  -  in  my  opinion  -  to  increase  the  use  of 
renewable  energy  at  the  present  is  one  of  demand  and  supply.  On  the  supply  side,  most 
renewable energy that we have, in particular, solar and wind are intermittent in nature and 
cannot be relied upon for the production of electricity for peak demand. For the time being, 

 

95 

only biomass in combination with coal is being used for production of  electricity for base 
load. So, supply is a problem to increase the increased use of renewable energy.  

On the demand side, being a small island, we have limited demand for energy. So, 
increasing energy produced from one particular source will inevitably mean that there is less 
demand  for  energy  to  be  produced  by  another  source.  So  if,  for  example,  we  increase  the 
production of electricity using fossil fuel, be it coal, heavy oil or even gas, it would mean that 
we have less power available to produce wind from renewable energy sources. That is why it 
is  very  important  that  this  Government  achieves  the  right  mix  between  fossil  fuel  and 
renewable energy. 

And,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  days  to  come,  Government  will  have  to  take  swift 
decision as to the source of energy that it will use in the short, medium and long term. Today, 
unfortunately, Madam Speaker, we do not have the luxury of time and I am not blaming this 
Government for this state of affairs. For years, we have drawn the attention of Government of 
the need to increase our energy production capacity. PNQ after PNQ, the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition warned the then DPM and Minister of Energy and Public Utilities that time was 
running out and we needed badly to increase our energy capacity to meet peak demand. But it 
was always the same story; tout va bien, Madame la Marquise, no need to worry, no need to 
panic. The total mishandling of the CT Power Project and failure to install the 60 MW Plant 
in St.  Louis at time, means that today the Government is having a situation where  we  are 
walking on tightrope as far as energy supply is concerned.  

The  World  Bank  has  addressed  these  concerns  in  its  report  on  the  assessment  of 
electricity demand, forecast and generation expansion plan. We focus on 2015-2017 period 
which the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has laid before the House. The World Bank made several 
recommendations for short-term, namely optimising maintenance schedule, negotiating new 
power  purchase  agreement  with  IPP  in  Beau  Champ,  purchasing  60  megawatt  units  at  St. 
Louis and implementing emergency voltage reduction when necessary, and then at page 57, it 
is stated, and I quote - 

“In fact, even if all of the previous recommendations of this section (…).” 

Which I have just mentioned. 

“(…) are implemented, the quantitative simulations indicate that there would 
still  be  a  relevant  capacity  gap  in  2016  and  the  first  semester  of  2017. 
Maintaining the Pielstick units of the Saint Louis thermal plant in operation 

 

96 

would help overcome this capacity  gap, since these units have an aggregate 
injectable power of 25 MW.” 

‘Would  help’,  would  not  solve  the  problem  but  would  help.  As  we  have  seen  from  last 
week’s PNQ, there is a difference in interpretation of the World Bank. We don’t share the 
same reading that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has of the World Bank report and I really 
hope that we are wrong. I really hope that the CEB is right, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, 
Minister of Energy and Public Utilities is right and, we and the World Bank are getting it all 
wrong. But surely, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister would agree with the World Bank when it 
states at page 58, and I quote - 

“However,  the  island  may  face  capacity  shortages  if  the  demand  grows  as 
indicated  in  the  high  growth  scenario,  even  if  all  the  above-mentioned 
measures are implemented.” 

So, even if everything goes as planned, if we have a high growth scenario, we will still have 
energy  shortage.  What  is  high  growth  scenario?  High  growth  scenario  simply  means  that 
growth will be one third higher than the base case. That is, growth would be 5.1% in 2015-
2016 and 5.2% in 2016 and 2017.  

So,  Madam  Speaker,  things  will  worsen,  if  the  prophecy  of  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development materialises and we get above 5% growth. So, if we get 
above 5% growth, then even all the measures which will be implemented including providing 
for this 60 MW of St. Louis will not be sufficient, we will have a definite shortage of supply 
in this country for peak demand. So much for the short term, Madam Speaker, we will have 
the  60  MW  Unit  in  St.  Louis  which  will  use  heavy  oil,  fossil  fuel,  so  there  would  be  no 
significant increase in the share of renewable energy in the short term, meaning 2016-2017.  

Now,  let’s  come  to  the  medium  term,  2018.  I  have  not  heard  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister disagree with the World Bank that we need to increase our production capacity now 
to avoid a shortage in 2018. In its report, the World Bank at page 71 states, and I quote - 

 “The  island  of  Mauritius  is  expected  to  experience  capacity  gaps  in  2018, 
partly as a result of the cancelling of the CT Power project.”  

Now, the choice of energy that we are going to use to produce electricity for 2018 will have a 
definite  impact  on  the  share  which  renewable  energy  will  play  for  the  production  of 
electricity for 2018 and that is why the World Bank recommends at page 72, and I quote - 

 

97 

“(…)  the  technology  alternative  recommended  for  the  additional  firm 
generation capacity to be commissioned in the beginning of 2018 is the 2 × 36 
MW gas-turbine thermal plant.” 

This gas turbine plant will run on high-quality diesel when gas is not available. 

Madam Speaker, it is very important to note that the World Bank was only talking 
about the capacity gap in 2018. The World Bank did not make any recommendation for long-
term  beyond  2018.  In  particular,  the  World  Bank  did  not  recommend  that  the  purchase  of 
natural  gas-fired  turbines  without  proper  and  careful  planning.  In  fact,  at  page  63  of  the 
report, the World Bank stresses and I quote - 

“(…)  the  immediate  procurement  of  a  natural  gas-fired  turbine  is  not 
considered in this document, since issues related to the scale of the long-term 
demand  for  natural  gas  in  Mauritius  have  to  be  carefully  factored  into  the 
assessment. This requires a more formal long-term planning analysis, (…).” 

And  this  is  normal,  this  is  logical.  C’est  tout  à  fait  normal.  Before  we  go  and  commit 
ourselves to LNG in the long run, we need a thorough long-term planning analysis. Why? 
Because  we  all  know,  Madam  Speaker,  that  energy  will  require  massive  investment  in 
infrastructure  namely  in  the  port  area  and  in  storage  facilities.  Then,  there  is  the  cost  of 
conversion; liquefied natural gas has to be gassified before they can be used in the turbine. 
Then, there is the cost of laying the pipelines. So, all this cost money and it only makes sense 
to  incur  all  these  costs  if  we  have  sufficient  demand  for  LNG.  LNG  could  be  used  for 
transport.  In fact, it is not  LNG, it is more CNG, compressed natural  gas, that is used for 
transport but again this will necessitate massive investment. The engines of vehicles will have 
to be adjusted and adopted to be used for CNG. Filling stations will have to be especially 
equipped and safety measures will have to be implemented to avoid risk of explosion. 

So, Madam Speaker, what we are saying is simply that today we are not in a position 
to commit to LNG, we need long-term planning first. But yet, it would seem that, without 
such long-term planning analysis, without considering the long-term demand for energy, the 
Government has already opted for liquid natural gas as a preferred source of energy and if we 
do use LNG to meet energy demand, then automatically there will be less space available to 
use renewable  energy because we have limited demand for  energy. So,  if we  go on  LNG, 
probably we won’t have enough space to use biomass, be it cane or other source of energy 
crop. Yet, it would seem that the dice have already been casted in favour of LNG.  Les dés 

 

98 

sont jetés.  Otherwise, how can we explain that the second object of MARENA at Section 
4(b) of the Bill is and I quote –  

“(b)  

to advise on possible uses of liquid natural gas”. 

Why  single  out  LNG?    Why  not  other  energies  that  can  be  used  in  combination  with 
renewable  energy?  I  would  have  had  no  quarrel  if,  instead  of  talking  about  LNG,  the  Bill 
would  have  said  –“any  non-renewable  energies  that  can  be  used  in  combination  with 
renewable energy source”. At least, we get a mandate rather than specifically targeting LNG.   

In  an  interview  in  l’Express  newspaper  of  19th  September,  the  Director-General  of 

CEB, Gérard Hébrard, announced that and I quote – 

«Une  centrale  thermique d'une  capacité  de  135  à  150  MW  aux  Grandes 
Salines.  Avec  le combined  cycle  gasturbine, elle  va  tourner  au  diesel  léger 
pendant  trois,  quatre  ans  à  partir  de  2018  avant  de  passer  au  gaz  naturel 
liquéfié quand ce sera disponible.» 

So, the decision has already been taken and announced by the Director-General that CEB is 
going for LNG. There will be a plant of 135 to 150 MW at Grandes Salines which will be 
operated using light diesel until we can use liquid natural gas. Here we are no longer talking 
about the two 26 MW combined gas turbine which the World Bank has recommended that 
we install for 2018.  We are talking about 135 to 150 MW. So, we are talking about long-
term supply and when asked as to why we should not have an open tender for all types of 
energies  as  proposed  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  Opposition,  the  Director-General  of  the  CEB 
candidly replied and I quote - 

“Nous savons très bien le résultat. Ça équivaudrait à mettre du charbon, qui 
est le combustible fossile le moins cher, partout. C’est contraire à la politique 
de l’État.” 

So, here we have the Director-General of CEB who is substituting himself for the Minister of 
Public utilities. He is substituting himself for the Government and announcing to the public 
that it is the policy of Government to no longer use coal, even if we can have now recourse to 
cleaner coal because the hon. Vice Prime Minister, himself, during the Budget Speech made a 
whole case for coal. He said that he was informed that now we can have a clean coal. I don’t 
think  that  we  can  have  coal  which  does  not  emit  CO2.  carbon,  but  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister was, at one point, very emotional about coal. At one point, the hon. Minister even 

 

99 

said that: when I hear people talk about coal, it is as if I hear people talking about alcohol. 
You said it! 

(Interruptions) 

So, I don’t know.  We don’t understand, Madam Speaker, why this sudden change of heart?  
Before  we  had  done  all  this  long-term  planning,  why  suddenly  we  have  decided  -  the 
Government,  CEB  in  particular  –  to  go  for  LNG?    But,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  no  surprise 
because  I have come to the conclusion that CEB, probably, does not believe in renewable 
energy sources and I am not the only one who thinks so.  The World Bank also said so and 
I’ll quote page 75 of the report – 

“The  capacity  with  which  renewable  generators  whose  output  is  highly 
intermittent  in  the  short-term  such  as  wind  and  solar  plant  are  assumed  to 
contribute to the supply of peak power is considered as nil in the simulation of 
the IRP 2013-2022.”  

Nil!  This  assumption  may  lead  to  an  undervaluation  of  the  attractiveness  of  this  class  of 
generator as alternative for generation system expansion planning. So, what effectively the 
World Bank is saying is that because the CEB is not factoring  any energy from wind and 
solar  plant,  they  don’t  even  consider  these  two  sources  of  renewable  energy  as  reliable 
sources that can be relied upon for base load in the medium and long terms. These are not my 
words.  They are words of the World Bank.  So, Madam Speaker, at the very outset we need 
to change mentalities. We need to change mentalities at the CEB.  They should be more open 
to  renewable  energy.    LNG  is  not  a  panacea.    It  is  still  fossil  fuel.    It  is  still  a  source  of 
pollution.  It is expensive.   It requires huge investment and once we opt for  LNG, we are 
locked  in  for  years  and  this  naturally  means  that  there  will  be  less  demand  available  for 
production of energy from renewable sources.  So, my plea, Madam Speaker, today to this 
Government is not to rush into LNG without a thorough long-term analysis.  Don’t write-off 
any source of energy.   

So, let an independent expert - here, I don’t mean by any stretch of imagination that 
CEB is an independent expert - come up with the most optimal energy mix for us taking into 
consideration  our  size,  our  geographical  location,  our  locally  available  resources,  and  then 
decide what energy mix to use in the medium and long terms.   

Madam Speaker, there is consensus on both sides of this House in favour of the Bill. 
In days to come, this Government will be called upon to take a decision with regard to energy 

 

100 

sources that we will use for the short-term, medium-term and long-term and such decision 
will  definite  have  an  impact  on  the  use  of  renewable  energy.    So,  Madam  Speaker,  let  us 
today  take  a  pledge  to  increase  the  share  of  renewable  energy  in  our  total  energy  supply 
capacity.  It is the very least we can do for our children and for the future generation of this 
nation.   

Thank you. 

 

(5.55 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, perhaps we do not realise, certainly public opinion does 
not realise that what we are doing today, what the unanimous feeling of the House is today is 
a ground-breaking revolution for the future of Mauritius. Let me say straightaway that I do 
not take any credit for what is happening. People before me have clearly laid out what should 
be the plan for our energy future and I am going in the same track which was unfortunately 
stopped by the Labour Party in 2013. We have had reports, but we have had public debates, 
public  participation  leading  to  the  report  of  the  National  Energy  Commission  by  which  I 
stand guided because it is a thorough report, well worked out and from which we can obtain 
inspiration for our future action. I will be coming with amendments at the Committee Stage, 
they have been circulated, but let me straightaway say that very rarely we have heard that sort 
of level of debate as we have heard in connection with that Bill and I thank hon. Uteem for an 
extremely learned speech which he has made on energy.   

Well, we do not have great political differences on this matter, but there is one thing, 
hon.  Uteem  has  shown  that  two  lawyers  can  master  the  field  of  energy  much  better  than 
Engineers.  

(Interruptions) 

I  am,  certainly,  completely  receptive  to  the  arguments  which  I  have  heard,  from 

Engineers as well from hon. Lesjongard, but also from hon. Uteem. 

From the hon. Leader of the Opposition, we disagree on one thing, on how we should 
read the World Bank report. I am not going to go back on this because I believe I have, in the 
course of the last PNQ of the Leader of the Opposition, set out what is my thinking and my 
reading of the situation. We can agree to disagree and the future will show us the path. I do 

 

101 

not, therefore, intend to indulge into any controversy because there is no controversy. We are 
not going to go into whether the growth will be 5.7%, and if it reaches 5.7%, which is very 
likely, what will happen to our energy future.  That is a debate which is not for today. 

Four  important  points  have  emerged  in  the  course  of  the  debates.  First  of  all, 
everybody agrees that we have accumulated inexcusable delay in implementing our national 
strategy on renewables. I dare say when  I listened to hon. Mahomed, I also hear the same 
language, although he is an MP for the Labour Party and he bears the crunch of the attack 
when  we  are  talking  of  inexcusable  delay.  So,  everybody  agrees  that  there  has  been 
inordinate, unexplainable, unconscionable delay in this matter. The nation is going to pay a 
price for that delay, but we have to live with it. 

Secondly, everybody is conscious of the strategic importance of the use of local and 

renewable energy - local meaning hydro, etc and renewable means what we have. 

Thirdly, there is still a feeling that renewables are full of obstacles, that renewables 
are unattainable, are costly  and ineffective, and  I have heard it subsumed in the speech of 
hon. Uteem when he was talking. Again, that is one of the points where I cannot agree on 
this. 

Fifthly, and that is perhaps the most important one which has been touched by many 
of  those  who  have  taken  the  floor,  in  which  we  have  not  gone  through,  it  is  the  legal 
framework. The legal framework must be reviewed and it is a matter of urgency that we do it 
if we are going to go forward on our energy planning. 

Today,  Madam  Speaker,  CEB  imports  225,000  tonnes  of  heavy  fuel  oil.  In  two 
categories, but, never mind! This produces 1,000 GWh of electricity and this costs the nation 
Rs5 billion per year, that is 40% of our energy from heavy fuel oil. Then, we have coal which 
is used by the IPPs, which caters for 43% of our energy. The rest, 18% to 20% - because if 
we  say  20%,  probably,  it  does  not  adapt  -  which  is  renewable  energy,  which  includes  the 
electricity  used  by  the  sugar  industry,  3%  for  the  sugar  industry,  17%  which  goes  to  the 
nation. 

Let  me  give  a  few  facts  and  figures  because  that  has  been  the  subject  of  some 
criticisms from my hon. friends. Hydro, in fact, hydro is before 1960. Major Atchia started it 
in  Réduit,  if  you  remember.    You  do  not  remember,  of  course.  In  the  1960s,  it  became 
anything  to  use  hydro-electricity.    All  those  who  were  at  primary  school  in  my  days, 
remember  how  we  were  learning  how  to  do  electricity  from  water  which  was  something 

 

102 

stupendous for us, little kids, at that time.  Hydro, we have 3.1%, that is 90.8 GWh; bagasse 
is 15.5%, that is 456.2 GWh including 334.5 GWh which is injected into the national grid of 
the CEB.  

Then, we have landfill gas. Mare Chicose which produces 21.3 GWh, 0.7%; Solar, 
mainly Saraco, 24.4 GWh, 0.66%, and then we have the roof tops, small scale and medium 
scale, which is 4.2 GWh, 0.14%. Those are the figures for renewable energy. 

For  IPPs,  bagasse  mainly,  in  reply  to  PQ  B/391  from  my  very  good  friend,  hon. 
Jahangeer, I gave detailed figures on the production by IPPs, that is, coal and bagasse. What 
is important from these figures is that coal is now about 70% of the production for IPPs. The 
objective is to have 35%. This is the stated official objective by 2025. This is not enough, we 
must be ambitious, we must try and do better. The technology has improved vastly in the last 
two years, the cost has decreased and there is no difficulty in trying to achieve what Réunion 
is trying to do, what Seychelles is trying to do, that is, to achieve maximum efficiency on the 
energy feat. 

The plan, in facts and figures, that we want to achieve by 2025 is as follows – I am 

sorry for the figures – 

Hydro: 2.2%, that will fall down from 3.1%; 

Bagasse will be 14.5%; 

Small Scale and Medium Scale: 0.6%; 

Wind farms: 4.5%; 

Solar: 4.6%, and we see that solar will increase from 0.66% to 4.6% 

And then waste to energy which will be 8.7%, which is not being accounted for today. 

Now, let me deal with wind. There are two projects now. The first one is at Plaine des 
Roches which is going on smoothly. I understand the turbines are on their way and not only 
the turbines, but the cranes which are needed to lift these turbines are on their way as well. 
They are expected to become operational in 2016. 

Then we have Plaine Sophie, this has been delayed because of objections, permits and 
environmental issues which have been raised. We shall see what happens. Next year we will 
have  five  solar  PV  plants  generating  a  total  of  10MW  and  a  wind  farm  of  9.35MW  will 
become  operational,  that  is,  the  Plaine  des  Roches  issue  which  will  bring  the  share  of 

 

103 

renewable energy to 21%. There we are! We are progressing by next year. Then we will have 
the rooftops. I shall come later to what we are doing to encourage the rooftops because that is 
an essential part of the plan although it is not going to increase the share in the energy mix of 
Mauritius, but it will make the population prendre conscience of the importance of the sun in 
our daily life. We have  not forgotten Rodrigues in this matter.  In fact, Rodrigues is doing 
very well and we plan on inserting an additional 200KW in Rodrigues. That is not much, but 
that is progress.  

The  CEB,  on  directives  of  the  Ministry,  on  my  directives,  launched  a  demand  for 
expression of interest and when we thought - I certainly thought - we were going to receive 
25 to 30 projects - we have now received 255 expressions of interest for 339 projects because 
some of them include two or three projects! There has been some scoffing on the fact that 
once I said 1200, then 1500, then 1800. That is not the point! The point is that while CEB 
was trying to sort out what was good and what was bad and making the technical analysis, the 
figures increased  and each time that  I quoted figures,  I was very  careful to say more than 
1200,  more  than  1500.  It  is  not  entre  les  lignes,  it  was  clearly  stated  that  these  were  the 
figures.  The  final  figures  today  are  1993  MW. Nine  projects  are  not  being  considered.  Of 
course, this will be followed by a formal request for proposals. 

Perhaps it is of interest to see what sorts of projects have been manifested. Solar is the 
hit, 269 proposals for a total of 1402 MW. Of course, we can’t take all that. There is a limit 
for the intake of solar energy. But, that is an indication of the interest which people, investors 
have in renewables. Waste-to-energy, we have 17 proposals. There is one which is already in 
the making and it has already converted waste into compost, so there is an additional step to 
be done before it can produce energy. Wind, we have 17 projects. Let me say that personally, 
from the readings that I have had and the people to whom I have talked internationally and 
locally, the problem of wind turbines is the space that it requires. We can have offshore as 
hon. Uteem, indeed, some projects are offshore wind turbines, I am a bit sceptical about this. 
But, engineers are there to guide us, at least they can prove that they can be useful at times as 
well! 

For the biomass, we have eight projects for 74 MW. There is not only fatak, we have 
bamboo. There is the Mauritius Research Council’s project for algae which apparently can be 
fed with some nutrients and that is a very serious study by the MRC which is on board as 
being  a  potential  for  energy.  Of  course,  we  have  bagasse  which  falls  in  that  generic  of 
biomass. For hydro, there four further projects, they are mainly in sugar estates where there is 

 

104 

still water to be used for hydro. Then we have what is called ‘other technologies’. We have 
15 of them, one more eccentric than another like using vibrations on the motorway when cars 
go by in order to have a sort of windmill to produce energy - I don’t know, I have seriosities - 
or to use tyres to burn them into energy.  Leave  it to the engineers, at least they will have 
something to do! 

There is ocean. That is interesting, first of all, there is a legal issue because we have 
an exclusive economic zone. How far can we give the ocean on lease to investors! Let us not 
forget  that  there  is  a  precedent  and  this  is  the  fish  farms  that  we  have  all  round.  As  hon. 
Uteem , I will join him on this, I am not too sure of the legality of this leasing of the ocean 
because  we  have,  in  our  law,  a  principle  that  the  ocean  does  not  belong  to  anyone,  but  it 
belongs to the public. Lawyers will try and find a solution to this. 

Of course, we all agree that CEB’s challenge will be to upgrade its grid. On this we 
all agree. The National Energy Commission has dealt with this matter and has urged CEB - as 
I am now urging CEB - to upgrade its grid. It is not only to upgrade its grid, but to have smart 
chips technology in the meters, encourage people to use electricity at night. It is double usage 
between day and night – 200 MW to 492 or 500 MW, more than double that we use between 
the day and the night. So, to have smart metering, we need to upgrade. Of course, it costs 
money. Nothing in this world is for free. But, it will cost what it costs because we are going 
to do savings from that, we have got to be ambitious and we have got to do what we say and 
we have got to say what we are doing. 

Let  me  have  one  word,  I  think  it  is  very  unfair  to  accuse  CEB  of  being  against 
renewable energy. I think it is very unfair to try and say that they are protecting their own 
patrimoine by discouraging renewable energy. They have been historically and traditionally 
the one to transmit electricity, to produce electricity until the IPPs and they are here to stay, 
they will have to evolve with time and that will be the policy directive which I will give. 

They might be happy, they might not be happy, that is not their choice because there 

will be - and I will come to that later - legal developments in the field of electricity.  

When we come to renewable energy, many of the interveners, Madam Speaker, have 
talked of the fiscal incentive.  But before I come to that - because it is a bit linked - let us talk 
of the MID Fund, which has been the subject of comments. Well, the MID Fund is going to 
be wound up like all these funds which were created in the last ten years. The Build Mauritius 
Fund  proceeds  from  the  levy  will  subsidise  renewable  energy  and  Solar  Water  Heater 

 

105 

Schemes, which probably will become redundant as and when the small scale schemes come 
into force. There is a sum of Rs219 m. which is earmarked in the Budget to pay CEB the 
difference between its marginal cost and purchase price of electricity from renewable energy. 
So, the MID Fund is not lost forever.  It is going to be used for this.  We have all the projects 
which I have mentioned, and these payments will be made over some 15 years. 

Incentives.  First of all, we will have fiscal incentives.  We have already announced it 
in the Budget. We have section 24 of the Finance (Miscelleaneous Provisions) Act of 2015 
for Solar Investment Scheme. For the moment, it is going to be solar energy for roof tops, 
households which invest in renewable energy. That will be income tax deductible as from this 
year.  That  is  a  great  incentive  because  we  can  encourage  people,  and  people  will  be 
encouraged to put up roof top solar panels. 

One word on standby fee. I don’t think anyone has talked about it, but it is good that 
we talk about it now.  In December, last year, regulations were made for everyone who has a 
Solar  PV  unit  to  pay  a  certain  amount  to  CEB.  The  idea  was  that  CEB  must  stand  by  to 
provide electricity because solar is intermittent, and they have to pay for it. That was very 
unfair,  and  one  of  the  first  things  I  did  was  to  repeal  and  revoke  these  regulations  and  to 
revoke the standby fee. 

That is for small scale, but for medium scale we have the big supermarkets; Super U, 
Bagatelle.  They are not to be compared with people like you and me, Madam Speaker. They 
are making a profit.  What we have done for the moment is to try and insert an ad hoc new 
tariff for a capacity greater than 50 kilowatts. We will evolve in time. I probably will put in 
place a committee to hear representations at the level of the Ministry because these people are 
complaining that CEB is asking took much money from them.  So, we will put in place a 
committee and we will try to sort it out, because we don’t want to discourage any of these 
medium scale generation schemes. 

With  regard  to  net  metering,  hon.  Lesjongard  has  talked  about  it,  as  well  as  hon. 
Uteem, I believe. The issue is simple.  When you have that Solar PV on your roof top, you 
use  electricity  and  you  send  the  surplus  to the  grid.    But,  sometimes, there  is  no  sun  and, 
therefore, CEB must chip in. What will happen is that every month there will be an account 
kept and probably every six months or every year the ‘prosumer’ - that is the term which is 
used, that is, the consumer who is also a producer - will receive the balance in cash. 

106 

 
It is anticipated that, as in all countries, people will produce more electricity that they 
consume from the grid. We have cyclones, we have the night time.  This will be eliminated - 
and I will talk later on this - by the evolution in battery technology, which enables us to store 
electricity when it is produced by the solar panel. 

The other objection which has been raised by many of us - and I share these qualms - 
is the cost of renewable energy.  First of all, prices are  going down.  I have discussed with 
ARENA.  ARENA has been analysing renewable energy cost and points out that the levelised 
cost of electricity of Solar PV has been reduced by 50% between 2010 and 2014.  Solar PV 
module prices in 2014 were around 75% lower than at the end of 2009.  China and Malaysia 
are now on the market and they brought the prices tumbling down. We are perhaps a little bit 
traumatised by the example of Sarako. Sarako is the most expensive one.  It is Rs6.06 per 
kilowatt hour, but we all know this was a sweetheart price – well, sweetheart, big heart ... 

(Interruptions) 

price.  We all know the circumstances, and there is no need to go back on this. I have got the 
occasion to speak to the promoters about this. I think that it is extremely unfair on the State of 
Mauritius, on the population, that such a high price is being charged. But, now, we have the 
market price, because in the expression of interest we have seen what prices are being quoted.  

For solar, minimum Rs3.50 and it goes up to Rs9; the average is about Rs4. So, this is the 
market.  This is what has appeared in the expressions of interest, and some of the big firms 
which have quoted - I am not going to give the names because it is unfair - are quoting very 

good prices for solar energy, especially for biomass. I shall come to that later on. 

So,  let  us  be  guided  by  what  the  market  tells  us.  Sarako  is  different.  Sarako  was 

hastily concluded, and there will be no Sarako for so long as I am Minister of Energy. 

 (Interruptions) 

Of course, justified comments were made on the fact that the sun does not shine all day and 
that there are cyclones, there are clouds. I have looked at some of the figures - I don’t have 
them  in  my  mind  -  for  Sarako  because  every  time  there  is  a  cloud  that  passes  by,  it  goes 
down, it is intermittent and CEB has got to chip in in order to stabilise the grid. 

Twenty years ago, it was unthinkable to try and bring a solution to this. Today, we 
have battery storage. I comment the reading of page 117. I won’t waste the time of the House 
by  quoting  extensively  what  the  National  Energy  Commission  says  about  battery  storage.  
But that was 2013!  Six months ago, Tesla in the United States invented low cost batteries. 

 

107 

Extremely  powerful!  Of  course,  China  is  taking  the  lead,  and  we  will  soon  have  batteries 
which will be able to store electricity. This is what people like ARENA tell me, people like 
Agence Française de Développement tell me. I am not talking of experts who may or may not 
be influenced by certain local conditions. I have met the World Bank this afternoon at 1.30 
during our lunchtime. The World Bank is encouraging  us forward and  I shall come to the 
reasons later. We have submitted an application for a grant of some USD 13 m. - when I say 
‘we’, I mean CEB - from the Green Climate Fund.  

Now, let me come to therm power. That is easier because solar has got the problem 
which I have mentioned. Therm power, that is, biomass, bagasse, waste to energy, etc., algae, 
‘fatak’,  bamboos.  Let  me  say  one  word  about  ‘fatak’.    Yes,  a  lot  of  land  is  required  with 
‘fatak’, but we have the possibility of South-South cooperation with Madagascar where the 
‘fatak’  will  be  planted  there  and  pelletized  to  bring  over  to  Mauritius  in  order  to  produce 
electricity if the project goes forward. Apparently, there is one project where it says that we 
will be able to have sufficient land to for the plantation of ‘fatak’; we will see. 

Let me deal with bagasse.  There has been a drop of 200,000 tonnes in the last ten 
years. The area of land under sugarcane cultivation has dropped by 18,000 hectares. Let me 
quote what the National Energy Commission said at page 112 - 

“Our  country  over  the  past  decade  has  lost  18,128  hectares  of  cultivated 
sugarcane land. Overall, in 2012, bagasse helped the country avoid Rs954 m. 
of  coal  imports.  481.7 GWh  of  electricity  were  produced  from  bagasse,  i.e. 
17.2%  of  total  electricity  generation.  However,  ten  years  before,  in  2002, 
bagasse represented 23.2%. It is crucial to reverse the decline of bagasse in 
electricity generation.” 

But, how do we do it? 

“Greater  electricity  generation  from  bagasse  could  be  achieved  through  the 
modernisation of the existing coal-bagasse plants and the introduction of new 
cane varieties with higher energy content.”  

This is why some people don’t know what they are talking about when they say: “Ah, Alteo, 
there has not been a tender. It is an unsolicited bid.” They have a machine on their land, they 
have  reached  the  end  of  their  life.  What  do  you  want  us  to  do,  tell  them:  “Close  your 
machines;  send  them  to  wherever  in  Africa.”  or  else  we  tell  them  “Modernise  your 
technology, use other products, try and diminish coal and then, we shall go forward.” And 

 

108 

that  is  what  the  National  Energy  Commission  recommends,  and  etc.  This  is  where  small 
planters come in. If we are going to plant high-fibre cane, if we are going to plant ‘fatak’, 
where  are  we  going  to  get  the  land,  other  than  in  partnership  with  small  planters?  These 
people are dying; their sugarcane fields are worth nothing today. Their sugar is negligible, 
their  bagasse  even  worse.  Now  they  have  got  a  future  ahead  of  them.  They  will  go  into 
partnership with renewable energy, venture capitalist, with local private sector and they will 
earn their money either by the work or by producing, by providing their land as capital. Their 
land will increase in value. The hon. Minister Agro-Industry and Food Security is fully on 
board on that. He is currently examining the Landell Mills Report and one point he has made 
clear,  it  is  that  small  planters  must  be  adequately  remunerated  for  the  bagasse  which  they 
produce  and  the  Ministry,  the  Government  will  be  behind  him  in  order  to  make  sure  that 
small planters get their due and are not treated unfairly. Of course, we need consensus. Hon. 
Minister Seeruttun is a man of consensus. 

(Interruptions) 

We have just received a copy of the Parliamentarian where we have read his article and we 
see what sort of person he is. I have no problem that contrary to his predecessors he will, in 
his  own  quiet  way,  be  able  to  work  out  a  consensus  so  that  the  producers,  the  planters, 
everybody gets a fair share of that produce. 

Now, let me come to another aspect, the reasons for renewable energy. First of all, 
employment  priority.    The  rush  into  renewable  energy,  this  is  going  to  be  creation  of 
employment not only for young, high-tech young men but also for low skilled people who 
will need to be working on these solar PV techniques.  

Secondly, financial. Right now, there is a rush for investment in the field of renewable 
energy. The World Bank was telling me just a few hours ago that the financial clean-up that 
we have done in Mauritius since January is of a nature to encourage investments in the short-
term and surely in the energy factor. The international capital funds are just waiting for the 
appropriate structures to come in on the market. Why? First of all, because in Mauritius they 
know their investment is secure. We have got a good history on that. And then, they will have 
power purchase agreements which will guarantee them a return on their capital according to 
the agreed tariffs and the more technology improves, the greater their profitability will be. 
This is why today some of them can quote Rs3.50 and not Rs6.60.  

109 

 
The third reason - I don’t need to repeat what hon. Uteem had to say -  is COP21, it is 
in December. What is our problem? Our problem is that we never polluted anyone. We are 
the victims in this matter, but we are going to be influenced by climate change, we are going 
to suffer tidal changes, we are going to suffer the two-degree increase in temperature and if 
we don’t take part in COP21, we are doomed and that is where I come to SIDS.  

Hon. Mahomed, rightly so, quoted his participation in the Samoa SIDS Conference.  
But what happened? In 2004, Mauritius took the lead.  I remember the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition and the hon. Prime Minister did everything  they could to make SIDS a success. 
In 2003, he became Prime Minister and finally, in 2004, there was that immensely successful 
SIDS Conference and then, what happened? Just in order to show that ‘I am right, I am better 
than  the  other  one’,  they  killed  our  leadership  in  SIDS!  Other  island  States  took  the  lead 
because we left a vacuum just because of cheap, not even cheap politics, cheap personality 
conflicts.  

That is all that there was.  People were rascals.  They are rascals to have done what 

they did.  Today, I hear… 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t use this word! 

Mr Collendavelloo:  No, they! They, Madam Speaker.! 

(Interruptions) 

Not hon. Members of this House!  No, hon. Members of this House are not rascals!  

(Interruptions) 

Outside! To have done what they did.  I am sorry, but I really boiled over when I read about 
what has been done.  They made a brave effort at Samoa.  Of course, they did everything they 
could, but if your Head of Government is not there, what do you hope to obtain and today, 
the Prime Minister, yesterday had to try and reverse the change at the United Nations and I 
hope it is going to get the consensus around in this House to make Mauritius take the lead. 

(Interruptions) 

Because it is a patriotic duty of one and all.  Just as in 2004, today we need to take the lead.  
We need to participate in AOSIS.  We need participate and we need to get the United Nations 
to recognise, to have all the agencies recognise SIDS as a unit of its own, as a group of its 
own.  Why? Because at COP 21, if we don’t go forward as a unified force, if the small islands 
do not redo what they did in 2004, and apart from Trinidad and Tobago, perhaps it is only 

 

110 

Mauritius that can do this; unify the small islands, make a common force because make no 
mistake,  the  big  countries  in  Africa  will  not  make  us  any  gift.    They  will  try  and  get  the 
biggest slice of the cake.  Already now, I will quote later on, what is happening in Ghana, in 
Rwanda,  in  Zimbabwe;  how  they  are  getting  the  slice  of  the  cake  and  we  are  being  left 
abandoned because the Government of the day between 2005 and 2014 left us, abandoned us.  
He did not go to Samoa because he had to go to London.  

That is what was happening.   

(Interruptions) 

Now, let me just quote a few examples.  In 2012, the United Nations launched the 
‘Sustainable  Environment  For  All’  and  in  Africa,  the  platform  is  managed  by  the  African 
Development Bank.  Already other big African countries are using that money; we know we 
have not done anything with this.  We are going to go for it now.  Kenya, Tanzania, Ghana, 
Rwanda  are  already  taking  advantage  of  this  and  for  this  year  RDC,  Angola,  Zimbabwe, 
Malawi  and  Zambia  are  getting  on  the  starting  blocks.    The  Danish  and  the  United  States 
Government are putting huge amounts of money in order to encourage renewable energy in 
Africa because they know it is a safe return on their investments.  World Bank, they have 
launched, since this year, the Scaling Solar Initiative.  The sun is being used as a raw material 
and the World Bank has told us that they will help us in defining the scale of our needs and 
will provide us technical assistance to draft the tender documents.   

The  Commonwealth  Development  Corporation,  Norfund,  a  Norwegian  Investment 
Fund, they have highlighted to put money everywhere in Africa and they have taken over a 
company  called  Globalec  Africa  and  they  will  build  up  5,000  MW  of  electricity.    Masdar 
Power from Abu Dhabi, they have just signed a contract for installing 7 solar farms for a total 
of 12 MW in Mauritania.  I have been to Abu Dhabi, I have discussed with ARENA.  They 
are going to help us and they are going to help us to get the investments.  Total is investing 
20 MW solar energy in Ghana.  Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, lastly let us talk of South Africa.  
ESKOM has failed.  It is too late.  They have lagged in their maintenance.  They have not 
renewed  their  capacity.    They  have  just  bangoler  the  money  and  now,  today,  they  are 
shedding load between 4 o’clock and, I think, 10 o’clock at night.  They have got to cut out 
electricity.    So,  what  do  they  do,  they  turn  to  renewable  energy  because  upgrading  their 
network will be too costly.  But they are also turning to LNG.  But especially, they have got 

 

111 

one big advantage, it is that they have got Mozambique and they are no longer at war with 
Mozambique.  So, that is going to help them probably sort out their situation.   

I  am  going  to  Reunion  Island  next  month  because  I  want  to  enter  into  a  contract 
between France, Reunion and Mauritius for technical assistance.  They are way ahead of us.  
We can benefit from that technical assistance at very low cost with EDF Reunion.  I hope it 
works.  Following the visit of the Minister of Finance in Reunion, there has been an accord-
cadre.  I am going to try and use one paragraph – well, one slice – of this accord-cadre in 
order to try and get the technical assistance from Reunion.  What do we need to do now?  I 
am sorry if I have taken more time than expected. 

First of all, we have got to restructure our energy sector.  CEB must be in competition 
and cannot continue to reign over that sector. So, without necessarily privatising the sector - 
although it is still an option – we have to separate production by CEB from other matters.  
Distributions,  marketing,  sales  and  transmission,  all  these  must,  in  our  philosophy,  be 
separate.  The State will be there in a supervisory and regulatory role with URA becoming 
operational  very  soon,  as  soon  as  we  can  earmark  the  CEO.    This  is  what  Egypt  did  in 
February.  In February, Egypt did exactly what I am saying in order to separate all this and 
you know what happened?  The United States, which has stopped providing arms to Egypt, 
immediately rushed with OPIC to come with huge amounts of money to invest in the energy 
sector.  The  Overseas  Private  Investment  Corporation  now  is  coming  all over  Africa.    It  is 
telling us – “Update your legal environment and I will help you in the investment sector”.  

In Mauritius, we are working with the African Development Bank now on a master 
plan for renewable energy because we accept that we are not the navel of the world and that 
we need technical assistance on this.   

Let me come to gas turbines before I come to LNG.  Briefly, ‘gas turbine’ is not a 
dirty  word.    Gas  turbines,  it’s  true  that  we  are  traumatised  by  Nicolay,  but  if  we  do  it 
carefully as CEB is planning to do it with the combined cycle gas turbines, we will use diesel 
oil  and  then,  for  the  future,  if  LNG  becomes  a  reality  –  I  say,  “well,  if  LNG  becomes  a 
reality”  –  and  I  will  say  a  few  words  on  that  in  a  few  moments,  we  will  be  able  to  do 
something successful on this.   

I have heard the Leader of the Opposition - and that has become a matter, the only 
matter  of  controvery,  real  matter  of  controvesy  -  forcefully  urged  that  fresh  international 
tenders for open technology should be launched. I think it is good that we quote his speech – 

112 

 
“I have said that I don’t know how many times over the few  years.  I said: 
“let’s call an international tender for offers for 50/100MW, any state-of-the-
art  technology,  including  coal,  coal-bagasse,  heavy  oil  like  diesel  oil, 
Liquefied Natural Gas.” 

In a subsequent press conference, I noted that he watered down his speech when he talked of 
coal. Fair enough! But the fact is that this was clearly okay about 10 years, but, today, we 
cannot do this. Today, if we have an open tender as Mr Hébrard has said. He is being blamed 
for having said that. As he has said: “You open a tender for all technologies” as the Leader of 
the Opposition said himself, well, we will have coal because coal is the cheapest. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, we do not have to go on the cheapest and then people will accuse me of having taken 
commissions from people.  I  am not mad! Not  yet!  I  agree he has not been listened to, 10 
years ago it should have been done. I agree with this, but today, we have moved in times. I 
understand that this was done apparently through an expression of interest – I say apparently, 
because I have not seen evidence of that, but I have been told that this was done, but was not 
conclusive. 

The  World  Bank  -  on  which  my  hon.  friend  Uteem  relies  so  much  -  did  make 
recommendation to address the power generation situation. But did it consider the option of 
open tenders? Again, we shall see how each one reads the report. I do not see it in the report. 

The next issue is that with COP21, the world has changed and we cannot go for coal 
except if we are sure that the zero CO2 emissions can be satisfied. Yes, I mentioned it! But it 
is horribly expensive to sequestrate CO2 so that it does not go into the air. So, technically, 
theoretically, it is possible, but I do not think we can do it in Mauritius. Therefore, are we 
going  to  pollute  the  air  and  lose  our  credit  from  the  Green  Economic  Fund,  lose  all  this 
money  because  we  are  not  complying?  No,  I  do  not  think  it  is  safe  that  we  do  it.  Carbon 
capture options, altough possible, are too way out of this world to be considered. 

I now come to Liquefied Natural Gas which will be the last part of my speech. A lot 
has been said about it. The first time that this cropped up was – I do not know which one 
comes before which, but I know that the Parsons Report - which I have laid on the Table of 
the  Assembly  -  and  the  National  Energy  Commission,  both  said  that  we  should  consider. 
They  have  not  made  recommendation  and  we  are  not  going  to  jump  into  a  sea  of  gas  by 

 

113 

saying this is the panacea to North Hills. I agree with all the comments that have been made 
on energy, but does that stop us from exploring. 

We are doing a pre-feasibility study, a committee has been set up, we shall see what 
happens, but we cannot just prejudge issues, we have got to stop this habit of just prejudging 
issues without examining what is the real issue in controversy. Of course, it is expensive. Of 
course,  we  have  got  to  transport  it.  We  do  not  need  pipes  to  bring  to  Fort  William  which 
probably is the site where it could be done, because barges can do the job very well, but it is 
expensive.  But  then,  it  is  the  economies  of  scale.  If  we  are  going  to  take  LNG  only  for 
electricity, forget about it, but if we are going to use CNG for transport, for all lorries and all 
buses, first of all, the credit that we get from the Green Climate Fund. Secondly, the clean air. 
Thirdly, the cost effectiveness. Therefore, why not? 

There is a third aspect which everybody forgets. Right now, there are 44 ships under 
construction which are going to use LNG and, probably, in the next five years, we will. Why? 
Because the big shipping companies want to obtain carbon credit. It is a question of money. 
Because of this, they are converting the new ships in the shipyard of Norway, the new ships 
are going out with LNG. But you see what their problem is? There is no bunkering. 33,000 
ships  sail  through  the  Indian  Ocean,  4,000  stop  in  Port  Louis,  but  if  we  are  bunkering  on 
LNG, this is the feasibility study which we will have to do. I do not profess to know all. This 
Government,  there  is  one  thing  about  it,  there  is  the  modesty  of  its  approach,  because  we 
need to tread carefully before we do things, we do not blurt out our feelings, our expressions, 
but when we read everybody, when we listen to everybody, when I read the National Energy 
Commission, should I be so mad as to shelve the Manraj Report, as the old Government did? 

(Interruptions) 

Last point, of course! LNG is not renewable energy, why put it in renewable energy! Why 
not? What is the purpose of that futile debate? We say there is going to be a Commission: “In 
addition to renewable energy, please, advise us also on LNG.” For a simple reason, I am not 
going to set up a costly agency to advise on one matter which, probably, is going to be a non-
starter at the end of the day. So, the MARENA will be headed by competent people who will 
be  able  to  offer  us  independent  advice  on  the  matter.  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  CCGT 
technology  is  associated  with  medium  speed  diesel  engines  and  these  are  the  best 
technologies as I stand advised for the moment. 

114 

 
I  have  not  said  enough  of  energy  efficiency.  It  has  been  mentioned.  I  totally  agree 
with  all  the  interveners  who  have  mentioned  energy  efficiency.  Energy  efficiency  is 
important in Mauritius. I did mention I think that the CWA with EEMO from my Ministry is 
going to try and save 15% of energy. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I must say a word about the tariffs. Well, welcome, 
first of all, that hon. Mahomed raised the matter in the course of the PNQ. It is welcome, but 
it is extremely surprising. What the MMM/MSM Government did, perhaps the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition forgets, was to introduce a tariff - 110 (a) where if you consume between 1 to 
70  units  you  get  a  30%  reduction  on  your  bill.  There  were  30,000  consumers  when  that 
scheme started. They were able to pay less than the ordinary consumers. Now, they killed that 
scheme. You know ‘they’, I can’t use the term! Alright, ‘they’! This is parliamentary! Zott!  

(Interruptions) 

They killed the scheme. It is now reduced to 7000! CEB is going to reintroduce the 110 (a) 
Scheme… 

(Interruptions) 

At the next Board meeting, CEB is going to say that we will extend it and now the estimates 
of 70,000 poor consumers who are going to benefit from the scheme… 

(Interruptions) 

After I have said all this, I want to hear people who say that I do not understand what I am 
talking about! 

(Interruptions) 

I think I have to say something now about the Bill that I commend the Bill to the House. Let 
me do over the formality stages. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

115 

 

THE MAURITIUS RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY BILL 

(NO. XI OF 2015) 

Clauses 1- 6 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7 (The Board) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stands part of the Bill.” 

Mr Collendavelloo: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in 

clause 7 –  

“(i)  

in subclause (1) –  

(A) 

(B) 

in  paragraph  (h),  by  deleting  the  words  “energy;”  and  
replacing them by the words “energy, to be  appointed by the 
Minister;”; 
by adding the following new paragraph, the full stop at the end 
of paragraph (i) being deleted and replaced by a semicolon –  
(j) 
2 members of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, to be 
appointed by the Chairperson of the Rodrigues Regional 
Assembly. 

(ii) 

in subclause (2), by deleting the words “and (g)” and replacing them by the 
words “, (g) and (h)”;” 

Amendments agreed to. 
Clause 7, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clauses 8 – 13 ordered to stand part of the Bill 
Clause 14 (Estimates) 
Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  move  for  the  following  amendment  in 

clause 14 (1)-  

“by deleting the words “30 September” and replacing them by the words “31 
March”. 

Amendment agreed to. 
Clause 14, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clauses 15 – 22 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 
The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

116 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency Bill (No. XI 

of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

SELECT COMMITTEE ON LIVE BROADCASTING  

OF PROCEEDINGS - REPORT 

Madam  Speaker:  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Chairperson  of  the  Select 
Committee on the Live Broadcasting of the proceedings of the House and matters ancillary 
thereto, hon. Bodha has this afternoon, pursuant to Standing Order 70 (14) (a) of the Standing 
Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly,  submitted  to  me  the  report  of  the  Select 
Committee. The report is being tabled today. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House for Tuesday 06 October 2015 at 
11.30 a.m. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

 

(7.05 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

 

117 

CANAL ANGLAIS, VALLÉE PITOT – WASTE COLLECTION, CLEANING 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  raise  a  matter  which  concerns  the  hon.  Minister  for 
Local  Authorities  and  that  relates  to  the  collection  of  waste  and  cleaning  of  canals  in  the 
region of Vallée Pitot, in particular an area called Canal Anglais which has not been cleaned 
for several weeks and if the hon. Minister can speak to the people responsible at the level of 
the Municipal Council of Port Louis to have regular cleaning of that area.  

Thank you. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, I will look 

into it.  

 

ROCHE BOIS – ILLEGAL MOTORCYCLE RALLY 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker,  tonight  I  shall  raise  a  matter  of  illegal  rally  which  is 
taking place in my Constituency and I am addressing this issue to the Ag. Prime Minister, the 
fresh one!  

(Interruptions) 

It is your day today! Madam Speaker, there is illegal motorcycle rally which is held 
every Saturday very late at night between the Cocoterie and Roche Bois Roundabout. This 
rally, as I said earlier, is taking place very late at night and the main reason for this rally is 
illegal  gambling.  There  is  illegal  gambling  taking  place  there.  There  have  been  mini  riots 
there  between  the  participants  and  the  local  inhabitants  of  Roche  Bois.    Many  inhabitants 
have been to Police station, but up to now the Police has not taken a serious and severe action 
against the illegal rally there. Apart from that, it is causing great nuisance and discomfort to 
the people there. There have been cases where people have thrown rocks on the motorway. 
So, therefore, I am asking the Ag. Prime Minister to direct the Commissioner of Police to 
make a special investigation and to be there on Saturday evening so that this can be stopped 
and prevent further incidents. Thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time ... 

 

118 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I am going to answer on behalf of my colleague.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! 

Mr Soodhun: This is not the first time that my colleague has raised this issue in this 
House, I am sure he is going to agree with me and tomorrow I have a first meeting with the 
Commissioner of Police. It is the first issue I am going to take. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I think it is the third time today that I have heard 
phones ringing in this House. I wish to remind all Members that they have to switch off their 
mobile phones when coming to Parliament.  

Thank you. 

 

ROADS  - POLICE RIDERS  - NIGHT PATROL 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): I will join 
my hon. friend to ask the Ag. hon. Prime Minister - I don’t know which one – with regard to 
the fatal accident. All the fatal accidents, all the hit and run cases have occurred during the 
night recently, most of them. I have been informed by the Police that the riders have just been 
bought for Rs22 m. and we have invested to have the Police Officers to ride patrol on the 
road, but they only work during the day. They have only two shifts. There is no rider at night 
and I, personally, have witnessed this. On Saturday, I have been driving around for religious 
purposes and I have not seen any rider. So, can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to see to it 
that these riders are present at night as it is the most important part of the day that we need 
them, at night. There is no point for them to be on the roads, on the motorway, as they cause 
more obstacle during the day, especially at peak hours. So, they should ride at night and ride 
on the motorway to prevent all these illegal rallies and make sure that there is no hit and run. 
So, can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister convey the message. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister  (Mr  X.  Duval):  Madam  Speaker,  we  agree  fully  on  this 
issue.  In fact, the riders are also working at night, I have witnessed it myself, but when I 
spoke to the Commissioner of Police, I did raise the issue with him of increasing the Police 
presence, at all times, that is, on a 24-hour basis and I think this is going to be done.  It is 

 

119 

being  done  obviously,  the  weekend  you  have  more  and  in  the  week  days  also,  but  we 
understand fully the need to increase Police presence at night.  

 

SYRIA – REFUGEES  

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Madam  Speaker,  I 
would like to raise an issue which has been high on the agenda on the  international plane 
recently. The issue is still attracting a lot of attention all over the world. I am referring to the 
human tragedy and the refugee crisis taking place in Syria. The objective of this intervention 
is  to  obtain  the  reaction  of  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Government  on  this  tragic 
issue.  

Madam Speaker, the wave of the Syrian refugees continues unabated and the flow of 
refugees constitutes perhaps the most significant human migration since the Second World 
War. Millions of Syrians are reported to have been displaced. 50% of Syrian families have 
left their homes, 4 millions have already taken refuge in neighbouring States while millions 
have  been  migrating  to  European  countries  in  very  traumatising  circumstances.  More  than 
250 people are reported to have died already in their quest for a safer haven. We are aware of 
the  solidarity  unleashed  at  the  international  level.  The  European  plan  to  deal  with  the 
refugees, other more distant States like Canada and US have also offered the support as part 
of  the  international  effort  in  this  burden  sharing  process.  The  Pope  François  has  himself 
launched a moving and poignant appeal to the European Catholics to accept the refugees. The 
purpose  of  my  intervention  is  not  to  embarrass  Government  as  to  whether  Government 
favours any diplomatic solution to this very complex Syrian conflict. We would, of course, be 
interested to know what is the stand of Government on this matter, but principally, I wish to 
know  of  Government  stand  on  a  purely  humanitarian  basis,  that  is,  on  the  refugee  crisis 
perspective.  It  is  being  reported  that  our  Government  has  received  requests  from  Syrian 
refugees for help and support and the right to have access in our territory. I would like to 
know whether Government has taken any decision to symbolically open its arms to some of 
these families.  

Nous sommes, Madame la présidente, nous-mêmes, un peuple d’immigrés, une nation 
imbue de grande valeur humanitaire et prêts à exprimer et à témoigner de notre générosité et 
solidarité  aux  peuples  opprimés.  I  would,  therefore,  like  to  have  a  reaction  from  the  hon. 
Minister of Foreign Affairs.  

120 

 
I have done, 

 Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr  E.  Sinatambou):  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  sad  issue  indeed,  but  also  a  very 
complex one. However, I can inform the House that we have received no request from any 
Syrian at all, but the matter needs to be looked into very seriously and I shall report to the 
House later on. Thank you. 

 

LOWER VALE & FOND DU SAC – DRAIN WORKS 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for  Grand’ Baie and Poudre D’or): Thank 
you Madam Speaker. Well this is a request for the Road Development Authority through the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, actually funds have been earmarked for 
drain and handrailing works in Lower Vale and the second project for drain works at Branch 
Road in Fond Du Sac. I would request the hon. Minister for Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport  to  please  look  into  the  possibility  of  accelerating  the  works  through  the  RDA. 
Thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 

Madam Speaker, I will certainly look into the matter. 

 

CHEBEL – TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente, ma requête, ce soir, s’adresse à l’honorable ministre des Infrastructure Publiques 
et cela concerne la circulation à Chebel. En début d’année des feux de signalisation ont été 
installés à l’entrée de Chebel Branch Road afin de rendre plus fluide la circulation dans cette 
région. Mais, malheureusement les véhicules qui sortent de Chebel et qui tournent à gauche 
pour  aller  vers  Port  Louis  ont  tendance  à  accélérer  et  dès  qu’ils  accélèrent  et  à  quelques 
mètres des feux à l’entrée de Chebel, il y a un passage pour piétons avec des feux justement 
qui permettent aux piétons de traverser la route. Je sais c’est un peu compliqué, il faudrait 
peut-être déléguer des officiers à venir voir sur place mais j’ai préféré quand même soulever 
le problème de façon à ce que le ministre soit au courant. Donc, ce qui fait que les véhicules 
ont  tendance  à  accélérer.  Certains  oublient  qu’il  y  a  un  passage  pour  piétons,  d’autres 

 

121 

s’arrêtent quand il ne faut pas, d’autres continuent leur route alors qu’il faut s’arrêter pour 
permettre aux piétons de traverser. D’un côté de la route, il n’y a pas de feux qui indiquent 
aux véhicules qu’ils peuvent continuer vers Port Louis, par contre, à droite pour les véhicules 
qui remontent vers Rose Hill, il y a des feux qui indiquent. Donc, il y a une confusion et je 
suis  persuadé  que  les  honorables  députés  de  la  circonscription  dont  l’honorable  Bhagwan 
ainsi  que  nos  amis  de  la  majorité  ont  dû  constater  ce  problème.  Ce  qui  fait  qu’il  faudrait 
déléguer rapidement des officiers du ministère du MPI et venir voir sur place aux heures de 
pointe  principalement  toute  la  confusion  qui  y  règne  et  cela  afin  d’éviter  qu’il  y  ait  un 
accident  grave.  On  fera  tout,  bien  sûr,  pour  éviter  ce  problème.    Donc,  je  compte  sur 
l’honorable ministre. 

Merci. 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madame la présidente, nous allons certainement organiser une visite sur place et trouver les 
solutions qui s’imposent. 

At 7.16 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 06 October 2015 

at 11.30 a.m 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

BEAU BASSIN & PETITE RIVIÈRE – PROJECTS EARMARKED  

(No.  B/577)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No. 20, Beau 
Bassin and Petite Rivière, he will give a list of the projects earmarked for implementation 
thereat by the National Development Unit during the financial year 2015-2016. 

Reply: I am tabling a list of future projects for Constituency No. 20, Beau Bassin and 
Petite  Rivière,  which  has  been  approved  for  implementation  by  the  National  Development 
Unit during Financial Year 2015-2016. 

In addition, new projects will also be considered under the forthcoming Framework 

Agreement for the construction and upgrading of roads and associated works. 

 

 

122 

DRUGS RELATED OFFENCES  - DETAINEES  

(No. B/578) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to drugs, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of persons presently 
serving sentence/on remand/being detained for a drug related offence. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that as at 28 September 2015, 
451  detainees  were  serving  sentence  and  168  others  were  on  remand,  for  drugs  related 
offences.    Moreover,  as  at  same  date  15  persons  were  being  detained  in  Police  cells  or 
detention centres for such offences. 

 

PLASTIC BAGS - BAN 

(No. B/602)  Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in 
regard to the use of plastic bags in mainland Mauritius, he will state where matters stand as to 
the proposed introduction of regulations for the ban thereof.  

Reply: The Environment Protection (Banning of plastic bags) Regulations 2015, with 
regard to the use of plastic bags in the mainland Mauritius, have already been promulgated on 
06 August 2015, and will be effective as from 01 January 2016.   

The Regulations shall not apply to the island of Rodrigues. However, consequential 
amendment  to  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  (Prohibition  of  use  of  Plastic  Bags) 
Regulations 2014, will have to be brought in view of the reference made to the Environment 
Protection (Plastic Carry Bags) Regulations, 2004. To this effect, my Ministry has already 
issued a letter to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on 19 August 2015 for necessary action. 

 

SUNNEE SURTEE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL - FAMILY FUN DAY 

(No. B/603) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Family Fun Day 
held on the football ground of the Sunnee Surtee Government School, on 13 September 2015, 

 

123 

he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis, 
information as to if it was involved in the organisation thereof and, if so, obtain therefrom – 

(a)  

(b)  

a breakdown of the expenses incurred in relation thereto, and  

the names of the other parties who jointly organized the said event.  

(Withdrawn) 

 

HAJJ 2015 – VISA ALLOCATION 

(No. B/604) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to  the  five  hundred  additional  visas  allocated  to  Mauritian  nationals  for  the  Hajj  2015,  he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Islamic Cultural Centre, information as to –  

(a)  

the official designated point of collection thereof and;  

(b)   who  was  mandated  for  the  collection  thereof,  indicating  why  his  return  to 
Mauritius after collecting same was delayed, further indicating if this incident;  

(i)  

resulted  in  many  persons  being  unable  to  leave  for  Hajj  and,  if  so, 
indicate,  the  number  thereof  who  finally  obtained  a  visa  and  left  for 
Hajj, and  

(ii)  

is  likely  to  affect  the  future  attribution  of  hajj  visas  to  Mauritian 
nationals. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

FLEET MASTER LTD – FINANCIAL & STAFFING SITUATIONS 

(No. B/605) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  Fleet  Master  Ltd.,  a 
subsidiary of Iframac Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the 
financial and staffing situations thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 
LE MORNE VILLAGE & LA PRAIRIE PUBLIC BEACH - EROSION 

124 

(No. B/606) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to the coastal region between Le Morne Village and the La Prairie public 
beach, he will state the measures, if any, that have been taken to prevent the erosion thereof 
and the risk of the coastal road thereat collapsing. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

UNIVERSITY OF MAURITIUS – BUDGET 

(No. B/607) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Science 
Research whether, in regard to the University of Mauritius, she will state the measures that 
Government  proposes  to  take  to  ease  out  the  financial  situation  thereof  with  a  view  to 
ensuring  the  smooth  running  of  the  courses  being  run  thereat  and  the  quality  of  education 
being provided thereat. 

Reply:  The  mission  of  the  University  of  Mauritius  is  to  serve  a  social  mandate  in 
providing  tertiary  education  to  both  develop  the  intellectual  capital  and  build  capacity  at 
national level. Fulfilling that mandate comes with a cost. 

The  budget  of  the  University  of  Mauritius  is  currently  financed  through  both 
Government grant and income generated by the University itself. This includes income from 
student fees as well as funds generated by research commissioned by business and industry 
both locally and internationally. 

Students following full-time undergraduate programmes pay only general fees while 
other students, that is, part-time undergraduate  and postgraduate students pay both  general 
and tuition fees. 

Currently, the campus has a student population of 11,800, out of which 8,700 (74%) 

fall into the category of full-time undergraduate students. 

For the year 2015-2016, the estimated budget of the University is Rs925.42 m. to be 
financed by the Government grant of Rs504 m. and its own income of Rs365.78 m. The own 
income generated by the University would include student fees, consultancy, donations and 

 

125 

rental of its premises. This leaves it with a projected deficit of approximately Rs55.64 m. for 
the year 2015-2016. 

This budget is currently under close scrutiny by the Tertiary Education Commission 
and my Ministry. The University of Mauritius has already been requested to adopt efficiency 
measures so as to reduce expenditure and also to ensure judicious use of existing resources. 

In this context, an Efficiency Measures Committee has been set up at the University 
to look into such issues as overtime, teaching hours, calendar week for semester, tapping into 
the  alumni  network  as  part  of  fund  generating  strategy,  development  of  online  modules, 
amongst others. 

Moreover, the UoM Council has appointed an independent external auditor to review 
the utilisation of financial, human and physical resources and to make recommendations for 
improved efficiency. The exercise of the independent external auditor is currently ongoing 
and is expected to be completed in 2 months’ time. 

In addition, my Ministry is working on measures to harmonise operations at the level 
of all public institutions. Public universities will thus be encouraged to work collaboratively 
and in a complementary manner to further optimise the use of resources. 

I  must  point  out  that  the  commitment  of  the  University  to  sustain  quality  in 

programme delivery and research is deeply embedded in its Strategic Plan of 2015-2020. 

Moreover,  as  announced  in  the  Budget  Speech,  a  more  transparent  and  efficient 

financing model based on performance of publicly funded TEIs will be introduced. 

I wish to reassure the House that, alongside the measures just enunciated above, no 
compromise will be made on the quality of education dispensed by the University, whether it 
is at the level of teaching or research excellence. 

 

JUVENILE COURT – SETTING UP 

(No. B/608) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 

asked the Attorney-General whether, in regard to the juveniles, he will state –  

(a) where matters stand as to the proposed setting up of a Juvenile Court, and 

(b) the actions that are being taken for the protection thereof, either as accused or as 

witnesses. 

 
Reply: As regards part (a), the Government Programme 2015-2019 provides – 

126 

(a) 

(b) 

at  paragraph  141  that  –  a  new  legal  framework  will  be  developed  for  the 
detention and management of juveniles in custody. 

at paragraph 173 that – Government will introduce a Juvenile Justice Bill to 
provide for a more modern juvenile justice system. 

On 16 December 2011, Cabinet approved the drafting of the Juvenile Justice Bill to 
repeal and replace the Juvenile Offenders Act.  The Juvenile Justice Bill is intended to be a 
comprehensive  piece  of  legislation  which  aims  to  bring  the  juvenile  justice  system  in 
Mauritius in line with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the General 
Comment  No.  10  on  “Children’s  rights  in  juvenile  justice”,  the  United  Nations  Standard 
Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, the United Nations Guidelines for 
the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency and the United Nations Rules for the Protection of 
Juveniles Deprived of Their Liberty. 

A draft Juvenile Justice Bill was prepared by the Attorney-General’s Office in 2013 
including  several  Ministries  and  Non-

following  consultations  with  stakeholders, 
Governmental Organisations. 

The  draft  Juvenile  Justice  Bill  was  submitted  to  the  Ministry  for  Social  Security, 
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions for its comments in April 2013. The Attorney-
General’s Office has also consulted other stakeholders in relation to the draft Juvenile Justice 
Bill in 2014. 

On  03  July  2015,  Cabinet  took  note  of  the  outcome  of  the  recent  mission  of  the 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions to Western Australia.  
The  main  objective  of  the  visit  was  to  take  stock  of  the  juvenile  justice  and  rehabilitation 
system in Western Australia with a view to developing appropriate strategies for the youth 
rehabilitation sector in Mauritius.  Following meetings the Minister had with various persons, 
the matters below were agreed to – 

(a)  Mr William Cullen, Correctional Consultant, has agreed to work on a Strategic 

Plan for the Rehabilitation Youth Centre; 

(b) 

the  Australian  authorities  would  provide  assistance  in  the  setting  up  of  a 
Juvenile  Court,  and  in  respect  of  amendments  to  be  made  to  existing 
legislations, viz., the Juvenile Offenders Act and the Reforms Institutions Act; 

 
(c) 

(d) 

127 

Australian  experts  would  provide  training  to  the  staff  of  the  Rehabilitation 
Youth Centre, and 

bilateral assistance and cooperation with relevant departments and agencies of 
Western Australia would be consolidated. 

On 27 July 2015, a meeting, chaired by the hon. Minister of Social Security, National 
Solidarity and Reform Institutions, was held in my presence, that of my officers as well as the 
Australian expert, Mr Cullen, to discuss, inter alia, the Juvenile Justice Bill.   

Given the recent appointment of Mr Cullen who is acting as a consultant in relation to 
the  drafting  of  the  Juvenile  Justice  Bill  and  the  fact  that  Mr  Cullen  has  not  yet  made  his 
recommendations, the drafting of the Juvenile Justice Bill is still in the early stages.  

Once  Mr  Cullen  has  submitted  his  report  and  all  relevant  stakeholders  have  been 
consulted, Cabinet approval will be sought in relation to the policy issues which have to be 
decided before the finalisation of the Juvenile Justice Bill. 

As  regards  part  (b),  relating  to  actions  that  are  being  taken  for  the  protection  of 
minors,  either  as  accused  or  as  witnesses,  I  am  informed  by  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions  that  in  relation  to  the  actions  that  are  being  taken  for  the  protection  thereof, 
either as accused or as witnesses, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions has set up 
a fast track procedure for all Court cases involving children victims and witnesses as well as 
Juveniles.  The Child’s Victim and Support Unit which has been set up at the Office of the 
Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  acts  as  a  liaison  between  the  investigation  phase  of  the 
enquiry by the Police, the advice stage and the lodging of the cases in Court.  This set-up 
ensures that children are not further victimised in the judicial process. 

Regarding juveniles called as witness in criminal cases, I am informed by the Master 

and Registrar of the Supreme Court of Mauritius that – 

(a) 

since July 2012, the Criminal Division of the Intermediate Court has initiated 
administrative measures for a fast track procedure where priority is given to 
cases involving juvenile witnesses.  Further, the Presiding Magistrate closely 
monitors  cases 
juveniles  as  witnesses  and  ensures  prompt 
communication  among  all  concerned  so  as  to  avoid  delay  in  the  hearing  of 
such cases.  The Presiding Magistrate can also hold pre-trial conferences with 
all Counsel to narrow down issues and ensure that the juvenile witness attends 
Court on a single occasion and during school vacation, wherever possible;  

involving 

 
(b) 

128 

video  conferencing  facilities  are  also  usually  available  at  the  New  Court 
House in the afternoons and are used to avoid direct confrontation between the 
juvenile witness and the accused.   In addition, a juvenile always deposes in 
presence of his/her responsible party; 

(c) 

although  the  name  of  the  juvenile  appears  on  the  list  of  witnesses,  the 
Judgment of the Court does not refer to him/her by name.  

As far as cases involving juveniles as an accused party are concerned, I am informed 

that – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

such cases are heard by the Juvenile Court consisting of the District Magistrate 
sitting in Chambers.  For that purpose, it is always the Magistrate’s Chambers 
which is converted into a Juvenile Court; 

juvenile  Court  hearings  are  held  in  camera  to  protect  the  identity  of  the 
accused, and in the presence of a responsible party of the accused juvenile, as 
per the provisions of the law; 

such  cases  are  treated  diligently  and  are  heard  within  the  shortest  possible 
delay. Hearings are usually conducted prior to normal Court sessions wherever 
possible, so that the accused juvenile does not have to wait in Court; 

legal aid is granted to a juvenile accused who wishes to avail himself/herself 
of this facility except for contravention cases, and 

before  a  juvenile  accused  is  sentenced,  relevant  reports  regarding  his/her 
personal  and  social  circumstances  and  his/her  suitability  for  a  non-custodial 
sentence are always called for by the Magistrate. 

An Inter-Ministerial Committee has been set up to examine all the recommendations 
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in its Concluding Observations on the Combined 
3rd to 5th Periodic Report of Mauritius.  I am informed by the Ministry of Gender Equality, 
Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare  that  a  psychological  support  and  follow  up  is 
provided to any child victim of abuse and violence.  Furthermore, various proposals are being 
made in the Children’s Bill to provide support to children within the Court system. 

 

RODRIGUES - CORRECTIONAL YOUTH CENTRE - CONSTRUCTION 

129 

 
(No. B/609) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West)  
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether he 
will state if Government proposes to construct a Correctional Youth Centre in Rodrigues, in 
view of the considerable hardships caused to minors who are placed on remand. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  there  is  currently  no  Rehabilitation  Youth  Centre  or 
Correctional Youth Centre in Rodrigues to accommodate either children beyond control or 
children who have been placed on remand or those convicted for an offence. 

In  Mauritius,  we  already  have  a  CYC  for  boys  to  accommodate  minors  who  have 
been placed on remand or convicted for serious offences.  Those who have been placed on 
remand or convicted for minor offences as well as children beyond control are sent to a RYC 
for boys.  As far as girls are concerned, there is only a RYC to accommodate minors who 
have been placed on remand or convicted for both serious and minor offences.  Girls beyond 
control  are  also  sent  to  the  same  institution.    With  a  view  to  segregating  girls  who  have 
committed serious offences, a CYC for girls is being set up, and is expected to be operational 
shortly. 

I wish to inform the House that, following discussions and working sessions with a 
UNODC(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime) Expert in Criminal Justice, we are in 
the  process  of  reviewing  the  rehabilitation  system  for  minors..    In  this  respect,  we  are 
contemplating the establishment of a structure for children beyond control to ensure that they 
are given proper support and the problems they encounter with their families are effectively 
addressed with the help of the community. 

With  regard  to  Rodrigues,  in  the  absence  of  either  a  RYC  or  a  CYC,  minors  are 
currently being sent to the RYC/CYC in Mauritius.  However, the transfer of these minors 
from Rodrigues to Mauritius entails a lot of hardships.  In case of non-availability of seats on 
flights  and  other  unforeseen  delays,  minors  are  detained  in  police  cell  until  their  transfer.  
Moreover,  minors  are  removed  from  their  birthplace,  families  and  culture  until  the  end  of 
their  committal.    They  are  totally  cut  off  from  their  parents  and  loved  ones  during 
incarceration  as the latter cannot afford to pay  a ticket to Mauritius to visit their children.  
This separation can cause greater damage to a child’s development and eventually impede the 
process for his/her rehabilitation. 

In light of the above, I have been informed by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly that 
a Rehabilitation Youth Centre is being set up at Fond La Bonté Baie aux Huîtres.  A building 

 

130 

has  already  been  identified  for  this  purpose  and  renovation  works  are  currently  underway.  
The renovation is expected to be completed by December 2015. 

I am also informed that all minors in Rodrigues who have been placed on remand or 
have  been  convicted  for  minor  offences  as  well  as  children  beyond  control  will  be 
accommodated in this Centre.  The purpose of this Centre is to minimise the hardships caused 
to both the minors and their families on being sent to Mauritius. However, minors who have 
committed serious offences will be referred to the CYC in Mauritius. 

However,  I  wish  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  House  to  the  fact  that  this  is  only  a 
temporary measure.  Gradually the rehabilitation system for minors in Rodrigues would be 
aligned with the revised system in Mauritius.  
 

DRUG ADDICTION –  

METHADONE SUBSTITUTION THERAPY PROGRAMME 

(No. B/611) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to drug addiction, he will state the 
number - 

(a)  

of drug addicts island wide, indicating the number thereof treated under  the 
Methadone Substitution Therapy Programme, since its inception to date, on a 
yearly basis, and  

(b)  

percentage of inmates at the Brown Sequard Hospital being treated therefor. 

Reply: I am informed that based on the three Integrated Biological and Behavioural 
Surveillance Surveys conducted  by my Ministry in 2009, 2011 and 2013, it was found that 
there were around 10, 000 injecting drug users in Mauritius.   

Since  the  introduction  of  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy  Programme  in  2006, 

6897 injecting drug users have been induced on the programme as follows -   

 

Period 

Number of 
Injecting 
Drug Users 

 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

Jan – July 2015 

131 

25 

346 

798 

825 

1,567 

1,507 

806 

479 

386 

158 

I  am  informed  that  four  patients,  who  are  following  the  methadone  substitution 
therapy treatment, are presently admitted at Brown Sequard Mental Health Care Centre and 
they are being provided with their daily doses during their stay.  This constitutes 0.71% of the 
total number of patients at the hospital.    

 

KEWAL NAGAR - SIR SEEWOOSAGUR RAMGOOLAM  

- 115TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION 

(No. B/612) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
celebration  of  the  115th  anniversary  of  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  at  Kewal  Nagar,  he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation, 
information as to the stand thereof as to the alleged manipulation of news by the Corporation 
in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

132 

 

DR. JEETOO HOSPITAL - CARDIAC CENTRE - SURGEONS 

(No.  B/613)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Cardiac 
Centre at the Dr. Jeetoo Hospital, he will state if the Director thereof and the cardiac surgeons 
attached thereto are entitled to draw overtime payment for work performed outside normal 
working hours, indicating the - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

number of cardiac surgeons attached thereto;  

total amount of overtime payment effected thereto over the past five years, and 

if  the  Director  thereof  is  entitled  to  practise  medicine  privately  and  further 
indicating if consideration will be given for a review of this policy. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that there is no Cardiac Centre at  Dr. A. G. Jeetoo 
Hospital but an ICU Unit and I believe that the hon. Member meant in fact to refer to the 
Cardiac Centre at Pamplemousses operating under the aegis of the Trust Fund for Specialised 
Medical Care in line with the Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care Act of 1992. 

There are two Cardiac Surgeons at the Centre namely, Dr. T. K. Gunness and Dr. S. 

Bhagia. 

Firstly, Dr. T. K. Gunness was appointed by the Board in a substantive capacity on 01 
December 2002 as Director/Cardiac Surgeon.  In May 2006, his post was restyled to Director, 
Cardiac Services in line with the 2003 Pay Research Bureau Report recommendations. 

Secondly,  Dr.  S.  Bhagia,  an  Indian  expatriate,  has  been  employed  on  a  contractual 

basis with effect from 01 April 2014 and his contract renewed for one year. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Director,  Cardiac 
Services  is  not  entitled  to  the  payment  of  overtime.    However,  he  is  paid  an  on-call  /  in-
attendance allowance.  For the past five years, the Director, Cardiac Services has been paid 
an on-call / in-attendance allowance to the tune of Rs1,678,884 as per paragraph 20.04.11 of 
the PRB Report 2013.   

In  addition,  the  Board  has,  since  30  October  2009,  approved  the  payment  of  an 
allowance of Rs3,000 per hour for extra sessions to be carried out after working hours to curb 
the outstanding waiting list of patients from Dr. A. S. Bhoyroo who resigned. 

133 

 
I  am  informed  that  Dr.  T.  K.  Gunness  performs  only  4  cardiac  surgeries  per  week 
during working hours and any additional surgery is considered as extra session.  He has thus 
been paid an amount of Rs19,022,625 for extra sessions carried out for the past five years. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, approval has been conveyed by the Board in 

April 2007 to the Director, Cardiac Services to undertake private practice. 

My Ministry is presently reviewing the policy of private practice to ensure that such 

privilege is maintained in scarcity areas within well-defined parameters. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

