 

1 

 

 

No. 08 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 10 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID  

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn          

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training 

 
 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal,  Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 08 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 10 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

A.  Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport – 

 

The  Road  Traffic  (Taxi,  Bus  and  Lorry  Stands)  (Amendment)  Order  2015 
(Government Notice No. 17 of 2015). 

B.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 

 

The  Municipal  Council  of  Vacoas-Phoenix  (Fees  for  Classified  Trade) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No.18 of 2015). 

C.  Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment – 

 

The  Report  of  the  National  Economic  and  Social  Council  on  Income 
Inequality in Mauritius – The Role of Wage policy. 

D.  Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 

Outer Islands – 

The Annual Report 2013 of the Fishermen Investment Trust. 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

TOOFANY, MR IQBAL - DEATH - POLICE CUSTODY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development  Unit whether, in regard  to the death of Mr  Iqbal Toofany whilst in 
Police custody at Rivière Noire, he will - 

(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain information -  

(i) from the Commissioner of Police -  

A. if the Police objected to the release on bail of the Police Officers arrested in 

connection therewith and if not, why not;  

B. if he or his representatives has/have received members of the family of the 

deceased, and  

C. where matters stand as to the Police inquiry carried out thereinto;  

(ii) if the Director of Public Prosecutions has received members of the family of 

the deceased, and  

(iii) where matters stand as to the judicial inquiries carried out thereinto, and  

(b) state if urgent measures will be taken for the protection of detainees from Police 

brutality. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, at the very outset, I would like to present my 

sincere condolences to the bereaved family of late Mr Mohamad Iqbal Toofany.   

I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  on  Monday  02  March,  2015  at 
0105 hours along Black River Road near La Balise Marina, Black River, Police stopped a 
private car bearing Registration No. 3166 ZM 00, coming from the direction of Tamarin and 
proceeding towards Le Morne, which was driven by one Mohamed Iqbal Toofany, residing at 
Vingta No. 3, Vacoas, for stop and search purposes. Mr Toofany produced his driving licence 
on request.  

 

9 

Whilst checking the vehicle, the Police Officers noticed that the registration number 
on the insurance vignette was different from that on the said vehicle.  When questioned, the 
driver failed to provide any explanation thereon. 

Police effected a body search on Mr Mohamed Iqbal Toofany and secured - 

(a)  one jigsaw, and 
(b)  a Swiss knife; 

The vehicle was also searched and a bag containing the following items were secured 

- 

(a)  a torchlight; 
(b)  a cutter; 
(c)  a pair of socks, colour blue; 
(d)  one right hand side glove, colour white; 
(e)  screwdrivers; 
(f)  3 cellular phones make Nokia, and 
(g)  a sum of Rs345. 

On  being  questioned  about  the  items  secured,  he  remained  silent.  He  was 
consequently booked for the offences of “Insurance vignette not affixed” and “Motor Vehicle 
Licence not affixed”.   

In  view  of  the  items  secured  during  the  search,  Mr Toofany  was  brought  to  Black 
River Police Station for enquiry at 0145 hours. He was handed over to Black River CID for 
further  questioning  as  he  was  suspected  to  be  involved  in  cases  of  larceny  of  vehicles 
reported in Black River Station area. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  that  on  the  same  day  at 
10.00 hours while Mr Toofany was being brought to Bambous District Court for lodging of a 
Provisional  Plaint  of  “Rogue  and  Vagabond”  against  him,  he  complained  of  pain  in  the 
stomach.  He was immediately conveyed to Victoria Hospital for treatment.  Whilst he was 
undergoing treatment at the hospital, he collapsed.  He was reanimated, but in vain.  At 1050 
hours, Dr Jeetun, Senior Medical  Officer,  certified death and the body  was referred to the 
Police Medical Officer for an autopsy.  The autopsy carried out at 1700 hours revealed the 
cause of death as being “Acute Pulmonary Oedema”.  The body was, thereafter, handed over 
to the relatives. 

Following the autopsy, the Chief Police Medical Officer informed the Commissioner 
of Police of the probable cause of death and the extent of injuries found on the body of Mr 

 

10 

Toofany.    The  Commissioner  of  Police  referred  the  matter  to  the  CCID  in  view  of  the 
seriousness of the case.   

The  CCID  immediately  initiated  an  enquiry  in  the  course  of  which  five  officers  of 
CID Western Division who dealt with the case were arrested on 03 March 2015.  They were 
detained  during  the  night  and  on  the  next  day  they  were  provisionally  charged  with  the 
offence of “Torture by Public Officials” before the District Court of Bambous. 

In regard to part (a) (i) A of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police  that  Police  did  not  object  to  the  release  on  bail  of  the  five  Police  Officers  for  the 
following reasons - 

 (i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

the Police Officers were charged with “Torture by Public Officials” as a result of 
the  injuries  found  on  the  body  of  the  deceased  and  the  cause  of  death  was 
certified by Chief Police Medical Officer as “Acute Pulmonary Oedema”;  
the Police Officers have denied the allegations levelled against them, and 
their  defence  statements  were  already  recorded  and  they  were  not  needed  for 
further inquiry at that point in time, and their further detention was not warranted. 
They  were  therefore  bailed  out  after  each  furnishing  a  surety  of  Rs9,000  and 
recognizance of Rs50,000.  They were all interdicted from duty on the same day  and will 
appear anew before Court on 25 May 2015. 

I must say, Madam Speaker, that I am personally not satisfied with the circumstances 
leading  to  the  release  on  bail.    I  have  already  conveyed  my  dissatisfaction  to  the 
Commissioner of Police.  He has reassured me that he has already issued the necessary Order 
to better guide Police Officers how to handle such situations. 

In regard to part (a) (i) B of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  on  03 March  2015  between  1225  hrs  and  1240  hrs,  together  with  the  Deputy 
Commissioners of Police, Administration and Operations and the Assistant Superintendent of 
Police Western Division, he received the father of the deceased and his Counsel, Mr Erikson 
Mooneeapillay.    Following  representations  made  by  the  father  of  the  deceased,  the 
Commissioner of Police reassured him that the Police inquiry would be conducted in a fair 
and impartial manner. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  C  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Police that the inquiry is in progress.  The future course of action in the investigation will be 
determined, inter alia, by the outcome of the toxicological and alcohol report of the deceased. 

 

11 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that following receipt of a 
letter dated 05 March 2015 from Counsel Mooneeapillay, on the same day at 1100 hrs, the 
Director of Public Prosecutions received the father of the deceased and the said Counsel and 
another individual who accompanied them. 

They made written and  oral representations to the Director of Public Prosecutions to 
appeal  against  the  decision  to  grant  bail  to  the  Police  Officers  involved.    The  Director  of 
Public Prosecutions explained to them that there were no grounds of appeal.  The meeting 
ended at around 11.30 hrs.   

With regard to part (a) (iii) of the question, I am also informed that on 05 March 2015, 
the Director of Public Prosecutions lodged a judicial inquiry into the death of Mr Toofany 
before the District Court of Black River Bambous pursuant to sections 110 and 111 of the 
District and Intermediate Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act.  The matter is ongoing and is 
scheduled for hearing today. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Commissioner of Police 
has initiated immediate measures for the protection of detainees in Police custody, whereby 
when  persons  are  arrested  and  detained,  the  officers  dealing  with  the  case  will  henceforth 
have to furnish all details of the arrest to the Police Information and Operations Room as well 
as  their  Divisional/Branch  Operations  Room.    The  Officer-in-Charge  of  the  Police 
Information  and  Operations  Room  and  the  Divisional/Branch  Operations  Room  concerned 
will  be  responsible  to  communicate  the  information  to  any  Counsel  or  relatives  of  the 
detainees.   

All interrogations will be recorded using existing CCTV and Audio Recording Systems 

which are available at all Divisional Headquarters.   

I  can  assure  the  House  that  in  my  capacity  as  Minister  for  Home  Affairs,  I  will  not 
tolerate any abuse by Police Officers encroaching on the fundamental rights of citizens.  Any 
‘brebis galeuse’ within the Police Force will be taken to task.  

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, after he has confirmed that the charge was “torture” - 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told us that he is not satisfied the way this bail issue was 
handled - will he agree with me that, in fact, recently in any case, be it the Roches Noires 
case, be it the La Caverne tape issue and so on, in all cases, the Police asks the Court not to 
grant bail; it objected to bails, whereas in this case where the provisional charge is “torture”, 

 

12 

the Police did not object?  Will he agree with me that this is perceived as deux poids deux 
mesures because some Police Officers are concerned? 

The Prime Minister:  That was my own impression, Madam Speaker, and I said it to 
the  Commissioner  of  Police.    I  said:    “I  find  it  strange  that,  in  all  cases,  Police  had  been 
objecting and, in this case, they chose not to object as if there are two classes of citizens in 
this country and the law does not apply equally to all of them.” I was not happy at all with the 
situation, and the Commissioner of Police knows that. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Thank  you.    Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  also  aware  that,  in  fact, 
adding  insult  to  injury  -  if  we  can  say  so  -  the  Police  Officers’  lawyer,  in  fact,  stated  on 
Tuesday 03: “Demain, ils obtiendront leur caution.”  Before they  were brought before the 
Court, the lawyer had been informed, apparently from the Police Officers, that: “Demain, ils 
obtiendront leur caution” and this happened.  Was the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware of that? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I have read it also. It was in the newspaper.  What can I 

say about it?  That was the opinion of the lawyer.   

Mr Bérenger:  Can I know, at this point in time, who, in the Police Force, gave the 

directives for bail not to be refused? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t have this information.  If a specific question is put, 

I will get the information for the House. 

Mr Bérenger:  I see that the Ag. Commissioner of Police did, in fact, receive – and it is 
a very good thing – the family of the deceased.  In the case of the DPP also – we have been 
informed - he received the family of the deceased.  In both cases, it is a very good thing, but 
in the case of the DPP, what we have been provided with is only the information that the DPP 
concluded that there was no ground of appeal.  I know that the DPP is totally independent, 
but did the Rt. hon. Prime Minister look into that?  Because we know of cases where the DPP 
stepped in, after the Court had granted bail, to have the accused arrested again. 

The Prime Minister:  Well, this may be the case, but in this case we know the stand 

that was taken by the DPP and I don’t think that it will be fair for me to comment on that.  

Mr Bérenger:  As far as the Police and Judicial Inquiry are concerned, especially the 
Police, it seems that there was doubt as to where the deceased was, in fact, detained.  Is it 
established now where he was detained? 

 

13 

The Prime Minister:  What I have been told, it was in Black River Police Station.  

Mr Bérenger:  I take it, Madam Speaker, that all forensic possibilities and so on will 
be used in this and other cases.  In this case, is the DNA dimension to the inquiry and so on 
being taken care of? 

The Prime Minister:  This, I am not aware of.  If a specific question is put, I will 

get the information. 

Mr Bérenger: On the last part of my question, Madam Speaker, I am glad to hear the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  say  that  the  Ag.  Commissioner  of  Police  has  taken  immediate 
measures. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, being given that there is a lot of confusion, 
before when a detainee alleged to have been brutalised, the statement was taken in that Police 
Station, then it was felt that it would be better that it be not taken in the same Police Station, 
but at CID in Rose Hill. Of course, this took time, people had to travel to Rose Hill and so on; 
it has not worked. Also, we know that regularly Magistrates, when the detainee says he has 
been roughed up, would order an enquiry and nothing would happen. So, are we looking at 
that? Since an independent Police Complaints Commission, presided over by a former Judge, 
has been announced in the Government Programme, is this coming as soon as possible and 
what will happen to the Police Complaints Bureau in that case? 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  certainly  mean  to  implement  what  is  in  our  Programme, 

but, of course, it takes some time. We have no magic wand to do everything in two months. 

Mr Mohamed: I have two questions with your permission, Madam Speaker. Could 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House whether he could tell us why is it that those 
Police Officers were provisionally charged with torture and not anything like murder or even 
manslaughter? 

The Prime Minister: Well, as a barrister, I think that the hon. Member should know 
from what we have heard, from what we have as evidence. I do not think a charge of murder 
is warranted. If the enquiry later on reveals that there is enough evidence of a prima facie 
case of murder, then obviously these people will be charged with murder. 

Mr Uteem: But there was, at least, a case of wounds and blows causing death. The 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in the Government Programme, announced an independent Police 
Complaints  Commission,  but  that  comes  in  after  the  event,  after  the  brutality.  In  order  to 
ensure  that  there  is  no  Police  brutality,  would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  that  it  is 
urgent for the Commissioner of Police to designate what we have elsewhere, which is known 
as a Custodian Police Officer, who is independent from the enquiry, who ensures that, from 

 

14 

the  day  the  suspect  is  brought  in  till  his  release,  there  is  proper  recording  and  his  human 
rights are properly looked after? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will convey that to the Commissioner of Police and I 
agree that every step must be taken to ensure that everything is done properly and that there is 
no unfair treatment towards any detainee. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider to ask the 
Commissioner of Police to investigate whether those Police Officers,  who investigated the 
suspect, were under the influence of alcohol? 

The Prime Minister: So far, I have no information whatsoever that they were under 

influence of drink or alcohol, but I will try to find out through the Commissioner of Police. 

Mr Baloomoody: I have listened carefully to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister with regard 
to how events happened on the day when he was supposed to go to the District Magistrate. 
Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the Magistrate was informed because section 
110 of the District and Intermediate Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) says clearly that where a 
person has died in prison or while in custody of the Police, the Magistrate should be informed 
and the Magistrate shall proceed or order an officer to proceed to the examination of the body 
and an investigation of the matter with the assistance of the medical practitioner? Can I know 
from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  the  District  Magistrate  was  informed  that  this 
gentleman has died whilst he was in Police custody? 

The Prime Minister: I have no such information. 
Mr Mohamed: Picking up from where the hon. Leader of the Opposition left off on 
the doubts as to where the deceased was detained, there is information to the effect that this 
deceased was detained not in Black River, but in Rose Hill. Could, therefore, the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister verify, because if that is the case that this person was detained in Rose Hill 
and not Black River, this means that the persons who potentially could be still responsible for 
having caused his death, are still at large, and that those who are still responsible potentially 
for  having  caused  this  death  unlawfully,  are  still  roaming  around  and  working  as  Police 
Officers day in, day out and not being worried at all by Police? 

The  Prime  Minister:Well,  they  might  have  been  transferred  to  Rose  Hill,  but  I 

cannot confirm that, I will have to ask the Commissioner of Police. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  the  disease  was 
mentioned to be pulmonary oedema. Does that tally with the post-mortem report from the 
médecin légiste? 

The Prime Minister: Well, yes. This is what the officer has found; it is his finding. 

15 

 
Mr Baloomoody: Coming to the provisional charge, normally when public officers 
are involved, especially in the case we have Senior Police Officers, the State Law officers are 
informed and they stepped in with regard to Bail Motion and what action to take with regard 
to  the  bail  under  drafting  of  the  provisional  information.  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister whether the State Law Office was consulted prior to the drafting of that information 
and prior to the Police taking the stand of not resisting to bail? 

The Prime Minister: I have no such information. I will ask the hon. Member to come 

with a specific question. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can conclude! Being given that when I raised that issue, I must say, 
in  a  sitting  position  on  Tuesday  03  March,  hon.  Minister  Soodhun  reacted.  There  was  a 
discussion with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and then Minister Soodhun said publicly that the 
Prime Minister was going to follow that case personally and, more recently, he has stated that 
Government will help the family in every possible way. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
- we are dealing here with a young man who leaves daughters behind and a young wife, the 
whole family, but especially his children and his wife are going through very difficult time - 
whether we  can have confirmation that Government will do whatever can be done to help 
them along? 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  I must say that when this unfortunate thing 
happened, the very next morning when the Commissioner of Police came to see me, I told 
him what I felt about it. I told him that I wanted an enquiry to be fair, proper and to find out 
the truth so that the culprits may be brought to justice, and this is my line; I have been asking 
the Commissioner of Police every day how the enquiry is going on, but he assures me that 
everything is going well. 

Madam  Speaker:  Any  other  question?  No!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been 
advised that Parliamentary Question B/160 addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will now 
be replied by the hon. Minister of Local Government. Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – VIP LOUNGES - FACILITIES 

(No. B/148) Mr. P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  access  to  the  VIP  facilities  at  the  La 
Terrasse Lounge and at the State Lounge at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International 
Airport  granted  at  the  discretion  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  he  will  give  a  list  of  the 

 

16 

persons who have benefitted therefrom on direct request from the Private Office of the Prime 
Minister’s Office, since July 2005 to date, indicating in each case the – 

date of travel; 
capacity in which the person was granted the said facilities, and  
name/s of the person/s who have seen off or greeted the person. 

(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to access to VIP facilities at the La 
Terrasse Lounge and at the State Lounge at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International 
Airport  granted  at  the  discretion  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Airports of Mauritius Ltd that, according to records, direct requests have been made by the 
Private Office of the Prime Minister’s Office only once since June 2008, and only in respect 
of access to La Terrasse Lounge. 

No direct request has been made by the Private Office for access to VIP facilities at 

the State Lounge. 

All  requests  which  emanated  from  the  Private  Office  concerned  La  Terrasse  VIP 
Lounge  until  11  September  2013.    Thereafter,  with  the  coming  into  operation  of  the  new 
passenger terminal in September 2013, all requests for VIP facilities from the Private Office 
concerned the VIP Departure Lounge and VIP Arrival Lounge at this terminal. 

In regard to the information requested by the hon. Member, I am tabling the list of 
passengers who have benefitted from  facilities at the VIP  Lounges,  with the dates of their 
travel as well as the names of persons who had seen them off or greeted them. 

However, in regard to part (b) of the question, no information is available as to the 

capacity in which the persons were granted facilities at the VIP Lounges. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister on what ground the officer-in-charge 

of the Private Office authorised Mrs N. S. to use the Private Office and the VIP lounge? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  there  is  no  document,  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  the 
ground. It seems the person who granted the permission only knows on what ground. I am 
unable to answer that. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  I  have  a  similar  question  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister.  Under  what 
authority  the  Head  of  the  Private  Office  made  arrangements  for  Mrs  N.  S.  to  use  these 
facilities? 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  I  will  ask  the  hon.  Member  to  query  from  the  former  Prime 

17 

Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

POLICE COMPLAINTS BUREAU - CASES 

(No.  B/149)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police 
Complaints Bureau, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to – 

(a) the number of cases reported thereat, since the setting up thereof to date, indicating 

the number thereof disposed of, and  

(b) who is at the head thereof. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker,  I presume that the hon. Member is making 
reference to the Police Complaints Division operating under the aegis of the National Human 
Rights Commission.   

In fact, following the proclamation of the Police Complaints Act 2012 in July 2013 
and  the  setting  up  of  the  Police  Complaints  Division  within  the  National  Human  Rights 
Commission  which  is  empowered  to  enquire  into  cases  of  complaints  against  Police,  the 
Complaints Investigation Bureau of the Police Department which was set up in November 
1999  ceased  its  operation  in  October  2013  and  all  its  pending  cases  were  referred  to  the 
National Human Rights Commission. 

I am informed by the National Human Rights Commission that, since the setting up of 
a Police Complaints Division within the National Human Rights Commission in July 2013, it 
has  received  1,509  complaints  against  Police  officers,  out  of  which  893  cases  were  those 
transferred by the Complaints Investigation Bureau of the Police Department, which ceased 
its operation in October 2013.  As at 28 February 2015, 930 cases have already been disposed 
of by the Commission. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Police  Complaints 

Division is led by the Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission. 

18 

 
Mr Bérenger: Can I, therefore, again put a question which I put earlier on when we 
were dealing with the PNQ? We have been reminded that there is a division of the Human 
Rights Commission - the Human Rights Commission being itself chaired by a former Judge 
of the Supreme Court - that is dealing in such cases of complaints against the Police and so 
on and, in the Government Programme of Government, another Commission to be chaired by 
another  Judge  has  been  announced,  that  is  an  independent  Commission  on  such  Police 
complaints. At this point in time, does the Government know which way  we are heading? 
Will one absorb the other; will there be two Commissions dealing with the same issue? 

The Prime Minister: No, I suppose when we will come with the new one, everything 

will be dealt with by the new one. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister gave the answer as to the 
number of cases and I think there are about 1000 cases.  Can I ask him, out of the figure that 
he gave, how many cases are of Police brutality?  

The Prime Minister: I do not have the information, I cannot answer that.  

Madam Speaker: Okay! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Since we heard that there is a substantial number of cases, may I 
ask the hon. Prime Minister how many staff are there at the Commission and whether the 
number of staff is sufficient to handle such substantial number of cases? 

The Prime Minister: I must enquire about that. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Madam  Speaker,  one  of  the  main  criticisms  with  regard  to  that 
Police  Investigation  Commission  is  that  once  people  make  a  complaint,  they  never  heard 
about the result. They are not informed about the outcome and what enquiry has been carried 
out. Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister to look into it because we know that 930 cases have 
been disposed of, but the complainants are not aware of it? Can the complainants, at least, be 
communicated about the outcome of their complaints? 

The Prime Minister: That has been the case in the past; we will look in the future. 

Mr Ganoo: Does the hon. Prime Minister have the figure of how many cases have led 
to the prosecution of the Police Officers in the number of complaints that have been made 
against them? 

 
The Prime Minister: No, I don’t have the figure. 

19 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  In  fact,  I  was  anticipating  that  a  very  low  number  of  cases  of  Police 
brutality actually end up in conviction. I am going to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that, 
being given that there are so few convictions, whether he does not think that urgent measures 
have to be taken to speed up the enquiry process because he himself mentioned that there are 
around 900 cases that were handed over from the Police Complains Bureau to the Human 
Rights Commission. 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  not  happy  at  all  with  the 
situation myself. I am not happy that whenever there is a complaint against the Police, the 
Police itself enquires into it. We must have some other independent institutions to enquire 
and to say whether there should be prosecution or not. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

LA CAVERNE & PHOENIX – NDU PROJECTS 

(No. B/150) Dr. R.  Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Constituency  No.  15,  La  Caverne  and 
Phoenix, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Development Unit - 

(a) information as to the projects being implemented thereat, and  

(b) table a list of the future projects earmarked for implementation thereat. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am tabling the list of 

projects which were carried out in Constituency No 15, during financial year 2014. 

Moreover, I am informed that four projects namely - 

construction of Seeboo Lane, Vingta 2 (New), Solferino; 
construction of Reebye Lane, Vingta (New Road), Solferino; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  resurfacing and extension of Subway Lane, Solferino, and 
(iv)  construction of bridge at Hollyrood. 

are  presently  in  abeyance  due  to  absence  of  necessary  clearances  such  as  way  leaves  and 
road alignment, and also lack of funds. 

 

20 

As regards part (b) of the question, the NDU is presently working the cost estimates for 
a list of projects drawn up by the Parliamentary Private Secretary of that Constituency after 
consultation with the relevant stakeholders.  In the absence of a voted Budget, it is premature 
at this stage, to table a list of future projects. 

Dr. Sorefan:  May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will consider 
with the PPS, hon. Benydin, to include in the list to come the bridge – they call it River La 
Caverne - behind l’Eglise Visitation?  We visited the place recently and there was flooding 
there. 

The  Prime  Minister:  As  I  have  said,  it  will  depend  on  the  financial  situation  and 

whether we have provision in the Budget. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

POLICE OFFICERS – ASSAULT - INQUIRY 

(No. B/151) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, following the case of assault of Police 
Officers whilst being on duty which occurred in the afternoon of 21 February 2015, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) where matters stand as to the inquiry carried out there into, and  
(b) the measures taken or that will be taken to prevent the recurrence thereof. 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 

that on 21 February 2015 there has been no case of assault of Police Officers reported. 

However, on 11 February 2015, a case was reported where one Police Officer, who 
was  regulating  traffic  at  the  Southern  Exit  Crossing  along  Farquhar  Street  Port-Louis  was 
assaulted, by a pedestrian, who grew vexed when ordered to wait until the road was clear. 
Two other Police Officers, who came to his rescue, were also assaulted by two other persons.  

One of them was  arrested on 20 February 2015 and the two others on  21 February 

 
2015.  All three have admitted their guilt and were remanded to police cell. 

Police has completed its enquiry and has referred the case to the Director of Public 

 
Prosecutions for advice. On 09 March 2015, the three assailants were released on bail. 

 

21 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the daily Police deployment of the Traffic Unit 
North based at Fanfaron Police Station has been reinforced and the number of daily patrols 
increased 

Mr Mahomed: I had the opportunity to watch a video that was publicly broadcasted on 
the Internet wherein I saw that the Police Officers appeared defenceless. So, may I ask the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister whether consideration may be given to the way they are equipped so that 
they can better defend themselves in such cases? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will look into it. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In this particular case, we heard the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  say  that  those  three  accused  parties  were  remanded  at  some  stage. 
Obviously,  if  they  were  remanded,  there  was  objection  to  bail.  So,  in  this  particular  case, 
when there is an assault on the Police which is condamnable, there was an objection to bail. 
Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister take it up with the Commissioner of Police not to have 
double standards in the approach?  In one case where there is an assault against the Police 
there is objection, but whereas when there is assault causing death on a normal citizen, who 
was not a Police Officer, for that immediately there is no Police objection. This is a clear case 
of double standard. 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  have  already  made  that  very  clear  to  the  Commissioner  of 
Police that there should be no double standard. All citizens before the law must be treated 
alike. 

Mr Mohamed: There is a circular which was issued by the former Commissioner of 
Police whereby if someone was on bail altogether,  systematically the Police must object to 
bail without getting into the merits of the matter since we are talking here about bail issues. 
Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister take it up with the Commissioner of Police or the person in 
charge of the Police Force that this issue should be looked into again and revisited in order to 
give  again  the  discretion  to  the  senior  Police  Officers  to  decide  whether  people  should  be 
released  on  bail  on  their  own  discretion,  based  on  the  merits  of  the  case,  not  basing 
themselves on a circular issued by the former Commissioner of Police, that one-size-fits-all 
policy should stop? 

The Prime Minister: I certainly agree with the hon. Member. But, we must remember 
the  case  he  is  talking  about.  The  previous  Government  should  have  taken  steps  and  done 
something about it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 
 

REMOTELY PILOTED AIRCRAFTS - LEGISLATION 

(No. B/152) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  use  of  drone  aircrafts  around  the 
country  for  reconnaissance  exercises  or  for  filming  purposes,  he  will  state  if  Government 
proposes to introduce legislation for the regulation thereof. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, a Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA) is generally 

described as an unmanned aircraft which can vary in size, shape, forms and speed.  

I am informed that the Civil Aviation Regulations 2007 presently cater for the operation 
of RPAs weighing between seven and 20 kgs and that smaller RPAs of less than seven kgs 
are  not  regulated  as  they  are  classified  as  “Model  Aircraft”  and  used  for  recreational 
purposes. 

Madam  Speaker,  however, 

recent 

to 
miniaturisation of the aircraft which can be fitted with cameras and other sensing devices. 
Such RPAs when fitted with surveillance equipment are known as drones.   

technological  developments  have 

led 

Whilst it is recognised that the operation of RPAs are more cost effective to undertake 
commercial and scientific activities as well as security operations including reconnaissance 
exercises,  their  use  also  represents  fresh  challenges  in  areas  such  as  privacy,  security  and 
aviation safety, and, therefore, needs to be regulated.   

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that in this regard, draft regulations have already 
been prepared by the Department of Civil Aviation and will be finalised after consultations 
with  concerned  authorities.    In  the  course  of  the  exercise,  which  is  a  complex  one,  due 
attention will be given to aligning the regulations with best practices in the European Union 
and other jurisdictions.   

Mr Ganoo: I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his answer. There was nothing 
sinister in my question. The purpose was precisely for Government to look at the new issues 
because  this  is  an  evolving  legislation  like  privacy,  security.  I  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  for  having  highlighted  again  that  this  is  a  complex  issue.    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister has informed the House that the legislation is being prepared now and they will look 

 

23 

at the best practices obtained in other jurisdictions.  We all know that in the UK, Japan, US, 
the legislation is already there and is still evolving. Therefore, may I ask the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, when the legislation is ready, whether it will be in the form of regulations or in the 
form of Bills? 

The  Prime  Minister:  So  far,  from  what  I  have  got  in  the  answer,  they  speak  of 
regulations.    Well,  we  will  see  when  finalising  it,  if  there  is  need  for  a  Bill,  of  course, 
obviously, we will come with a Bill. 

Mr Bérenger: In the meantime, obviously new regulations are required and are being 
prepared.  Can I know, in the meantime, is it free for all, as per the existing regulations which 
are outdated, obviously, dépasseés? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that is how it was, and that is how it is right now until we 

do the needful. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  India,  for  example,  they  are  preparing  new  regulations,  and  they 
have decided no drone flights until the new regulations are ready.  I am not saying that we 
must do the same thing, but the security aspect is such that I understand during the visit of 
Prime Minister Modi, drones will be banned completely.  And there is privacy also, airports 
security.  Therefore, it is a very difficult issue.  But are we going to ‘free for all’ until the new 
regulations? 

The Prime Minister: As far as I am concerned, I am prepared to ban them all. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, having heard all those issues raised by Members of 
the Opposition, and having heard the Rt. hon Prime Minister just give his views of wishing to 
ban  it  all,  may  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  ensure  that  the  regulations  or  Bill, 
whatever the shape it will take, does not tend to go towards overregulation, so much so that 
we create a situation where the use of drones for legitimate purposes, in line with the privacy 
laws of the country, are totally banned in the process, and the use of it is made so difficult 
because of permits being required and what have you?  Because we have to at least not be 
overdramatic about this whole situation. 

24 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  I  have  already  answered  that,  before  finalising,  everybody 
concerned will have a say in the matter, and whatever would come must be in the best interest 
of the country. 

CAP MALHEUREUX - POLICE STATION – CONSTRUCTION -  

(No. B/153) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if consideration is or will be given 
for the construction of a Police Station in the vicinity of Cap Malheureux and, if so, indicate - 

if a survey has been carried out in relation thereto, and 
where matters stand. 

(a) 
(b) 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the need for the construction of a Police Station in a specific locality is determined by a 
number of factors, including the population density of that region; the prevailing crime rate; 
the extent of socio-economic and commercial activities; industrial development and assets, 
and the geographical area being covered by the nearest Police Stations. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  village  of  Cap 
Malheureux  falls  under  the  policing  jurisdiction  of  Grand  Bay  Police  Station,  and  that 
Cap Malheureux and its adjoining coastal villages such as Péreybère, Calodyne, Anse la Raie, 
Petit Raffray are being adequately policed by Grand Bay, Grand Gaube and Goodlands Police 
Stations. 

I  am  also  informed  that  these  Stations  are  reinforced  by  the  Emergency  Response 
Service,  the  Divisional  Support  Unit,  CID,  ADSU,  Police  du  Tourisme  and  the  National 
Coast Guard, which assist to maintain law and order in that region. 

I  am accordingly advised by the Commissioner  of Police that the construction of a 

 
Police Station at Cap Malheureux is not envisaged for the time being.  

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
when an appropriate survey was carried out during the last three or four years to determine - 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just mentioned there was a list of criteria that they will take into 
consideration - whether there is a need for a Police Station?  I want to know from the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister if, during the last three to four years, there was such a survey that has been 

 

25 

carried  out  to  determine  whether  there  is  a  need  for  a  Police  Station  in  Cap  Malheureux, 
because in the recent years there has been an increase of the inhabitants. 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member has made his point! 

The Prime Minister: From what I have answered, the information I have from the 
Commissioner of Police is that there is no need.  Therefore, the survey must have shown that 
there is no need. 

Mr Rughoobur: I will still request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - because there is an 
increasing  demand  from  the  inhabitants  in  the  region  -  to  please  make  a  request  to  the 
Commissioner of Police to have a look and try to see if they can consider the need. 

The Prime Minister: I’ll have to ask the Commissioner of Police to have a second 

look. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Aliphon! 

PONZI SCHEMES – INQUIRY 

(No. B/154) Mr A. Aliphon  (Third Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Ponzi Schemes which 
have allegedly made one thousand nine hundred victims in the recent past, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  where 
matters stand as to the inquiries carried out thereinto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the Ponzi Scheme came to light following a case of “Embezzlement of funds” reported to 
the Rose Hill Police Station on 26 March 2013. 

Enquiry initiated by the Police revealed that there were several companies involved in 
Ponzi Schemes.  So far, 11 such companies have been identified, and 103 persons have been 
arrested in connection with this illegal activity. 

The status of the enquiries in the cases involving the 11 companies is as follows - 

(i) 

in  one  case,  the  enquiry  has  been  completed,  and  the  case  file  already 
forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice; 

 
(ii) 

26 

in  three  cases,  the  enquiry  has  been  completed,  and  the  case  files  are  being 
finalised to be sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice; 
in other three cases, the enquiry is nearly completed, and 
in four cases, the enquiry is in progress. 

(iii) 
(iv) 
Madam Speaker, I must also point out that the Asset Recovery Unit is also following 

the matter insofar as tracing and forfeiture of assets are concerned. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  answering  to  a  PNQ  two  years  ago,  the  then  Prime 
Minister  stated  that  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  would  be  going  abroad  and  secure  freezing 
orders  for  assets  that  are  outside  of  Mauritius.  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Prime  Minister 
whether he has  any information whether the Asset Recovery Unit has indeed been able to 
secure any assets outside Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister: No, Madam Speaker, I don’t have such information. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  May  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  with  regard  to  the  Ponzi 
Scheme, what amount of money has been seized, and whether after the enquiries this money 
will be refunded to the victims? 

The Prime Minister: Which money?  I don’t know what the hon. Member is talking 
about.  What money?  Where is the money?  How much money is there? We, ourselves, don’t 
know!  And all the money has not been traced out.  So, whatever money there will be will 
legitimately be refunded to those who will be deserving. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/159 addressed to the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been  withdrawn.  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has 
been  advised  that  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/172  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Business  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-
Industry  and  Food  Security.  PQ  No.  B/180  addressed  to  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister, 
Minister of Housing and Lands will now be replied by the Minister of Social Integration and 
Economic  Empowerment.    PQ  No.  B/195  addressed  to  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Housing and Lands.  PQ No. B/198 addressed to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security.  
Hon. Ameer Meea!  

 

 

27 

CATTLE (LIVE) - IMPORTATION 

(No.  B/162)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection 
whether, in regard to live cattle, beef, goats and muttons, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain information as to - 

(a) the number thereof imported in 2014, indicating the - 

(i) names of the importers thereof, and  
(ii)  measures  taken/mechanisms  put  in  place  to  control  the  selling  price  thereof, 

and  

(b) if the State Trading Corporation - 

(i) floated tenders for the freighting thereof, and  
(ii)  will  be  importing  same  with  a  view  to  reducing  the  selling  prices  thereof, 

especially during the Eid Ul Adha and end of year festivities. 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I must, at the very outset, state that the importation of 
live cattle, beef, goats and muttons is liberalised and any potential applicant complying with 
the  requirements  of  an  import  permit  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 
Security is authorised to import these live animals. 

As regards part (a)(i) of the question, I am informed by the Ministry of Agro-Industry 
and Food Security that, in 2014, a total of eight thousand three hundred and twenty (8,320) 
live cattle, beef, goats and muttons was imported by four importers, namely - 

(1) Socovia Belle Vue Ltée; 

(2) Bosmara Cattle Breeders Ltd; 

(3) Mauritius Meat Authority, and 

(4) Medine Ltd. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (a)(ii) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
on 12 September 2014, the then Government agreed to the Ministry of Industry, Commerce 
and Consumer Protection making regulations under the Consumer Protection Act to provide 
for a maximum mark-up on the sale of live cattle on the occasion of Eid Ul Adha with a view 
to protecting consumers interest.  The retail selling price of imported live cattle for Eid Ul 
Adha  2014  was,  therefore,  fixed  at  Rs139.50  per  kg,  based  on  the  costing  submitted  by 

 

28 

Socovia Ltd at a mark-up of 25% on the CIF value.  This was in line with section 4 of the 
Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) Act. 

In addition to this, I am informed that officers of the Consumer Affairs Unit effected 
checks on the sites where live cattle were sold with a view to controlling any abuse in terms 
of pricing.  The Legal Metrology Services also ensured that the weighing scales being used 
were properly calibrated in order to avoid any abuse and unfair practices. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)(i)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  State 
Trading  Corporation  that  on  19  September  2014,  at  a  meeting  held  at  the  Ministry  of 
Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection under the chairmanship of the then Minister 
and  where  representatives  of  Mauritius  Meat  Authority  (MMA)  and  State  Trading 
Corporation  (STC)  were  present,  it  was  decided  that  STC  should  launch  a  Request  for 
Quotation (RFQ) for the importation of live cattle, sheep and goats for slaughter. 

 The RFQ was launched on 22 September 2014 with closing date on 30 September 

2014.  I am informed that four offers were received. 

The bidders also informed that livestock carriers serving South Africa and Mauritius 
are very rare and expensive because the market is small and a vessel has to be repositioned 
from another port to South Africa in case of need. 

Subsequently, on 28 October 2014, the STC invited companies for an Expression of 
Interest  (EoI)  for  transportation  services  of  livestock  by  sea  from  South  Africa  to 
Mauritius.  The livestock vessel was to accommodate up to 500 cattle of average weight of 
450  kg  each.   On  the  closing  date,  21  November  2014,  two  companies  submitted  their 
offers.  Both companies could not find livestock vessels that could accommodate up to 500 
cattle.  Instead, they proposed bigger vessels which could carry in the range of 800 to 2,625 
cattle per trip. 

Based on the price proposals received from the potential bidders, it was clear that the 
retail  prices  of  cattle,  goats  and  sheep  were  found  not  to  be  cost-  effective  in  view  of  the 
increase in the freight as a result of the number of cattle that was intended to be transported 
per trip to Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)(ii) of  the  question,  in  accordance  with  the 
objectives set out in section 4 of the State Trading Corporation Act of 1982, the STC sources 

 

29 

and  imports  selected  essential  strategic  commodities,  including  petroleum  products, 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), long grain white rice and wheat flour to meet the needs of 
the domestic market.  The import of live animals for slaughter is not envisaged by the STC. 

However,  I  am  now  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Meat  Authority  that  it  intends  to 
import  live  cattle,  goats  and  sheep  to  regulate  the  market  to  control  unfair  practices.  
Moreover, I am also informed that a new company has been granted an import permit by the 
Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security for the importation of live cattle.  Any other 
importer willing to import live cattle will be granted import permits.  The Government will 
provide all the necessary facilities to ensure that there are new players in this particular field 
of activity with a view to bringing more competition for the benefit of the consumers. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  anticipation  of  the  forthcoming  Eid  Ul  Adha  festival  which,  I 
understand, will be celebrated at around September 2015, I met the main importers of live 
cattle, beef, goats and muttons with a view to bringing down the prices of these items. 

I have to inform the House that the meeting was very positive and they have given me 
an assurance that they will work towards bringing down further the prices of live animals for 
the Eid Ul Adha and end of year festivities 2015 compared to 2014. 

Mr Ameer Meea: I thank the hon. Minister for his reply, but can I ask him if he is 
aware that there is a cartel in Mauritius and that this cartel has been on since several years, 
and  that  in  Mauritius  all  throughout  the  year,  the  prices  remained  stable  for  price  of  live 
cattle, but when the festivities for Eid Ul Adha and end of year festivities approach, we see a 
sudden rise in the prices? So, despite the hon. Minister saying that he met them… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  come  with  your  question.  Don’t  make  a 

statement, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea: …and he reassured that everything would be done, can I ask him to 
see to it that these people are taken to task because every year it is the same story and the 
prices never go down? 

Mr  Gungah: Madam Speaker,  I  am very  well  aware of the situation that has been 
prevailing for years. Now that a new Government is here, we are going to take this matter 
seriously. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

30 

Mr Bérenger: If I heard the hon. Minister clearly, the STC carried out an in-depth 
enquiry and found that it was not cost-effective. I take it, it was not financially interesting for 
the  State  Trading  Corporation  to  go  into  this,  and  yet,  we  are  informed  that  the  Mauritius 
Meat Authority is going to do the same at a loss. Can I ask the two hon. Ministers concerned, 
but  the  hon.  Minister  replying,  is  the  Mauritius  Meat  Authority  really  better  equipped  to 
import this cattle to regulate the market, then the State Trading Corporation, and what kind of 
an  importing,  trading  at  a  loss  are  we  talking  about  in  the  case  of  the  Mauritius  Meat 
Authority? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I am informed that from the time when the experience 
of STC and Mauritius Meat Authority decided to carry out these activities and, as at now, 
there have been changes in transportation facilities for the cattle. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With a view of trying to ensure that - as 
hon. Ameer Meea explained - just before the festivities, that the price does not take a hike for 
the reason that there is a festivity and more people would require to buy live cattle, could the 
hon. Minister consider, once again, for the second time, as was done last year, that the laws 
be amended, the regulations be once again brought in in order to ensure that there is a control 
of price during this festivity in order to stop people from making an abuse of the situation 
specifically during this period? 

Mr Gungah:  Madam Speaker, as I said, we are here for less than three months and this 
matter is going to be given consideration and I am proposing to set up a committee to look 
into it. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  One way of regulating the market is also to 
encourage local farmers to rear cattle.  So, may I know from the hon. Minister - I know it is 
probably not directly under his Ministry – whether consideration would be given to come up 
with  schemes  and  to  make  State  lands  available  for  those  who  want  to  rear  cattle  and 
muttons? 

Mr Gungah:  All incentives will be given, Madam Speaker, to these people. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

31 

Mr Ameer Meea:  In the answer to the hon. Leader of the Opposition’s question, the 
hon. Minister answered that the STC when they did the quotation, the tender process, did not 
find it viable  and then after that, things have changed  and now it is the Meat  Authority  – 
according to the answer of the hon. Minister – which finds it interesting.  So, can I ask the 
hon. Minister whether the STC could float new tenders? Because things have changed, prices 
have gone down; prices of freight, prices of whatever.  Could the STC do new tenders so that 
it is STC which does the importation?  

Mr Gungah:  Madam Speaker, STC does not have the expertise in this field. 

Madam Speaker:  Next Question, hon. Ameer Meea!  

AGALEGA - - PROJECTS EARMARKED 

(No. B/163) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping 
and Outer Islands whether, in regard to Agalega, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Outer Islands Development Corporation, information as to where matters stand in 
relation  to  each  of  the  six  projects  earmarked  in  the  Programme  Based  Budget  2012  for 
implementation.  

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  regarding  the  six  projects  referred  to  by  the  hon. 
Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East  for  implementation  by  the 
Outer Islands Development Corporation, I am informed by the Outer  Islands Development 
Corporation that the status of the projects is as follows – 

(i) 

Refugee Centre Project  

This project relates to the construction of a Refugee Centre on South Island at 
Agalega.  Initially, the project value was Rs11 m. and started in October 2012 
and the expected date of completion was scheduled by the end of 2015. The 
project consists of two phases.  As per the Engineer report, only 67% of Phase 
has  been  completed  and  Phase  II  has  not  yet  started.    The  amount  already 
disbursed for that project represents 48% of the project value, i.e. Rs1.9 m. out 
of Rs4.1 m.  

(ii)  Rehabilitation of Airstrip   

 

32 

Tenders were launched in December 2011 for the rehabilitation of the airstrip, 
but the amount tendered was in the range of Rs318-Rs350 m. against Rs120 
m. which was the amount earmarked for the project in 2012.  The Corporation 
did not go ahead with the project. 

(iii)  Rehabilitation of Coconut Plantation 

Under  this  project,  at  the  cost  of  Rs0.6  m.,  the  Corporation  purchased  two 
dehusking  machines  for  dehusking  of  coconuts.    In  the  past,  such  activities 
were carried out manually.   

(iv)  Fire Fighting Project 

I understand that a fire fighting vehicle was purchased in July 2013 at the cost 
of Rs15.7 m. I am advised by the Corporation that the vehicle is still awaiting 
shipment  to  Agalega.    Apparently,  the  Corporation  is  having  transportation 
problems as the vehicle cannot be dismantled for shipment.  The vehicle is still 
lying at Coromandel Fire Station and I learnt that the warranty on the vehicle 
will expire in July 2015.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, allow the hon. Minister to reply, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, I am on my feet! 

Mr Koonjoo:   

(v)  Construction of Houses   

The  houses  are  meant  for  the  inhabitants  of  Agalega.    The  project  value  is 
Rs2.9  m.  Two  duplex  type  quarters  have  already  been  constructed  and  are 
currently being occupied by four families comprising of eight members.  Each 
duplex comprises two housing units.  

(vi)  Installation of Solar Panel   

The project has never been implemented.  The amount of Rs1.5 m. earmarked 
for  the  installation  of  solar  panel  has  been  reallocated  for  the  renovation  of 
two houses.  The two houses are occupied by the Officer-in-Charge of South 

 

33 

Island  and  the  other  one  by  the  daughter  of  the  Officer-in-Charge  with  her 
family. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    All  these  projects  have  been 

announced since several years, but nothing has been done.   

(Interruptions) 

In  every Budget, every  year it is announced and nothing has been done.   I know the hon. 
Minister  just  assumed  office,  but  can  I  ask  him  if  he  can  give  a  time  frame  for  all  these 
projects to be implemented urgently as the situation there is chaotic? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, I can’t give a time frame when these projects will start 
and when they will be completed, but I can assure the hon. Member that I have gone through 
the files of the Outer Islands and I have contacted the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and also the 
hon. Minister of Good Governance and I have asked to carry out a forensic audit to find out.. 

(Interruptions) 

…what are the situations financially in the outer islands? 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Regarding this specific fire service lorry 
which cannot be transported to Agalega, can the hon. Minister consider to open an inquiry 
and, if need be, refer this case to the Police? 

Mr Koonjoo:  I just answered, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Minister will agree with me that 
there is an urgent need of action there.  Can I ask the hon. Minister if he is planning to visit 
Agalega in the meantime?  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker. 

 

34 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No cross-talking, please!  Allow the hon. Minister to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

I will definitely do so after the Budget and I will ask the hon. Member to accompany me. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, did you get the reply of the hon. Minister. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Yes.  A last question!  Concerning the lorry for the Fire Station, 
since it has now been established that the vehicle won’t be able to travel to Agalega, can I ask 
the  hon.  Minister  it  would  be  simple  to  redeploy  such  vehicle  to  a  local  station,  here,  in 
Mauritius because it is a waste of public funds. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo:  I will look into it, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for 

lunch. 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.39 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

FOOTBALL ACADEMY – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/164)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the project for the setting up of 
a  Football  Academy  by  an  English  Premier  League  team,  as  stated  in  the  Government 
Programme 2015-2019, he will state where matters stand. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  Government 
Programme 2015-2019 makes reference to the setting up of a high level football Academy in 
collaboration with an English Premier League Soccer Club. 

Madam Speaker, since I took office as Minister, I am having consultations with all the 
stakeholders on the proposed project of the setting-up of a Football Academy. Discussions 

 

35 

are still going on. Once agreement has been reached on the modalities  of operation of the 
proposed  Football  Academy,  the  project  will  be  implemented  in  collaboration  with  West 
Ham United or any other football club, as I must add that many foreign football teams have 
also expressed interest in the project. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, vu que l’honorable ministre a mentionné le nom 
de West Ham United, peut-on savoir s’il y a eu des correspondances échangées avec le club 
en question et de bien vouloir, bien sûr, déposer copies sur la Table de l’Assemblée de ces 
correspondances? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, these are high level meetings and hon. Pravind 
Jugnauth, on a private visit, went to West Ham himself, and we had discussions there, and 
definitely, my office is in contact. We are having proposals from other football clubs as well. 
So, we are looking into all the matters. 

Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister inform the House, at some stage, before the 
elections, there was the issue of Sam Allardyce who was referred to as a very well-known 
football coach? Could the hon. Minister inform the House whether Sam Allardyce came to 
Mauritius voluntarily, whether free-of-charge, out of the goodness of his heart or did anyone 
find  it,  out  of  the  goodness  of  their  heart,  necessary  to  sponsor  such  an  event,  which  is 
important? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Member should agree with me 
that we were in the Opposition and football teams like West Ham and Sam Allardyce was 
never  forced  to  come  to  Mauritius.  He  came  on  his  own  voluntarily  to  give  his  help  to 
improve football in Mauritius. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, can I ask the hon. Minister whether the project will 

be funded by Government or will it be a private venture? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  it  is  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  that’s  why  we  are 

discussing with all the stakeholders. The discussion is still going on. 

Mr Mohamed: Since I am happy to hear that this gentleman, Sam Allardyce, out of 
the goodness of his heart, came over voluntarily to Mauritius to help, could the hon. Minister 
now confirm that his ticket, his hotel, his stay here or consultancy fees were at no point at all 
charged to any person, be it private or public and it was all free? 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, he came on his own on our invitation. At that time, we 

36 

were not in Government. So, everything was private. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, si je comprends bien la réponse du ministre, est-ce 
qu’il est en train de dire à la Chambre que, jusqu’à présent, il n’y  a eu  aucune discussion 
approfondie avec la direction de West Ham United, il est clair que pour pouvoir concrétiser 
ce genre de projet, on ne peut pas discuter avec l’entraineur. Toute décision doit être prise par 
la direction du club ou des clubs en question. Alors, ma question est la suivante: est-ce que 
l’honorable ministre est en train de nous dire que tout ceci ressemble à ce qu’on a vu dans le 
passé avec le bluff de la venue de Liverpool à Maurice ou bien est-ce que c’est effectivement 
un projet sérieux qui sera concrétisé? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker,  I have just answered to the hon.  Member that 
discussions are still going on, but if my colleague has other proposals, I will invite him to do 
so. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has made mention of other clubs apart from West 

Ham. Can we have an idea of the names of those clubs which he has contacted? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we had a request from Celtic and Bastia.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

BEAU BASSIN & PETITE RIVIÈRE - YOUTH CENTRES – FACILITIES 

(No.  B/165)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Youth  Centres  in 
Constituency No. 20, Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière, he will state, in each case, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

opening hours thereof; 

staff attached thereto, and 

facilities and equipment available thereat. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  two  youth  centres  namely  Barkly  and  Mont 
Roches  Youth  Centres  are  operational  in  Constituency  No.  20  -  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite 
Rivière. 

Like all other youth centres, these two Youth Centres operate up to 18.00 hours from 
Monday to Saturday. The centres also are made available to youth organisations on request 

 

37 

for the conduct of activities for the benefit of the youth at any time beyond normal opening 
hours. 

A Youth Officer is posted at each of the two Youth Centres. They work under the 

supervision of a Senior Youth Officer and a Principal Youth Officer.  

The Barkly Youth Centre comprises a committee room, a Computer Room with free 
internet  facilities  and  a  multi-purpose  hall  for  the  practice  of  boxing,  table  tennis,  dance, 
music,  zumba,  fitness  activities  and  indoor  games.  A  learning  corner  with  all  necessary 
equipment and materials will be launched shortly at the centre. I would like to stress the fact 
that  the  Computer  Room  has  been  fully  refurbished  with  the  assistance  of  the  National 
Empowerment  Foundation  and  all  IT  equipment  is  new.  The  facility  will  soon  be 
inaugurated.   The Mont Roches Youth Centre, on the other hand, offers free internet indoor 
games and committee room facilities, and also outdoor activities like pétanque, volleyball, 
basketball and street football. 

Madam Speaker, as regards equipment available at Youth Centres, I am circulating 

the information. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, je dois demander au ministre s’il est au courant 
que le centre de Jeunesse de Mont Roches, actuellement, n’a pas d’officier en charge ; qu’il 
n’y a aucune activité qui est organisée, et que le centre lui-même demande à être rénové ou il 
serait  préférable,  je  pense,  de  doter  cette  région  d’un  nouveau  centre  vu  la  grosse 
concentration de jeunes qui s’y trouvent. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Okay, I will definitely ask my officers to have a look into it. If 

need be we will do it. 

Mr Bhagwan: Concerning the Youth Centres over the years, as far back as 1983-84, 
it  was  the  policy  of  all  Governments  to  have  these  Youth  Centres  reserved  for  sports 
activities  and  political  parties  have  been  debarred  from  having  the  use  of  these  Youth 
Centres. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether there is a new policy or whether the same policy 
will  be  maintained  as  far  as  the  use  of  Youth  Centres  exclusively  for  youth  activities  and 
none for political activities are concerned? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, the same policy will be involved. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, avec votre permission, je dois attirer l’attention du 
ministre  du  fait  que  les  centres  de  jeunesse  actuellement  ferment  à  18  heures  et  je  suis 

 

38 

persuadé qu’il est bien au courant de cela, et c’est l’heure à laquelle les jeunes sont libres 
pour pouvoir bénéficier des services qui sont offerts dans les centres. Alors, ma question est 
la  suivante:  est-ce  que  le  ministre  n’envisage-t-il  pas  de  revoir  les  heures  d’ouverture  des 
centres de jeunesse dans la circonscription No. 20 et dans le pays, en général? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  if  the  hon.  Member  has  seen  it  in  our 

Programme, it is clearly written that all youth centres operation hours will be reviewed. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed! 

 MAURITIUS/SOUTH AFRICA - DOUBLE TAXATION AGREEMENT 

(No.  B/166)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Non-Double  Taxation  Agreement  signed  between  the 
Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of South Africa, he will state where matters stand, 
indicating if he is in presence of information indicating whether other countries having signed 
similar agreements with the Republic of South Africa have also had theirs reviewed along the 
same lines as the one existing between our two countries. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between 
Mauritius and South Africa was signed in July 1996 and it came into force in June 1997. This 
Agreement was revised at the request of South Africa which had expressed concerns about 
the use of the 1996 Treaty in a manner that was not originally intended. 

Following  consultations  between  South  Africa  and  Mauritius,  a  revised  agreement 
was signed on 17 May 2013 but has not yet entered into force. The revised agreement has 
been ratified by South Africa but is yet to be ratified by Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that concerns were raised by operators of our global 
business sector principally on the application of the new Article 4 subparagraph (3) which 
relates as to how a company having a dual residence status would be dealt with under the 
proposed mutual agreement process to resolve dual residency issues should both countries not 
agree. 

Under the proposed tax treaty, the effective management criterion is substituted with 
an  administrative  discretion.  Accordingly,  South  Africa  Revenue  Service  (SARS)  and  the 
Mauritian authorities will endeavour to reach mutual agreement on whether a dual resident 
company should be taxed only in Mauritius or only in South Africa. If SARS does not reach 

 

39 

an agreement, the dual resident company will then be subject to double Taxation and this is 
where the issue lies in the absence of clarity. 

Madam Speaker, though certainty regarding the application of the proposed Article 4 
of the revised agreement is expected to develop over time, to give immediate comfort to our 
investors and ensure consistency of the revised Article 4, Mauritius firmly believes it would 
be appropriate to detail the process and both quantitative and qualitative requirements would 
be followed by our competent authorities to settle reported cases of dual residence issues. 

To that effect, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development together with the 
Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  and  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  in  consultation  with 
industry  stakeholders  have  worked  out  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  detailing  the 
process and requirements to be followed by the competent authorities to resolve cases of dual 
residence through the mutual agreement mechanism. 

Following  consultations,  a  draft  MoU  detailing  the  process  to  be  followed  by  the 
competent authorities to settle cases where there are issues of dual residence through a mutual 
agreement process and also a request that Mauritius benefits from the most favoured nation 
treatment  which  is  not  less  favourable  than  the  treatment  granted  to  South  Africa’s  other 
treaty partners was forwarded to the South African authorities on 26 August 2014.  

On 22 October 2014, the Department of International Relations and Co-operation of 
the  Republic  of  South  Africa  submitted  counter  proposals  on  the  mutual  agreement 
requirements to settle issues of dual residency.  Furthermore, the South African authorities 
then  informed  that  they  do  not  propose  to  extend  the  scope  of  the  Most  Favoured  Nation 
clause with respect to the mutual agreement process in settling dual residency issues.  

Discussions are currently ongoing on the draft MoU between the Mauritius and South 

African authorities and we expect to submit our proposals on the revised MoU soon. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the second part of the question, according to information 
published  by  the  South  African  Revenue  Service  (SARS),  which  is  South  Africa’s  tax 
collecting  authority,  South  Africa  has  renegotiated  or  is  in  the  process  of  renegotiating  its 
Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreements  with  Germany,  Lesotho,  Malawi,    Namibia, 
Singapore,  Zambia  and  Zimbabwe.    However,  it  appears  that  none  of  these  renegotiated 
agreements  have  so  far  come  into  force.  As  such,  we  do  not  have  any  details  about  the 

 

40 

changes that have been made or proposed to be made to that. South Africa is also negotiating 
the amendment of Protocols with a number of its other treaty partners. 

Madam Speaker, I also wish to add that, since the start of my mandate, my Ministry 
has already  engaged in  discussions with various stakeholders of the  global business sector 
with  respect  to  the  proposed  growth  strategy  of  the  financial  services  sector  in  Mauritius. 
Consultations also covered potential threats and also identified opportunities in the light of 
the  Proposed  Base  Erosion  and  Profit  Sharing  (BEPS)  initiative  which  is  currently  taking 
place in accordance with the directives of the G20. 

This, Madam Speaker, is exactly the subject of debate and discussion with the South 
African authorities as the proposed Article 4 on the determination of the residency status of a 
contracting state in the case of dual residence through a mutual agreement process is expected 
to  be  in  line  with  the  proposed  OECD  Treaty  Model  under  the  BEPS  initiative.  This  is 
something we need to look into because GAAR seems not to be an issue anymore now after 
the Indian Government has pronounced itself on that. 

Madam Speaker, in the light of the challenges facing the industry, I have decided, as I 
stated before, to reactivate the Financial Services Consultative Council which will be chaired 
by myself and will include the Governor of the Central Bank, the  Financial Secretary, the 
Chief Executive of the FSC, the Chairman of the FSC and other representatives of the global 
business  sector  with  the  aim  to  proactively  turning  such  threats  facing  our  industry  into 
opportunities and act upon the identified opportunities in a timely and proactive manner. The 
FSCC will be meeting by the end of this month, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Does the hon. Minister still have a long statement? 

Mr Bhadain: No. 

Madam Speaker:  If the hon. Minister has a long statement, he better circulates it. 

Mr Bhadain: I have got four lines left, Madam Speaker.  

Representatives of my Ministry will also be in Johannesburg after April 2015 and we 
will take the opportunity to take stock of the status of discussions on the treaty between our 
two countries, in order to conclude on this issue and, of course, establish a clear way forward. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

 
Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker  and  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his 

41 

detailed answer. 

(Interruptions) 

With regard to the Non-Double Taxation Agreement being referred to with the Republic of 
South  Africa,  at  some  stage,  this  whole  process  had  started  out  with  the  hon.  Minister 
Jugnauth and then the hon. Deputy Prime Minister Duval. 

According  to  information  there  are  many  other  countries,  as  the  hon.  Minister  has 
explained, that are in the midst of renegotiating the agreement with the Republic of South 
Africa. But, they have decided not to proceed with what the Republic of South Africa has 
proposed  and  Mauritius  happens  to  be  the  only  country  that  has  signed  up  to  this  whole 
agreement. Does not the hon. Minister believe that there is a danger that Mauritius is placing 
itself  in  a  situation  of  uncertainty  by  having  agreed  to  the  new  deal  as  proposed  and  as 
negotiated as opposed to other competitors who, in various other jurisdictions, have agreed 
unanimously - strangely enough - not to themselves deal with the South African authorities 
and do not want to negotiate? Have we not put ourselves in a situation where our competitors 
will be at an advantage compared to us? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes,  of  course.  I  mentioned  before,  Madam  Speaker,  that  there  are 
issues which have been raised by operators in the global business sector in Mauritius. We are 
well aware of these issues and this is why the previous Government came up with a draft 
Memorandum of Understanding which we are now looking into. We are going to take this 
forward and whatever we will do, of course, will be in the best interest of Mauritius.  We will 
also ensure that the qualms of the operators in the global business sector are well taken into 
consideration and, at the end of the day, when we go ahead it will be for the interest of our 
country. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I raised this very same issue in 2013 when the Deputy 
Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval was the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Finance. 
Would  not  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  agree  with  me  that  the  problem  with  all  this  DTA  stems  from  the  fact  that  the 
officers of the Income Tax Department went ahead and signed a treaty as far back as in May 
2013 without consulting stakeholders and now, after le fait accompli, we are having to ask 
the South Africans to go back on what we ourselves had signed and agreed? Would not the 

 

42 

hon.  Minister  agree  that  going  forward  before  his  Ministry  takes  any  decision  concerning 
Double Taxation Treaty there should be wide consultations with the stakeholders? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes.  That  is  exactly  what  we  are  doing,  Madam  Speaker.  We  are 
holding  wide  consultations  with  everybody  and  we  want  everybody  to  come  up with their 
opinion so that we can actually take an informed decision which is in the best interest of all 
the parties and of course, we want our industry to succeed.  

Having said that, this is also why I am setting up the Financial Services Consultative 
Council  because  this  is  the  Council  which  will  act  as  the  think  tank  for  this  sector  of  the 
economy so that we can actually identify those growth opportunities. I cannot be responsible 
for what has been done before.  Certainly, we will take this forward and make it work for the 
interest of Mauritius. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has given us a lot of details of the consultations and 
so on taking place here in Mauritius. From what I understand, there are several countries that 
are refusing to agree to what our South African brothers and sisters - they can be ‘tough’ to 
use  the  diplomatic  word.    Can  I  know  how  many  SADC  countries  we  find  among  those 
countries that have run into trouble with South Africa on that issue and whether there is any 
attempt to get those SADC countries together when facing South Africa? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  first  and  foremost,  I  don’t  know  whether  these 
countries are actually running into all those problems mentioned by the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition. They are renegotiating.  This is what is stated by SARS in South Africa and they 
would know the terms and conditions of the renegotiation. We are not aware of whether they 
do not want to do business with South Africa on this issue. Having said that, the countries I 
mentioned, apart from Germany and Singapore, in terms of African nations involved we have 
Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Of course, we can also consult them. We 
will certainly do that. 

Having  said  that,  with  regard  to  the  consultations  which  have  taken  place  in 
Mauritius, the operators in the sector are well aware of all these issues because they are the 
ones  who  are  going  out  there  in  Africa  and  doing  their  business.  Government  is  here  to 
facilitate the process for them and we will certainly use all our endeavours to do that. I am 
answering  this  question  as  Minister  of  Financial  Services  and  as  Minister  of  Good 

 

43 

Governance  like  my  hon.  friend  has  been  telling.  On  good  governance,  I  am  dealing  with 
other matters. 

Mr Mohamed: In the light of all the remarks that have been made by the hon. Minister 
-  which  I  find  very  interesting  -  may  I  humbly  suggest  that  Government  considers  the 
possibility of getting in touch with the Government of South Africa and use all diplomatic 
channels for that purpose in order to ensure that whatever was agreed upon in 2013 or before 
is  halted,  pending  to  what  goes  on  with  other  countries  and  other  States  that  are  in 
negotiations  with  the  Republic  of  South  Africa.  That  would  ensure  that  we  do  not  put 
ourselves in a situation where our competitors have this competitive edge or that we lose our 
competitive edge. To put it simply that we approach the Government of South Africa, use all 
diplomatic  channels,  use  our  friendship  with  the  people  of  South  Africa,  to  ensure  that 
whatever  was  agreed  upon  in  2013  is  halted  until  there  is  more  visibility  as  far  as  the 
negotiations that our competitors are making with the people of South Africa are concerned. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes,  we  will  certainly  do  that,  Madam  Speaker.  As  I  have  stated,  we 
have a team from my Ministry who will be visiting South Africa in April 2015. There is a 
conference  which  is  being  held  over  there  and  apart  from  that,  we  will  be  meeting  the 
representatives and our counterparts over there. I am a firm believer, Madam Speaker, that in 
the face of adversity, always lies the opportunity. We are going to take those opportunities 
forward. 

Madam Speaker: Next question hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

ROUTE DES PAMPLEMOUSSES  - RAISED JUNCTION PLATFORMS 
(No. B/167) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the Route des Pamplemousses, from the junction of Vallée des Prêtres to the Kadhafi Square, 
he will state if consideration will be given for the introduction of raised junction platforms as 
a new means to enhance road safety and thereby making its use along the said road as a test 
case to be replicated elsewhere if it produces results, if so required. 

Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  a  raised  junction  is  generally 
restricted to roads with moderate to low traffic and not to those whose primary function is to 
deliver traffic from motorways to secondary roads. Such high capacity roads are termed as 
main arterial roads and Route des Pamplemousses falls in that category. In fact, Route des 

 

44 

Pamplemousses is a 900m road which takes traffic from the M2 Dual Carriageway to connect 
to the city centre at Khadafi Square, through the A2 road, at Abercrombie roundabout.  

Construction of raised platforms along Route des Pamplemousses could give rise to a 
number of problems including reduction in traffic performance, in terms of traffic throughout 
and travel time and forcing motorists to opt for less appropriate routes. In view thereof, other 
road safety measures such as pedestrian crossings, traffic lights, parking restrictions and one 
way schemes have already been implemented in that region.  

Madam Speaker, however, as regards raised platform, due consideration can be given to 
the suggestion and its construction on a trial basis as a pilot basis, on roads with moderate 
traffic  volume.  If  proven  satisfactory  it  may  then  be  replicated  on  roads  with  similar 
characteristics. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer. This is a suggestion that I have 
made some time back with regard to raised platforms. Are they the same experts at the level 
of his Ministry who have basically kept on saying that raised platforms are not the solutions 
for Route des Pamplemousses? Because raised platforms as such do not exist in Mauritius. It 
seems  as  though  because  it  is  a  new  method  of  reducing  traffic  velocity  and  reducing  the 
number  of  accidents  and  risk  of  road  accidents  that  people  are  réfractaires  to  this  whole 
novelty.  Could the hon. Minister look into the possibility of it being installed in Route des 
Pamplemousses  again  or  the  adjacent  roads?  There  are  no  traffic  lights  and  traffic  humps 
there and more and more people from that region are complaining because people have no 
discipline in the way they drive? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, not everything has a … 

(Interruptions) 

I think that the hon. Member has made a good suggestion. In fact, in Reunion island, these 
raised platforms are being used.  There are platforms about 10 cm2 and cover the whole road 
and which can lead to lessen the speed. But the problem is where do we put them?  So, we 
can try some on a pilot basis. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  the  same  issue,  since  the  hon.  Minister  is  well  aware  of  the 
traffic at Route des Pamplemousses and the junction of Vallée des Prêtres which is a very 
busy one, can I appeal to the hon. Minister whether he can convey to the Commissioner of 
Police to put policemen in the morning and in the evening especially on Saturday because 
there is a market fair there and the traffic is a real nightmare? 

 

45 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, we will certainly do that and we will also consider the 

possibility of traffic lights there. 

MBC – LICENCE FEE 

(No. B/168) Dr R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the payment 
by households of the monthly  fee of Rs150 to the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he 
will state if he will consider recommending a revision downwards thereof to Rs100 in the 
forthcoming budget. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, in 2002 when the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 
(MBC) had three (3) analogue TV channels, the TV licence fee was Rs100 per month. Since 
then, there have been developments and now there are 17 digital TV channels being offered 
to viewers alongside three analogue TV channels. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  may  recall  that  licence  fee  was  revised  upwards 

from Rs100 to Rs150 per month in August 2013.  

When this Government took over in December 2014, we discovered that the financial 
situation of the MBC was in the red with overdrafts of Rs235 m. and debts of Rs960 m. The 
immediate priority of the MBC is to reduce its costs which has already started with a cost 
reduction  of  Rs2  m.  per  month. We  are  also  awaiting  the  conclusion  of  the  enquiry  being 
conducted  by  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, which will also look into the financial aspects of the Corporation.  

Therefore, in the given circumstances, I am informed that it will not be wise to reduce 

the licence fee. 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister saying the difficult financial 
situation  as  clearly  described  by  him.  Now,  with  a  view  of  trying  to  alleviate  the  difficult 
financial situation which the MBC finds itself in; could the Government consider as a means 
of raising funds or has the Government consider already the possibility of privatising two of 
the channels there, and if that is the case, has the Government been informed by interested 
parties as to who would be interested in such a privatisation process, and if so, who would 
they be? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I think the hon. Member is jumping the gun because there is a 

question on privatisation of the two channels that is coming.  So, I’ll answer that. 

 
 

 

46 

SHORT MESSAGE SERVICES  - LEVY 

(No. B/169) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne &Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Short 
Message Services, he will state if he will consider recommending a waiver of the levy of the 
10 cents tax per message in the forthcoming budget. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Luchmeenaraidoo):  
Madam Speaker, the issue regarding waiver of the levy applicable on Short Message Services 
would be considered in the context of the forthcoming Budget exercise. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House, at least, of the amount of money 

collected by means of this levy in the past years? 

Mr  Luchmeenaraidoo:    Yes,  revenue  from  levy  was  Rs92  m.  in  2012,  Rs99  m.  in 
2013 and Rs85 m. in 2014. This is expecting by the fact that more and more people are using 
mobile  applications  like  Skype,  Viber  and  WhatsApp  for  the  communication  with  permits 
which commit them to send free messages via Internet connection. 

Dr. Sorefan: Are we to understand from the hon. Minister that Government intends to 

remove this 10 cents tax on Short Message in the coming Budget? 

Mr  Luchmeenaraidoo:    Well,  I  have  never  said  that.  But  what  I  am  saying  is  that 
based  on  statistics,  revenue  is  decreasing  because  the  public  is  using  more  and  more  free 
Internet facilities through Viber and WhatsApp. 

 

PRE-PRIMARY & PRIMARY SCHOOLS - FLUORIDE TABLETS - 

DISTRIBUTION 

(No. B/170) Dr R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the prevention of tooth decay, he 
will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  a  reintroduction  of  the  distribution  of  fluoride 
tablets in the pre-primary and primary schools of mainland Mauritius, of Rodrigues and of 
Agalega. 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  in  order  to  meet  the 
dental  needs  of  the  population,  my  Ministry  provides  dental  care  in  58  dental  clinics 
throughout the island including three mobile dental clinics targeting the school population. 
There  are  also  three  dental  clinics  in  Rodrigues.  For  Agalega,  a  dental  surgeon  visits  the 
island three times a year to provide care to local inhabitants.   

 

47 

With regard to the use of fluoride, my Ministry subscribes to WHO guidelines about the 
benefits  of  fluoride  in  the  prevention  of  dental  diseases.    However,  according  to  WHO 
Technical Report of 1994, fluoride tablets have limited application as a public health measure 
and are recommended only for at-risk children. 

My Ministry is also envisaging to seek WHO assistance to conduct a National Oral 
Health Survey soon in Mauritius, with a view to formulating a National Oral Health Plan of 
action.  The plan will define our future preventive strategies in relation to Oral Health.  My 
Ministry  will  stand  guided  with  the  recommendations  of  WHO  with  regard  to  the  use  of 
fluoride tablets for the prevention of tooth decay in school children. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Minister whether he is 
aware that we had several researches and documents since 1950, and that fluoride is the best 
preventive measure? The hon. Minister has mentioned a lot of clinics; those are curative. To 
reduce  the  cost  in  the  long  run,  prevention  is  better  than  cure.    I  take  it  that  this  new 
Government will go mainly on prevention … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sorefan, what is your question? 
Dr. Sorefan: Do not go on WHO requirements, go on Mauritian requirements.  From 

a dental point of view, we find fluoride is the best preventive measure. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Sorefan,  are  you  making  a  statement  or  are  you  asking  a 

question? 

Mr  Gayan:  I  understand  the  hon.  Member  to  be  asking  about  the  introduction  of 
fluoride.  May  I say, Madam Speaker, that fluoride is used mainly in toothpaste, which is 
widely  available  in  Mauritius.    We  will  certainly  look  into  whatever  the  World  Health 
Organisation says, but at least we trust the world body about this matter. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  on  what  frequency  do  dentists  go  to 

Agaléga? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Well, I did say, Madam Speaker.  Three times a year.  

 

LOCAL AUTHORITIES - GPS PROJECT  

(No. B/171) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the GPS Project for Local 
Authorities, he will state - 

(a) 
(b) 

who advised the implementation thereof;  
if a prior study was carried out in relation thereto and, if so, indicate  

 

(c) 

48 

by whom;  
when and, 
the cost thereof and;  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
if tenders were called for the supply and installation thereof and, if so, 
Indicate  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

when;  
the name of the successful bidder thereof, and  
the cost thereof. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  an  analysis  of  the  scavenging 
services at each local authority was carried out by the Local Authorities Governance Unit of 
my Ministry in 2012 to assess amongst others, the costs of refuse collection services and the 
fleet profile, namely the types, conditions, age, capacity utilisation and replacement policy of 
vehicles.    The  Local  Authorities  Governance  Unit  subsequently  recommended,  amongst 
others, the introduction of the Global Positioning System for vehicle tracking with a view to 
help save on vehicle running cost while making better use of the existing fleet and manpower, 
with a view to improving quality of service. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that a study of waste collection 
systems in two local authorities was carried by the Faculty of Engineering of the University 
of Mauritius in 2012. 

As  far  as  part  (c)  of  the  question  is  concerned,  I  am  informed  that,  following  a 
procurement  exercise    carried  out  on  06  August  2014,    the  contract  was  awarded  to 
Navigation and Geocoding Technologies Ltd, the lowest evaluated substantially responsive 
bidder for the amount of Rs22,221,834.00 (inclusive of VAT).  This price also includes the 
supply of a Geographical Information System software. 

Mr Bhagwan: May the hon. Minister inform the House whether this system is fully 

operational? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, this contract was awarded on 20 January 2015, and now they 
are in process of training the users how to use the system. This has started on 09 February 
this year.  Now it is in the training phase, and it is going to be fully operational in October or 
early November 2015. 

 
 
 

 

49 

BAMBOUS - AGRICULTURAL LAND - LEASE 

(No.  B/172)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether, in regard to the plots of 
agricultural land leased to individuals at Bambous, he will - 

(a) 
(b) 

state the number thereof and, 
table a list of the beneficiaries thereof, indicating in each case, the   
(i) 
(ii) 

extent thereof, and  
conditions thereof. 

 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker, I shall, with your permission, reply to this Parliamentary Question.  I am advised 
that State agricultural land at La Ferme Land Settlement and Roches Brunes Seed Production 
Centre  near  Bambous  is  leased  to  planters  and  breeders  for  vegetable  cultivation  and 
livestock production. 

Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that there are 24 lessees at La Ferme 
Land Settlement and 13 at Roches Brunes Seed Production Centre; that makes a total of 37 
lessees. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I am tabling the list of beneficiaries.  May I add 
that, regarding the main conditions attached to the leases, the offer is for a period of seven 
years, renewable, and the rental payable to Rs1,000 per arpent annually.  The lease may be 
cancelled at any time and the land retrieved if the lessee does not comply with the conditions 
of the lease, that is, neglecting the land, subletting the land, using the land for other purpose 
or not paying the rental. 

Mr Bhagwan: May I know from the hon. Minister whether he has inquired if, in the 
list, the former Minister of Local Government, Mr Hervé Aimée, benefitted a considerable 
amount of arpents of State land in that region? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  if  we  go  through  the  list,  indeed,  we  have  one 
former Minister who is the beneficiary of land at Roches Brunes Seed Production Centre.  He 
was awarded that lease in March 2008, and the lease expired in February this year. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister at least inquire from his officers whether there 

has been a case of sub-renting of that land which was awarded to him? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  my  Ministry  is  undertaking  an 
internal enquiry with regard to land leased to various planters and breeders.  Wherever there 
has been breach of contract with regard to conditions laid out in those lease agreements, lands 
are going to be retrieved from those beneficiaries. 

50 

 
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has stated that there was a former 
Minister.  Could  he  please  confirm  to  the  House  -  if  my  information  is  correct  -  that  this 
person referred to as a former Minister was not Minister at the time when he was granted the 
lease? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  what  I  can  say  is  that,  at  the  time  the  lease  was 
awarded to that person, probably he was not a Minister, but since the lease went through to 
the  end  of  February  2015,  at  one  particular  time  during  that  period  of  the  lease,  he  was 
Minister. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, can I ask the hon. Minister what extent of land 

was he granted, and may I know also what was he cultivating there? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, the acres of land awarded to that person amounted to 
two  arpents,  and  the  purpose  of  the  lease  was  for  poultry  breeding,  vegetables  and  fruit 
cultivation. 

Mr Jhugroo: May I ask the hon. Minister whether he considers taking legal action 

against those planters who have sublet their land? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, all those who have contravened the conditions of the 

lease are going to answer to that. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  The  hon.  Minister  just  informed  us  that  the  lease  has  been 

terminated.  May we know whether the lease would be renewed? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  leave  it  to  my  Ministry  to  reconsider  if  there  is 
request of renewal, and we will deal with that matter as and when the request is made to my 
Ministry. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    It  is  a  case  of  double  employment.    At  the  time  when  he  was  not 
Minister, he was bargaining with the previous party to stay in that party.  He was given that 
as a bribe. 

Mr Mohamed: If the hon. Minister could, maybe, enlighten the House and enlighten 
myself. Normally, at the end of a lease, if there is no request for a renewal or if it does not 
come to an end as such, there is no notice sent by the lessee to the lessor or vice versa, there 
is this operation of renewal by tacit reconduction.  Isn’t this included in the lease, therefore, 
the issue of renewal does not arise, and it has just been renewed automatically for the same 
period? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I need notice of that question. 
 

 
MAURICE ILE DURABLE COMMISSION/UNITED NATION INDUSTRIAL 

51 

DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATIONS - CONTRACT 

(No. B/173) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the contract signed between the former Maurice Ile 
Durable  Commission  and  the  United  Nation  Industrial  Development  Organisations  for  the 
Resource Efficiency and Cleaner Production Programme for the industry, he will state where 
matters stand as to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

implementation thereof, and  

time frame set for the completion thereof. 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  following  the  signature  of  the  contract  between  the 
former  Maurice  Ile  Durable  Commission  and  the  United  Nations  Industrial  Development 
Organisation in November 2014, a Memorandum of Understanding was to be signed between 
the  Maurice  Ile  Durable  Fund  and  the  Ministry  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer 
Protection, to facilitate the implementation of the project.  

The  Memorandum  can  only  be  signed  after  appropriate  amendments  would  be 
brought to the Finance and Audit Act to enable the MID Fund to operate under the aegis of 
my Ministry. A time frame can then be set for the completion of the project. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 
 

SOLAR WATER HEATER PROGRAMME - BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/174) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the Solar Water Heater Programme implemented 
by the Maurice Ile Durable Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Fund, 
information as to - 

(a)  the number of schemes implemented to date, indicating in each case, the - 

(i)  date of implementation thereof;  
(ii)  number of beneficiaries thereof;  
(iii) energy savings in respect thereof to the country;  
(iv)  societal benefit thereof, if any;  
(v)  emission reductions thereof;  

 

52 

(vi)  economic savings thereof to the country, and 
(vii) cost to Government and the payback period of the investment, and  

(b)  if any additional scheme is still awaiting implementation and, if so, indicate the 

expected time frame for implementation set therefor. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (i) and (ii)  of the question, I am 
informed that three schemes have been implemented  in respect of the Solar Water Heater 
Scheme as follows - 

Date of implementation 
2008 
2012  
2013  

 
Scheme 1   
Scheme 2 
Scheme 3 
With  regard  to  parts  (iii)  to  (vii)  of  the  question,  a  study  was  conducted  by  Green 
 
Energy Solutions Centre based in US with the support of the UN Energy in September 2013 
for the scheme implemented in 2012 and the findings were as follows - 

Number of beneficiaries  
24,000 households 
14,100 households 
19,757 households 

1.  Energy savings: LPG savings of 786 tonnes per year and electricity savings of 3,466 

MWh/year; 

2.  Economic savings: Rs54.2 m. per year on a total investment of Rs146 m. for 2012 

with a simple payback period of 2.7 years; 

3.  Emission reductions: 5,204 tonnes of CO2 per year on emissions from electricity 

generation and combustion of LPG; 

4.  Societal Benefits: out of all the households who benefitted from the schemes, 47% 

were without existing water heating. 

5.  However, it was observed that nearly 40% of the systems in place were not 

operational since a large number of SWHs were either not functional or not properly 
installed due to the high cost of connections and fittings. 
With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that no additional scheme is 

 
awaiting implementation under the MID Fund.  
However, allocation of Rs100 m. was made in Budget 2014 for a new Solar Water Heater 
Scheme  in  the  National  Habitat  Fund  under  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that the National Habitat Fund has set up a Technical 
Committee comprising representatives of different Ministries and other agencies, including 

 

53 

my  Ministry,  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands, 
Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment, MID Fund and DBM to review 
the scheme in light of the findings of the study undertaken by Green Energy Solutions Centre 
and to make proposals on the operationalisation of an improved Solar Water Heater Scheme.   
A decision on the operationalisation of that improved Solar Water Heater Scheme will 
be  taken  in  the  context  of  the  forthcoming  Budget,  after  discussions  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economic Development. 

Mr Bérenger:  I  am not sure  I heard correctly,  but if that is the case, will the hon. 
Minister  confirm  from  what  I  heard  that  40%  of  the  installed  solar  water  heaters  are  not 
functional and, if that is not the case, has a calculation been made of all the installed solar 
water heaters, what percentage thereof indeed is not functioning? 

Mr Dayal: This is true, and because it was done before my coming into office, we 

will be seeing the whole file and come up with whatever remedial action that is required. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister does not have the figures? 
Mr Dayal: I don’t have the figures as such. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

AIRPORTS OF MAURITIUS LTD - VIP CONSULTANT - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/175) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the post of VIP Consultant at Airports of Mauritius Limited, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from Airports of Mauritius Limited, information as to - 
(a) if it was advertised and, if not, indicate the mode of recruitment thereof, and  
(b) the name of the incumbent thereof, indicating - 

(i) his qualifications;  
(ii) his salaries and terms and conditions of appointment, and  
(iii)  the  make  and  model  of  car  put  at  his  disposal,  together  with  the  date  of 

purchase and cost thereof, and 

(iv) the duties assigned thereto. 

The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications 
(Mr X. L. Duval): Madam Speaker, the Airports of Mauritius Ltd, as any Limited Company, 
is governed by the Companies Act, and its Constitution.   Management of the Company is 
vested in its Board of Directors.   

54 

 
As is the practice, I shall not in future deal in this House with internal or commercial 
matters of the Company.  However, since this question has already been tabled, I shall reply 
to it. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Officer-in-Charge of Airports of Mauritius Ltd 
(AML) that on 18 June 2013, AML in consultation with the Prime Minister’s Office, the then 
Prime Minister’s Office, decided to retain the services of a VIP Facilitation Officer. 

(Interruptions) 

The  appointment  was  made  by  the  ex-CEO  of  AML  on  the  basis  of  his  delegated 

authority as CEO and without seeking the approval of the AML Board.  

This was effected through a letter of offer sent to Ms J. W., on 18 June 2013 and same 

was renewed after one year by the ex-CEO, again without the approval of the Board. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to parts (b)(i) and (ii) of the question, I am informed that 

AML has no records of the qualifications or C.V. of Ms J. W.   

(Interruptions) 

‘The salary and terms and conditions of appointment were as follows - 

(i) 

Period of one year starting 17 June 2013, renewed as I mentioned; 

(ii)  Rs82,500 per month as salary; 

(iii)  Driver’s Allowance - Rs8,000 per month; 

(iv)  Petrol Allowance - Rs8,470 per month; 

(v)  Company car of about 2,000 cc from the car pool of the Company or 

purchased.  

(vi)  A mobile phone for the value not exceeding Rs10,000, and 

(vii)  Rs2,000 monthly free calls. 

In regard to part (b) (iii) of the question, I am informed that an Audi A4 Auto Petrol 
1788 cc was purchased on 23 August 2013 at a price of Rs2,050,000 inclusive of VAT from 
Allied Motor Company Ltd and put at the disposal of the VIP Facilitation Consultant. 

 

55 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b)(iv) of the question, I am informed that the duties 
assigned to Ms J.W. were to facilitate the visit of VIP guests and assist in the organisation of 
official events.   

Ms  J.W.  submitted  her  resignation  on  16  December  2014  just  after  the  General 

Elections. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister confirm whether this post was on 

the organisational chart of AML prior to her recruitment? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I don’t know, Madam Speaker, but I believe not. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister inform the House on what grounds 
this  lady  was  recruited  and  can  he  inform  the  House  who  took  the  decision  for  her 
recruitment, and can we know to whom she was reporting with regard to her duties?  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: There are no records at AML, Madam Speaker, but it is 
mentioned in the reply that she was recruited in consultation with the then Prime Minister’s 
Office. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Being given that she is not a Head of Department of AML, can we 

know who took the decision to grant her a company car? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, the then CEO took it 
upon himself with the permission of the PMO to arrange for the recruitment of the lady and 
the conditions too. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo:  Can we  know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether the said 
lady was transferred from AML and, if so, can we know where and in which capacity and 
when?  

(Interruptions) 

 
And why? 

56 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  It does not say in the reply, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, Mr Jhugroo! 

AML - ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGER - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/176) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the post of Administrative Manager at Airports of Mauritius Limited, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from Airports of Mauritius Limited, information as 
to – 

(a)  when it was advertised, indicating the criteria laid down therefor, and  

(b) the name of the incumbent thereof, indicating his -  

(i)  qualifications, and 

(ii) salaries and terms and conditions of employment. 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, as stated in the reply to PQ B/175, the 
Airports of Mauritius Ltd as any Limited Company is governed by the Companies Act, and 
its Constitution.  Management of the Company is vested in its Board of Directors.   

As is the practice, I shall not deal in future with internal or commercial matters of the 

Company.  However, since this question has already been tabled, I shall reply. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Officer-in-Charge  of 
Airports of Mauritius Limited (AML) that the post of Administrative Manager was advertised 
in the local press on 18 to 21 February 2014, closing date for submission of applications was 
28 February 2014.   

The profile of the post as advertised was as follows - 

(i)  HSC or GCE A Level with Business Studies and Mathematics; 
(ii)  Degree in Business Administration/Human Resources Management or any related 

field; 

 

57 

(iii)  minimum 5 years’ experience at Senior Management Level in a similar position; 
(iv)  excellent interpersonal and communication skills, and 
(v) 

experience  in  company  secretarial  and  administrative  duties  would  be  an 
advantage. 

In regard to part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that the interviewing panel of the 
Board  has  recommended  that  Mr  S.  K.  be  appointed  as  Administrative  Manager  at  AML.  
This was approved by the Board on 21 May 2014.  He has been nominated with effect from 
01 October 2014, with a probation period of 6 months. 

The qualifications held by Mr S. K. are as follows - 

(i)  BSC (Hons) Management with specialisation in Tourism and Hospitality (1997-

2001) – University of Mauritius; 

(ii)  Associate Member of the  Institute of Chartered  Secretaries and Administrative, 

UK 2014; 

(iii)  MBA  with  specialisation  in  Finance,  University  of  Southern  Queensland, 

Australia, and 

(iv)  Affiliate, Association of Certified and Chartered Accountants (ACCA).  
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, I am informed that in line 
with the Scheme of Service for the post, Mr S. K. draws a monthly salary of Rs73,300.- plus 
Rs945.- as salary compensation.  He is also paid - 

travelling allowances of Rs16,500 per month; 
car allowance in lieu of cash grant Rs8,900 -, and 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  welfare and meal subsidy of Rs1800 - in line with AML Terms and Conditions of 

Employment. 

With regard to part (b)  (ii) of the question,  I  am tabling the terms and conditions of 

employment of Mr S. K. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Can  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister 

inform the House what is the Schedule of Duties of the Administrative Manager? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  I mentioned that, I think. 

Madam Speaker:  The hon. Minister just mentioned that, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

58 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  Administrative 
Manager who has got no qualification and experience in Human Resources, has been given 
the responsibilities of the Human Resources Department? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I would tend to agree.  I understand 
that in his MBA, one of the papers was Human Resources, but when I look at the Schedule of 
Duties, a lot of it deals with staff, etc.  So, I would tend to agree with that. 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  Administrative 
Manager, who was recruited on 01 October 2014, has been appointed Director and Secretary 
of a newly subsidiary private company of AML known as AML Group Corporate Services 
Ltd which was incorporated on 17 November 2014? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, indeed.  The AML Group Corporate Services is a 

dormant company and will probably be closed down. 

(Interruptions) 

AML Corporate Services, I was informed, was created to provide secretarial services to the 
group.  But now it is going to be restructured, it is no longer needed.  

Mr  Jhugroo:    Is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  that  this  private  company 

which is not governed by PoCA and Public Procurement Act, has as objectives – 

(i)  to centralise the company secretarial funding functions of AML, MDFP and ATOL, 

and  

(ii) to centralise the administrative affaires of AML, MDFP and ATOL? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Yes, Madam Speaker.  As I stated, it was, I understand, 

meant for secretarial services.  It is dormant and will probably not be reinstated.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Mrs Selvon! 

WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY - WASTEWATER BILLS - 

ARREARS 

(No. B/177) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
poorest sections of the community who are heavily in arrears in relation to their waste water 

 

59 

bills, he will state if consideration will be given for them to be allowed to clear the said bills 
by small instalments with a view to reducing the burden thereon. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority 
that wastewater bills have to be paid within a period of 21 days.   

In the case of persons in a hardship situation, the Authority gives consideration, on a 
case to case basis, to the payment of charges by instalment over a period of 3 to 36 months 
and waiving of 10% surcharge, depending on the amount owed and the repayment capacity.  

Mr Barbier:   Is the Vice-Prime Minister aware that in many cases, people have not 
received their bills for years and now when they have got their bills, they are asked for a huge 
sum of money which they are unable to pay?  This is the situation in so many quarters in our 
constituency.  Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister see to it that these special cases could be 
seen immediately? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  in  the  course  of  our  next  conversation,  we  will  raise  this 

case and we will report again.   

(Interruptions) 

We should deal with this on a case by case basis. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Mrs Selvon. 

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST – WATER SUPPLY 

(No. B/178) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Port  Louis,  particularly  of  the  region  of  Pailles  and  of  the  vicinity  thereof, 
including  several  other  regions  of  Constituency  No.  1,  Grand  River  North  West  and  Port 
Louis West, who are currently deprived of adequate water supply, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Central Water Authority, information as to when the target of a 
24-hour adequate water supply of potable water will reach thereto? 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):    Madam  Speaker,  the  irregular  supply  of  water  to  Port  Louis  and  other 
regions is a matter of concern to the Government.  I am aware that the water supply in Port 

 

60 

Louis is limited to 10 hours daily during normal period and is reduced to about 4 hours daily 
during and after heavy rainfall, this being due to clogging of filters at the Pailles Treatment 
Plant. 

I am informed that the water supply will increase to up to 15 hours daily during normal 
period  and  consumers  will  not  suffer  from  the  drastic  water  cuts  due  to  clogging,  after 
upgrading  of  the  Pailles  Treatment  plant  from  its  present  capacity  of  58,000  m3  daily  to 
80,000 m3 daily.  This upgraded plant will come into operation by end of April 2015.   

It is expected that there will be 24-hour supply in Port Louis after completion of the 
construction  of  Bagatelle  dam  and  its  downstream  works  hopefully,  by  end  of  2016.    The 
water supply will further improve with the renewal of old pipelines in Port Louis for which 
provision will be made in the forthcoming budget. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Since  the  question  talks  about  the 
inhabitants  of  Port  Louis,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether 
consideration will be given to increasing the number of camions citernes, especially in those 
times of heavy rainfall?  Because 4 hours, is creating lots of problems especially for those 
inhabitants  of  Port  Louis  in  my  constituency,  the  more  so  as  we  are  supposed  to  have 
reservoirs which are not being filled like in Vallée Pitot. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Provision is going to be made in the next budget for the purchase 
of additional water tankers and this will alleviate hopefully the supply of water for a certain 
time.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  each  time  that  there  is  heavy  rainfall,  it  is  the 
same reason that is given by the CWA, that is, filters are blocked.  This has been happening 
since a long time.  Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he can commission an 
inquiry of experts to find means and ways so that these things be prevented in the future?  
Because we know that when there will be heavy rainfall, filters will be blocked.  What can he 
do specifically on this issue? 

Madam Speaker:Hon. Member, put up your question! 

61 

 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  From  reports  that  I  have,  it  is  the  upgrading  of  the  water 
treatment which will alleviate the clogging. I am afraid, I am not an expert. They tell me this 
and I have no reason not to believe them. 

POINTE-AUX-SABLES – WASTEWATER DISCHARGE 

(No. B/179) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW &Port Louis West) asked 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether he will state if he is 
aware of the nuisances caused by the wastewater discharge into the sea at Pointe-aux-Sables, 
namely  an  uncovered  outlet  from  which  emanates  a  strong  unpleasant  smell  of  which  the 
local residents keep complaining of and that the infrastructure for the discharge of effluents 
suffers from a structural problem that prevents it to be properly covered where the wastewater 
reaches its outlet into the sea and, if so, indicate if urgent remedial measures will be taken in 

relation thereto. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  The Wastewater Management Authority (WMA) has a pumping station at 
Holly Hook Avenue, Pointe aux Sables, where an electro-mechanical screening system at the 
cost  of  Rs10  million  has  been  installed  in  December  2014.  This  year,  the  Authority  will 
implement  the  next  phase  of  the  project  which  includes  the  covering  of  all  existing 
infrastructure associated with the pumping station and the installation of deodorizing units. 

Secondly, there is a deep ocean outfall, 800 m off the coastline, at a depth of about 35 
m  beneath  the  sea  level  for  the  discharge  of  treated  effluents  from  Montagne  Jacquot 
Wastewater  Treatment  Plant  located  at  Petit  Verger,  near  Pointe  aux  Sables.    There  is  no 
odour emanation at the discharge point, and 
Thirdly,  further  to  complaints  received  in  the  region  of  Montagne  Jacquot,  odour 
 
mitigating  measures  have  been  implemented  at  the  Treatment  Plant  in  April  2014.  All 
treatment  units  have  been  covered  and  deodorising  units  installed  to  capture  the  gas 
emanating from these units. 

 
However,  I  have  taken  note  of  the  concern  raised  by  the  hon.  Member  and  have 
requested  the  Authority  to  investigate  further  into  the  matter  and  take  immediate  remedial 
measures.   

62 

 
Mr Baloomoody: In a written reply to a PQ which I put B/142, the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister informed us that for Kensington the project is Rs80 m. and will last for 18 months. 
May we know when the work will start? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The hon. Member is talking of Kensington, I do not know off 

hand - I had it last week. 

BOLLARAM LANE, PAILLES – INHABITANTS – RELOCATION 

(No. B/180) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW &Port Louis West) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether he will state if he is aware 
that  the  inhabitants  of  Bollaram  Lane,  in  Pailles,  are  currently  living  in  sub-humane 
conditions and in constant danger of flooding and, if so, indicate if, as a matter of urgency, 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  relocation  thereof,  as  already  decided  by  the  former 
Government. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to  this  Parliamentary 
Question.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  on  the  05  February  2015,  the  hon.  Member  made 
representations to me with regard to the poor living conditions of the inhabitants of Bollaram 
Lane, Pailles. I thank her for that initiative.  

I wish to add that this issue was dealt with at the level of my Ministry since August 

2014.  

On  12  February,  I  effected  a  site  visit  at  Bollaram  Lane  with  the  hon.  Member 
together  with  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  Affairs;  hon.  Armance  and  hon. 
Abbas Mamode, Parliament Private Secretary  as well as  representatives of the Ministry of 
Housing and Lands, the National Development Unit and the City Council of Port Louis.  

Madam Speaker, during the site visit, it was noted those twelve families, lessees of 
corrugated iron sheets housing units situated on a private property were living in deplorable 
and overcrowded conditions. They were without individual electricity and water connections, 
and without any proper sanitation. In addition, there were four families owners of land whose 
housing units were located near the riverbank. In the absence of drains, all the residents of the 
said lane are prone to flooding during heavy rainfall.  

63 

 
The  representatives  of  the  National  Development  Unit  had  recommended  the 
construction of drains to mitigate the impact of flooding. However, in view of the fact that 
one of the privately owned housing unit was encroaching on the access road leading to the 
river  bank,  the  construction  of  drains  could  not  be  considered  unless  the  housing  unit  is 
relocated.  

The  owner  of  that  housing  unit  was  informed  of  this  predicament  and  he  was 
agreeable to be part of the solution. He was, therefore, advised to arrange for his surveyor to 
liaise with the surveyor of the City Council of Port Louis with regard to the determination of 
the exact extent of land that would be required to enable the National Development Unit to 
proceed with the construction of the drains.  

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the City Council of Port Louis that to date, the 

surveyor of the owner has not contacted the Council.  

It  is  worth  mentioning  that,  out  of  the  twelve  families,  ten  of  them  are  eligible  to 
receive  support  from  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation.  However,  they  cannot  be 
provided with housing units under the existing Schemes since they are not owners of a plot of 
land.  

On  the  other  hand,  Madam  Speaker,  the  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  has  been 
requested  to  ensure  that  the  lessor  abides  to  all  prevailing  sanitary  regulations  insofar  as  
these families are concerned.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  insofar  as  the  relocation  of  those  families  is 
concerned, the former Government was agreeable to relocate them subject to the site being 
listed  as  a  flood  prone  area.  Since  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management 
Centre  had  established  that  Bollaram  Lane  is  not  listed  as  a  flood  prone  area,  this  option 
cannot be pursued further.  

Mrs Selvon: Madam Speaker, would the hon. Minister agree that, on a humanitarian 

ground, those families need to be relocated? 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, I concede that the families are living in a very difficult 
situation, but relocation is possible only if those persons are either owners of land or they are 
given a lease on a State land which by the way the NEF will be ready and willing to help and 
support them for another housing unit. 

64 

 
Mr Baloomoody: I heard the hon. Minister mentioning that these people can only be 
relocated if this area is declared a flood prone area. It is a fact that it is a flood prone area and 
it is a fact that even if we  move these people, other people will come here. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, because the owner of these premises is interested in only renting these houses. So, may I 
invite  the  hon.  Minister,  together  with  the  Minister  of  Environment,  to  delcare  this  area  a 
flood prone area so that the owner is not tempted to re-rent these premises to other people, 
especially people coming from Rodrigues? 

Mr Roopun: We will consider the option but, according to what the NDU states, if 

one of the houses could be relocated, a drain could be provided. 

CARS (SECOND HAND) – IMPORTATION 

(No.  B/181)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in 
regard to second-hand cars, he will state if consideration will be given for the regulations in 
relation to the importation thereof to be revisited in order to remove the mandatory element 
therein, namely, for the proposed imported second hand cars to have been first registered at 
least 18 months prior to the importation thereof and, if not, why not. 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that my Ministry regulates 
the importation of second-hand motor vehicles in compliance with the Consumer Protection 
(Control of Imports) Regulations 1999.  

According  to  these  Regulations,  there  are  several  conditions  to  be  satisfied  for  the 
importation of second-hand cars. One of them is that a second-hand car must be between 18 
months and 4 years from the date of first registration, at the date of shipment. This condition 
is, however, not applicable to a certain category of importers who are exempted from such 
condition.  Some  of  them  are:  Government  bodies,  Embassies,  religious  and  educational 
institutions. 

Madam Speaker, the present regulations date back as far as 1999, that is, more than 15 

years. In the meantime, the landscape of the motorcar business has changed drastically. 

In  this  context,  I  propose  to  set  up  a  Technical  Committee  to  look  into  the  whole 
to  make 

importation  of  second-hand  motor  vehicles  and 

to 

matter  relating 
recommendations as appropriate. 

the 

65 

 
Mr  Mohamed:  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his  very  straightforward  answer.  The 
issue therein, if I may be allowed, Madam Speaker, is the following: it is the fact that when 
someone wants to bring in a car and they have to wait that the car is 18 months old. That very 
fact - could the hon. Minister look into it that it is coupled with the fact that other bodies are 
entitled to bring in cars that are less than 18 months old? It is, therefore, discriminatory in the 
fact that some bodies are allowed, others are not and the fact that 18 months is discriminatory 
for those who cannot afford to buy a new car, they have to wait for the car to be old enough 
to 18 months and that is the discriminatory element that I ask the hon. Minister to be able to 
remove from the regulations. 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  this  issue  will  be  taken  into  consideration  by  the 

Technical Committee. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: May I ask the hon. Minister, in relation to this Technical Committee, to 
give consideration to the fact that anyone who import cars should make sure that there is a 
stock of spareparts available because the number of cars that are imported in Mauritius are 
outdated and consumers are left without recourse whenever there is a sparepart missing? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, the Technical Committee will look into it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed! 

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES – VISA REQUIREMENT  

(No.  B/182)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade whether, in regard to the visa requirement for Mauritian nationals to enter the United 
Arab Emirates, he will state if he will consider taking up the matter with the Government of 
the United Arab Emirates to exempt the Mauritian nationals from such a requirement. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that Mauritius is 
one  of  the  few  countries  in  the  world  whose  nationals  do  not  require  visa  to  enter  106 
countries. 

Madam Speaker,  I also  wish to inform the House that  I have, in fact, taken up the 
issue raised by the hon. First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East not later 
than  yesterday  afternoon  with  His  Excellency Essa  Abdullah  Al  Basha  Al  Nuaimi, 

 

66 

Ambassador for the United Arab Emirates to Mauritius. He is currently here in the context for 
the National Day celebrations and I met him yesterday in my office. 

Mr Mohamed: Once again, I thank this hon. Minister as well for having taken this up 
with the Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates because those are matters that have been 
taken  up  with  the  Ambassador  many  times  before.  May  I  humbly  suggest  that  the  hon. 
Minister of Foreign Affairs is directly contacted by the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
that the representation be made for one good reason - there are many - the number of flights 
that  have  increased  from  Emirates,  the  landing  rights  that  this  Government  has  allowed 
Emirates into Mauritius warrants the fact that we be given the special consideration that our 
nationals should no longer require a visa application, waiting for a passport for them to enter 
the United Arab Emirates? Since we have given them so much in terms of landing rights, I 
believe that it would be fit and proper, if not long awaited, that the hon. Minister of Foreign 
Affairs  - not this one but the Government -  contacts his counterpart so that this matter be 
taken up not at the level of an Ambassador - who is a very nice gentleman and I know him 
personally - but taken up at high level, at the level of Government and, if need be, even the 
hon. Prime Minister could be asked to take it up with the Prime Minister,  Al Maktoum, of 
the United Arab Emirates. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  back  as  05  February  2014,  a  draft  visa 
exemption agreement was submitted to the United Arab Emirates for their consideration. But 
I do understand that there is a labour problem. There is an apprehension on the part of the 
authorities there that there might be labour implications. They fear that if no visa is required 
from citizens from this country that labour problems might arise if people go there and stay 
and they might not be in a position to trace them and send them back. So, that is why things 
have delayed but the Ambassador has promised that he will look into the matter. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister if the nationals from the United Arab 
Emirates  require  visa  to  enter  Mauritius,  and  if  no,  can  this  be  used  as  an  argument  to 
reciprocate visa requirements?  

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I don’t have the answer to this question. The hon. Member 

can come with a substantive question and I will certainly answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

 

 
PLAINE VERTE MEDI-CLINIC - AYURVEDIC HEALTH SERVICES 

67 

(No. B/183) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the provision 
made in the 2012 budget for the dispensing of ayurvedic health services at the Plaine Verte 
Medi-clinic, he will state when the said services will be provided thereat. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, my Ministry is already providing Ayurvedic services at 
five health institutions and it is proposing to start these services at Plaine Verte Mediclinic as 
from May this year.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD. – STAFF - REPRESENTATIONS 

(No. B/184) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether he will state if he has received representations from the staff of Air Mauritius Ltd. 
regarding their conditions of employment and, if so, indicate the actions he proposes to take 
in relation thereto, if any. 

The Deputy Prime  Minister: Madam Speaker,  I have not received  representations 
from the staff of Air Mauritius Ltd. However, my office has received a request for a meeting 
with me from the three unions of Air Mauritius Ltd. commonly known as the Air Mauritius 
Intersyndicale. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether he is aware that 
there is a sort of an industrial unrest there due to the fact that the 14th month has not been paid 
and the role played by the new consultant is, in fact, a more nuisance than somebody who is 
assisting the casino? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am not aware but, this is a matter for the Board and 
the management of Air Mauritius Ltd. I am not aware, but people should also be concerned, 
Madam Speaker, with the competitive situation faced by Air Mauritius Ltd. with the need to 
maintain  cost  at  a  lower  level.  Of  course,  we  are  also  concerned  with  the  condition  of 
employment of the employees but, we must safeguard the employment and at the same time, 
give the employees a good remuneration. 

68 

 
Mr Bérenger: Recently there was a very tough strike in France because Air France 
had created another company with less favourable conditions and so on and, I understand that 
Air Mauritius did that in the recent past. As a policy decision, it created another company 
Airmate Ltd. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether Government had the opportunity to look at 
that issue? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we have a new Board of Directors, I 
will leave it to them for the moment to try and deal with the issue of Airmate Ltd. and the 700 
or so employees who work for Airmate Ltd compared to the 2000 or so employees who work 
for Air Mauritius Ltd. But, we are talking about a lot of livelihoods, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

GRAND’BAIE - SOCIAL SECURITY OFFICE - RENT 

(No. B/185) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the social security office at Grand Bay, she will state the amount of monthly rental 
fee payable for the building housing same, indicating the – 

(a) name of the owner thereof; 

(b) duration of the contract therefor, and  

(c) date on which bids were issued in relation thereto, indicating the – 

 (i) name of the bidders therefor; 

(ii) prices quoted, and  

(d) if copy of the evaluation reports in relation thereto will be tabled. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  I wish to inform the House that the previous Grand Bay 
social security office which was rented from November 2003 to November 2014 was located 
at Sottise Road, Grand Bay. It occupied an overall space of 1165 square feet at a monthly rent 
of Rs25,000. However, the officers of the Ministry complained of inadequate office space, 
non-proper aeration and lack of parking facilities.  

69 

 
The management took the decision of relocating the building. As such, tenders were 
launched for the renting of office space of an area between 2,700 to 3,000 square feet within 
Grand Bay area. 

With regard to parts (a) and (c) of the said question, I am informed of the following –  

•  bids  were  invited  from  owners  for  the  renting  of  a  building  of 
approximately 2700 to 3000 square feet to cater for the Grand Bay 
social security office located within the boundaries of Grand Bay 
giving on a main road; 
tender  was  launched  on  05  July  2012  through  open  advertised 
bidding; 

• 

•  as at the closing date, only one bid was received from Mr I. T. The 
quoted  price  for  renting  of  the  office  space  was  Rs90,000  per 
month; 
the  Bid  Evaluation  Committee  met  to  evaluate  the  only  bid  and 
found that the bid was responsive and compliant; 

• 

•  on  27  November  2012  the  Departmental  Tender  Committee  met 
and agreed to award the contract to Mr I. T. subject to completion 
of some works and the necessary  clearances being obtained from 
all relevant authorities; 
to that end, a letter of award was issued to Mr I. T. on 05 December 
2012 informing him that the Ministry has approved his offer for the 
renting  of  the  said  office  for  a  period  of  one  year  renewable 
thereafter; 

• 

•  all  clearances  applied  for  were  obtained.  The  clearance  from  
Valuation  Department  had  to  be  reassessed  inasmuch  as  it  had 
found that the area of the building of Mr I. T. to be less than 2000 
square feet and that the monthly rent should be Rs76,000 and not 
Rs90,000. 

As such, the Permanent Secretary did not approve the tender. Meanwhile, following 
the  protest  of  the  owner  maintaining  that  the  space  area  amounts  to  3000  square  feet,  a 
second  valuation  was  carried  out  and  the  Valuation  Department  maintained  that  the  net 

 

70 

usable office space has been measured as per the RIC code of measuring practices and was 
found to be less than 2000.  

Subsequently,  a  site  visit  including  the  valuation  officer,  the  civil  engineer  and  the 
owner was effected and the Valuation Department concluded then that an additional space of 
131.88 square metres has been provided and that the rent of Rs90,000 was fair and reasonable 
for the said area of 3000 square feet.  

On 01 September 2014, a letter of approval for renting of office space for a period of 

one year was issued to Mr I. T. renewable thereafter at a monthly rent of Rs90,000. 

In  respect  to  part  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  a  lease  agreement  for  a 

period of two years was signed. 

As regards part (e) of the question, Madam Speaker, a copy of the valuation report 

is being tabled. 

In respect to part(ii) of the question, I am informed that a lease agreement for a period 
of two years was signed. As regards part (e) of the question, Madam Speaker, a copy of the 
evaluation report is being tabled. 

Mr Rughoobur:  Can  I know from the hon. Minister if at the very outset when the 

tender was launched there was an estimate for the project? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  it  seems  that  the  cost  estimate  is  not  mandatory  in 

those cases as the final rental fee is determined by the valuation office. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon Rughoobur! 

HOTEL INDUSTRY – EXPATRIATES – WORK PERMIT 

(No. B/186) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the hotel industry, he will – 

(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the number of expatriates 

(i) currently employed therein;  
(ii) eligible for a work permit issued by the Board of Investment, and  
(iii) a local hotel can appoint, and  

(b)  state  if  his  Ministry  has  record/statistics  on  the  list  of  local  professionals  thereof 

currently appointed in the same industry abroad. 

 

71 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  the  House  may  wish  to  note  that 
permits  for  the  recruitment  of  expatriates  in  the  hotel  industry  are  delivered  by  two 
institutions namely - 

(i)  The  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  which  is 
responsible for the issue of work permits in areas where local expertise is scarce, and 
(ii)  The  Board  of  Investment  (BOI)  which  issues  occupation  permits  to  professionals 
satisfying  a  set  of  established  criteria  including  professional  qualifications  and 
previous experience in specific fields. 
With regard to parts (a) (i) and a (ii) of the question, I am informed by the Ministry of 
Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training that it has issued 222 work permits to 
expatriates to take up employment in the hotel industry whereas the BOI has delivered  312 
Occupation Permits as professionals,  as at  05 March 2015. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (iii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  according  to  current 
policy,  there  is  no  formal  limit  on  the  number  of  expatriates  that  a  hotel  may  employ 
provided the applications fall within the approved list of scarcity areas and are subsequently 
approved by the relevant authorities and the criteria set for an Occupation Permit issued by 
the BOI. 

However, this policy is not applicable to Club Med hotels which fall in the category 
of Club hotels and where traditionally a quota of 100 has been set on the maximum number 
of expatriates they can employ, being given that it is the policy for such hotels to send local 
recruits to work abroad in its different Clubs around the world.  

 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  such 

information is not available at the level of my Ministry.  

Mr Rughoobur:  I just wanted to know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether 
he would consider restricting the number of years that an expatriate can be appointed at the 
senior managerial position in hotels. 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  What I can say, Madam Speaker, is that some hotels are 
employing  very  large  number  of  expatriates.  I  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  putting  up  the 
question.    We  will  look  at  the  whole  matter  with  my  colleague  the  Minister  of  Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training and with the BOI.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to say for instance, that in relation to these hotels, some 
people have been abusing and we need to look at it. In fact, one hotel, for instance, Attitude 
Hotel,  which  has  five  or  six  very  successful  resort  hotels,  is  working  completely  with 

 

72 

Mauritian personnel, proving that it is possible if you make the effort to have a successful 
operation without too many expatriates. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  If  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  can  consider  the  possibility  of 
having, at least, among the top positions - I am made to understand that  you have got the 
General Manager and the Resident Manager - one local professional appointed among one of 
these two positions. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  we  will  look  at  the  whole 
question. At the same time, we must remember that hotel promoters have invested billions of 
rupees  in  these  hotels.  In  a  way,  they  are  entitled  to  have  the  Manager,  as  they  choose, 
because they have put their money where, maybe, we have not put ours. 

At the same time, we must find an appropriate balance and I promise I will look into it. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: Last year, there were several meetings that were held at the Ministry of 
Tourism and the specific purpose of those meetings were precisely to address those issues 
raised by the hon. Member and spoken of by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister. 

The  issue  was  about  identifying  scarcity  areas,  that  is,  areas  where  Mauritians  are 
qualified in order to do those jobs; areas where the Board of Investment also present at the 
meeting would collaborate with all the Ministries and all the parties concerned in order to 
draw out a common list with the Ministry of Labour to ensure that Mauritian graduates are 
given the opportunity of occupying such positions. Could the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, 
therefore, consider tabling that list and report that was carried out by the Ministry of Tourism 
in  a  committee  where  I,  myself,  at  the  time  was  present  in  order  to  ensure  that  all  those 
graduates from Mauritius obtain jobs that they deserve? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, if it was such a good report perhaps the 

hon. Member himself should have put it into effect. But I will look at it. 

 
PUBLIC PROCUREMENT - INDEPENDENT REVIEW PANEL BOARD - 

COMPOSITION 

(No. B/187) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Independent  Review  Panel  Board,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to the – 

(a) number of challenges allowed by the Panel over the past five years, and  
(b) composition thereof, indicating in respect of each Board member thereof  

73 

 

(i) his qualifications  
(ii) his experience, and  
(iii) the duration of his contract. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed  that  over  the  past  five  years  the  Independent  Review  Panel  received  193 
applications  out  of  which  53  cases  have  been  allowed  by  the  institution  and  nine  are  still 
under consideration. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  action  has  been 
initiated  under  section  4  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  to  reconstitute  the  Independent 
Review Panel for a period of three years. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  is  considering  - 
based on the number of appeals allowed by IRP as well as the number of judicial review that 
you have following the decision of the IRP - the possibility of having a review of the Public 
Procurement Act of 2006. Is he considering a revision of the Act? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, Madam Speaker.  In fact, the Finance Bill would provide 

for certain amendments to the Act itself. 

Mr Uteem:  I heard the hon. Minister of Finance mention that he will be reconstituting 
the Board  after three  years.   Does that mean that the  existing incumbent will be kept into 
office until that time? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, yes, until the new Board is reconstituted, the old one 

continues to exist. This means probably one more week. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, Hon Uteem! 
 

(EIILM) MAURITIAN BRANCH CAMPUS – FACT-FINDING COMMITTEES 

(No.  B/188)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Science  Research    whether,  in  regard  to  the  Eastern  Institute  for  Integrated  Learning 
Management  (EIILM)  Mauritian  Branch  Campus,  she  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Tertiary Education Commission, information as to – 

(a)  the  outcome  of  the  Fact-Finding  Committees  set  up  to  inquire  into  alleged 

irregularities in relation to the operation thereof; 

(b) if it has been allowed to enroll new students and offer new courses for academic 

year 2015, and  

(c) if the qualifications awarded thereby will be recognised and accredited. 

 

74 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Tertiary Education 
Commission (TEC) that there has not been any Fact-Finding Committee set up to enquire on 
the  allegation  of  irregularities  in  relation  to  the  operations  of  the  Eastern  Institute  for 
Integrated Learning and Management (EILM) University (Mauritius Branch Campus). 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Tertiary  Education 
Commission  that  EIILM  has,  on  03  December  2013,  been  instructed  in  writing  by  the 
Commission, not to enroll any students and not to offer new courses for the academic years 
2014 and 2015.   

I am also informed by the Tertiary Education Commission that EIILM has not enrolled 
any students though currently it has on its roll 68 students, out of whom 20 are following 
Year 2 programmes and 48 are following Year 3 programmes.  These two groups of students 
will complete their courses in the year 2015 and 2016 respectively. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, I am informed by the TEC that a 

communiqué was issued on 11 June 2014 stating that and I quote – 

 “As per TEC Board decision taken at its meeting held on 21 May 2014, all academic 
qualifications awarded by overseas universities relating to courses accredited by the 
TEC and offered by post-secondary educational institutions duly registered by TEC 
are fully recognised”. 

However, Madam Speaker, strictly speaking, it would appear that this decision should 
not apply to EIILM. This institution cannot be recognised as an overseas university, as it has 
not been authorised to operate as an off-campus or offshore branch by the UGC. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to a PQ last year, No. B/152, the hon. Prime 

Minister stated, and I quote – 

“Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  add  that  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission  has  already 
instituted two Fact-Finding Committees to inquire into, one, the allegations regarding 
the clinical training of its students at D. Y. Patil Medical College, and also into the 
alleged  irregularities  in  relation  to  the  operation  of  EIILM  University,  that  is,  the 
Mauritius Branch Campus.” 

So, is the hon. Minister telling us that when the Prime Minister answered the PQ, that 

was not correct? 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The information I have, Madam Speaker, is that no such 

75 

enquiry has been carried out, no Fact-Finding Committee was set up. 

Madam Speaker: Yes hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: I am asking the same question to the hon. Minister.  Perhaps it is not a 
Fact-Finding Commission.  But, has there been any body set up at that time by the previous 
Government with the help of British universities? This also we were told at that time.  We 
have  heard  of  certain  British  universities  to  make  an  investigation  and  to  report  on  the 
workings of the Commission. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, no Fact-Finding Committee was set up 
to go into the irregularities of EIILM.  However, at a point later in time, the Prime Minister 
did ask the UK audit agency for higher education to look into all our Mauritian institutions, 
and to come up with an audit of the standards of the institutions.  But this has nothing to do 
with the Fact-Finding Committee. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I am very disturbed by the comment made by the hon. 
Minister  who  said  that,  according  to  her,  the  degree  awarded  by  EIILM  is  not  to  be 
recognised and, at the same time, the hon. Minister said that there are existing students doing 
a course - second  year, first year - to be completed in 2015-2016. So, is the hon. Minister 
saying that EIILM is allowed to operate and charge students for a degree that is not going to 
be recognised? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, this is sadly the case. But this has not 
been our doing; it has been the doing of the past Government.  Yet, our Ministry is right now 
working out a way to help these students and safeguard their interests. We have been working 
with the institutions in Mauritius, our public institutions, to see how we can help them.  By 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  the  University  of  Mauritius  had  refused  to  admit  the  students  from 
EIILM  to  its  postgraduate  courses,  due  to  programmatic  gaps,  as  they  stated,  alternative 
means will have to be identified.  And what we are thinking of, is that we are trying to work 
out  with  our  public  institutions  to  see  how  the  programmatic  gaps  can  be  tackled  and 
compensated to help the students get a degree which would eventually get recognition. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I have taken note of what the hon. Minister has said 
regarding  the  flaws  that  were  allowed  at  some  stage,  in  the  years  before,  with  regard  to 
EIILM. However, since students, as pointed out correctly by hon. Uteem, are still in second 

 

76 

year and third year, the flaw and the wrong is continuing.  Therefore, if the wrong is allowed 
to continue by the TEC vis-à-vis those students, could the hon. Minister consider ways and 
means  of,  as  soon  as  possible,  one,  giving  a  guarantee  to  those  students,  right  now,  that 
everything will be done and without any doubt, to ensure that their degrees are recognised? 

(Interruptions) 

The second option being if that cannot be given, then measures be taken immediately 
for the courses that they are following to halt immediately, because we cannot continue to 
allow the courses go on if we cannot ensure that the wrong does not continue. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I would like to stress on the point that 
this flaw has occurred in the previous Government, and I do agree, by no fault of the students.  
I have already met the students and their parents, and we are trying to see what we can do.  I 
have no guarantee to give in this House, but I am already working out certain ways to help 
them out.  And it is by no means our doing.  What we are trying to do, is that we are trying to 
safeguard the interests of the students, taking into consideration certain humane factors.  As 
far  as  EIILM  Institution  is  concerned,  we  have  ensured  that  they  are  not  enrolling  new 
students.    Those  who  are  at  present  in  the  Institution  were  allowed  by  the  former 
Government, and now we are having to come up with measures to help them out. 

Mr  Bérenger:  May  I  ask  one  question?    Has  Government,  the  hon.  Minister,  the 
Attorney General looked at the possibility of claiming damages from those who have been 
guilty in that whole affair? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: We are trying, Madam Speaker, to see whether this can 

be done. 

Mr Ramful:  I have heard the hon. Minister stating to the House that there was an 
Audit Committee that was set up by the previous Government.  Can we know from the hon. 
Minister whether the Committee has completed its work, and if so, will she be tabling a copy 
of the report to the Assembly? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, we are awaiting their final report by the end of 

March. 

77 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, being given that all the students of EIILM University 
had been misguided by the administration of the university, would she refer this case to the 
Police and legal action be taken against the Directors of this university? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: We are seriously considering this, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  she  has  met  the 
parents of the students.  In fact, there is a lot of concern because she has not communicated to 
them since January.  So, may I ask the hon. Minister whether she has a timeline as to when 
she is going to come with a solution to propose to them? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, Madam Speaker, I met the parents and they were 
telling me that there are students still going for the courses and yet to sit for exams.  We are 
waiting for these students to pass, and then, with their certificate in hand, whatever the worth 
of that certificate, we can then refer the case to our public institutions and try to see how we 
can make do with the gaps that exist in their programmes. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 
Mr  Ganoo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker,  for  giving  me  one  minute  for  this  last 
question. Can the hon. Minister inform this House why is it the case that when we were in 
Opposition, be it MMM or MSM, we questioned even the legality of the promoters of this 
University - including Minister Bodha and the Minister herself - to set up these universities, 
and we even quoted from Indian authorities?  If the House will bear with me, this is a public 
notice  issued  by  the  UGC  on  territorial  jurisdiction  of  universities,  and  I  am  just  going  to 
quote – 

“The UGC has not granted any permission to Sikkim Manipal University and EIILM 
University  to  set  up  off-  campus  centre(s),  study  centre(s)  or  off-shore  campus 
centre(s). As such, both, these universities cannot run courses in Mauritius through 
their own campuses or through franchisee agreement”. 

This is very clear. Why is it now that the new Government - because this is what are 

all expecting: put an end to this illegal situation once for all. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: May I, Madam Speaker, clear out something right away. 
We  have  not  allowed  EIILM  to  pursue  its  recruitment  of  students,  however,  because  of 
decision taken by the former Government the students were allowed to carry on with their 
courses so that they end up with a certificate that we can afterwards try to upgrade by seeking 

 

78 

equivalence or by trying to make do for any shortcomings in the course. However, we could 
not just stop straightaway, because the students would be left with nothing in hand. With the 
certificate in hand, we can always upgrade and compensate for anything that is missing or 
lacking.  

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ.  No.  B/192  has  been 

withdrawn. Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  all  the  business  on  today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(4.23 p.m.)  

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

STATE LANDS - ALLOCATION 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, in December 2014, as soon as the new Government took Office, we tasked 
ourselves  to  finding  out  what  was  the  extent  of  the  problem.    As  Vice-Prime  Minister, 
Minister of Housing and Lands, I made it a priority to investigate into the cases which were 
in the limelight.  I caused my Ministry to draw up an inventory of the cases where State lands 
have been allocated in allegedly dubious circumstances. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to  several  cases  where,  blatantly, 
procedures have not been followed and the more so in many of these cases the conditions of 
the letter of reservation or the letter of intent or the Lease Agreement have been flouted, and 
yet, the proponents were not sanctioned.   

In  the  face  of  what  the  in-house  investigation  has  unveiled,  I  immediately  initiated 
action to address the issues. I have, therefore, referred those cases to either the Police or to 
ICAC or to the State Law Office depending on the nature of the irregularity observed.  So far, 

 

79 

my  Ministry  has  reported  12  cases  to  Police  for  investigation  with  a  view  to  establishing 
whether irregularities have been committed, which would constitute an offence punishable by 
Law  and  for  action  as  may  be  deemed  appropriate.  Besides,  11  cases  where  letters  of 
reservation had been issued, 12 cases where lease agreements have been concluded and two 
cases where Letters of Intent had been issued are currently the subject of further action.  For 
that purpose, the advice of the State Law Office has been solicited with a view to taking back 
the State land, where this is legally in order. Moreover, two cases have been referred to ICAC 
for investigation.  

All these cases referred to, involve State land of an extent of more than 150 Arpents.  

My Ministry is pursuing the audit exercise and necessary remedial action will be taken. 

Madam Speaker, the circumstances call for immediate and drastic corrective action.  I 
am  personally  chairing  a  Committee  comprising  officers  from  the  Ministry  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and officers of my Ministry, to review 
the  policy  framework  for  the  allocation  of  State  land  to  ensure  transparency  and 
accountability  in  the  system.    In  due  course,  the  new  system  will  be  approved  and 
disseminated to the general public.  
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(4.26 p.m.)  

FLOODING  & WATER ACCUMULATION   

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Madam Speaker, the country has witnessed the flash floods 
caused by active clouds associated with a convergence zone over the Mascarene coupled with 
the  effects  of  Haliba,  causing  water  accumulation  and  flooding  throughout  the  island.  On 
average,  we  have  had  some  206  mm  of  rain  from  Saturday  until  this  morning,  weather 
bulletins were issued and advice given to the public in general at regular intervals.  

The  National  Emergency  Operation  Command  of  the  National  Disaster  Risk 
Reduction Management Centre was activated. The Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services jointly 
with the SMF and the Police carried out some 218 interventions relating to water pumping in 
houses and yards and attending to road accidents and rescue operations. 

Madam Speaker, there are  a number of reasons  to explain such occurrences. These 

include - 

80 

Climate Change.  

 
(i) 
Extreme climatic events are becoming a huge challenge for Small Island Developing 
Countries such as Mauritius. Observations made over decades in the region of Indian 
Ocean as well as in Mauritius are clear. The frequency and the intensity of extreme 
climatic  events  such  as  flash  floods,  coral  bleaching,  prolonged  water  scarcity  and 
beach erosion are all worsening. The latest fifth Inter-governmental Panel on Climate 
Change,  commonly  referred  to  as  IPCC  Assessment  Synthesis  Report,  released  in 
November  2014,  projects  that  extreme  climatic  events  will  worsen.  A  number  of 
serious risks such as risk of deaths, breakdown of infrastructure networks and critical 
services such as electricity, water supply and health and emergency services and risk 
of food insecurity have been identified. 

Poor Land Planning. 

(ii) 
 Over the last decade, it has been observed that developments have been authorised in 
areas without proper planning and due consideration given to ecosystem functioning.  
Flic  en  Flac  is  one  such  area  which  is  facing  inundation  frequently.  Port  Louis  is 
another  critical  area  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a  high  concentration  of  human 
settlements,  which  make  it  vulnerable.  Water  catchment  basins  are  quite  small  and 
they can result in flash floods that could have high destructive potential and do not 
allow enough time to alert the population. Also, some of the human expansions are in 
flood-prone  areas.  For  a  country  like  Mauritius  with  limited  land  and  natural 
resources,  promoting  an  efficient  land  use  planning  in  an  environmentally-friendly 
manner is of paramount importance.  

Inadequate Development Control. 

(iii) 
Poor  conception  as  well  as  inadequate  provision  of  appropriate  land  drainage  in 
certain  areas,  including  recent  IRS  and  other  developments  is  serious  issues  which 
need  to  be  addressed  urgently.  Developments  in  high-risk  areas  such  as  in  river 
reserves and riverbanks have remained unchecked. In addition, very often drain exits 
are not connected. 

(iv)  Climate change considerations to be incorporated in the EIA mechanism EIA 
is a tool to facilitate successful climate proofing of projects or to avoid maladaptation 
to climate change. Consideration of climate change issues through EIA  will in turn 

 

81 

improve  the  resilience  of  the  project  being  assessed.  This  aspect  will  be  duly 
addressed in the forthcoming amendments to the Environment Protection Act 2008. 
Madam Speaker, a number of actions are being undertaken to address these issues as 

follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

The  National  Disaster  Scheme  (NDS)  2014  is  being  updated.  This  scheme 
defines  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  Ministries,  Departments,  Response 
Agencies,  Local  Authorities,  Parastatal  Organisations  concerned,  Non-
Governmental  Organisations, 
relevant 
stakeholders before, during and in the aftermath of different types of disasters. 
In the proposed NDS 2015, the list of disasters has been extended to include 
heavy rain falls/floods and flash floods conditions. Wide consultation is being 
done on the proposed NDS 2015 with all the stakeholders concerned; 

the  private  sector  and  other 

mapping of risks and hazards at national level is being effected with a view to 
developing specific contingency plans for identified risks; 

a  draft  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Bill  has  been 
prepared.  This  Bill  provides  for  an  integrated  and  efficient  mechanism  for 
disaster preparedness, response and post disaster recovery and rehabilitation; 

a Landslide Management Unit has been set up at the level of the Ministry of 
Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  which  is  working  in  close 
collaboration with the JICA and the NDRRMC.  The main objective of this 
Unit is to closely monitor and manage landslide prone areas in consultation 
with my Ministry;   

a Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy and Action Plan, including Risk Maps in 
relation to inland flooding, landslide and coastal inundation for the Republic 
of Mauritius has been developed.  These will contribute to designing robust 
disaster risk reduction and policies and management practices for the decades 
to come. Climate risk analysis, which is a central component of this project, is 
one  of  the  first  comprehensive  climate  modelling  studies  conducted  for  the 
Republic of Mauritius. It is imperative for the Mauritian community to build 
disaster-resilient architecture and has an up-to-date early warning system so as 
to enhance the country’s preparedness in the face of disasters; 

 
(vi) 

(vii) 

82 

a  study  on  land  drainage  and  watershed  management  has  been  carried  out 
under  the  aegis  of  the  NDU.    This  study  comprises  a  feasibility  study  and 
preliminary design of the land drainage system in 12 flood prone regions.  The 
study report has been circulated to all the stakeholders, and 

upgrading of topographic survey of high resolution GIS maps will be carried 
out.    This  will  enable  authorities  concerned  to  implement  risk  reduction 
strategies and also facilitate post disaster impact assessment. 

Madam  Speaker,  whilst  a  number  of  actions  have  been  taken  in  the  recent  past  by 
various  authorities,  there  is  a  need  to  look  at  these  problems  in  a  holistic  manner, 
Government is coming up with a Land Drainage Agency with the broad objectives to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

execute, monitor and maintain land drainage system in flood-prone areas, and 

control  development  taking  into  consideration  land  drainage  and  watershed 
Management.  

In  this  perspective,  Local  Authorities  and  the  Road  Development  Authority  will  be 

called to play a critical role.  

Furthermore, an Early Warning System for incoming surge in the Republic of Mauritius 
is being worked out.  This will involve development and implementation of an early warning 
system for incoming surges such that coastal communities in the Republic of Mauritius have 
at least 3 hours warning of possible incoming surges to evacuate safely. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhadain! 

(4.36 p.m.) 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

 MINISTER OF FINANCIAL SERVICES/DUFRY AG REPRESENTATIVES – 

MEETING 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain):  Madam Speaker, with your permission, I wish to make a note of personal 
explanation to the House with regard to the issue raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition 

 

83 

on 05 March 2015 during the Private Notice Question, to the effect that  I had supposedly 
stated the day before, that I was not present at the meeting with representatives of Dufry AG 
on 16 February 2015.   

The hon. Leader of the Opposition stated, inter alia, the following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

“(…) en direct à la television - the hon. Minister for Good Governance said 
he was not present, because he was not in Mauritius, he was with the Queen 
in London (...)”; 

“(…) It is recorded.  It is on ION News. Shame!”, and 

“(…) he said that he was not in Mauritius when the dinner took place on 16 
February.” 

Madam Speaker, in fact, I had never stated that I was not present at the meeting held on 
16 February 2015 with the representatives of Dufry AG.  I answered a specific question from 
a  journalist  the  day  before,  during  a  press  conference  with  regard  to  the  ‘objection  to 
departure’ against them by stating the following – 

 “Ou trouv mwa kapav blok dimounn dan Maurice sirtou kan mwa mo pa dan Maurice.  
Zot inn trouv monn al zwen La Reine ek sa inn publie dan zournal”.  

And I had also precisely stated during that press conference that, and I quote –  

“Mo pa ti dan Maurice huit dernie zour ni Attorney General.” 

The  meeting  took  place  on  16  February  2015  and  I  left  Mauritius  on  21  February  2015.  
Following my mission in the UK, I came back to Mauritius on 02 March 2015. I was clearly 
not in Mauritius for eight full days, (i.e. from 22 February 2015 to 01 March 2015).   

The affidavit dated 26 February 2015 which has been referred to by the hon. Leader of 
the  Opposition  cannot  be  rebutted  as  I  do  not  even  have  the  possibility  of  rebutting  this 
affidavit by swearing a counter affidavit as would have been the case if the affidavit had been 
filed in proper Court proceedings. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

 
(4.38 p.m.) 

84 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): If I can be allowed after the point of 

personal explanation, why I said what I said is for the following reasons – 

On one day - I don’t have the exact date - there was a press conference.  When the press 
put questions about a meeting which allegedly had been held, the hon. Minister threatened the 
journalist concerned.  The innuendo… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes! Yes!  He threatened the journalist concerned and said: “This is defamatory.” And so on 
and so on. If the innuendo – I listened carefully to what he said. I think I should be entitled to 
a point of personal explanation.  I base myself on that first.  The innuendo was clear that there 
was no such meeting, that it is defamatory to say so, and so on, and then on ION News, the 
way the reply came: “I was not in Mauritius”, and so on, clearly the intention was to cover 
the whole period.  It is after I put questions on what dates the Minister was outside and on 
what  date  the  dinner  took  place,  it  is  then  that  we  were  provided  with  the  dates,  Madam 
Speaker.  It is clear! 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 4.37 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.24 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

MOTION 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS – MOTION OF THANKS 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the following motion of the hon. Second 

Member for Grand River North West & Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in 

the following terms - 

We,  the  Members  of  the  Mauritius  National  Assembly,  here 
assembled, beg leave to offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of 
Mauritius for the Speech which he has addressed to us on the occasion of the 
Opening of the First Session of the Sixth National Assembly." 

 
Question again proposed. 

85 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, firstly, let me, I think like probably 
every  Member  of  the  House,  congratulate  yourself  on  your  election  and  also  the  Deputy 
Speaker. Also, if  I may say, I particularly appreciate the way that both of you are presiding 
the House. May I also, on this occasion, say how impressed I have been with the quality of 
the maiden speeches by Members of the House on both sides. I really have been impressed. It 
is  wonderful  for  our  democracy  to  see  that  such  young  people,  the  new  Members  are 
interested in our House and in serving in Parliament. 

Three months, Madam Speaker, to this day since the election, I must say it has been a 
pleasure to work  with our friends - old friends,  new friends now - hon.  Pravind Jugnauth, 
leader of the MSM, I worked before with him.  

It is a pleasure to work with professionals, Madam Speaker, hon. Ivan Collendavelloo, 
leader of the ML; VPM Soodhun is an old friend; hon. Bodha, an old friend also, and hon. 
Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo  is  even  an  older  friend.  So,  it  is  very  good,  and  then,  Madam 
Speaker,  the  able  and  wise  leadership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  No  doubt,  there  are 
tremendous expectations out there in the public, and similarly, no doubt, Madam Speaker, 
that  we  would  be  up  to  the  job  in  Government.  My  feeling  is  that  we  have  an  excellent 
Council of Ministers made up of very able people . I have not seen such excellent Members 
for  a  long  time  and  I  am  sure  that  we  will  deliver  what  the  nation  wants  which  is  vrai 
changement, and no doubt, Madam Speaker, it will be so. 

I returned yesterday from my first trip abroad in Berlin - ITB (International Tourism 
Bourse) - and I must say quite sincerely that we had an excellent fair; we had an excellent 
reception at Berlin, something that Mauritius has not seen recently. There has been a lot of 
optimism, not only on the part of Government, but also on the part of the private sector which 
attended the fair. There is, as I had the occasion to mention publicly, a feel good factor which 
is very promising for Mauritius. So much so, Madam Speaker, that Lufthansa Airways which 
had left Mauritius, deserted Mauritius for the last 26 years, is now coming back to Mauritius 
at the end of this year, not with one, but with two flights per week. This is something which is 
fantastic… 

(Interruptions) 

Lufthansa  being  a  quality  airline  and  Mauritius  is  all  about  quality;  this  is  wonderful  that 
Luftansa  is  coming.  But  we  did  not  stop  there;  we  had  the  pleasure  also  to  meet  again 

 

86 

Austrian  Airlines,  Lufthansa  Group  also.  Lufthansa  is  coming  from  Frankfurt  and  I  am 
pleased to say, Madam Speaker, that Austrian Airlines will as from October provide a twice 
weekly  service  to  Mauritius  this  time  from  Vienna.  So,  not  to  end  there,  because  the 
Germanic  world  seems  to  have  a  côte  d’amour  at  the  moment  with  Mauritius.  Condor, 
already  operating  in  Mauritius,  will  provide  a  fitfh  flight  and  Edelweiss  from  Zurich  is 
thinking of buying new planes and of coming from Zurich as from next year.  

So, we can see the change, the turnaround as far as the Germanic world is concerned 
vis-à-vis  Mauritius  and  we  know  that  Germans,  Austrians  are  some  of  the  best  friendly 
tourists, best friendly visitors that we have, and this augurs well for the destination.  

On this same subject of airlift because tourists and visitors need to get here, they have 
to get here somehow and we are happy to say that Air Mauritius has helped, is helping with 
additional flights in low season. We are talking about nine additional flights in low season 
from Paris, four additional flights from London, and importantly, they will be providing this 
flight with Emirates because there have been two complaints - both have some basis to them. 
The first is that there are insufficient flights sometimes; the hotels are empty and airplanes are 
full  sometimes  because  there  are  also  ethnic  travellers  who  come.  In  the  low  season  they 
come from everywhere and they fill up the plane seats, but they do not fill our hotel rooms. 
So, we need to provide for these at some point of time. The second thing also - I made a study 
of that - is sometimes excessive air fares are being charged because we have two or three 
airlines  that  control  the  routes  to  Mauritius  and  like  everyone  they  could  be  tempted  to 
overcharge.  I am happy to say that we have talked to Air Mauritius and to Emirates Airline 
and both are going to act and react and provide a fairer deal to our visitors and to Mauritians 
alike. 

We have greater air capacity coming for this year, which has been one of the major 
complaints  of  the  tourism  sector.    On  top  of  that,  we  have  TUI  coming  from  London  and 
Stockholm already which will come at the end of the year from Copenhagen and Poland, not 
to  forget,  of  course,  India  where  Air  Mauritius  will  be  providing  a  fifth  flight  in  the  low 
season. 

There  is  good  news  also  from  emerging  markets  so  far  as  air  connectivity  is 
concerned.  We  are  having  one  flight  as  from  July  from  Mauritius  to  Chengdu  which  is  a 
Municipal province in Central China and we are looking forward to a second weekly flight by 
Air  Mauritius  to  Chengdu.  We  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  it  is  welcome.  For  some 

 

87 

reasons,  the  Municipal  Government  of  Chengdu  is  substantially  helping  Air  Mauritius  to 
provide this air capacity. So, in fact, it is the other way round, instead of us helping it is the 
Chinese Municipal Government which is helping to have these flights become a reality. 

Madam Speaker, another issue that we have concerns Reunion Island which is next 
door to us. Reunion Island has the capacity to help us with tourists by providing visitors in 
many of the low season months. I will finish with that section to say that Air Mauritius has 
agreed to provide, at a  very  reasonable cost, some 14,000 seats in the low season towards 
Mauritius.  

I am saying all this, Madam Speaker, because, as I mentioned, there were two main 
issues that arise with the tourism industry in Mauritius. There are many other issues, but two 
issues which everybody is raising all the time. I wanted to show that although L’Express is 
saying we have been keeping quiet, in fact, I have been working and we have been addressing 
some of the main issues dealing with connectivity. In a moment, I will mention some other 
issues. 

Madam  Speaker,  you  may  have  seen  recently  in  January  that  Mauritius  had  an 
expansive growth of about 7.4% in tourist arrivals. I am not saying we are just running after 
numbers - because we are not - but I am just saying that this has happened in January. There 
is a general feeling in Europe, with the economies improving, that most of the economies will 
be performing better than last year. I am sure the hon. Minister of Finance - who is not here - 
will be happy to know that. So, Germany will be doing better, UK is doing very well, France 
as well will be doing better, Italy is going to do better and these are some of the core markets 
that provide tourists to  Mauritius. So, there is a general feeling which  we saw in  London, 
very upbeat about Mauritius. We are hoping to do at least 10% increase from UK. There is 
the same feeling in Germany and my colleague tells me that in France also there is a good 
feeling. So, there is a general feeling in Europe about the economy getting better and that is 
also helping to generate tourism. 

Most  importantly,  Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  is  now  a  mature  tourist  destination. 
What does that mean? In my view, it means that we have achieved diversity and we have 
matured  well.  I  will  talk  about  diversity  in  a  moment  to  show  how  the  destination  has 
matured very well. What is changing, in our view, about the tourism industry? Can I take a 
few  minutes  to  show  what  is  the  new  vision  of  the  new  Government  concerning  tourism? 
Perhaps I would like to say it in two words: we need to have a customer-centric approach, 

 

88 

that is, the customer comes first. The customer, that is, the visitor’s experience in Mauritius 
must be as perfect as possible. As a patriot, I see that as my major role to make sure that from 
the moment the visitor lands at the airport to the moment he takes back his flight, he enjoys a 
perfect holiday experience.  

Now, we have one million tourists in Mauritius, a little bit more. If I had one million 
perfectly  satisfied  customers,  I  could  close  down  the  MTPA  and  not  need  to  do  any 
promotion because they  would promote the country themselves. That is the importance, in 
my mind, of having a customer-centric experience and make sure that everything is perfect. 
This is why, Madam Speaker, we need to adopt a whole Government approach because the 
experience, in fact, cuts across many Ministries and many Government agencies.  

In fact, it is important also to have a multi-stakeholder approach where every citizen 
is concerned. I will tell you why in a moment but, for me, above all, le tourisme c’est l’affaire 
de  tous.  Everybody  ought  to  be  concerned  with  tourism.  We  have  28,000  people  working 
directly  in  tourism,  another  70,000  people  earn  their  living  indirectly  in  restaurants,  boat 
houses, agriculture etc. and that is a lot of people, maybe 100,000 families or a little less. My 
message to the Mauritian nation must be that we need to be concerned about the prosperity of 
tourism, the welcome that people  get, the cleanliness of the island, the state of our tourist 
sites and everything concerned because if we take out tourism, we take out one billion Euro 
of revenue and we are taking out 100,000 jobs nearly. So, that is important, Madam Speaker. 

Concerning the feel good factor, as I said, there was a 7.4% increase in January and I 
am pleased to tell you, Madam Speaker, that in February we have achieved 15.4% increase in 
tourist arrivals. That is almost a record and that is extremely good. The main markets like 
France, Germany and China also. The Chinese had reduced coming to Mauritius because, I 
think, they associated Mauritius with Ebola. But, that seems to be over and we had, I think, 
76% increase in Chinese arrivals in February this year compared to February of last year. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  tourism  industry  will  be  happy  to  know  that  we  are  now 
providing very detailed statistics. In fact, we are covering 60 countries now in our statistics 
because our markets are open, are diversified and as at December, we were only providing 
statistics for the arrivals of about 30 countries. 

Si  le  tourisme  va  bien,  tout  va  bien,  that  is  also  something  I  used  to  say.  Madam 
Speaker, it is a big mistake to think that tourism is only 120 hotel owners around the island. 

 

89 

That is not tourism! I explained before how many people work in tourism. The planters are 
concerned with tourism because they sell their produce to hotels and restaurants; fishermen 
certainly  are  concerned  because  fish  is  consumed;  taxis:  how  many  taxis  are  there  around 
Mauritius? Tour operators, restaurants, shops, including duty free shops, essential products, 
the airlines, the airport, of course, beach-hawkers, pleasure-craft owners, bungalow owners 
and everyone is concerned with tourism.  That is perhaps the first major point that I wanted to 
make.  

In Mauritius, Madam Speaker, for every one thousand jobs created directly in tourism 
- say in a hotel - 2500 jobs are created outside. It is a very significant figure. It is more than 
the  work  average  which  is  1:1.4;  here  it  is  1:2.5.  So,  when  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance 
wishes to increase employment – we have an unemployment problem – an obvious area to 
look  at  is  an  increase  in  the  tourism  sector.  So,  we  have  a  very  high  job  creation  rate  in 
tourism. 

But,  of  course,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  a  need  today  to  relook  at  our  tourism 
industry. In the last few years, I had lots of occasions to talk to my ex-colleague, Mr Yeung 
Sik Yuen. The tourism has been a little bit in the doldrums, the feeling was not good. It was 
becoming a sunset industry. It was slowly dying like twenty years ago we saw that the textile 
industry had started to become a sunset industry.  Now - I don’t know if it is the MSM - we 
want it to become a sunrise industry, Madam Speaker. 

That is the change that we want to make; from a sunset industry to a sunrise industry.  
Because to survive, the tourism industry must attract the best human resources and the best 
brains in Mauritius.  This is how an industry survives.  If you believe that there is no future in 
an  industry,  you  will  not  go  there.    You  will  join  politics  or  something  else.    There  is 
probably a future here.  That is what you will do.  So, Madam Speaker, let us make it once 
again a sunrise industry.  I am happy to say that at the ITB, we had six important awards from 
different persons and what most people appreciated and what most people are talking about is 
the diversity, so many hotels, so many centres North, South, East and West, so much culture, 
so much cuisine, music, so many activities.  You can dive from a plane, sky-dive, you can 
dive in the sea, you can swim with the dolphins or you can walk with a lion.  You can hunt 
deer and you can go deep sea fishing and so on, Madam Speaker.   

(Interruptions) 

 

You can fish for sharks and catch them! 

90 

(Interruptions) 

And bring them on board!  But this is another issue.  I do not want to get into that. 

Madam Speaker, we need to rebalance our priorities and look at the customer-centric 
approach.    The  more  or  less  thing  that  I  want  to  do,  Madam  Speaker,  is  a  hotel  grading 
system, so that we are able to give our own official rating to hotels.  Why do we want to do 
that? Two reasons. Firstly, because 30%-40% of people book directly on Internet. When you 
book directly on the Internet, there is no idea what the website of the particular hotel will tell 
you.  So, there is a need to achieve value for money and the person knows exactly where he is 
going and what is being charged.  So, hotel grading system, star rating, we will do that with 
the minimum rate that the hotel will be charged per its category.  We will also ensure that it is 
an obligation to display their rating so that there is no doubt at all to what type of hotel we are 
going.  In the hotel rating system, Seychelles also is going to do exactly the same thing.  We 
will be collaborating with my friend, hon. St. Ange, to do the same thing with Mauritius and 
Seychelles.  It is a good way to start collaboration with Seychelles and we will do even more. 

Next, Madam Speaker, there is something that has not been well understood. I want to 
introduce  a  moratorium  on  the  opening  of  new  hotels.    That  is  not  the  same  thing  as  a 
moratorium on the construction of new hotels.  We all know that a hotel is not constructed 
overnight.  It would take some time, minimum two or three years to get all the permits, the 
EIA etc.  We start building and we will finish, in fact, in two or three years’ time.  So, what 
we  are  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  is  more  about  the  qualitative  statement  rather  than  the 
quantitative statement.  We do not think that it is going to affect the FDI because, in fact, if 
we were to start in a few months’ time, we would finish after the end of the moratorium and it 
will not affect the FDI.  Instead it might positively act on the FDI by encouraging FDI by 
purchasing  of  hotels  which  are  lagging  and  which  have  not  had  enough  money  to  invest 
because of the low returns in recent years and which need to be revamped. So, we think there 
is  a  positive  effect  on  FDI  and,  as  I  have  said,  there  will  be  no  particular  effect  on 
construction, but we are making a very strong quantitative statement to people. We are not 
just looking after for numbers. We are not just looking at them. We want quality. 

Mauritius has always been a quality destination. It has never been in the numbers game. 
That is why we did not have charters, right from the beginning and till now. We called them 

 

91 

special flights, but not charter flights. The feeling has been in recent years that we have just 
tried to add on hotels, we can say there is such and such growth. This year, Madam Speaker, 
we will get the growth without new hotels and I will explain why. To give you an idea why 
we need to do something dramatic, is to tell you what is the tourism revenue per tourist. That 
is the point. The point is not quantity, but the point is to get them to spend money here. Now, 
in  2014,  according  to  official  statistics,  tourists  spent  Rs42,600  in  Mauritius  on  average. 
Would  you  believe  that  in  2012,  they  spent  Rs46,000?    So,  where  are  we  going?  We  are 
bringing more tourists, but less money per tourist.  This is not the way and it has to stop and 
that  is  why  the  moratorium  which  will  make  a  qualitative  statement  of  the  intention  of 
Mauritius to keep its hotel and the tourism sector as a quality destination. This is why it is so 
important. 

Now, what are the other initiatives? I have to thank my colleague, the hon. Minister of 
Environment.  We want a zero défaut on cleanliness.  I, myself, have toured the beaches on 
Monday morning,  I  am  sure my colleague is doing the same.  We  want everywhere to be 
spotlessly clean because that is a sine qua non and that is the basic condition for a tourist 
destination. Nobody goes to a poubelle, to a junkyard for holiday. Nobody does that and we 
do not want people to do that in Mauritius. In fact, I have to thank my colleague, the hon. 
Minister of environment, who is very active - action man - and for doing that. 

We  are  also  working  with  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  Pamplemousses  Garden 
which is our major tourist destination. Can you imagine going to London without going to 
Trafalgar Square! What happen if you go to Trafalgar Square and you see that it is a dump… 

 (Interruptions) 

Or Piccadilly Circus! This is where the Prime Minister goes!  You would not imagine 
doing that! So, why do we force our tourists to go to Pamplemousses Garden when it was 
much  nicer  before  and  is  not  as  nice  today.  How  can  we  expect  that?  Again,  it  is  basic 
common sense and we are working with the Ministry of Agriculture to get Pamplemousses 
Garden back to what it was before. 

(Interruptions) 

Replenishing  our  beaches,  Madam  Speaker,  if  you  go  to  many  beaches  you  must  be 
surprised, Cap Malheureux, for instance.  Who cares! The beach has disappeared. Nobody 
has  mentioned  it.  I  am  mentioning  it.    The  Ministry  of  Environment  is  on  board.  We  put 

 

92 

Rs100 m. in the last year’s Budget and I don’t know how much has been spent to replenish 
that. It is essential. What else do we have! If we do not have beaches, we will not have any 
hotels.  So,  we  didn’t  need  just  to  look  at  the  beaches,  we  need  to  look  at  the  safety  and 
security. There are too many thefts in our hotels that must be addressed and must be given 
special attention. A fast track system so that thieves who attack tourists are brought to court 
quickly because they are an easy target. You steal something and by the time you go to Court, 
in a year’s time, the tourist does not want to come back anyway. So, you are scot-free. This is 
why tourists have become in a way, a bit of a soft target and we need to reverse that to make 
it specially tough if you try and steal a tourist. 

Something which is very close to my wishes, Madam Speaker, hotels in Mauritius very 
rarely give us a sense of place. It could be, let’s say, in a luxury hotel in Mauritius, to take the 
building  and  put  it  elsewhere,  it  could  be  there  also.  You  don’t  know  that  you  are  in 
Mauritius. That is a mistake that people are picking up now. Just now, I have just mentioned 
Attitude Resort.  Let me  mention Zilwa Hotel in  Calodyne.  It’s a model for the rest of the 
island because there it develops the Mauritian culture. If you sit there for a drink you will 
hear the sound of drums - Africa I presume. But, you believe that you are in Mauritius and 
that is the sense of place that is missing. We have such a wonderful culture. So, few countries 
in the world can display as many cultures as Mauritius. There are so many religious festivities 
and there are a few countries that can do that. And yet, that is not taken advantage of by most 
of the hotels and that is a mistake. Because it was a long time ago when you know big hotels 
like Saint Geran etc, all the people wanted to do was lying on the beach. We have developed 
that. But, people have changed. The visitor has changed now. He wants an activity. He wants 
to eat well and be able to spend it. That is all about diversity. 

Madam  Speaker,  sense  of  place,  our  music,  our  culture,  our  history,  our  cuisine,  all 
these are attractions that we must use more dynamically in the tourism industry. Our nature 
wildlife is obviously a  major part now, whether it is Casela - it is not so Mauritius, but still it 
is nature wildlife and all the other wonderful attractions that Mauritius has and that people 
love. 

So, in a nutshell, Madam Speaker, tourists are looking for an experience when they 
travel, be it jumping from the plane, diving with dolphins, culture, learning history, these are 
experiences that the tourists want and that Mauritius will need to provide.  Of course, you 
can’t have all that without a pristine environment, and when you sometimes look at some of 

 

93 

our lagoons - and we will be cleaning; we need to clean the lagoons - people are throwing 
things  etcetera.  Without  environment,  there  is  no  tourism.  So,  we  will  look  at  the 
environment  again  and  certainly  make  sure  that  the  1.3  million  Mauritians  that  we  have  - 
Seychelles  has  an  advantage  as  it  has  70,000;  there  is  less  pollution. We  have  1.3  million 
people on a small island, and we need them to be conscious of the need for a proper and a 
clean, pristine environment. 

That is, Madam Speaker, what I mean by customer-centric approach. We will leave 
no  stone  unturned  to  ensure  that  when  a  visitor  lands  in  Mauritius,  c’est  un  plaisir  right 
through to the taxi, to his hotel, to his entertainment, to his restaurant, whether he goes to a 
culture, whether he goes to a family for dinner, whatever happens, that it is all perfect.  And 
that  is  where  the  sustainability  of  the  tourism  industry  lies  in  my  humble  view,  Madam 
Speaker.  

But  there  is  an  important  aspect  which  we  touched  on  this  morning,  that  is,  the 
employees. Mauritius is known throughout the world. Not so much for our beaches, but for 
the quality of the hospitality.  Right down from Ministers to the taxi driver, to the persons in 
the street, we are all smiling.  Some people don’t like it when I smile.  I keep on smiling; I 
like to smile. Most Mauritians like to smile.  You are smiling, Madam Speaker, and there is 
nothing wrong with it. Please continue to smile.  It is important to smile.  And so, this is a 
major plus point.  But how can you smile if the employee does not get satisfaction?  If you 
have  to  work  48  hours  -  and  I  know  my  ex-colleague  did  something  about  it  in  the  last 
Government - and sometimes even more, without overtime - overtime comes on top of that - 
imagine what social life you have!  If you are a mum with children at home, imagine what 
happens; imagine what happens to your spouse.  It’s many long hours.  In fact, there was a 
Remuneration Order issued by the last Government after I left, which reduced it from 48 to I 
think 45 hours, if I am not wrong.  But that Remuneration Order had also some issues which 
were objected to by the tourism industry. It is a shame, because I think they could have sat 
around a table and gotten rid of these few issues that remained. 

The result is that the Remuneration Order has been challenged in Court.  It is not law 
and, therefore, it is still status quo. They are still working 48 hours patati patata, etcetera. 
Apparently, it is not law. So, nobody is applying it.  So, what to do?  I am proposing, Madam 
Speaker,  to  meet  the  hotel  industry,  because  all  this  effort  is  being  done  for  some  reason.  
What is the purpose of all this?  Not at all to help the hotel owners!  That is not the point!  

 

94 

The point is that this should benefit the whole of the nation. So, I will speak to them, I want 
that Remuneration Order to be applied.  I will consult my colleague, the Minister of Labour, 
and maybe we might round off some of the edges.  But it is important that the Court case be 
removed and that the hours be reduced in the tourism industry. We need to get the smile back 
on the faces of the employees. They need to be treated well.  There have been - and it upsets 
me - some reports of foreigners in the hotels; managers abusing because they are only here a 
year or two. They don’t care; they don’t have to stay a whole life here.  So, they can afford 
maybe to be rude, to be abusive, to be rough with the Mauritian staff concerned.  It has to 
stop!  Obviously, there is always a staff role, but there must be respect.  We must réclame le 
respect pour les travailleurs mauriciens. That is important also, and again I know that my 
colleague, the Minister of Labour, has dealt with some of these issues. That is important for 
me that they should be well paid.  Then, the hotel needs to be profitable - we understand that; 
we  are  not  crazy.    They  have  to  be  respected  in  all  areas  and  at  all  times.    That  does  not 
depend on profitability.  They need also - as my hon. friend just asked this morning or this 
afternoon – to be given the chance to rise, to take over the positions.  But that is a tricky issue 
because  obviously  if  you  are  investing  Rs5  billion  in  a  structure,  you  may  want  to  have 
maybe  someone  from  your  group  to  manage  it,  or  maybe  have  someone  with  wide 
experience.  So, there has to be a mixture because we need people with experience overseas.  
But we need to give the Mauritian guy the chance.  Attitude Resorts is a hotel chain that has a 
100% Mauritian workforce and that is doing extremely well.  So, there is a way out of the 
tunnel, there is light at the end of the tunnel, and we need to keep on talking and convincing 
people to  give  a chance to Mauritius.  Of  course, there is always the limitation that could 
come  on  work  permit  etcetera.  So,  employees  is  central  to  our  tourism  policy,  Madam 
Speaker, to give everyone a chance to participate.  Each region, everywhere should see the 
benefits of tourism because it is l’affaire de tous.  I must mention Madam Speaker, on this 
aspect of tourism that, when I was there from 2005 to 2010, we had built a cruise terminal.  
Costa Croisière, the big chain of cruise lines, had come to Mauritius and had stopped.  I am 
happy  that  they  started  again.    They  are  doing  seven  rotations,  and  the  Mauritius  Ports 
Authority tells me that they  estimate that each of these seven rotations of these ships take 
about 2,000 people, take all the ravitaillement or fuel etcetera from Mauritius, and it goes off 
on a two-week cruise around the Indian Ocean.  That ship has started again in Mauritius, it is 
calling  seven  times  this  year,  and  the  seven  times  will  bring  Rs500  m.  of  business  to  the 
Mauritian economy.  It is fantastic.  We have people going this week to the Miami Cruise 
Ship Fair in collaboration again with Seychelles - because Seychelles is sending someone - 

 

95 

we want to see whether we cannot have more of these ships.  Imagine ten; that is Rs5 billion.  
That is a lot of money.  So, let’s get more cruise lines to Mauritius, especially since the piracy 
issue - that was also an issue - has now virtually disappeared, we can start to look again at the 
cruise ships.  Mauritius, in the Indian Ocean, is one of the last oceans where we don’t have 
enough  cruise  activity.    We  could  have,  and  we  should  have,  and  we  will  have.    Madam 
Speaker,  I  hope  that  the  delegation  will  come  back  -  we  have  sent  one  person  -  with 
interesting news from the Miami Cruise show. 

Madam Speaker, just quickly on this issue before I end on that score concerns the low 
season.  What is the low season?  The low season is for instance in June, where you get 50% 
less people than  you get in December.  So, in December - say  you get 120,000 tourists in 
June - you get 60,000.  It is a bit better in the other months, but you could say May, June, 
July, August, September, these are the euro months, the shoulder months, and we need to do 
something there because there is a manque à gagner. Everyone is there, the staff is there, 
everyone is sitting in the hotels; we only need the tourists. From now on, we are going to 
promote Mauritius as an all-year-round destination where you don’t just need sun. 

In fact, if you have seen the Chinese around, Madam Speaker, they cover themselves 
completely, because they don’t like to be exposed to the sun. I am sure that most people from 
Asia  would  not  need  to  have  the  sun  on  their  holiday.    Same  thing  from  Africa  and  the 
Middle East. So, we have a potential for the low season that we need to sell without the sun.  
But,  without  the  sun,  what  do  you  do?  You  need  to  have  all  these  activities  that  are  now 
available in Mauritius.  Why?  Because we will need to become an all-year-round destination. 

Madam  Speaker,  an  all-year-round  destination;  that  is  the  word.  Activities  in 
diversity!  We  will  do  it  and  we  will  get  this  done,  as  that  is  the  way  we  can  increase 
dramatically the number of tourists coming to Mauritius without having a huge number of 
additional hotels. I am confident, Madam Speaker, that we will do it, and we have started, as I 
mentioned just now.  You will see a big promotion in Reunion Island, and all around you will 
start seeing lots of people, even in June to September, etc.  

Let  me  come  to  the  marketing  side.  Each  country  had  its  own  way  of  marketing 
Mauritius. Each had a different picture, each had a different logo. In India, it was ‘Marvellous 
Mauritius’,  in  France  c’est  ‘Un  Monde  Loin  du  Monde’,  etc.  So,  you  are  talking  about  a 
global village but, in fact, everywhere it is different.  In Belgium, it would be different from 
France,  etc.  We  are  trying  to  harmonise  the  approach,  but  it  would  not  be  the  case  for 

 

96 

everything.  We want to, at least,  have a Blueprint where you see something and you would 
know  it  is  Mauritius,  whether  you  are  in  Australia,  in  New  Zealand  or  elsewhere.  We  are 
trying to harmonise the way that we portray Mauritius, the visuals, the messages. In fact, over 
the last two weeks, we had meetings with all our PR agents throughout the world, some in 
Mauritius, some in Berlin, to be able to achieve that.   

Of  course,  we  need  to  have  a  much  greater  use  of  the  digital  media.  The  MTPA 
Facebook page was closed for the last two years - probably not a good thing, you will agree, 
Madam Speaker. So, again, the digital era is with us, iPads and that sort of thing, and we need 
to get really strong on digital marketing and social media.  

Finally, we will be restructuring both the MTPA and the Tourism Authority. Both, to 
my mind, are not today  equal to the task that is ahead of them  and both need to have the 
appropriate human resources to do the job. For me, there are no problems in Government, 
there are no problems in business; there are only human resource issues. That is the only real 
issue that anybody has.  If  you have the right person in the right place, you don’t need to 
worry so much because the job will get done. And so, we will need to get the right people and 
the right structure at the MTPA and the Tourism Authority. 

Obviously, tourists come.  First thing they come to is our airport, our big new airport, 
which  -  I  must  say  this  because  I  have  to  be  fair  -  has  just  won  a  prize  from  the  Airport 
Council. This is the second most preferred airport of this type, a medium-sized airport – small 
to medium.  But, it has cost a fortune. In fact, it cost some Rs10 billion for the terminal and a 
further Rs2 billion for the additional taxiway. That’s Rs12 billion.  I don’t want to get into the 
Airway Coffee issue and all that. Obviously, we are finding a way -  you have seen in the 
papers, etc.; I don’t need to go into that; we are going to get our money back and increase 
competition so far as provision of food services is concerned at the airport. 

Madam Speaker, each passenger who comes to Mauritius pays about Rs3,000 to the 
MRA and to the airport when he lands in Mauritius. That is a lot on a ticket; you have to pay 
Rs3,000. We had a report when I was Minister of Finance, complaining about the cost of the 
airport.  But, nevertheless, the baby is there, you have to feed it.  It costs what it costs, and 
now, we have to pay for the airport. We need to increase the numbers coming through, the 
captive passengers coming through as tourists, as Mauritians, who are going to pay this fee, 
and also, obviously, the transit passengers because the airlines land, they pay landing charges 
etc., and the transit passengers also are in the airport.  The airport is big, it has lots of space 

 

97 

and it is very comfortable.  It has now to be paid for, it is expensive and it can be paid for 
only by increasing captive passengers and increasing transit passengers. We will be making 
some small improvements to make it more homely and more pleasant.  

 Madam Speaker, I just need to say that the Airway Coffee - Airway Coffee saga - 
will  be  replaced  by  other  operators  that  we  are  looking  for.    There  will  be  a  variety  of 
suppliers, and everything will happen through public tender; not like what happened before. 

We are building up a cargo hub, Madam Speaker. Phase 1 of the cargo hub, the cargo 
terminal; Phase 2, Freeport, Express Courier, etc., which cost around Rs500 m. each, but the 
important thing is that it would provide 4,000 new jobs in the south of the island, Madam 
Speaker. That is the important thing about the cargo hub, and we are talking about finishing it 
in a year’s time.  I hope that it will be a big success and that we can find work for all the hon. 
Members and, in fact, méritocratie, everyone who deserves… 

(Interruptions) 

Why not?  It is part-time job! Jobs for everyone! 4,000 jobs are expected in the cargo hub that 
is under construction and which will be ready in a year’s time. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that Air Mauritius has done well to survive the hedging 
saga. If my memory serves me right, it lost about 200 million euros; Rs8 billion at that rate. It 
wasn’t under my Ministry but under the Prime Minister’s Office. It came under my Ministry 
after it had lost that money.  But it has done well to survive because no additional funds were 
put  into  Air  Mauritius.  We  must  say  that  it  has  done  well  to  survive,  but  it  was  facing 
challenging issues, Madam Speaker. The weakness of the euro! It will be good if we travel to 
Paris on holiday, but for Air Mauritius there was not only the weakness of the euro but the 
weakness of the cross rate between the euro and the US dollar.  The cross rate, that is, the 
value of the two when you exchange them, was selling at 136 a few months ago; it is now 
110.  So, it has lost 25%. What does that mean? It means that Air Mauritius, which receives 
something like 40% of its income in Euros, and another 45% of the expenses in dollars. What 
does that mean? Less euros, more dollars to pay, Madam Speaker! That is why at the moment 
- I also answered a question about that - we have to be careful; it is not bonhomme noel.   We 
have to be careful with the airline. It is serving the country and it needs to continue to face the 
competition because the country also needs new airlift.  The real issue is the weakness of the 
euro vis-à-vis the dollar, which will impact - and the public opinion needs to know that – on 

 

98 

the  financial  performance  of  Air  Mauritius.  So, it  is  going  to  face  very  challenging  times, 
Madam Speaker, in particular as it pays its fuel in dollars. And also, we have the issue of 
these inefficient planes that will be replaced; two in 2017, two in 2019, and two in 2020.  

(Interruptions) 

It’s a good thing, Madam Speaker, we did not have the métro léger. We  nearly had the métro 
léger, but it’s a good thing it did not come.  

These airplanes which are fuel efficient, about 25% using less fuel than the present 

airplanes in use at the moment, whatever the other issues are… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it’s a good thing.  We nearly had the métro léger; it was a question of weeks, I think. 
Anyway, it did not happen.  

Blié. Blié! 

(Interruptions) 

So,  that  is,  Madam  Speaker  the  situation  at  Air  Mauritius.    It  would  inevitably  be 
exposed to more competition because the new flights that we are having; it does not require 
any further extension of agreements we have with other countries.  We already have a large 
number of agreements; they are called BASAs, Bilateral Air Services Agreements.  We have 
a large number and people from these places are entitled to come to Mauritius from Australia, 
from everywhere.  So, Air Mauritius will face competition.  It is inevitable and it needs to be 
prepared for that.   

Madam Speaker, I will now come quickly to the port, Cargo Handling Corporation 
Ltd. 1,300 employees,  Madam Speaker,  generally well paid but often unsatisfied.  We are 
going to spend over the next two years Rs1.5 billion in capital expenditure buying two ship-
to-shore  cranes.    We  shall  take  it,  I  think,  2506  ship-to-shore  cranes.    They  are  called 
super post-Panamax.    We  are  buying  6  huge  machines  that  transport  containers  and  stack 
them five storeys high for additional efficiency, etc.  That is the Cargo Handling Corporation 
Ltd.  However, let me say one thing, efficiency is an issue.  We need to move from about 19 
to 20 container moves per hour to come at 25.  We hope to reach that with the equipment 

 

99 

being installed in one year’s time so that we reach, as I mentioned, 25, which will be great for 
the region because we have competitors.   

Again, the port, Madam Speaker, is a bit like the airport.  You want to buy chocolate, 
it has to be imported.  It comes from the port probably, but the transhipment, the containers 
that are moved from a ship to shore and then put back on another ship, that anybody can do 
that.  We have competitors.  Believe it or not, Reunion Island is a competitor, now, for our 
port.  Durban remains a competitor.  Madagascar could come along.  Seychelles is trying to 
compete with us.  So, we have competitors and the employees need to understand that.  We 
need  efficiency  and  we  need  profitability  to  be  able  to  reinvest  in  the  port  and  that  is 
important.  Labour relations are important.  Efficiency is important in the Cargo Handling 
Corporation Ltd.   

Madam Speaker, I am not blaming anyone, but if you compare 2012 to 2014, we have 
an increase of more than 30% in labour cost.  30% in labour cost and hon. Shakeel Mohamed 
knows this fully well.  We have 30% increase in labour cost.  Can you imagine!  Business is 
virtually the same, revenues are virtually the same, but labour cost - God knows, who had a 
bright spark!  Perhaps you would tell us one day who had a bright spark!  Overnight, they 
increased the salaries, huge amount, in the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.  So, now people 
have to understand that the labour … 

Yes, negotiations, good negotiations!   

(Interruptions) 

Now, this happened and employees need to understand that we are happy to pay, but we need 
efficiency in return otherwise transhipment, blier transhipment, bye-bye transhipment!  We 
have already lost one major client; we could lose more and if that happens, it is going to put 
the whole port’s future in question and I am saying we are investing Rs1.5 billion in Cargo 
Handling  Corporation  Ltd,  but  in  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority,  we  will  put  nearly  Rs9 
billion over the next five years, in the future of the Port’s employees, their future, the future 
of Port Louis.  Everything depends on the port.  The port has the potential to make Port Louis 
even more prosperous.  Even if we move to Highlands, Port Louis will continue because of 
bunkering; because of avitaillement; because of ship repairs; because of the ocean economy; 
because everywhere around people are finding petrol and they need maybe storage, maybe 
they need expertise.  All these can be provided out of the port of Port Louis if we play our 

 

100 

cards right.  So, we need to play our cards right.  Government is going to put a lot of money.  
We  need  to  have  in  return  the  efficiency  and  responsible  labour  force  that  will  make  this 
happen for themselves, for their families and for the country, Madam Speaker. 

We also have a management issue at Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. that we need to 
resolve.  Insufficient, in my view, I mentioned, human resources in tourism; human resources 
also at Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd and we need to deal with to ensure the future of the 
company.  

Madam Speaker, I mentioned a little bit about the MPA, what we are doing.  We are 
extending the quays.  That is going to cost us Rs4.3 billion.  Dredging – not Boskalis, this 
time – another Rs1.2 billion and a big tug Rs300 m. So, planning the port; making sure that 
the land is used correctly.  Thank God, we are getting the land back from Neotown.  We will 
see whether Jin Fei also can collaborate on this and how we can have the whole area at the 
port to serve the interest of the nation.  Some of the most valuable lands in Mauritius are 
around the port.  

Madam Speaker, we would move from about 500,000 equivalent containers capacity at 
the moment to 750,000 in two years’ time and we hope – like I mentioned the Airport and the 
tourism  –  that  the  port  also  will  contribute  substantially  to  job  creation.    That  is  the  most 
important thing I can do for someone, Madam Speaker.  It is to give him a job. Who wants a 
son  or  a  daughter  at  home  who  is  not  working?    That  is  a  disaster!    So,  let’s  try  and 
concentrate  and  agree  on  job  creation.  Let  the  tourism,  the  airport  and  the  port  altogether 
contribute to job creation in a major way, Madam Speaker.  When it will happen, then we 
will put back again, Madam Speaker, the slogan of l’Alliance Lepep, ‘résultat lor résultat’ 
because this is what it is all about.   It is to give value for money to the people who have 
elected us and who have trusted us and I must say for the PMSD, it is the third time and we 
are humble about this.  We are obviously pleased about it, but it does also translate into our 
responsibility with our brothers from the MSM and from the ML also to provide the sort of 
response to the needs of the nation, that the nation expects, Madam Speaker; meritocracy, 
equal opportunity, giving everyone a chance whatever his community.  This is what we are 
doing and we must admit it.  If we look at the appointments, this is what is happening.  Hard 
work!  Nothing comes without hard work.  Honesty, Madam Speaker, it is very important that 
people  of  integrity  and  honesty  are  in  Government  because  we  are  dealing  with  public 
money.  It is not my money.  We are talking about billions in the port, it is not my money.  I 

 

101 

have never thought it would be my money.  If I have some money, it is mine; I don’t want 
someone to steal it, but that is not my money and I would not ever think of taking it.  So, 
honesty and integrity is an important issue, Madam Speaker, for all those who wish to lead 
the nation; make a difference between our private assets and State assets. 

As far as efficiency is concerned, so many of our institutions exist, but are not efficient.  
So  many!    My  ex-colleague,  hon.  Mohamed  has  complained  as  to  why  the  Youth 
Employment  Programme  was  under  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  not  under  another  Ministry.  
Because it was not efficient when it was there!  Hardly anyone started to have a job and when 
we did it, 8000 people!  I am not complaining.  It is not his fault.  It is just that so many 
institutions are just not efficient.  Is the National Productivity Council - which was under my 
Ministry  -  productive?    Probably  not!    That  is  the  crux  of  it.    Many  institutions  are  not 
efficient.  We need to act with dynamism, sense of purpose.  We have a vision.  I commend 
all  those  people  –  coming  from  the  PMSD,  obviously  the  MSM  and  ML  who  wrote  the 
Government  Programme.    It  is  rare  that  you  see  a  programme  so  down  to  earth  and 
addressing directly the needs of the nation.  I am happy that this is a Blueprint.  It is not a 
difficult Blueprint because there are no big words and you don’t know what action lies under 
that.  No!  

To  my  mind,  it  is  a  simple  document  that  provides  a  sense  of  purpose,  a  sense  of 
direction to this Government’s action, Madam Speaker. And obviously, everything has to be 
done in patriotism. We all love our beautiful country. Some of us, who have lived overseas, 
would come back here. Because of our love for the country that we are doing all this. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  taken  enough  time  of  the  House  to  say  that  all  the  issues 
concerning my Ministry, but the list of the issues that I mentioned are the core values that 
guide this Government’s action and will continue, with God’s help, Madam Speaker, to guide 
this Government’s action for the next five years. 

Thank you very much. 

 (6.23 p.m.) 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Bérenger): Madam Speaker, as tradition has it, 
we start by congratulating you for your election as the first lady Speaker in our Parliamentary 
history and also by congratulating the young Deputy Speaker, the youngest Deputy Speaker 

 

102 

we  had  in  our  history  also.  Let  me  also  welcome  all  the  new  elected  Members  of  this 
Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the Government Programme 2015-2019 constitutes un shopping list 
de mesures presque complet, un shopping list with which we have no major quarrel, une liste 
de déclaration d’intentions qui ne nous pose pas de problème.  

Mais,  Madame  la  présidente,  cela  n’est  guère  étonnant,  puisque  ce  Government 
Programme  reprend  largement  ce  que  l’Alliance  du  Remake  2000  avait  adopté  comme 
programme  et  que  l’Alliance  MMM-Parti  Travailliste  avait,  à  son  tour,  adopté  plus 
récemment. Je parle de programme, Madame la présidente. Mais ceci dit, il est fort à craindre 
que  deux  mesures  fondamentales  contenues  dans  ce  programme  gouvernemental  restent 
lettres mortes, comme elles le restèrent  en 2000-2005, malgré deux Select Committees.  La 
réforme électorale d’abord,  Madame la présidente, certes, on nous a  promis  « une dose de 
proportionnelle », mais on nous a aussi dit dans le manifeste électorale de l’Alliance MSM-
PMSD-ML que, je cite – 

« Le système de Best Loser sera maintenu. » 

Et mardi le 05 mars dernier, ici même, le Premier ministre nous a dit qu’il est de l’intention 
de son gouvernement de réintroduire le recensement communal… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, it is good ! You will have plenty of opportunities to correct that because this has been 
reported in the press and I checked as best as I could… 

Well, it is a good thing! 

Madam Speaker: Order!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:  Because  as  I  said,  I  waited  for  a  response  and  this  is  why  I  am 

mentioning it. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I know that it is hon. Mohamed who said it, but I also learnt about the reaction of the 
hon. Prime Minister. If it is not so, I will be the happiest man! 

 

103 

(Interruptions) 

Good, very good! Because I was going to remind the House that we took that progressive 
step more than thirty years ago. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, let us leave the affidavit for later on. 

(Interruptions) 

I will deal with the affidavit later on, but now it is about electoral reform and I am sure that 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is perfectly aware that putting into practice such an issue, with 
which I disagree fundamentally, would, in fact, open a dangerous pandora’s box. We must all 
be aware of that and it is in the interest of the population that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
after his reaction a few minutes ago, clears the air completely on that because, opening that 
pandora’s box, the first victim would be any serious electoral reform. That was the first issue 
I was very worried about, especially after what was reported last Tuesday, Madam Speaker, 
first point, electoral reform. But I am still in very strong doubt. I hope that time proves me 
wrong, but I am worried that, as in 2000-2005, electoral reform demeurera une lettre morte. I 
hope, I repeat, that time proves me wrong. 

And also the same thing, second point on which I hope time proves me wrong, but I 
am  worried  because  of  the  past,  that  is,  une  loi  pour  contrôller  le  financement  des  partis 
politiques et des élections. Certes, Madam Speaker, on nous a promis dans le Government 
Programme 2015-2019 un Financing of Political Parties Act. Mais là encore, c’est ce que le 
manifeste  électoral  puis  le  programme  du  gouvernement  de  l’Alliance  MMM-MSM 
promettait en 2000-2005 et on connait malheureusement la suite. 

Therefore, on these two issues - electoral reform and a law to control party finances 
and elections, I am worried that, like 2000-2005, ces deux mesures fondamentales risquent 
fort  de  demeurer  lettres  mortes.  Je  note,  par  ailleurs,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  deux 
mesures, là encore fondamentales, me semblent avoir changé de nature – mais là encore - I 
will listen carefully to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister entre le programme électoral présenté par 
l’Alliance MSM-PMSD-ML et le Government Programme qui est devant nous. 

D’abord l’ICAC, Madame la présidente - dans le manifeste électoral, on nous avait 
promis à la page 44 un nouveau Financial Crime Commission qui enquêterait elle-même - a 

 

104 

new one spelt out; it is in the programme - sur les différents types de fraude. I am quoting the 
electoral programme et qui engloberait – the expression used in French – l’ICAC. 

Par contre, je note à la page 35 du Government Programme, Madam Speaker, on nous 

promet cette fois un Financial Crime Commission qui va seulement oversee l’ICAC. 

This  is  what  is  spelt  out  in  both  the  electoral  programme  and  in  the  Government 
Programme. So, we have every right to request clarification, Madam Speaker, et surtout que 
dans l’interval l’ICAC, post-élection, a pris un très mauvais départ et la FIU aussi. Premier 
point où je souhaite clarification entre ce qui est dit dans le programme électoral et ce qui est 
dit dans le Government Programme. 

Le  deuxième  point  concerne  la  police.  Tout  au  long  de  la  récente  campagne 
électorale, Madame la présidente, l’alliance MSM/PMSD/ML avait promis que les policiers 
auraient dorénavant le droit de se syndiquer, c’est-à-dire, de former des trade unions. Mais 
dans le Government Programme - j’espère qu’encore une fois les clarifications viendront - il 
est dit à la page 21 que, I quote –  

« Police officers will be allowed to syndicate to safeguard their interests. » 

“To  syndicate”,  whatever  that  means!  Not  to  form  full-fledged  trade  unions.  It  would  be 
therefore very much to the advantage of everybody concerned that it is clarified, as promised, 
that the Police officers will be allowed to organise full-fledged trade unions and not simply to 
syndicate  –  whatever  that  means  –  to  safeguard  their  interests  because  there  are  many 
countries where Police officers are not allowed to form full-fledged trade unions but they are 
allowed to syndicate to defend their common interests. There is a fundamental difference and 
I hope there also that the hon. Prime Minister clarifies that point. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I am listening to you because if you promised the Police officers the right to form a 
full-fledged trade union, well,  you must think through! We  are entitled to ask  you.  Yes!  I 
hope you do reply to that question because promising the Police officers a full-fledged trade 
union means what it means.  I must say that the  reaction of the hon. Prime Minister  I feel 
proves  me  right  that  what  we  are  talking  about  is  not  a  full-fledged  trade  union  but  a 
syndicate, whatever that means, without - as I think from a sitting position the hon. Prime 
Minister has said - the right to strike! So, let us clarify that point! What was said during the 
electoral campaign and what is said in the Government Programme, it is in the interest of one 

 

105 

and all and not just the Police officers but, it is in the interest of everybody that the point be 
fully clarified, Madam Speaker. 

I would wish, now, to speak on what I find missing from the Government Programme. 
First of all, as a patriot, I find it inacceptable qu’on ait complètement oublié Tromelin dans le 
Government Programme - later on, I will come to the Chagos Archipelago - pas une mention, 
pas un mot sur Tromelin.  

Il y a aussi l’affaire MedPoint, pas un mot là aussi. Certes, Madame la présidente, il y 
a une  affaire en  cour mais la population a le droit de savoir  enfin toute la vérité sur  cette 
affaire  MedPoint.  Surtout  que  l’on  sait  maintenant  que  tout  avait  commencé  avec le  Dr. 
Jeetah au ministère de la Santé mais aussi qu’il y a eu un long communiqué du DPP pour 
expliquer pourquoi, de son point de vue, il fallait poursuivre au criminel l’honorable ministre 
Pravind  Jugnauth.  De  mon  point  de  vue,  whatever  happens  in  Court,  whatever  way  ICAC 
conducts the case in Court, de mon point de vue, une vraie commission d’enquête sur toute 
l’affaire MedPoint aurait été à l’avantage et serait à l’avantage non seulement du pays tout 
entier  mais  aussi  des  personnalités  concernées  qui  n’ont  rien  à  se  reprocher,  Madame  la 
présidente. 

Il n’y a pas eu non plus un mot dans le Government Programme sur l’affaire Jin  Fei 
ni  sur  l’affaire  Neotown.  Pas  un  mot,  aucune  référence  à  ces  deux  affaires,  Madame  la 
présidente.  

(Interruptions) 

These  are  facts!  We  are  entitled  to  want  to  know,  when  we  look  at  the  Government 
Programme, what is going to happen in the case of Jin Fei and in the case of Neotown. Pas 
un mot non plus, Madame la présidente, sur la commission d’enquête sur la MTC, la Gaming 
Authority et la Police des jeux. And yet, we know la Police des jeux for example, who was at 
the Head of la Police des jeux until recently. No mention at all on this issue was made in the 
Government Programme, Madam Speaker. Pas un mot non plus sur l’abolition des special 
funds créés et utilisés abusively par l’ancien régime et qui viennent d’être abusively used à 
nouveau depuis les élections dans le cas du diesel et de l’essence. Alors que ceux qui sont au 
gouvernement aujourd’hui, avec raison, n’avait pas fini de critiquer l’utilisation abusive de 
ces special funds.  

106 

 
On  ne  nous  a  pas  dit  non  plus  ce  qui  va  arriver  exactement  à  la  Banque  de 
développement et à la Banque des petits copains, the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank 
Ltd.  Au contraire, rien n’est dit dans le Government Programme et nous voyons des zigzags 
sans fin de la part du ministre des Finances depuis les élections. Nous avons droit de chercher 
dans le Government Programme 2015-2019, qu’on nous dise qu’est-ce qui va se passer. Dans 
les deux cas on nous promet une nouvelle banque pour les petites et moyennes entreprises, 
une semaine après on nous dit non la banque de développement va continuer mais ceci, cela. 
On n’y voit plus clair.  Et nous sommes en droit de vouloir savoir qu’est-ce qui va  arriver 
exactement  dans  le  cas  du  Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank  Ltd  qui  est  une  vraie 
pandora’s box explosif et la Banque de développement.  

Il n’y a aussi pas un mot sur le scandale de hedging à la State Trading Corporation et 
à  Air  Mauritius !  Dans  un  passé  pas  tellement  lointain,  passé  aux  oubliettes,  Madame  la 
présidente, alors que cela a coûté des milliards aux consommateurs et au pays et nous avons 
tout  simplement  laissé  ça  passer  aux  oubliettes.  Je  donne  là  quelques  exemples,  Madam 
Speaker,  from  what  I  find  missing  and  we  are  most  interested  to  have  answers  on  these 
issues. 

A few other remarks, Madam Speaker, sur la question là aussi fondamentale de notre 

souveraineté sur les Chagos. Certes à la page 44 we read, Madam Speaker –  

“Government is much concerned at the lack of progress made to date to resolve the 
long-standing  dispute  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago.  Every  effort  will  be  made  to 
speed  up  diplomatic  talks  with  the  UK  and  US  Governments  and  actively  seek  the 
support of the international community in this respect.” 

Très bien! But, I must say, il est de mon devoir de dire que ce que j’ai obtenu du Premier 
ministre comme réponse et réaction quand j’ai soulevé la question de notre souveraineté sur 
le Chagos par voie d’une Private Notice Question (PNQ) le 26 février dernier, disturbs and 
deeply worries me ! Nous avons perdu beaucoup de temps - je veux dire Ile Maurice a perdu 
beaucoup de temps - a raté beaucoup d’occasions depuis que le président Obama a succédé 
au président Bush, depuis que Gordon Brown a succédé à Tony Blair. Nous nous sommes 
engagés dans cette contestation à La Haye en passant par le tribunal sur les droits de la mer, I 
must say I repeat que ce que j’ai obtenu du Premier ministre deeply disturbs and worries me 
and I hope that we will find a way forward on that issue. 

107 

 
Also  on  Africa,  Madam  Speaker,  et  l’importance  capitale  de  l’Afrique  pour  notre 
avenir économique, on that we all agree, all of us. But, I join with those who have criticized 
the  fact  that  we  are  supposed  to  give  Africa  toute  sa  place  dans  notre  stratégie,  Madam 
Speaker,  alors  qu’en  fait  nous  ne  sommes  tout  simplement  pas  sérieux,  nous  je  dis  le 
gouvernement  précédent  et  so  far  this  present  Government  also.  Nous  ne  sommes  tout 
simplement pas sérieux. J’avais critiqué le former Prime Minister parce qu’il ne s’était pas 
rendu  personnellement  à  l’investiture  au  swearing  in  ceremony  du  nouveau  président 
Malgache et moi, à l’invitation du nouveau président, j’étais là-bas. What a wrong signal to 
send! Madagascar, un pays voisin, un pays frère, un pays de peuplement pour l’île Maurice 
est notre avenir, est dans une large mesure lié à l’avenir économique de Madagascar. He did 
not turn up !  

Mais si je le critiquais pour cela, le mois dernier ce nouveau gouvernement a brillé par 
son  absence  à  l’investiture  d’un  nouveau  président  du  Mozambique.  Alors  que  le 
Mozambique encore une fois, un pays voisin, un pays de frère, un pays de peuplement et un 
pays avec un avenir économique immense.  Le précèdent gouvernement avait raté l’occasion 
malgache, le nouveau gouvernement rate l’occasion mozambicaine.   

Nous  devrions  commencer  à  être  sérieux  en  ce  qui  concerne  l’Afrique  et  son 
importance pour nous.  Et ce qui m’inquiète additionnellement, c’est que non seulement le 
nouveau gouvernement rate cette occasion au Mozambique mais quelques jours avant, avait 
aussi  raté  un  sommet  crucial  de  l’Union  Africaine.    No  one  was  there!  No  Minister!  
Personne! 

Let us stop talking about Africa. Its importance for our economic future and yet nous ne 

traitons pas l’Afrique au sérieux malheureusement, Madame la présidente. 

A  la  page  20  du  Government  Programme,  on  nous  confirme  qu’une  commission 
d’enquête sur la drogue sera nommée.  Mais, encore une fois, ce sont des éclaircissements 
avant tout que je cherche.  Mais on ne nous dit pas quels seront ces terms of reference. Sinon 
dans le Government Programme, ce sera on drug trafficking only. Bien sûr, le combat contre 
les trafiquants de drogue est crucial et prioritaire.  Bien sûr! Mais nous devrions donner  à 
cette commission d’enquête the right people in the right place.  Nous devrions donner à cette 
commission d’enquête la possibilité de faire des recommandations sur tous les aspects de ce 
problème extrêmement  important, Madame la présidente.    

 

108 

Dans le cas des marchands ambulants de Port Louis, surtout, on nous promet à la page 

18 and I quote – 

“Government will address the longstanding problem of marchands ambulants and 
provide alternative attractive locations to enable them to continue their trade.” 

Mais, Madame la présidente, ce que nous avons reçu comme réponse ici même du ministre 
concerné  et  du  gouvernement  en  général  manque  –  de  mon  point  de  vue  –  totalement 
d’ambition et d’imagination et ne revient pas sur ce que nous avions fait en 2000 et 2005.  Ce 
que nous avons entendu comme réponse, c’est qu’il y a deux sites – en fait il y a trois – qui 
vont être réaménagés etc. mais cela ne va pas très loin.  Nous devrions reprendre le projet de 
hawkers palace.  Bien sûr, beaucoup d’eau a coulé sous les ponts depuis, mais nous devrions 
revoir le projet de hawkers palace et il y a d’autres possibilités à Port Louis. Je trouve que ce 
qui est proposé jusqu’à présent manque d’imagination et d’ambition.   

This  is  an  area  where  we  must  work  together:  Government  and  the  Municipality. 

Otherwise, we won’t move forward and we will not solve this issue. 

Dans  le  cas  de  la  démocratie  régionale,  Madame  la  présidente,  en  2000  et  2005 
toujours,  nous  -  je  veux  dire  le  gouvernement  MMM/MSM  -  avions  garanti  une  vraie 
autonomie  régionale  à  Rodrigues.    En  inscrivant  cette  autonomie  régionale  dans  la 
constitution elle-même, nous avions voté une loi superbe et vraiment démocratique sur les 
municipalités  et  les  district  councils  mis  sur  un  pied  d’égalité.  Le  régime  précédent 
malheureusement a tout ruiné avec la loi Aimée, une loi rétrograde et scélérate.  Mais ce qui 
me déçoit, Madame la présidente, c’est qu’au lieu de révoquer la loi Aimée - toute la loi - 
pour la remplacer par une loi reprenant les avancées de 2000 et 2005; reprenant l’essentiel de 
la loi que nous avons adoptée en 2000 et 2005, et traduisant cela dans les faits, au lieu de 
cela,  Madame  la  présidente,  on  nous  promet  seulement  à  la  page  39  du  Government 
Programme que, I quote – 

« The Government will amend the Local Government Act » 

C’est unamendable ce monstre que le ministre Aimée a produit ou we could throw it in the 
basket and come with the then new law reprenant l’essentiel de la loi que nous avons votée en 
2000  et  2005.   Enfin, Madame  la  présidente,  à  la  même  page,  le  Government  Programme 
nous dit que and I quote – 

 

109 

« Private Television will be permitted » 

Le choix du mot.  ‘Permitted’ pas ‘facilitator’ ou même encourager la télévision privée.  
Alors qu’on se souvient que l’ancien régime était, lui aussi favorable à la télévision privée, 
pour ensuite s’assurer dans la pratique que cela ne se ferait pas. 

Mais, en fait, we all know.  If Government does not have the political will to help the 
birth of private television, that birth will not occur.  This is what the previous Prime Minister 
was doing, pretending to be in favour and then keeping the MBC as it is and seeing to it … 

(Interruptions) 

…that private television will not take off.  Therefore, I urge Government not just to permit 
private television, but to facilitate and even encourage private television in Mauritius, Madam 
Speaker. 

Having said what I have said on the Government Programme and sought clarification 
on a good number of points, Madam Speaker, après certaines choses qui ont été dites ici à 
l’occasion des débats sur le Government Programme, vous me permettrez de revenir sur ces 
choses-là – le passé récent. 

Le  MMM,  Madame  la  présidente,  était  en  alliance  avec  le  MSM  dans  le  cadre  du 
Remake 2000.  Mais à un moment, nous avons estimé pour des raisons sur lesquelles je ne 
m’étendrai pas ici, le MMM a décidé de mettre fin au Remake 2000.  Le Remake dernière 
nous, Madame la présidente, le MMM a eu à choisir entre aller seul aux élections générales 
ou aller aux élections avec le Parti Travailliste.  Nous avons beaucoup hésité - tout le monde 
le sait … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bérenger: Nous avons beaucoup hésité, Madame la présidente, à cause de tout ce 
qui s’est passé entre 2005 et  2010.  C’est cette hésitation de notre part qui explique les on 
and off.  Mais le Parti Travailliste a accepté notre programme et une épuration sévère de ses 
rangs.  Quant à nous, Madame la présidente, nous n’avons jamais défendu quoi que ce soit, ce 
qui s’est passé de 2005 à 2010 quand le Parti Travailliste et le PMSD ont gouverné ensemble 

 

110 

ni après 2010. Nous n’avons jamais défendu quoi que ce soit ni ce qui s’est passé après 2010, 
après que le MSM ait porté à nouveau le Parti Travailliste au pouvoir avec le PMSD. 

As far as the MMM is concerned, Madam Speaker - you will allow me to say that - 
the  aim  was  to  kick  the  former  Prime  Minister  upstairs  to  the  Réduit  and  to  nettoyer  et 
redressser le pays with a new … 

(Interruptions) 

Shut up! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please don’t interrupt! 

Mr Bérenger: He is supposed to be a Whip! 

…and to nettoyer et redresser le pays with a new Prime Minister who would have kept his 
prerogatives  as  Prime  Minister.    Madam  Speaker,  a  lot  of  hysteria  then,  and  here  in  this 
House, was whipped up around la deuxième république, and I must say that the former Prime 
Minister himself went on and on to give the impression that he would indeed keep l’essentiel 
du pouvoir. As per the written agreement signed on 20 September 2014 between …  

(Interruptions) 

Of course the Rt. hon. Prime Minister can!  I have one with me, and with great pleasure I’ll 
let him have it!  But I’ll quote from it before, because it seems that he has not read it.   I 
would wish him to read it because I am serious about that. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking please! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, proceed 

with your speech please! No cross-talking! 

Mr Bérenger: But I have to respond positively when the Rt. hon Prime Minister asks 
for a copy!  I am not being negative; not at all!  I was saying, Madam Speaker, that as per the 
written agreement signed on 20 September 2014 between the MMM and the Labour Party, 
and which was made public, which was circulated and put on Internet and so on, this was not 
to be, that is, the former Prime Minister was not to keep l’essentiel du pouvoir. This was not 
to be.  In particular, I would advise the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to have a careful look at - I’ll 
give him a copy - sections 4(a) ‘Powers of The President’ and 4(b) ‘Powers of The Prime 

 

111 

Minister’ of that written agreement, which clearly spells out in writing, Madam Speaker, and  
I quote – 

“The powers, responsibilities and prerogatives of the Prime Minister would remain as 
current…” 

Madam Speaker, at least someone who did not fall into this hysteria that was whipped 
up  -  somebody  like  Maître  Raouf  Gulbul  -  took  the  trouble  to  read  carefully  that  written 
agreement and gave his opinion.  I quote Maître Raouf Gulbul - 

« le  Premier  ministre  détiendra  tous  les  pouvoirs.  C’est  le  Premier  ministre  qui 
détiendra  le  vrai  pouvoir  sous  la  Deuxième  République,  comme  préconisée  par 
l’alliance PTr/MMM. » 

(Interruptions) 

I am being objective, Madam Speaker!  C’est ce qu’a affirmé le légiste Raouf Gulbul 
dans Le Grand Journal, animé par Nawaz Noorbux, et repris par Le Défi Quotidien du 06 
November 2014.   And it is indeed with great pleasure that I’ll provide the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  with  a  copy  of  that  written  agreement,  which  was  made  public  and  circulated  on 
Internet  and  otherwise.    But  it  happens  dans  l’histoire  that  hysteria  takes  over  at  a  given 
point,  and  this  is  indeed  what  took  place,  helped  along,  as  I  said,  by  the  former  Prime 
Minister  himself,  because  for  his  electoral  purposes  he  thought  fit  to  give  the  wrong 
perception of what was provided and what we meant to do, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, without playing as being wise after the event, I am prepared to say 
que le MMM a eu tort et aurait dû aller seul aux dernières élections, malgré le risque qui 
existait de voir le Parti travailliste et le MSM, si nous avions decidé d’y aller seul ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please ! Order, please ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: They can say that now! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order in the House, please?  

 

112 

(Interruptions) 

I am asking hon. Members to have some order in the House! 

Mr Bérenger: Now they can say that!  But I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, when he 
was humiliated, insulted in front of Government House in 2005, somebody would have told 
me  that  the  same  gentleman  would  help  bring  Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam  to  power  in 
2010, we would have had the same kind of reaction, Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

I explained!  I think he has heard what I have said, and I’ll provide him with a copy of 

the agreement. 

(Interruptions) 

As I said, without playing at being wise after the event, I am prepared to say that we should 
have gone alone, malgré le danger qui existait. Madam Speaker, let’s be fair ! Le fait est que 
si  le  Parti  travailliste  avait  fait  alliance  en  2014,  comme  en  2010,  reconnaissons-le,  tout 
aurait continué à aller très bien! 

Tout aurait continué … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please ! Can we have some order? All hon. Members had 

the opportunity to talk.  Now, allow the hon. Leader of the Opposition to talk! 

Mr Bérenger: Tout aurait continué, Madam Speaker, à aller très bien pour madame 

la sirène, et tous … 

… les coffres-forts et comptes bancaires auraient soigneusement gardé leurs secrets ! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker : Can we have some order ! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Bérenger: Good luck, Madam! 

113 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I am on my feet!  Would you, please, allow the 
hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  to  pursue  with  his  speech?    Each  one  of  you  had  the 
opportunity to talk!  Now, we need some order in the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: One can understand, Madam Speaker!  It is not difficult to understand!  

So, Madam Speaker, after all this … 

(Interruptions) 

Is this parliamentary?  The gentleman who uttered these words … 

The hon. Member knows what he said! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can I know what words were uttered and by whom? 

Mr Bérenger: Well, if you did not hear ‘bullshit’, what can I say! 

Ki non sa !  Mo pena zoreille ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Who said that ? 

Dr. Husnoo:  I have never said it! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down! I am on my feet! Please, sit down when I am on 

my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: You can’t even express yourself. I am not saying you said that! 

 

114 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker. Alors, as I said, Madam Speaker… 

Bann lâches! From a sitting position, they don’t even have the guts to say he said it. 

(|Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Thierry Henry! Please! 

Mr Bérenger: Therefore, Madam Speaker, all this said, finalement, tant mieux pour 

ce qui est arrivé. Le peuple a kicked the former Prime Minister, non pas upstairs, mais out.  

(Interruptions) 

Not even downstairs, out! Même si nous, au MMM, avons pris un collateral kick.  

Madam Speaker, je terminerai en disant quelques mots sur ce qui se passe déjà dans le 
pays depuis les élections générales de décembre dernier. Soixante jours de cela à peine, et à la 
lumière  de  ce  qui  se  passe  déjà  dans  le  pays,  nous  devons  déjà  relire  le  Government 
Programme  2015-2019.  Car  déjà,  Madam  Speaker,  les  masques  tombent,  la  désillusion 
s’installe. These are facts, Madam Speaker. Je ne dis pas cela pour m’en réjouir ou pour jouer 
au prophète de malheur, mais les faits sont là déjà. Il y a eu les nominations que l’on sait, et 
l’affaire Gayan/Sumputh. Il y a eu le très mauvais départ postélectoral pris par l’ICAC et la 
FIU. Il y a eu l’abus des Special Funds dénoncés dans un passé récent. Il y a la perception 
que la bavure policière continue de plus belle. Il y a eu l’affaire DPP où certains font preuve 
d’une mauvaise foi  révoltante, alors que d’autres se laissent  emporter par leur  dislike bien 
justifié  du  DPP  actuel,  au  point  de  confondre  la  personne  du  DPP  actuel  avec  le  poste 
fondamental et constitutionnel du DPP.  

Plus récemment, il y a eu toute l’affaire, trois VVIPS, Gooljaury, Dufry ;  la liste est 
longue. Et dans l’intervalle, Madame la présidente, rien n’a changé du côté de la MBC/TV. 
C’est  pourquoi  100  jours  après  les  élections  de  décembre  déjà  les  masques  tombent,  la 
désillusion s’installe, malheureusement. 

 

115 

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  qui  a  toujours  compté  et  qui  compte  avant  tout  pour  le 

MMM, c’est son programme. Seuls… 

Stupidity ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

Mr Bérenger: Madame la présidente, ce qui a toujours compté, … 

(Interruptions) 

You know how even these days you are talking in favour of an MMM/MSM Alliance! You 
know that!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please, sit down! Can I ask hon. 

Members not to have any cross-talking so that we can finish with these debates! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Kan  dir kitsoz gagn kourage! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, would you continue? Would you continue? 

Mr Bérenger: I plead for him, Madam Speaker. Pitié! 

Madam Speaker: Don’t push me to act! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  conclude  by  saying,  ce  qui  a 
toujours  compté  et  qui  compte  avant  tout  pour  le  MMM,  c’est  son  programme.  Seuls, 
Madame la présidente, ou avec le MSM ou avec le Parti Travailliste, nous avons voulu, et 
voulons toujours faire de notre pays un pays phare, un modèle d’unité dans la diversité, de 
démocratie, de combat contre la fraude et la corruption et de développement dans la justice 
sociale,  et  le  respect  de  l’environnement.  Madam  Speaker,  whatever  in  the  Government 
Programme  2015-2019  goes  in  that  direction,  we,  the  MMM,  will  support;  whatever  the 

 

116 

MSM/PMSD/ML Government does that goes in the opposite direction, Madam Speaker, we 
will oppose and denounce. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister! 

(7.09 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I join all the preceding orators to congratulate 
you  for  your  election  as  Madam  Speaker  of  this  august  Assembly,  and  also  the  Deputy 
Speaker. I am not going to waste my time to answer the hon. Leader of the Opposition… 

(Interruptions) 

…because I do not believe at all in many of the criticisms that he has made. There is not a 
little bit of sincerity; I don’t believe in that.  

(Interruptions) 

I will only answer the allegation that he made when hon. Mohamed spoke about new 
census  that  I  agreed  with  it;  it  is  all  a  lie.  I  never  agreed  with  that.    There  are  some 
newspapers,  people  who  have  got  twisted  minds  and  I  know  they  purposely  twist  things.  
They have their own agenda. I am not blaming all the media people, but there are some who 
must be knowing what they are after, what they are gaining, why they are behaving the way 
in  which  they  are  behaving.  Everybody  knows  here,  in  this  House,  when  an  affidavit  was 
mentioned,  I  was  being  questioned;  on  so  many  times  I  replied,  I  am  not  aware  of  the 
affidavit,  I have not received the affidavit, and the hon. Member who was questioning me 
told me: ‘if they send you the affidavit, will you accept it?’ I even said: ‘Yes, if they send it to 
me, I will take it; I will accept it’. But then, in the newspaper, it was stated that I agreed I had 
the affidavit. Well, if I had the affidavit, why should I accept another one that was going to be 
sent to me?  

Similarly, the other day, when hon. Mohamed spoke about new Census and he said: 
“How are we going to satisfy the request of the United Nations?”  I said it is simple. I said we 
will adopt the law that made the option for candidates not to declare their community. They 
made it for one election; we are going to make it permanent.  That will satisfy the United 
Nations.  

 

117 

(Interruptions) 

I am certain that will satisfy the United Nations. 

And insofar as MedPoint is concerned, I am not going to argue on that.  There is a case 
in Court.  We wait for the result, but I’ll remind the hon. Leader of the Opposition, at one 
time when Remake was not on, how viciously he spoke about MedPoint.  Later on, when he 
was in Remake, he said, now he has got relevant papers; he knows facts; he knows who are 
the culprits in the MedPoint affair.   

Let  me  tell  today  that  the  MedPoint  matter  is  completely  over.    The  sale  has  taken 
place.  The whole amount of money has been paid to the company and when somebody, who 
declares his interest, walks out of Cabinet when decision is being taken, and behind his back, 
decision is taken to buy MedPoint, and when the sale is going to be effected, the Ministry 
needed  money  to  pay  for  it,  under  the  item  there  was  not  enough  money;  they  asked  for 
reallocation from another item, on the principle of collective responsibility, the decision that 
was  taken  behind  his  back,  it  is  binding  on  everyone.    After  he  declares  his  interest,  it 
becomes  his  own  decision.    And  could  he  have  refused  as  Minister  of  Finance,  the 
reallocation,  when  all  through  the  procedures,  everybody  approved  it?    Ultimately  the 
Financial Secretary made a Minute asking the Minister that everything was correct, that he 
should approve it!  Well, I don’t know. I have been a Barrister myself.  I have practised for a 
number  of  years  and  I  can’t  see  how  Pravind  Jugnauth  could  have  been  blamed  and  how 
could they have seen there is conflict of interest in this thing.  I really cannot, by any stretch 
of imagination, come to that conclusion. Anyway, we will see the result.  We will wait for it!  

Now, insofar as all the other matters that have been raised are concerned, all these are 
scandals  denounced  when  he  was  not  in  alliance  with  the  Labour  Party;  when  he  was  in 
Remake,  vicious  attacks  were  made  against  the  Labour  Party  and  particularly  against 
Ramgoolam.  Pourriture! Pourri pays! 

(Interruptions) 

And then when the alliance was born, he told his own people, when some of them wanted to 
raise certain matters: “Non, s’il vous plaît, blié, nous guet divan, nou pas guet en arrière”.   

Well, if he had won the election today, would he have questioned all this? 

(Interruptions) 

 

Of course, not! 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

118 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Ramgoolam  ti  oulé  lapêche  requin  et  requin  ek  moustache! 

Enfin! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

The Prime Minister:  Well, anyway, I think I have finished with him. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  with  humility  that  I  stand  up  to  address  the  House  on  the 
Government Programme 2015-2019. First and foremost, I bow down to the Almighty who 
blessed our country and saved it from chaos and anarchy.  

(Interruptions) 

I humbly acknowledge that there are God’s hands in the course of events that led to the 
last General Elections and the victory  achieved  by l’Alliance Lepep. With the blessings of 
God, there is also the godly wisdom of the people of Mauritius that proved once more that 
real power lies in the hands of the electorate and that no electoral conspiracy can change the 
will of the people.  

Let me add that I feel honoured by the trust that our people has placed in my team and 
myself. And let me hurry to say that they will not be disappointed and in the situation I find 
myself today, I must say to the hon. Leader of the Opposition a great ‘thank you’.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, when I left the State House on 30 March 2012, I engaged myself upon 
the mission to prevent my country to go to rack and ruin after I dedicated myself during my 

 

119 

previous  years  of  prime  ministership  to  build  a  proud  and  prosperous  Mauritius  for  the 
benefit of one and all.  

I recall the day and the time the hon. Leader of the Opposition – he is still Leader of the 
Opposition by the way – came to see me at the State House and told me: “Sir Anerood, we 
must  join  our  hands  to  clean  up  our  country  and  prevent  it  from  being  destroyed  by 
pourriture  Premier  ministre  Navin  Ramgoolam.  Well,  that  pourriture  -  anyway,  after 
listening to him, I told the Leader of the MMM that I am all with him in our common mission 
to save our country and build a better future for our people, the nation.  

From  March  2012  to  March  2014,  we  worked  together  within  the  Remake  2000 
alliance which gathered momentum months after months and was heading towards a massive 
victory at the much awaited General Elections. Then, suddenly, the Leader of the Opposition 
decided  in  April  2014  to  break  the  Remake  2000  –  I  am  sure  he  must  be  regretting  it 
profoundly now. 

He would have been Deputy Prime Minister!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Probably  he  had  already  eaten  the  appetising  bait,  stuffed  with  blood  of  the  former  Prime 
Minister and got caught like a shark.  

He forgot the mission he shared with me; he did not listen to his own militants and 
contracted an alliance with the same Navin Ramgoolam he vilified and treated as a true evil 
since 2005. For me, it was the biggest treason I witnessed in my whole political career.  

It was a treason against the people of Mauritius that had placed hope in the Remake 
2000; it was a treason against those militants who believed in the ideals of the MMM and of 
their  leader.  Hon.  Paul  Bérenger  decided  to  join  hands  with  the  evil.  Parliament  was 
deliberately closed for almost eight months while an alliance was being discussed between 
the  MMM  and  the  Labour  Party.  They  came  up  with  their  Second  Republic  proposal  that 
confirmed  their  greed  for  power  and  the  ploy  to  make  of  Mauritius  worse  than  a  banana 
republic.  For  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  the  priority  was  no  longer  cleaning  out  the 
country; he, in fact, drowned himself in the ‘pourriture’ of the Labour Government. 

120 

 
He was lured by the five-year Prime Minister dubious deal; he forgot all his ideals and 
principles;  he  even  accepted  that  the  former  Prime  Minister  becomes  President  of  the 
proposed  Second  Republic  for  seven  years  and  be  vested  with  major  decision-making 
powers,  but  without  any  accountability  and  assorted  with  absolute  immunity  against  any 
prosecution for reasons that have become clear now. 

Madam Speaker, the danger for democracy was too high and I thank the population 
for  having  understood  that  someone  described  as  the  personification  of  filth  was  trying  to 
avail  himself  of  powers  to  become  a  dangerous,  vindictive  and  lethal  dictator.  I  was 
convinced during the electoral campaign that the Mauritian electorate would reject arrogance, 
corruption, incompetence and lust for absolute power and would choose the path of sincerity, 
modesty and proven competence in managing our economy.  

The biggest favour that the other side did us was in providing the nation with a new 
branch of mathematics that made 40%+40%= 80% sound like the arrogant science of experts 
rather than a simple addition. My 84 years had convinced me that 40+40 never equals 80 in 
politics,  especially  when  it  is  supported  only  by  cheap  insults,  abrasive  arrogance,  and  a 
pathological compulsion to take the people for granted. 

Unfortunately, the Leader of the Opposition did not have the same wisdom as the vast 

majority of the population.  

I hope he understands today what sort of monster he was about to create when we take 
cognizance day after day of the infernal machinery the former Prime Minister put in place to 
loot this country. I noted during the debates that even the main ‘agwa’ of the Labour Party–
MMM alliance (hon. Ganoo) and the only survivor of the former Government, on the other 
side of the House, (hon. Mohamed) have realised the harm that the former Prime Minister 
inflicted on this country. 

Madam Speaker, the Mauritian people has placed its faith in my Government, and it is 
our solemn, sacred duty to live up to their expectations. I have lived a long life, and some 
people’s  reminders  that  I  will  soon  be  85  have  made  me  even  more  determined  that  my 
legacy to this nation will be one that shows that change is possible and that real change is not 
only desirable, but absolutely imperative after the ravages of the last 9 years.  

By  the  way,  I  will  happily  accept  any  birthday  cake  from  hon.  Members  in  three 
weeks’ time. But I must warn them that this time, I will bite any finger that tries to feed me a 
slice. 

 

121 

(Applause) 

Madam Speaker, coming back to my Government’s pledge to the nation, I forcefully 
say that we will have no stone unturned in our fight against corruption, and those who have 
plundered the national wealth will have to explain the source of the incredible wealth they 
have amassed since 2005. We were elected primarily on the basis of one slogan: Bizin Vrai 
Sanzman.  

That necessarily means a complete clean-up of our institutions riddled with corruption 

and absence of accountability.  

My  Government  intends  to  do  precisely  that,  Madam  Speaker.  And,  if  we  have  to 
burn  the  midnight  oil  every  day,  we  will  do  so  not  only  to  clean  the  filth  of  the  previous 
Government, but also to achieve the meaningful change the country badly needs.  

In this respect, I strongly condemn the attempts made in this House and outside to cast 
doubts on the meeting of three Ministers with two foreigners regarding the Mauritius Duty 
Free  Paradise  and  Dufry  AG  scam  where  the  mistress  of  the  former  Prime  Minister  has 
cashed  commissions  to  the  tune  of  almost  Rs100  m.  as  at  January  2015.  The  aim  of  that 
meeting was to gather as much evidence, documents as possible so as to help the Police in 
their enquiry in order to bring the culprits to answer for their ill doings. I personally feel that 
we must be thankful to the three Ministers. 

There was no other agenda, Madam Speaker, and I can state that I will be ruthless 

against all those who have conspired against the State for their own personal benefit. 

Madam Speaker, once again as in the eighties, I am devoting the last few years of my 
life to turn this country into one where every component of the population will feel proud to 
be part of the nation-building process. And I say to these thugs and marrons causing havoc 
with their blatant abuses and conspiracies: Stop it now! It is never too late. 

I,  as  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Home  Affairs,  will  keep  a  very  close  eye  on 
their activities, and the forces of law and order will come down like a ton of bricks on these 
people who have had it their own way for far too long and who think they will continue to do 
as before.  I will make this a priority of the Government to tackle homelessness in a decisive 
manner. State lands will be used not to turn friends into multimillionaires overnight but to 
provide space for new houses to be built for those without shelter.  

(Interruptions) 

122 

 
I want to die happy with the knowledge that no one in my country will sleep on an 
empty stomach and in a miserable hovel. We owe it to our people to ensure that when our 
political careers are over, we leave the country in a much better state than it was when we 
took  power.  We  have  to  make  politics  the  noble  profession  that  it  was  and  that  it  can  be 
again.   

Madam Speaker, through that strong vote of confidence in favour of l’Alliance Lepep, 
people have clearly expressed their hope for a political and an economic rebirth that will turn 
this country around so that all Mauritian families, without distinction, may work together for 
a brighter future and for a mutual sharing of the wealth generated by collective hard work. 

Our people have a legitimate right to expect that the Government they voted in must 
govern  and  administer  for  the  social,  economic  and  inclusive  advancement  of  the  people. 
Therefore, following my personal pledge to apply my energy to work for the people, with the 
people  and  in  the  sole  interest  of  our  people’s  welfare,  my  Government  has  presented  a 
programme that does justice to the trust that the people placed in us.  

As the Head of this Government, I give all my fellow countrymen the assurance that 
they  have  put  in  this  august  Assembly  the  right  team  (on  this  side  of  the  House,  Madam 
Speaker), at the right time, for the right reason. 

Madam Speaker, an accountable and responsible Government is one that is dedicated 
to  bring  about  change  that  durably  impacts  the  quality  of  life  of  the  whole  nation.    And 
'achieving meaningful change' is what the 2015-2019 Government Programme is all about.   

Since the day I embarked on the electoral campaign, my objective has been to give a 
new hope to every Mauritian, be it man, woman, youth, children or senior citizens. Few days 
only after we took office, we increased Basic Retirement Pension, Basic Widow’s Pension 
and  Basic  Invalidity  Pension.  We  stood  by  our  word.  Parole  donnée  parole  sacrée!  The 
population has witnessed that we mean business and we have been demonstrating that we are 
determined in our mission to clean, reform and reconstruct. 

Madam Speaker, I have a vision for my country, a vision that will propel Mauritius to 
new heights, a vision that sees the current generation passing the torch to the next generation, 
a vision that is holistic enough to include inter-generational equity as well as happiness as an 
integral measure of well-being. Through this vision, the destiny of our country, of a nation, of 
a new generation of Mauritians will be forged.  

123 

 
Madam Speaker, that vision is unveiled in the Government Programme which rolls 
out  ways  and  means  to  achieve  social  inclusiveness  based  on  sustainable  economic 
development and an equitable distribution of the national wealth.   

As we join forces to recreate history through a second economic miracle, emphasis is 

on boosting GDP growth and job creation.  

The focus of this Government is to nurture a stable, secure, innovative, inclusive and 
progressive  Mauritius,  based  on  a  culture  of  hard  work,  good  governance,  transparency, 
ethical dealings and a no wastage policy. 

Madam Speaker, our programme is based on fundamentals for a better life and it is 
geared to meet the needs of all categories and of all walks of life. I am, therefore, more than 
ever determined to be the driver of a new economic model that inspires trust and creates the 
feel-good factor so essential for investment and sound business.   

Our  strategy  focuses  on  the  consolidation  of  traditional  sectors  as  well  as  the 
development of new fields of activities and the promotion of a healthy and ethical business 
climate that encourages a culture of entrepreneurship and investment across all sectors of the 
national economy.   

We  live  in  an  era  where  innovation  is  the  key  that  unlocks  the  future.  Should  we 
decide  to  be  complacent  and  choose  not  to  create  and  innovate,  our  aim  to  boost  national 
productivity and growth will remain but a pious wish.  But this Government thinks and acts 
differently.  

Madam Speaker, the stage is being set for progress through the development of strong 

economic pillars with high potential in the short, medium and long term.  

We  are 

investing  considerable  efforts 

like 
manufacturing, agro industry, tourism and financial services. Our services industry is at an 
interesting cross-road in its life cycle.  

in  consolidating  vital  sectors 

A  strategy  of  product  and  market  diversification  is  being  implemented  for  the 
progress of both our financial services and tourism sectors. While the manufacturing sector 
remains  a  key  employer  in  our  economy,  we  are  henceforth  focusing  on  a  promotion 
campaign  that  targets  investment  in  high  value-added  and  high-tech  manufacturing.  Our 

 

124 

export development plan is equally being re-looked into. There will be more emphasis on an 
Africa-geared export strategy. 

Madam Speaker, Information Technology and Connectivity occupy the driver’s seat 
in the life of every Mauritian citizen today. This Government sees the immense potential of 
ICT  as  an  accelerator  for  national  growth.    This  is  why  I  have  put  a  special  stress  on 
technology,  communication  and  innovation-linked  activities.  We  are  doing  the  needful  to 
increase broadband penetration to 50% by the end of this year.   

Investments will also be made in Techno parks and Cyber cities so as to attract global 
players to set up businesses in view of promoting Mauritius as the ‘Virtual Office’ of Africa.  
Our outsourcing industry  will be  geared to offer new services such as  Knowledge Process 
Outsourcing and Legal Process Outsourcing.  The current shortage of skills in the sector will 
be addressed through a reviewed skills matching strategy. Free WiFi in selected places and a 
revision of the cost of telecommunications are also part of enhancing connectivity. 

Madam Speaker, this will not be enough to achieve a ‘second economic miracle’.  We 
will need to set up new economic poles to drive and attain the desired level of growth. The 
launch of regional bunkering, the expansion of transhipment and cruise-linked activities, the 
development of the ocean economy, the implementation of the duty-free shopping concept 
and  the  promotion  of  other  ICT  enabled  services  sectors  are  all  integral  components  to 
graduate Mauritius to the next level of development.   

The  transformation  of  Mauritius  into  a  regional  aviation  hub  and  an  international 

maritime port are important factors in our economic equation for success. 

Madam Speaker, for the first time in our history, Government is setting up a bank fully 
dedicated  to  support  and  service  entrepreneurship  and  SMEs.    I  cannot  help  stressing  the 
urgency to encourage a culture of entrepreneurship in our country.  My vision is to create a 
whole nation of entrepreneurs that will be partners in the economic success of our country. 

Madam Speaker, our Civil Service is of utmost importance in the structure and smooth 
functioning of our economy and its administrative system.  This is why I am focusing on its 
human capital development, the streamlining of processes and the optimisation of technology 
with the objective of boosting efficiency.   

 

125 

The development of our Civil Service and Judiciary along with an in-depth reform of 
our  public  sector  institutions  as  well  as  economic  growth  and  diversification  will  help  to 
generate employment at all levels in the country.   

A minimum of 15,000 jobs will be made available annually as a result of our strategy.  I 

hope so. 

Hon.  Mohamed  said  it  is  not  enough,  but  he  failed  to  say  that  under  the  previous 
Government, jobs were given only to selected people close to the Labour Party and selection 
was  being  made  even  on  Sundays  to  favour  such  people  even  if  they  did  not  make  an 
application. We all know what former PPS Khamajeet revealed as regards recruitment by the 
former Government.  

Therefore, I tell hon. Mohamed that he better looks himself in the mirror before trying 
to  give  us  lessons.  This  Government  will  definitely  deliver  on  its  promise  as  far  as  job 
creation is concerned. A fair chance will be given to all eligible candidates to apply for jobs 
as they become available.  To this end, this Government will ensure that a transparent and 
merit-based  recruitment  process  is  implemented,  with  a  zero  tolerance  policy  regarding 
fraudulent practices or corruption.   

Madam Speaker, the provision of decent living conditions to the vulnerable segments of 
our  nation  is  one  of  my  heart’s  desires.  To  ensure  effective  social  inclusion  for  all,  the 
Marshall  Plan  to  combat  poverty  is  being  worked  on  and  the  Government  is  planning  the 
construction of some 10,000 social housing units during its present mandate.   

In  the  same  vein,  my  Government  will  develop  a  new  strategic  land  use  planning 

framework to meet the social objectives we have set. 

Madam Speaker, a healthy society does not just appear from nowhere, but it is created 

and it emerges as a result of dedicated effort, planning and the availability of resources.   

Women play a crucial role in its emergence.  This Government will ensure that the role 
and  potential  of  the  Mauritian  woman  will  never  again  be  undermined.  Your  appointment 
Madam, as Speaker of this august Assembly, is a sign of better things to come for the 50% of 
the population.  

 

126 

With  you  as  our  first  Madam  Speaker,  and  with  Mrs  Ameenah  Gurib-Fakim  as  our 
future first woman President, the signs are clear that this Government will not simply talk 
about gender equality, but will actually make gender equality a reality in our island.   

We will provide necessary support to women wishing to take up employment, launch 
their enterprises and be free to resume gainful employment to participate in their household 
budget and family upkeep.   

Madam Speaker, a happy people is one that has a balanced lifestyle.  Our beaches in 
Mauritius are part and parcel of our Mauritian heritage. Depriving our people access to some 
of the most beautiful beaches would be at cross purposes with this Government’s strategy.  
Necessary steps are being taken to ensure that beach-fronts, beaches  and access to the sea 
remain public.  All developments around these areas will be carefully assessed in the light of 
our people’s needs for their recreational activities.   

Strengthening  security  in  these  areas  and  paving  the  way  for  a  cleaner,  greener  and 

safer Mauritius are equally on this Government’s agenda.       

Madam Speaker, no society can progress without access to a good educational system.   

Sadly, Mauritius has been subject to a number of ill-doings, especially in the private 
tertiary education sector under the previous Government.  This Government is determined to 
reposition Mauritius as a trusted and leading knowledge hub.  All relevant bodies are already 
on call and are being closely scrutinised to this end.  

Madam Speaker, no Mauritian student should be deprived of the right to sit for SC or 
HSC examinations because of lack of funds.  This Government has restated full subsidy for 
SC and HSC examination fees for all students.  We are equally working on the introduction 
of nine-year basic continuous schooling to circumvent the ill-effects of the CPE on our young 
children. 

Madam Speaker, our plan will not materialise without the necessary infrastructure.   

Investments will, therefore, be made in new and innovative transport systems including 

a new Road Decongestion Programme. 

With respect to public utilities, this Government will also bring in considerable reforms 
to address water supply problems as well as electricity production through a Power Sector 

 

127 

Expansion Plan.  In line with my vision to develop a green and eco-friendly Mauritius, we are 
focusing on encouraging energy production from renewable sources.  

Madam Speaker, as a Government that is working for the progress and well-being of 
our fellow countrymen, the elimination of wastage and irresponsible expenditure is a top item 
on our agenda. I am personally seeing to it that there is full rationalisation in the use of our 
resources. This applies to all infrastructural development, global connectivity, procurement, 
as well as skills and technology transfers across all ministries, parastatal bodies and public 
institutions.  Madam Speaker, all Mauritians desire a peaceful and successful life.  

Addressing the problem related to law and order in the country is high on my agenda. 
Government will  provide the Police Force with all the necessary support and funding so that 
it is capable of delivering a world class service and  response of the highest order thereby 
meeting public needs and expectations. 

Over  the  next  three  years,  a  number  of  new  Police  Stations  will  be  constructed  in 

different parts of the country wherever it is found to be necessary.  

The existing infrastructure and facilities at the Beau Bassin Training School no longer 
meet the increasing requirements of the Force in terms of capacity-building.  Therefore, we 
will set up a Police Academy to ensure continuous training and development for all ranks in 
the Police.  Necessary financial provision will be made in the coming budget. 

Moreover,  Government  will  soon  implement  the  historic  measure  to  allow  Police 
Officers  to  unionise  like  other  employees  in  the  public  service.  This  has  been  allowed  in 
many other countries and, as far as I know, strike is not allowed insofar as the Police Force is 
concerned. 

Government will put in place an independent Police Complaints Commission, which 
will be presided by a former Judge of the Supreme Court, to investigate complaints against 
members  of  the  Police  Force,  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  abuse  of  power  and  that  the 
fundamental human rights of citizens are respected. 

Madam  Speaker,  drug  trafficking  in  the  country  has  become  a  cause  for  serious 
concern.    Government  is  determined  to  launch  a  merciless  fight  against  drugs  dealers  and 
traffickers. 

This requires a multi-pronged approach since actions must be geared towards demand, 
supply, consumption, rehabilitation and prevention.  The Police are primarily concerned with 
repression and prevention. 

128 

 
The Police alone cannot fight the drug scourge.  Other Ministries, departments, NGOs 
and the community must join hands together to successfully root out this scourge from our 
society. 

The port and airport will be closely monitored for a better control of the supply of 
drugs.    We  will  ensure  that  our  seaport  and  airport  are  equipped  with  state-of-the-art 
equipment and technology to counter any attempt to introduce drugs in Mauritius.  With a 
view to addressing the problem in a more holistic manner, Government will very soon set up 
a Commission of Enquiry on drug trafficking. Consultations to that effect have already been 
carried out in order to find the best competences to undertake the enquiry. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  we  have  achieved  in  less  than  100  days  since  the  new 

Government assumed office is unprecedented. 

(Interruptions) 

Together with my entire team, we shall deliver on all our promises during our five-
year mandate. I shall live up to the expectations of the population. The population has shown 
faith in me, and I assure my fellow citizens that I will not let them down. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude with this quote – 

 “Darkness flees when the sun rises.”  

Like my fellow citizens, I feel so relieved that a new sun has risen, and that we are on 
track  towards  meaningful  change  through  hard  work,  accountability,  transparency,  social 
justice, a consolidated democracy and innovation. 

Madam  Speaker,  three  months  ago,  we  were  all  powerless  spectators  of  a  drama 
auguring the worst.  But, today, the wise vote of the people has unleashed a new era for a new 
common destiny. It has changed our fear into a nation-wide hope.  The challenge we have 
taken is, unfortunately, compounded by a string of unpleasant surprises acting like hurdles in 
our way. 

However, gradually, we are being delivered from the grip of evil and its malpractices. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  crushing  legacy  that  we  have  inherited  shall  not  dampen  our 
resolve to fulfil all the promises made to the people. The more daunting the challenges, the 
more fired up my team becomes. The trust and patience of the people energize us to tackle 
the affairs of this country boldly, with an obligation to give results. 

 
Together, with God’s blessings, let us pursue this journey to create a new future. 

129 

Together, let us build a prosperous country for all our citizens, for the nation. 

I thank all hon. Members for their participation in the debates. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind attention. 

(Applause) 

Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Madam Speaker, 
as I have already done when presenting the motion of thanks for the Presidential Address, I 
will speak out my mind in a very independent and detached manner with primarily in mind 
the common good of the nation.  

In  this  context,  I  will  address  some  crucial  issues  raised  since  the  Government 
Programme was read by His Excellency the President of the Republic, and I have decided 
also  to  warn  the  nation  of  the  rapidly  changing  circumstances  that  could  jeopardise  the 
Government’s rightful claim of sovereignty for Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago, as 
vigorously expressed in the Presidential Address. 

Overall,  the  reactions  of  the  public,  as  well  as  in  this  House,  even  among  the 
Opposition, have been favourable to the Government Programme with, of course, a certain 
amount of scepticism and criticism, as should be normally expected. 

Madame  la  présidente,  l’année  2015  pourrait  être  pour  Maurice  une  très  mauvaise 
année,  parce  que  durant  toute  l’année  2014,  alors  que  le  Parlement  avait  été  fermé,  en 
violation  de  notre  démocratie  et  de  notre  constitution,  la  Grande-  Bretagne  adoptait  des 
positions nouvelles pour nous arracher notre Archipel des Chagos. Ce que je vais expliquer 
est extrêmement grave, et le peuple mauricien n’a pas était informé de ce qui se passait, ni 
mobilisé pour une action non partisane de grande envergure pour exprimer son opposition à 
la volte-face des Britanniques. Je voudrais que les Mauriciens sachent que, pour la première 
fois,  depuis  la  soi-disant  cession  des  Chagos,  il  y  a  50  ans,  les  Anglais  ont  affirmé 
officiellement dans un document présenté à l’International Tribunal for The Law of the Sea, 
un organisme de la United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, je cite ici les articles 
écrits  durant  toute  l’année  2014  dans  The  Vanilla  Islands  Newsletter,  codirigé  par  Sydney 
Selvon et moi-même – 

130 

 
« ….que  les  Chagos  n’ont  jamais,  d’après  Londres,  fait  partie  du  territoire 
mauricien ». 

La  même  publication  spécialisée  a  aussi  suivi  pas  à  pas  la  démarche  britannique, 
approuvée par les Etats-Unis, de promouvoir le retour du groupe de Chagossiens aux Chagos, 
et leur réinstallation aux frais du gouvernement britannique avec, je souligne - 

‘Un niveau et une qualité de vie semblable à ce qui existe en Grande- Bretagne, dont 
le passeport est détenu comme on le sait par les Chagossiens ». 

Un rapport intérimaire favorable dans ce sens a déjà été rédigé dans le dos de Maurice 

avec la finalisation prévue pour cette année.  

Dans cette même publication, le 02 février 2014, Allen Vincatassin, Leader Chagossien qui 
s’est fait proclamer Président des Chagos en exil en Angleterre, a expliqué au rédacteur en 
chef qu’il est en contact étroit avec le gouvernement britannique et que son plan à lui, c’est de 
débarquer aux Chagos avec la communauté Chagossienne pour y constituer un Conseil élu 
qui remettrait alors la souveraineté de l’île officiellement à la Grande-Bretagne. Rien ne dit 
que ce plan ne serait mis à exécution comme tel, mais ces trois développements intervenus en 
2014 vont dans le même sens. Entre-temps, Allen Vincatassin a commencé avec le soutien du 
Parlementaire  britannique  Henry  Smith,  à  partir  de  ce  mois-ci,  l’enregistrement  des 
Chagossiens qui veulent faire partie du groupe qui sera en principe réinstallé dans leurs îles. 
Une  assemblée  fut  tenue  à  cet  effet  le  samedi  07  mars  2015  et  le  nouveau  communiqué 
comme suit officiellement, je cite -  

« The BIOT people resettlement committee met with the Chagossian community today.  
The aim was to inform people about the BIOT feasibility report and to register those 
people  who  would  like  to  be  resettled.  President  Allen  Vincatassin  and  Mr  Henry 
Smith have addressed the community.” 

Je  vais  citer  maintenant  le  document  anglais  niant  tout  droit  de  souveraineté  de 
Maurice sur les Chagos. Il est un des nombreux documents échangés par Maurice et Londres 
durant le procès que Maurice a porté devant le Tribunal de la mer. Il s’intitule ‘Arbitration 
Under Annex 7 of the United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea, Mauritius versus 
United Kingdom, rejoinder submitted by the United Kingdom 17 March 2014’.  

 

131 

La  partie,  où  Londres  change  radicalement  de  position  par  rapport  aux  accords  de 
1965, est intitulée ‘The islands that now form the BIOT were never part of the territory of 
Mauritius’. C’est une position extrêmement choquante lorsqu’on sait que Londres a plusieurs 
fois reconnu à Maurice une souveraineté alternative sur les Chagos si jamais la base militaire 
n’était plus nécessaire. Certes, Maurice a répondu par une contre-argumentation légale devant 
le Tribunal. Mais si Maurice perd l’affaire, nous aurons totalement perdu les Chagos qui était 
au  départ  une  revendication  politique  qui  n’aurait  peut-être  pas  dû  être  portée  devant  le 
Tribunal International de la mer.  

J’espère, et je prie même pour que Maurice gagne son affaire, sinon on aurait d’une 
certaine manière perdu les Chagos pour la deuxième fois, et cette fois de manière définitive 
en droit international.  

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  que  je  veux  dire  en  résumé,    c’est  qu’avec  la  nouvelle 
position  légale  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  sur  les  Chagos,  avec  en  complément  le  projet  de 
réinstallation  des  Chagossiens  aux  Chagos,  avec  la  citoyenneté  britannique  en  poche,  ont 
complètement  changé  la  donne.  Les  deux  démarches  indiquent  une  position  anglaise 
comparable à celle adoptée aux iles Falklands, ce qui pour Londres veut dire les Chagos et les 
Chagossiens sont britanniques et le resteront pour toujours.  

En  fait,  des  dizaines  de  Chagossiens  sont  déjà  en  train  d’être  formés  en  Grande-
Bretagne pour travailler aux Chagos. Les Américains ont été priés de les employer également 
sur la base de Diego Garcia. On prévoit que tout cela figurera dans le rapport final. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  tiens  à  vous  remercier  et  à  remercier  cette  auguste 
Assemblée pour leur discours et aussi de m’avoir écouté avec attention et je recommande, 
encore une fois, que ma motion de remerciement pour le discours-programme soit approuvée.   

 Merci. 

(Applause) 

The motion was, on question put, agreed to. 

Resolved: 

 "That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 
following terms - 

 

132 

"We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, beg leave 
to offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of Mauritius for the Speech 
which he has addressed to us on the occasion of the Opening of the First Session 
of the Sixth National Assembly." 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 

Question put and agreed to. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Friday 13 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.  

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 8.05 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 13 March 2015 at 

2.00 p.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

SALE BY LEVY – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY – REPORT 

(No.  B/155)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit  whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 
on Sale by Levy, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

if it has now completed its works and submitted its report thereto, and 
(i) 
(ii) 
cost incurred for the inquiry. 

if so, indicate the main recommendations thereof, and 
if not, indicate the reasons, and 

Reply: I am informed that the Commission of Inquiry on Sale by Levy has already 
completed its work and submitted its report to the President of the Republic on 20 August 
2014.   

In regard to part (a) of the question, the Office of the President has informed that on 
20  August  2014  the  President  of  the  Republic  forwarded  two  copies  of  the  report  of  the 
Commission to the former Prime Minister.  However, the report is untraceable in my office.  I 

 

133 

am,  therefore,  neither  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  report  nor  about  any  action  taken 
thereupon by the former Prime Minister.  

Following a request made to the Office of the President, a fresh copy of the report has 

been made available to my office on 07 March 2015.   

The recommendations contained in the report will be examined and appropriate action 

taken thereafter. 

In regard to part (b)(ii) of the question, I am informed that the total amount incurred 
so  far  for  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  is  Rs1,725,000  representing  fees  paid  to  the 
Commissioners and the Secretary. 

 

POLICE DES JEUX – ILLEGAL BETTING - MONITORING 

(No.  B/156)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police des Jeux, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the – 

(a) 
(b) 

number of Police Officers attached thereto, and 
name  of  the  officer  at  the  head  thereof,  indicating  if  additional  human 
resources  will  be  attached  thereto  to  monitor  illegal  betting,  especially 
regarding horseracing. 

Reply:  The  House  would  recall  that  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/59,  I  did  mention  that 
information  in  regard  to  posting  of  officers  is  considered  to  be  of  a  sensitive  nature  as  it 
relates to security in the country.  Accordingly,  it would not be appropriate to divulge the 
information requested at part (a) of the question. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the Police des Jeux operates under the overall command of a Deputy Commissioner of 
Police. 

I am also informed by the Commissioner of Police that the Police des Jeux, by virtue 
of its functions in enforcing the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act 2007 is also involved in 
addressing  offences  relating  to  horse  racing,  namely  in  combating  illegal  bookmaking  and 
betting at Champ de Mars and throughout the island. 

 
At  present,  whenever  there  is  the  need  for  reinforcement  of  Police  personnel  for 

134 

specific operations of the Police des Jeux, additional officers are deployed. 

I  am  also  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  a  general  survey  of  the 
authorised and actual strength of Police as well as the operational requirements of all Police 
Divisions  and  Branches,  including  that  of  the  Police  des  Jeux,  is  being  carried  out  with  a 
view to the resizing and restructuring thereof. 

As announced in the Government Programme, combating the growing illicit gambling 
activities  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  Government.    In  order  to  achieve  this,  the  legal  and 
institutional  framework  will  be  strengthened  for  increased  effectiveness  so  as  to  protect 
society from the ill-effects of such nefarious activities. 

 

POLICE ACT – AMENDMENTS 

(No. B/157) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Act, he will state 
if consideration will be given for the advisability of introducing amendments thereto to make 
provisions for Police Officers to be members of any trade union of employees. 

Reply:  As  the  hon.  Member  is  aware,  one  of  the  measures  announced  in  the 
Government  Programme  2015-2019  is  indeed  to  allow  Police  Officers  to  syndicate  to 
safeguard their interests. 

Section 17 of the Police Act stipulates that no Police Officer shall be a member of any 
trade union of employees, or of any association having for its objects the control or influence 
of  the  pay,  pension,  or  conditions  of  service  of  the  Police  Force.    Furthermore,  the 
Employment Relations Act, which inter-alia sets out extensively the powers of trade unions 
covering the bargaining powers of member employees, the reporting of industrial dispute and 
the  institution  of  industrial  actions  including  strikes,  is  not  applicable  to  a  member  of  a 
Disciplined Force other than the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service and the Mauritian Prison 
Service. 

Preliminary  consultations  with  Ministries  and  Departments  concerned  on  the 
unionization  of  Police  Officers  have  already  started  with  a  view  to  formulating  a  proper 

 

135 

framework within which the Police Officers will be allowed to syndicate and which will be in 
the interest of Police Officers as well as the public at large. 

Appropriate amendments will have to be brought to the Police Act, the Employment 

Relations Act and any other relevant statute to enable the Police Officers to syndicate. 

I wish to draw the attention of the House that Police Officers Tuyau and Boojhawon 
have  on  21  September  2012,  lodged  a  Plaint  with  Summons  before  the  Supreme  Court 
averring that the current prohibition under section 17 of the Police Act on their forming part 
of  a  Trade  Union  or  Association,  is  unconstitutional  and  in  breach  of  their  Constitutional 
Rights  under  section  13  of  the  Constitution.    The  matter  is  still  at  the  stage  of  pleadings 
before the Supreme Court. 

 

COMMISSION OF INQUIRY – IMMOVABLE PROPERTIES – 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/158) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 
on  the  prescription  of  immovable  properties,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom,  information  as  to  if  it  has  completed  its  works  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 
recommendations thereof and the measures that will be taken for the implementation thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that the Commission of Inquiry on the System of Acquisitive 
Prescription  has  already  completed  its  work  and  the  Commissioners  have  submitted  their 
final report to the President of the Republic on 23 October 2013. 

I am further informed that on 05 November 2013 the President forwarded two copies 

of the report to the former Prime Minister personally. 

However, as the report is untraceable in my Office, I am neither aware of the contents 

of the report nor of any action taken thereupon by the former Prime Minister. 

Following a request made to the Office of the President, a copy of the report has been 
made  available  to  my  Office  on  07  March  2015.    The  recommendations  contained  in  the 
report will be examined and appropriate action will be taken in the light thereof. 

 

 

136 

MELROSE PRISON – MOBILE PHONES, DRUGS & COMPLAINTS 

(No. B/159) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Melrose Prison, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the – 

(a) 

(b) 

Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  number  of  reported  cases  of 
entry of mobile phones and drugs thereat, and 
Human Rights Commission, information as to if complaints of the prevalence 
of inhumane conditions of detention thereat have been reported thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS - LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT - 

AMENDMENT 

(No. B/160) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  municipal  council  elections,  he  will 
state  when  same  will  be  held,  indicating  if  Government  is  proposing  to  introduce 
amendments to the Local Government Act before same will be held and, if so, indicate the 
sections of the Act which will be concerned therewith. 

Reply (Minister of Local Government):  The Local Government Act 2011 provides 
that elections shall be held in 2012 and thereafter every 6 years on such date as the President 
shall appoint. 

As it was announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019, the Local Government 
Act will be amended to consolidate democracy at local level and promote better participation 
of local councillors in the management of community affairs. 

In  this  context,  my  Ministry  has  consulted  the  12  local  authorities  and  the  Electoral 
Commissioner  with  a  view  to  inviting  proposals  for  amendments.    The  proposals  received 
have  been  examined  and  the  Government  has  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  under  the 
chairmanship  of 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications to oversee amendments to be brought to the Local Government Act 2011. 

 

137 

The Ministerial Committee has met and made recommendations for the review of the 
Local  Government  Act  2011  with  a  view  to  consolidating  democracy  at  local  level  and 
Government has agreed to the recommendations. 

The Attorney-General’s Office has already been instructed to work out the draft Local 
Government (Amendment) Bill for introduction in the National Assembly.  At this stage, it is 
premature  to  indicate  which  specific  sections  of  the  Local  Government  Act  2011  will  be 
amended. 

 

NDU – CONTRACTORS – APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/161)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  registered  contractors 
resorted to by the National Development Unit since 2006 to 2014, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the NDU, a list thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 
(b) 

procedure followed for the selection and appointment thereof, and 
contracts allocated thereto indicating in each case the- 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

contract value thereof; 
procedures followed for the allocation thereof, and 
payments effected thereto; 
claims made by the contractors indicating the outcome thereof in each 
case, and 
total  cumulative  amounts  paid  to  each  contractor  during  the  period 
2006-2010. 

(v) 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  first  time  that  the  NDU  had  recourse  to  Registered 
contractors  was  in  August  2009.    An  invitation  was  made  through  the  press  calling  for 
contractors dealing with – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Building/Civil Engineering/electrical and other related works; 

Road works; 

(iii)  Drain works, and 

(iv) 

landscaping/embellishment works to register themselves. 

138 

 
A  similar  exercise  was  carried  in  July  2010,  June  2011,  January  2012  and  January 
2013.   I am made to understand that the Registered list of contractors emanating from the 
2012  exercise  still  prevails  given  that  the  exercise  effected  in  2013  has,  at  date,  not  been 
scrutinised and completed. 

I am tabling the list of registered contractors from 2009 onwards. 

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  criteria  followed  for 
appointment  and  selection  were  that  the  potential  contractors  should  provide  information 
pertaining to – 

(i) 

past experience in nature of works performed during; 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the last two years for 2009 exercise, 

the last five years for 2010 exercise; 

the last two years for 2011, and 

the last three years for 2012  

(ii) 

average annual financial amount of constructions executed over the last five 
years, and 

(iii) 

company profile including list of equipment available and technical personnel. 

As regards part (b) subsection (i), I am tabling the list as requested. 

NDU also resorts to  Zonal contractors.   In that  respect, Mauritius was divided into 
eight zones and as from 2009 into four zones with distinct constituencies.  Zonal contractors 
are  appointed  through  a  national  bidding  exercise.    The  duration  of  their  contract  was 
originally for one year and subsequently 18 months.  However, some contracts have a longer 
duration given that they were administratively extended on several occasions.  The latest one 
being in December 2014 up to March 2015. 

The  above  extension  has  resulted  in  Zonal  Contractors’  initial  contract  value  being 

exceeded significantly.  In one such case, it has even increased six times. 

I am tabling a summary of the Zonal Contracts awarded during period 2006-2014 as 
well as the list of projects for each Zonal Contractor.  The cumulative amounts paid to each 
Contractor during the period 2006-2014 is being compiled and will be laid in the National 
Assembly Library at the earliest. 

 

 

139 

STC - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/189)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to the contract for the supply of Liquefied Petroleum Gas for each of the years 2013, 
2014  and  2015,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State  Trading 
Corporation, in each case, information as to the – 
(a) name of the successful bidder thereof;  
(b) contract value thereof, and  
(c) procurement method use for the award thereof. 
Reply: The House may be aware that the State Trading Corporation (STC) is exempted 
from  the  provisions  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  by  virtue  of  the  Public  Procurement 
(Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2009, in  respect of  goods purchased for resale, including 
services incidental to the purchase or the distribution of goods.  However, the STC generally 
has recourse to international open bidding exercise for the procurement of LPG. 

I am informed by the STC that for the period 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, four offers 

had been received as follows - 

 

Bidder 

  Vitol SA 

Premium/MTon (USD) 

298.00 

 

Petredec (Bermuda) Ltd 

118.50 (lowest bidder) 

  Geogas Trading SA 

 

Tonimas Nigeria Ltd 

180.00 

140.00 

 
The  successful  bidder  was  Petredec  (Bermuda)  Ltd  and  the  supply  contract  was 
awarded  at  the  premium  rate  of  USD  118.5  per  ton.    The  value  of  the  contract  was  USD 
67,074,565 for 68,006 tons. 

In March 2013, the STC proceeded with its annual tender exercise which was launched 
to cover supply for the period 01 July 2013 to 30 June 2014.  At the closing date, four offers 
were received. 

 

Bidder 

Premium/MTon (USD) 

 

140 

  Aqualine General Trading LLC (UAE) 

  A-Z Petroleum Products Ltd (Nigeria) 

 

Petredec  (Bermuda) Ltd 

  Geogas Trading SA (Switzerland) 

98 

112 

125 

155 

 
The successful bidder was again Petredec (Bermuda) Ltd with a premium of USD 125 
per  ton  which  represented  an  increase  in  premium  compared  to  the  previous  year,  that  is, 
USD 118.50 per ton.   

The STC decided not to award the supply contract for the full period, that is, 01 July 
2013 to 30 June 2014, because of the increase in premium. However, in order to avoid any 
disruption  in  the  supply  of  LPG  an  interim  contract  covering  period  01  July  2013  to  30 
September 2013 was awarded to Petredec (Bermuda) Ltd. The value of the contract was USD 
17,750,709 for 18,676 tons. 

Concurrently, the STC held discussions with Petredec (Bermuda)  Ltd to review their 
premium and to come up with a guarantee to supply LPG at lower premium.  Subsequently, 
Petredec (Bermuda) Ltd agreed to supply STC at a reduced premium of USD 112 per ton, 
subject  to  the  STC  entering  a  contract  over  a  period  of  two  years.    I  am  informed  that, 
thereafter,  the  STC  signed  a  supply  contract  with  Petredec  (Bermuda)  Ltd  for  the  period 
covering  1  October  2013  to  30  September  2015.  Estimated  value  of  the  contract  is  USD 
113,474,314 for estimated quantity 135,814 tons. 

I am informed that the STC is presently in the process of preparing a tender document, 
which it will launch, through international open bidding, in due course, for the procurement 
of LPG after 30 September 2015. 

 

FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS – RATES & CHARGES 

(No.  B/190)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
financial institutions, he will state if consideration will be given for – 

(a) measures to be taken for the regulation of the rates and charges imposed by these 

institutions, and  

(b) the establishment of an Ombudsperson for the protection of the customers thereof. 

141 

 
Reply:  With  regards  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  following 
complaints  from  various  stakeholders  against  the  high  fees  and  charges  imposed  by  the 
financial institutions, Section 6(1)(w) of the Bank of Mauritius Act was amended in 2012 so 
that the Bank of Mauritius could impose limitation on the quantum of those fees and charges 
as it would consider appropriate. 

I am also informed that the Bank of Mauritius commissioned a Task Force in 2012 to 
look, inter alia, into the fees and commissions imposed by commercial banks.  One of the 
objectives  of  the  Task  Force  was  to  assess  the  reasonableness  of  the  fees,  charges  and 
commissions  of  banks  with  respect  to  banking  services  that  are  frequently  used  by  their 
customers.  The Report of the Task Force was released in June 2014.  Subsequently, the Bank 
of  Mauritius  invited  comments  on  the  Report  from  the  public  at  large  to  enable  it  take 
informed decisions on the recommendations made in the Report. 

Regarding part (b) of the question,  I wish to inform the House that my  Ministry is 
working on an Ombudsperson (Financial Services) Bill for the establishment of the Office of 
the  Ombudsperson  for  Financial  Services  to  better  protect  consumers  of  financial  services 
and provide them with a free and independent service to help settle disputes with the Banks 
and other financial institutions.  

 

DREAM BRIDGE – COMPULSORY ACQUISITION 

(No. B/191) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the new 
defunct project known as Dream Bridge, he will state when the plots of land compulsorily 
acquired in relation to the implementation thereof will be reverted back to the owners thereof. 
Reply: The Project being referred to by the hon. Member is, in fact, the Harbour Bridge 
Project, which was put on hold by the then Government sometime last year. I am informed 
that the project involved the compulsory acquisition of 64 plots of private land.  

With  the  shelving  of  the  project,  the  sale  back  of  these  plots  ought  to  be  made. 
However,  as  the  Harbour  Bridge  Project  forms  part  of  the  whole  Road  Decongestion 
Programme  and  the  Light  Rapid  Transit  System,  all  the  plots  of  land  which  have  been 
acquired will be considered in the light of different options and projects to be elaborated by 
the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. Therefore, at this stage, the plots of 
land acquired will not be reverted to the owners.  

 

 

 

142 

MBC – TELEVISION CHANNELS -PRIVATISATION 

(No.  B/192)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
two television channels of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Corporation, information as to if the privatization thereof is being 
contemplated and, if so, indicate if – 

(a) a prior study has been carried out in relation thereto and, if so, give details thereof, 

and  

(b) any time frame for the implementation thereof has been fixed. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

REGATTA COMPETITIONS - NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATION 

(No.  B/193)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Sports Act, he will state if 
he will consider the advisability of introducing amendments to the schedule thereof to make 
provisions for the recognition and registration of Regatta Competitions, commonly known as 
Regatte, as a National Sports Federation. 

Reply:  I have to inform the House that there is already a National Sports Federation 
namely, the Mauritius Yachting Association which caters for the promotion and development 
of sailing in Mauritius.  The need, therefore, to register and recognise another federation for 
the promotion of Regatte does not arise. 

The  organisers  of  Regatta  competition  have  to  enlist  the  support  of  the  Mauritius 

Yachting Association for their activities. 

 

CITES PAUL LANGLOIS, BURRENCHOBBEY & BALANCE - SALE 

(No. B/194) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the ex-
CHA  and  Cité  EDC  houses  located  in  Cité  Paul  Langlois,  Cité  Burrenchobbey  and  Cité 
Balance, located in the region of Plaine Magnien, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
information as to the number –  

(a) thereof sold to the occupiers thereof, as at to date, and  

(b) of owners thereof who have not received their respective title deed as at to date, 

indicating in each case the reasons therefor. 

 
Reply:  In  the  region  of  Plaine  Magnien,  there  are  3  ex-CHA  housing  estates 

143 

consisting of 287 housing units, as follows: 

(a)  Cité Balance                   138 
(b)  Cité Langlois                    50 
(c)  Cité Burrenchobay           99 

 

 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I have to inform that all these housing units 
have by now been sold to their owners.  However, out of these 287 cases, only 282 owners 
have already finalised their deed of sale. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, 5 owners, that is 2 from Cité Burrenchobay and 3 
from Cité Balance, have not received their title deeds because they have not yet submitted the 
relevant documents to enable the drawing up of the deeds. 

 

CASTING OF SLABS SCHEME - GRANT 

(No. B/195) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Casting of Slabs 
Scheme,  he  will  state  if  Government  proposes  to  increase  the  threshold  of  Rs  8,500  as 
monthly  earnings  in  order  to  allow  more  beneficiaries  to  benefit  from  the  grant  of  the 
allowances provided thereunder. 

Reply  (The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands):  I  wish  to 
inform  the  House  that,  currently,  under  the  Roof  Slab  Grant  Scheme,  families  with  a 
household income of less than Rs8,500 monthly are granted financial assistance to enable 
them to arrange for the casting of a slab to a house which they construct at their own cost on 
land owned either privately or through leasehold rights. The quantum of such a grant is up to 
, with a proportionate reduction according to area below 100m2.  
Rs65,000 for a slab of 100m2

In  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  the 
threshold  of  monthly  household  income  of  Rs8,500  is  being  examined  for  review,  as 
appropriate, to make it more responsive to emerging needs. 

PORT LOUIS - WATER SUPPLY  

(No.  B/196)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities 

 

144 

whether, in regard to the construction of a new rapid gravity plant of 800,000 m3 capacity per 
day to provide uninterrupted water supply to the Port Louis region, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Central Water Authority, information as to where matters stand, 
indicating - 

(a) the expected completion date thereof, and  
(b) if consumers from the Priest Peak Service Reservoir will benefit from water on a 

24-hour basis after the completion thereof and, if not, why not. 

Reply: The works at Pailles Water Treatment Plant consist of the upgrading of the 
existing 30,000m3/day slow sand filters and the construction of a new Rapid Gravity Filter of 
capacity 80,000 m3/day.  Works started in July 2013 and the contractual completion date is 
14 March 2015. 

I am, however, informed by the Central Water Authority that the plant will now be 

commissioned by end April 2015. 

I am further informed that according to the contractor, the delay is due to - 
(i) 

the late delivery of the Mechanical and Electrical equipment as a result of cyclone 
Bansi, and 

(ii)  the procurement of the filtration sand, following a ban on the export of sand by 
the Saudi Authorities.  The sand is now being procured from India and will be 
delivered by end March 2015. 

With regard to the second part of the question, I am informed by the Central Water 
Authority  that  after  the  works,  the  new  plant,  which  will  treat  water  at  a  higher  turbidity 
condition of 400 NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity Units) as compared to 15 NTU presently, 
will ensure an uninterrupted water supply in the region of Port Louis, including Priest Peak 
Reservoir.  

However, as mentioned in my reply to PQ B/178, a 24-hour supply in Port Louis can 
only be achieved after the completion of the Bagatelle dam scheduled for end 2016 and the 
renewal of the old pipelines in Port Louis. 

 

PORT AREA - PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - LAND LEASE 

(No.  B/197)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the port area, he will state - 

 

145 

(a) the allocation of prime land thereat reserved for the storage of petroleum products 

as per the approved master plans prior to 2005, and  

(b)  the  beneficiaries  of  land  thereat  allocated  for  the  storage  of  petroleum  products 

since 2006 indicating - 
(i)  if  the  leases  were  granted  to  established  players  and  were  in  line  with 

established policies;  

(ii) the procedures followed in each case;  
(iii) extent of land allocated to each beneficiary;  
(iv) the respective purpose and other terms and conditions thereof, and  
(v) rental charged in each case, and whether they were in line with the commercial 

valuation of the respective plots of land allocated. 

Reply: The information requested is being compiled and will be tabled in the National 
Assembly. 

 

 

 
 

SUGAR INDUSTRY – VRS – LAND ALLOCATION 

(No.  B/198)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme pursuant to the provisions of the Sugar Industry Efficiency Act 
2001, he will state the number of former employees of the sugar estates who agreed therewith 
but who are still awaiting the allocation thereto of their respective plot of land, indicating the 
- 

(a) number of sugar estates not complying with the agreement in relation thereto, and  
(b) measures his Ministry is proposing to take against the said non-complying sugar 

estates to enforce compliance with the agreement.  

Reply (Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun): As the 
House is aware, the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) was introduced in 2001 under the 
prime-ministership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth to initiate the much needed reforms in the sugar 
industry.  15,550 employees have retired under the VRS and of these 11,958 have obtained 
their title deeds for a plot of land of 7 perches.  There are, therefore, 3,592 employees who 
are still awaiting for the allocation of their respective plot of land. 

 
With regard to part (a) of the question, there are a number of procedures that need to 

146 

be followed for the allocation of land to the beneficiaries.   

These include - 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the selection of a suitable site which should be acceptable to the employees 
and approved by the authorities; 
application for a development permit and the issue of a letter of Intent by the 
Morcellement Board to be able to start the development of the site; 
seeking all clearances as specified in the Letter of Intent, namely clearances, 
among  others,  from  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  the  Central  Water 
Authority, the Road  Development Authority, the Waste Water Management 
Authority  ,  the  Traffic  Management  Road  Safety  Unit  the  Municipal  or 
District  Council; 
implementation of all infrastructural works for the Morcellement; 
drawing of lots for the plots to be allocated;  
application to the Morcellement Board for the Morcellement Permit; 
preparation of title deeds by notaries appointed by the sugar estate, and 

(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii)  handing over of title deeds to the beneficiaries. 
The sugar estates, once in possession of the Letter of Intent from the Morcellement 
Board, have to complete all infrastructural works within a period of 15 months in accordance 
with the provisions of the Morcellement Act. 

I  am  informed  that  the  situation  with  regard  to  land  allocation  to  2,566  out  of  the 

3,592 beneficiaries is as follows - 

467 are awaiting the title deeds to be transcribed; 
530 are expected to sign the title deeds shortly; 
130 title deeds will be prepared once the Morcellement Permit is issued, and 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv)  A  number  of  sites  involving  1,439  beneficiaries  are  awaiting  different 

clearances before applying for the Morcellement Permit and same be issued. 

The above processes are expected to be completed within the next three months. 
As regards the remaining 1,026 beneficiaries, the sites are either under different stages 

of development or awaiting letter of intent to proceed with development of the sites. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I have set up a Monitoring Committee under 
my own Chairmanship to follow closely on the implementation of the remaining projects so 
that  all  obstacles  are  removed  and  bottlenecks  are  urgently  addressed  for  the  timely 

 

147 

completion of these projects to ensure that the beneficiaries obtain their title deeds within the 
shortest delay. 

 

D. Y. PATIL MEDICAL COLLEGE - FACT-FINDING COMMITTEE 

- REPORT 

(No.  B/199)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Science 
Research whether, in regard to the D. Y. Patil Medical College, he will state if Former Chief 
Justice Arringa Pillay presided over a fact-finding committee in relation thereto during the 
tenure of office of the last Government, indicating if it has submitted its report and, if so, 
indicate  the  remarks,  if  any,  made  by  the  said  committee  on  the  International  Monitoring 
Report on Accreditation. 

Reply: Following numerous allegations made by two former students of D. Y. Patil 
Medical College that were widely echoed in the press, the Tertiary Education Commission 
(TEC) Board decided on 25 February 2014 to set up a Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with 
regard to the D.Y. Patil Medical College.  

 
 

The composition of the FFC was as follows - 
 Hon. Ariranga G Pillay, G.O.S.K, former Chief Justice  

 

(Chairperson); 

 

 M. Vasdev Hassamal, former Chairperson of the Mauritius  

Revenue Authority, Member, and 

 

Dr Bhaye Dawood Jaufeerally, MBChB, FRCS, Specialist in  

General Surgery, Member. 

 

 

 

The report of the FFC was submitted to the Chairperson of the TEC Board on 18 

April 2014.  

 I am informed that, according to the provisions of the Clinical Training Framework 
for Medical Education, TEC is called upon to set up an International Monitoring Committee 
to recommend accreditation of programmes and ensure quality of same. The Committee has 
to monitor the Medical College on a yearly basis for the duration of 2 cohorts of students. 

 According to the FFC Report, four International Monitoring Committee meetings 
had  been  held  between  2009  and  2013,  each  lasting  for  2  days.    In  each  meeting  which 
included a visit to the premises of D.Y. Patil Medical College, a set of recommendations was 
made.  A total of 62 recommendations had, thus, been made during that period. 

148 

 
The FFC had noted that many recommendations emanating right from the first IMC 
had  not  been  implemented  by  D.Y.  Patil  Medical  College  at  the  time  the  Committee  was 
carrying out its work.  These related to provision of a hostel, mess facilities, lecture halls, a 
museum and an anatomy  laboratory.  Equally, short comings were noted concerning, inter 
alia,  examination  process,  student  attendance  and  the  profile  of  lecturers.    Despite  these 
serious short comings, some of which still prevail as at now, the IMC in 2013 recommended 
full accreditation of programmes of the College for a period of 3 years. 

The FFC also mentioned that the IMC in 2011 noted that there was no evidence of 
inspection  or  visit  of  the  UTM  to  the  College.    The  IMC  equally  noted  that  UTM  should 
conduct regular inspections, document the findings and send reports to TEC. 

 I  wish  to  further  inform  the  House  that  the  FFC  had  stated  that  the  IMC  in 
November  2013  did  not  mention  in  its  report  the  amendment  to  the  Medical  Council  Act 
passed in December 2012 which came into force on 01 August 2013 whereby students would 
be required to undergo and pass the Medical Council Qualifying examination prior to seeking 
admission to post graduate programmes.  However, it is evident that it is the responsibility of 
the Medical College to keep the students abreast of any changes in the Medical Council Act 
prior to their admission. 

The FFC also noted that the D.Y. Patil Medical College prospectus had  not been 
updated on time to ensure that students of the batch of August 2013 would be aware of the 
changes prior to enrolment and prior to effecting any payment of fees for admission to the 
College. This resulted in students of that batch being recruited and made to pay the fees.  

 

 

 

 

 

  

