 

1 

 

 

No. 11 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

SATURDAY 14 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

PAPERS LAID 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 
      GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 11 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 14 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

Office of the Speaker 
The Report of the Standing Orders Committee.  
Prime Minister’s Office – 
Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Construction Industry Development 
Board (Amendment) Bill (No. II of 2015). (In Original) 
Ministry of  Local Government – 
(a)  The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No.19 of 2015). 
(b)  The  District  Council  of  Moka  (Fees,  Dues  and  other  charges  for 
Classified  Trades)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 20 of 2015). 
The  District  Council  of  Flacq  (Fees,  Dues  and  other  charges  for 
Classified  Trades)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 21 of 2015). 

(c) 

(e) 

(d)  The  District  Council  of  Grand  Port  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 22 of 2015). 
The  District  Council  of  Black  River  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 23 of 2015). 
The  District  Council  of  Rivière  du  Rempart  (Fees  for  Classified 
Trades) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 24 
of 2015). 

(f) 

A. 
 
B. 
 

C. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

PUBLIC BILL 

First Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded  the  Construction  Industry  Development  Board 

(Amendment) Bill (No. II of 2015) was read a first time. 

THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD (AMENDMENT) 

Second Reading 

BILL 

(NO. II OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

(2.10 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Pubic  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Construction  Industry  Development  Board  (Amendment) 
Bill be read a second time. 

The  Bill  comes  at  a  time  when  Government  is  committed  to  reviewing  existing 
legislations  with  a  view  to  improving  upon  existing  provisions  and  introducing  new 
provisions to meet the exigencies and realities of the economic sectors. It is our duty, Madam 
Speaker,  to  redress  the  situation  and  create  a  proper  conducive  legal  environment  for  the 
different  economic  sectors  to  develop  and  to  contribute  to  the  economic  growth  of  the 
country. 

Madam Speaker, however, the construction industry is viewed, as we know, as a very 
dynamic sector. The growth rate of the industry has plummeted from 11% in 2008 to 9.4% in 
2013, and subsequently to 6.7% over the last year. This situation has become alarming over 
the past two years and this is adversely impacting on the economic and social development of 
our country. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  importance  of  the  construction  industry  is  found  not  only  in 
infrastructure  developments,  but  also  in  the  creation  of  employment  in  the  country.  The 
construction industry in itself employs around 50,000 people, representing almost 10 per cent 
of the working population, and over the last 10 years it has been contributing to an average of 
6  per  cent  of  our  GDP.  As  we  know,  economic  development  is  much  needed,  and  the 
construction industry will help to give a boost to the economic development agenda of the 
Government. 

9 

 
However, Madam Speaker, year in and year out, the construction industry has to face 
a  number  of  challenges  and  it  has  to  evolve  in  an  ever-changing  economic,  social, 
technological and legal environment. It, therefore, requires constant adjustment. Thus, all the 
sectors in the construction industry will have to be properly regulated. Members of the House 
may  be  aware  that  already  all  the  professions  in  the  construction  industry  ranging  from 
professional  architects,  professional  engineers  to  professional  quantity  surveyors  are 
regulated.  The  last  Council  of  Quantity  Surveyors  has  been  recently  constituted,  Madam 
Speaker.  The  different  Acts  provide  for  defined  bodies  that  regulate  and  control  the 
professions and promote advancement in their respective fields. Likewise, there is a need to 
regulate consultants and contractors. 

Such  provisions,  Madam  Speaker,  find  its  place  in  the  Construction  Industry 
Development  Board  Act.  In  fact,  the  CIDB  Act  2008  sets  the  legal  framework  which, 
amongst  others,  regulates  and  registers  providers  of  construction  works  and  construction 
services, be it consultants or contractors. However, the relevant sections of the Act pertaining 
to the registration of consultants and contractors were not timely proclaimed due to the fact 
that appropriate regulations were not made.  

Madam Speaker, it took the preceding Government almost six years to come forward 
with the required regulations. It is only last year, more precisely on 01 August 2014, that the 
CIDB  (Registration  of  Consultants  and  Contractors)  Regulations  came  into  operation. 
Consultants and contractors were then  given  a transitional period of six months ending 31 
January 2015 to be registered with the CIDB.  

However, Madam Speaker, by that date, it is surprising to note that 60 consultants out 
of a number of 200 and 100 contactors out of around 1500 have so far apply for registration. 
Thus,  most  of  them  are  not  yet  registered  and  are,  therefore,  in  an  illegal  situation  while 
bidding  and  implementing  large  infrastructural  projects.  Should  we  have  recourse  to  the 
current legislation and apply the provisions of the law, they  would not  be able to operate, 
with  the  result,  Madam  Speaker,  that  quite  a  fairly  large  number  of  employees  of  these 
consultants and contractors would be laid off and find themselves in a very difficult financial 
situation,  and  also  such  action  might  impede  the  implementation  of  important  public 
infrastructure works. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, consultants and contractors are reluctant to register as this 
would  imply  that  they  would  have  to  comply  with  a  number  of  criteria  which  would, 
ultimately,  determine  their  real  capabilities  in  undertaking  contracts  for  infrastructural 
projects.  Furthermore,  a  grading  system  has  been  introduced  allowing  contractors  to 

 

10 

undertake construction contracts up to a certain amount in accordance with their experience 
and capabilities. 

Madam  Speaker,  however  strong  the  reluctance  for  registration  on  the  part  of  the 
consultants and the contractors is, this could be offset by a degree of acceptance on their part 
of the legislative requirement to which they would have to comply.  

Madam Speaker, with the new  amendments being proposed mainly for the extension 
of the transitional period to allow consultants and contractors to register themselves with the 
CIDB, and in line with the directive of the Public Procurement Office issued to public bodies 
requesting them to invite bids for construction works and services only from those registered 
consultants and contractors, then these consultants and contractors who have not registered 
themselves with the CIDB will be compelled to do so. 

Madam Speaker, in this spirit, I am confident that all of them will have no alternative 
than  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  law  and  register  themselves  if  the  deadline  for 
registration  of  consultants  and  contractors  is  extended.  We  are  being  flexible  enough  to 
redress the situation which has been allowed to prevail over the years due to a laissez-faire 
attitude of the previous Government. 

Thus, Madam Speaker, the need to bringing necessary amendments to the CIDB Act. 
Madam Speaker, the main object of the Bill is to amend the CIDB Act to, amongst 

others, –  
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

provide  that  a  firm  or  a  person  that  or  who  was  providing  consultancy 
services, or undertaking construction works, in Mauritius immediately before 
01  August  2014  may  continue  to  provide  consultancy  services  or  undertake 
construction  works  for  such  period  as  may  be  prescribed,  without  being 
registered as a consultant, contractor, foreign consultant or foreign contractor, 
as the case may be; 
provide  for  a  change  in  the  definition  of  ‘foreign  contractor’  and  ‘foreign 
consultant’, and 
provide  for  the  review  of  the  composition  of  the  Construction  Industry 
Development Council. 

Madam Speaker, I shall now explain in details the amendments being proposed to the 

CIDB Act.  

As the law stands today, a foreign consultant is defined in section 2 of the Act as a 
firm  which  provides  consultancy  services  in  the  construction  industry,  and  the  control  of 
which is vested in a person with relevant professional qualifications who is a non-citizen and 

 

11 

is not a resident of Mauritius. However, the Act also currently provides in section 2 (3) that 
an entity incorporated and that has been operating in Mauritius as a consultancy firm for an 
aggregate period of 4 years during the 10 years preceding the coming into force of the Act 
shall not be considered as a foreign consultant, but as a local consultant. 

Likewise, Madam Speaker, a foreign contractor is defined in the same section 2 of the 
Act, in the case of an individual, as a contractor who is a non-citizen and is not a resident of 
Mauritius  and  who  carries  out  construction  works  in  the  construction  industry.  The  Act 
defines also a foreign contractor as a firm, the control of which is vested in a person who is a 
non-citizen and is not a resident of Mauritius and that carries out construction works in the 
construction industry. Thus, a contractor for an aggregate period of four years during the 10 
years  preceding  the  coming  into  operation  of  the  CIDB  Act  shall  not  be  considered  as  a 
foreign contractor, but as a local one, according to the law today. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the definition given to the terms ‘foreign consultant’ and 
‘foreign  contractor’  are  not  proper.  Thus,  a  non-citizen  who  is  a  resident  in  Mauritius  by 
virtue of a residence permit and who controls a consultancy or contracting firm will not to be 
considered as a foreign consultant or contractor, but as a local consultant or contractor.  There 
would be no distinction between local consultants, local contractors and these foreigners.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  cannot  allow  an  unfair  practice  to  prevail  as  the 
main  difference  between  a  local  consultant  and  contractor  and  a  foreign  consultant  and 
contractor is that the local ones are given registration on an annual basis whereas the foreign 
ones  are  granted  registration  on  a  project  basis  in  two  stages,  namely  a  provisional 
registration  before  bidding  for  a  project  and  a  temporary  registration  upon  award  of  the 
contract for the project and for the duration of the implementation. That is, under one case it 
is for a year and under the other case it is only project wise.  

Madam Speaker, therefore, the first amendment being proposed is to delete the words 

‘is not a resident of Mauritius’ in the definition of foreign consultant and foreign contractor. 

The  second  amendment  which  is  being  proposed  in  section  2  of  the  CIDB  Act, 
Madam  Speaker,  is  with  respect  to  subsections  (2)  and  (3).  These  subsections  were 
introduced  in  the  CIDB  Act  in  2008,  so  as  to  consider  those  foreign  consultants  and 
contractors  who  have  been  operating  for  long  in  Mauritius  as  local  consultants  and 
contractors.  

However,  this  Government  has  at  heart  the  interest  for  our  local  consultants  and 
contractors. We have, therefore, decided that there will be no privileged treatment given to 

 

 

12 

these  consultants  and  contractors  who  have  been  operating  in  Mauritius  prior  to  February 
1999.  

In this respect, Madam Speaker, it is proposed to repeal subsections (2) and (3) and to 
replace  these  provisions  by  a  new  subsection  (3).  Thus,  these  companies  who  have  been 
registered prior to February 1999 shall apply for registration like any other company.  

The third amendment to the CIDB Act concerns the composition of the Construction 
Industry Development Council. At the time of the constitution of the Construction Industry 
Development Council, all the three professional councils, namely the Council of Registered 
Professional  Engineers,  the  Professional  Architects  Council  and  the  Professional  Quantity 
Surveyors’ Council were not yet established. It is considered that these professional bodies 
should absolutely now be represented on the Construction Industry Development Council in 
view of their importance in the construction industry.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is,  therefore,  proposed  that  a  representative  of  each  of  these 
professionals  be  represented  on  the  said  Council  in  replacement  of  those  professional 
associations, namely the Institution of Engineers of Mauritius, the Mauritius Association of 
Quantity Surveyors and the Mauritius Association of Architects in view of the fact that these 
councils are better structured now and operate under a legal framework. Thus, the Mauritius 
Institute  of  Surveyors,  the  Mauritius  Standards  Bureau,  the  Ministry  responsible  for  the 
subject  of  Employment  and  the  Ministry  responsible  for  the  subject  of  Human  Resources 
Development are being replaced by the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Local 
Government  as  these  two  Ministries  have  a  very  direct  interest  and  involvement  in  the 
construction industry. 

The  fourth  amendment  concerns  the  quorum  of  the  Council  in  section  9  of  the  Act. 
Since the composition of the Council is being reviewed, there is need to review the quorum 
from seven members to six members, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  next  amendment  is  with  respect  to  section  19.  In  fact,  when 
granting a registration to a contractor, the CIDB determines which class of works, grades and 
areas of specialisation are to be allocated to that contractor. Whilst the class of works and the 
grade apply to all contractors, the areas of specialisation on the other hand apply to specific 
cases  where  the  contractor  can  demonstrate  that  it  has  specialised  knowledge  and  skills  to 
undertake such types of construction works. Hence, the words, I quote – 

‘where applicable’  

are being added after the words, I quote – 

‘areas of specialisation’  

 

13 

to specify clearly that these would be allocated only where applicants justify it in cases. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  last  amendment  concerns  section  37,  which  I  have  already 
explained  earlier.  In  fact,  the  amendment  to  this  section  is  of  utmost  importance  as  it  is 
providing  for  an  extension  of  the  transitional  period  for  registration  of  consultants  and 
contractors which has already expired on 31 January 2015 and which is depriving almost 80 
per  cent,  as  I  said,  of  the  consultants  and  contractors  the  opportunity  to  register  with  the 
CIDB. 

Madam  Speaker,  these  amendments  to  the  CIDB  Act  would,  no  doubt,  facilitate  the 
registration of consultants and contractors. It would also provide for a more comprehensive 
legislation  to  enable  the  CIDB  to  fulfil  its  role  more  diligently  with  effectiveness  and 
efficiency. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  registration  of  consultants  and  contractors  would  consequently 
allow  the  compilation  of  a  national  register  of  consultants  and  contractors.  These  registers 
would  serve  as  useful  information  to  Government  as  one  of  the  biggest  clients  in  the 
construction industry, but also to the public at large. 

Madam Speaker, let me now highlight a few benefits of the registration of consultants 

and contractors - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

the register of consultants and contractors would contribute a single source of 
information on consultants and contractors, thus reducing wasteful duplication 
by clients and improving transparency; 
it  would  recognise  the  performance  and  capabilities  of  consultants  and 
contractors  in  the  field  they  are  registered  for  and  this  would  enhance  their 
prospects of success as well as their status with clients and other stakeholders; 
it  would  save  clients  the  costs  and  efforts  of  investigating  a  large  number  of 
inappropriate tenders whilst also saving the consultants and contractors the costs 
of  bidding  for  inappropriate  projects.  It  will  also  reduce  their  cost  in  the 
evaluation of bids; 
it would enhance the rate of success in delivery by matching the capabilities of 
consultants  and  contractors  with  appropriate  works  opportunity  thereby 
reducing  risks,  providing  confidence  throughout  the  industry,  and  ensuring 
greater continuity of works to capable consultants and contractors; 
it  would  enhance  the  ability  of  the  consultants  and  contractors  to  identify 
suitable partners for joint venture initiatives, and 

 
(vi) 

14 

the register of consultants and contractors would also provide a framework upon 
which  training,  capacity  building,  continuous  development  programmes  and 
policy guidance could be developed. 

Madam Speaker, overall the registration of consultants and contractors is going to have 
a  substantial  impact  on  the  construction  industry  and  would  help  to  improve  the  bidding 
process,  service  delivery  in  the  sector  and  the  way  consultants  and  contractors  undertake 
construction projects.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  go  the  extent  of  saying  that  the  industry  needs  better 
regulations in the light of recent events where projects costing Rs100 m. have failed, and we 
are now investigating who is responsible. Furthermore, we should be  able to see to it that 
projects  are  implemented  to  obtain  value  for  money  and  that  variations  should  be  the 
exception  and  not  the  rule  as  has  been  the  case  in  the  past  years.  This  is  why  we  should 
regulate all the professionals who operate in the construction industry. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is necessary to amend the CIDB Act to allow the CIDB 
to  undertake  the  registration  of  consultants  and  contractors  in  the  best  interest  of  the 
construction industry. 

Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 
Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Baloomoody rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

ADJOURNMENT 

adjourn to Friday 20 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.  

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 2.27 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 20 March 2015 at 

2.00 p.m.  

