 

 

1 

 

 

No. 21 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

WEDNESDAY 15 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

PAPERS LAID 

MOTION 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

BILLS (Public)   

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 21 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 15 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis, at 10.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

                                                            PAPERS LAID 
 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 
(a)  The Land (Duties and Taxes) (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 

2015 (Government Notice No. 49 of 2015). 

(b)  The  Registration  Duty  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 

(Government Notice No. 50 of 2015). 

(c)  The  Stamp  Duty  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 

(Government Notice No. 51 of 2015). 
(d)  The  Transcription  and  Mortgage 

(Amendment  of  Schedule) 

Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 52 of 2015). 

 

 

 

8 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(10.37 a.m.) 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

Question again proposed. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications  (Mr  X.  L.  Duval):  Madam  Speaker,  when  asked  what  was  the  best 
technological  innovation  of  modern  times,  Mr  Lee  Kuan  Yew,  the  father  of  Singapore, 
replied: the air conditioner. The air conditioner - because it allowed people in the tropics to 
be as productive and as efficient as people in the northern hemisphere. So, Singapore quickly 
became a First World country and, I must say, Madam Speaker, Mauritius as well has known 
tremendous progress since independence.  

In  1968,  when  we  became  independent,  the  per  capita  income  in  Mauritius  was 
US$250.  We  went  along  like  this,  hobbling  along  until  the  1980s,  and  in  1991,  Madam 
Speaker, Mauritius became a middle-income country. So, it took us from 1968 - 23 years - to 

 

 

9 

1991  to  become  a  middle-income  country,  and  from  1991  to  2015  we  have  remained  a 
middle-income country. We have gone up the scale, we have reached about 75% of our goal, 
and our goal is, of course, like any country in the world, to attain high-income status. So, we 
have done well, but we have, like many countries, stayed long as a middle-income country. 
You  can  even  call  it  the  middle-income  trap.  But,  nowadays,  with  the  anecdote  of  the  air 
conditioning, with the global village - the world is much smaller, transport costs are relatively 
less than they used to be, the Internet, etc. - Mauritius has tremendous potential to reach the 
high-income status.  Of course, Madam Speaker, we became a middle-income nation not by 
chance in 1991 but as a result of what is today known as the first economic miracle with the 
Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  hon.  Seetanah  Lutchmeenaraidoo  and  I  must  also  say,  the 
PMSD;  PMSD  was  in  Government,  of  course,  during  most  of  that  time  with  Sir  Gaëtan 
Duval  playing,  I  think  we  all  agree,  a  major  role  in  the  development  of  tourism,  in  the 
development  of  the  export  enterprise  zone  and  in  social  integration  as  a  whole,  Madam 
Speaker. So, we played our role and we are very proud to have played our role in the first 
economic miracle, and we expect fully to play our role again with our friends from the MSM 
and the ML in the second economic miracle. 

So, Madam Speaker, 24 years after becoming a middle-income nation, we now look 
forward to a second economic miracle to become a high-income nation. Why do we want to 
become a high-income nation? Because, we want better health services for our people, we 
want better education; in fact, we want better public services, and we want a better quality of 
life and more spending power for everyone. Now, some economists see us in a fairly long 
path to become a high-income nation. Some very well-known people have said that we will 
reach there in 2028, 13 years from now. 

Others  have  said:  “No,  it  is  probably  to  be  2032.”    I  see,  therefore,  that  the  main 
purpose  of  this  Government  is  to  enable  a  surge  forward  in  growth;  a  surge  forward  in 
prosperity; a surge forward in income, so that we belie what these economists have said and 
reach a high-income status much quicker than these people have said. Of course, a condition 
to this is to reach high growth.  Normally, people say 5%, more if we can get, but we do need 
to have that.  On that score, Madam Speaker, I note that the growth in 2014, last year, was 
3.5%, which, I must say, I consider to be reasonable: 2014 - 3.5%; 2013 - 3.2%; 2012 - 3.4%.  
These are the years, of course, where I presented the Budget. I consider them to be reasonable 
because I had a look at what the world was doing.  The US in 2014 had a growth of 2.3%; 
Japan, once an economic powerhouse, 0.5%;  Canada, great country, great mineral wealth, 
2.3%; Britain, with all that the Conservative, Liberal Government has done, 3%; Germany, 

 

 

10 

1.4%;  Singapore,  I  just  mentioned,  3.1%;  France,  straggling  along,  0.4%.    95%  of  the 
countries in the world did worse than Mauritius. I consider it could have been better, but it 
was  reasonable  and,  of  course,  unemployment  fell  from  8%  to  7.8%.  Now,  of  course, 
together,  this  team,  we  are  going  to  work  to  reach  a  5%  and  more  that  is  achievable  for 
Mauritius. Things look better on the international front. The European recovery is there.  It is 
fragile,  but  it  is  there.    Later  on,  we  will  see  the  effect  that  it  is  having  on  tourism.  US, 
obviously, has picked up strongly. China is doing well. India with a new Modi Government, 
we hope, will do very well. 

Nevertheless, as the Budget has identified, there are factors that must be addressed for 
us  to  achieve  greater  prosperity.  One,  which  is  addressed  completely  by  the  Budget,  is 
investment. What is investment? It is tools to enable the country to be more productive and 
achieve  higher  growth.  Let  me  take  the  example  of  the  Port.  We  have  five  cranes  at  the 
moment in the Port. We are investing in two additional cranes. What does that mean? Two 
additional cranes will cost us a lot of money, but it will be tools for our people in the Port to 
work and move containers around ships.  It is going to be an additional tool to enable greater 
revenue, to enable greater wealth in the Port. So, it will help to generate income from trans-
shipment. We are building new quays to service ships. We are building a fishing port. We are 
encouraging the construction of oil storage.  All these, Madam Speaker, are investments that 
will generate wealth in the future.  

So,  investment  is  crucial  in  the  creation  of  wealth  and  prosperity,  and  this  Budget, 
Madam Speaker, is a very pro-investment Budget. The hon. Minister Finance has identified a 
large number of projects, and we know that he is personally committed to getting rid of all 
the  bottlenecks  that  always  will  exist  and  need  to  be  addressed  proactively  so  that  these 
investments come to light as quickly as possible and with the number of committees, etc, to 
ensure  that  the  Government  is  fully  hands-on  in  facilitating  investment.  So,  this  is  very 
welcome in the way that this Budget is pro-investment. 

Madam Speaker, other things that will need investment - it is something important - is 
adoption  of  new  technologies.  Each  of  us,  Madam  Speaker,  the  more  that  we  can  use  the 
Internet, the more we are IT savvy, the more that we can use computers, the more productive 
we are. Just to take one example, we can go into farming, fish farming, animal rearing even 
sugarcane, whatever you like, the more that we have new technologies, the more that we are 
productive  and  the  new  Smart  Cities,  Madam  Speaker,  that  will  come  up  following  the 
Budget will provide, we hope, the right cadre, the right framework for people to adopt new 
technologies, connected to the world with the latest intelligent buildings.  We hope that we 

 

 

11 

will  create  a  new  mindset  in  Mauritius,  a  different  mindset  for  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies. I see also that we are continuing with the installation of fibre optic cable and we 
will  get,  by  the  end  of  this  year,  I  hope,  about  50,000  connections  on  fibre  optic  around 
Mauritius, which will also transform not only business accessibility to the Internet, but also 
households with the reduction in price that we have seen in the recent years in the Internet.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Budget  also  addresses,  to  my  mind,  the  need  to  adopt  new 
technologies so that we create the productivity that is required. Of course, Madam Speaker, 
one  issue  that  we  have  always  in  Mauritius  is  the  mindset.  People  are  not  always  keen  to 
work. Sometimes it is just 9.00 to 4.00, 9.00 to 3.30, whatever it is, we get home as soon as 
possible and we do something that really interests us. This change in mindset, I think, is also 
welcome here.  The way that this Government addresses discipline, productivity, the need for 
hard work is certainly different from the previous way that things were going. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk quickly also on the need to increase innovation in 
Mauritius. We have a new Minister for innovation. Why innovation? I must say innovation 
and  invention  are  not  the  same  thing.  Invention  is  that  you  are  inventing  new  things,  new 
gadgets, etc.  Innovation is that you are adopting new methods.  New methods to do what? 
New  methods  to  provide  services,  to  manufacture  goods.    Innovation  is  important. 
Innovation, you can copy from elsewhere, but the country as the economy itself needs to be 
constantly  innovating  to  improve  services,  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  products  and  to 
improve the cost of manufacturing products. MSIRI, in the past, Madam Speaker, won global 
acclaim for its innovative techniques in sugarcane production. So, we can do it in Mauritius. 
Only  yesterday,  I  visited one of the hotels.   There was a  conference.    I visited one of the 
rooms and I was happy to see how it was innovating.  It had an iPad in each room and the 
iPad allows the guests – there is no longer a phone, the iPad will know what is in the room - 
to  order  a  room  service  menu.    The  guests  can  reserve  the  excursions.  The  guests  can  do 
everything and communicate with the hotel management and hotel services through the iPad.  
So, that improves the quality of the stay of the tourists. That is innovation.  We need to 
constantly encourage innovation in all our sectors and the Ministry of Innovation, I am sure, 
will  be  looking  to  that.  When  we  talk  about  innovation,  we  don’t  forget  invention.  If,  for 
instance, we could have invented a new textile fabric in Mauritius, we would be very far. We 
have not done yet. Let’s hope that we will have innovation and invention, and we remember 
that Nokia is not the same as before. A small country like Finland, five to six million people, 
was known worldwide, Madam Speaker, for its innovation. We can do it in Mauritius, and I 
think we will do it with this new Ministry and with what is being planned. 

 

 

12 

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  talk  about  invention,  innovation  and  creativity,  we  often 
mention  SMEs.  People  often  have  ideas.  They  don’t  have  money.  They  don’t  even  have, 
maybe, management know-how to carry forward their ideas.  So, SMEs will continue to be a 
major avenue to harness growth in Mauritius; growth entrepreneurship creativity. I am happy 
that the SME loan scheme, which I set up in 2013, which was partly or fully guaranteed by 
Government,  has  known  an  extraordinary  success,  Madam  Speaker.  To  date,  Rs4.5  billion 
have been given to SMEs. Of the Rs4.5 billion - involving something like 3,000 SMEs - R1 
billion has been granted to micro-enterprises. These micro-enterprises had very little access 
to finance before, and this is done through partnership between Government guaranteeing and 
the  private  sector  providing  the  fund.  I  must  say  that  the  cost  to  the  Exchequer  has  been 
minimal - if at all anything - because if well regulated, loans to SMEs can be a profitable 
business for the SMEs and for the banks themselves. So, that has been a big success with, as 
we know, a reduced interest rate. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the loans, I am also happy that – I think it was in 
2014 – we set up something called the In Duplum Rule, which has been applied and which 
works  very  well.  The  In  Duplum  Rule  says  that  whether  it  is  a  business,  an  SME,  a  big 
company, an individual or whoever borrows, he will never repay more than twice the amount 
that he borrows. So, if you borrow Rs100, the interests, cumulative over the years, will never 
go beyond a Rs100. I know someone who borrowed Rs800,000 and had to repay Rs12 m. 
because he was careless and over the years he did not repay. The bank let him go on, he was 
careless and he repaid Rs12 m. from Rs800,000. That was clearly unacceptable for all-round. 
The In Duplum Rule, which was set up in 2014 Budget, limits now the amount of claim that 
the bank can make. Once you double your capital, you stop there, you will not pay a single 
cent more than that and it is up to the bank then to see what it will do to recover its money. 
So, that has worked well. 

Another thing that has worked well, Madam Speaker, and which is continuing, are the 
free websites that we offer to SMEs. The free websites had been taken up by about 9,000 
individual companies, because today SMEs need to be regional, SMEs need to be global. We 
have Africa.  We will talk about Africa in a moment, Madam Speaker, but it is important to 
give SMEs free-of-charge this window to the world. Of course, what is going to happen now 
is the ease of doing business with the new building dedicated to SMEs.  One thing that people 
do  not  know  -  it  is  the  same  for  the  poor,  it  is  the  same  for  small  companies  -  Madam 
Speaker,  they  do  not  have  access  to  information.  They  do  not  have  fancy  accountants  or 
lawyers and they do not know where to tap whatever Government offers. So, if you have it in 

 

 

13 

one  building  whether  it  is  SMEDA  for  the  advice  or  whether  it  is  for  a  loan,  etc.,  the 
likelihood is that the person will get the right advice and the right assistance when he most 
needs it. Madam Speaker, there is something  else which we have introduced, the overseas 
missions;  512  SMEs  benefitted  from  Rs12,000  in  2015  and  these  are  the  things  that  will 
continue. 

Madam Speaker, coming now to education, which is an important issue in growth, I 
am  happy  to  see  that  the  budget  this  year  compared  with  last  year  is  much  higher  than 
inflation. Inflation is about 3% and the increase in Tertiary Education budget is about 7%, 
Madam Speaker. That is important. International norms on spending on education show that 
Mauritius  is  still  a  little  under  par  in  terms  of  global  spending  on  education,  but  we  are 
catching  up  year  by  year,  we  are  catching  up  with  what  developing  countries  spend  on 
education.  But,  of  course,  there  remains  the  mismatch  that  exists  in  the  education  sector 
whereby what the economy requires is not what the schools and the universities provide, and 
it is so important, Madam Speaker, that we have a proper Careers Guidance Service in the 
universities and at the schools. People need to know what to study. 

Few  days  ago,  a  girl  came  to  see  me  looking  for  a  job;  she  is  doing  business 
management.  Now,  we  have  so  many  graduates  doing  business  management  who  are 
unemployed. But she did not know that. She has done a year’s course already because she 
does  not  have  the  information,  but  the  information  exists.    The  information  exists  at  the 
Youth  Employment  Program.  The  information  is  there  around  and  we  must  provide  our 
schoolchildren  with  this  sort  of  information  to  avoid  these  errors.  Because  then,  you  are 
wasting  a  lot  of  money  and  three  years’  time  in  studying  something  that  nobody  in  the 
economy  requires.  So,  Careers  Guidance  Service,  to  my  mind,  needs  to  be  beefed  up  and 
needs to make sure that we provide the appropriate information to our students. 

Madam Speaker,  I am happy to see that the huge gâchis that was happening in the 
Tertiary Education sector is now sorted out or being sorted out, and that we have to go for 
quality,  for  reputation,  and  we  have  to  honour  these  foreign  students  and  the  Mauritian 
students  that  choose  Mauritius  as  a  base.  I  am  happy  that  Médine,  with  its  very  upmarket 
education hub, is carrying forward. 

On  the  youth  issue,  I  mentioned  just  now  the  Youth  Employment  Program.  I  am 
happy to see - and that is continuing; it has been for two years - that 10,100 youth have been 
placed - not 1,000 or 2,000, but 10,100 - in enterprises by the Youth Employment Program. 

Madam Speaker, the population growth in Mauritius can be seen to be worrying. The 
crude birth rate, which was about 27% in the 1970s, has fallen to just 10.4% these days. So, 

 

 

14 

when we look at how we are going to grow our country, it is like a factory, Madam Speaker. 
You have 100 workers; you can make so many suits a day. You have 200 workers, unless you 
have technology, etc, you can make twice as much. So, if the population is not growing, you 
have  a  constraint  there  that  you  have  to  deal  with  and  there  will  be  an  issue  in  Mauritius 
about, firstly, how to increase the birth rate.  It is very difficult to get people to make more 
babies if they do not want to, unless we can all have a go here, but that is difficult. And then, 
you have the issue of foreign labour. What to do with foreign labour? Should we encourage 
foreign labour? I, personally, think, yes, but in very definite sectors. The export sectors, for 
instance, where we need to be competitive, but certainly not in some other sectors where they 
have taken jobs from Mauritians and these foreigners have been exploited. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about FDI and the need to continue to 
increase  FDI  in  Mauritius.  The  savings  rate  in  Mauritius  has  fallen  from  about  25% 
historically to about 15% now. So, it has fallen! People like to save, maybe, now, in different 
ways. They like to save maybe in buildings, in houses, etc., rather than put the money in the 
bank. But in the absence of FDI, the savings rate, what you save is what you invest, because 
that is all you have. You have saved Rs100; that Rs100 is lent to somebody else who invests 
the Rs100. Whereas if you bring FDI, it means you are taking savings from overseas and you 
bring it to Mauritius to increase your investment. FDI continues to be imported. A lot of the 
FDI  has  been  in  property,  obviously,  but  we  need  to  continue  to  attract  investment  from 
overseas  and  I  know  that  this  is  happening  also  with  the  Fast  Track  Committees  that  the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Empowerment is setting up, because FDI not only brings 
money, but it also brings technology transfer. 

Madam Speaker, I want to come to the thorny issue of institutions. We come all this 
way in Mauritius, in great part, because we have great institutions. Can you imagine having a 
developed country without an independent and efficient Judiciary? You would not imagine 
that  would  happen  if  this  country  was  not  un  État  de  droit  where  you  could  enforce  your 
rights! So, that was an institution that has served well. The Police are able to maintain law 
and  order,  not  perfect,  but  they  are  able  to  do  so.  Let  us  take  Kenya,  Madam  Speaker.  In 
Kenya,  terrorism  is  going  up.  Why?  Because  the  army  there  cannot  control  terrorism!  So, 
institutions maintaining law and order, independent Judiciary, the parliamentary democracy 
where I am speaking today, the free press, all these are important institutions in Mauritius 
that have taken us from a low-income to a middle-income, but now we need to go further to 
high income.  

15 

 

 
The question that we need to ask ourselves is whether these institutions need to be 
reformed and if they need to be reformed how they need to be reformed so that we move on 
to the high-income status, like maybe these institutions that exist in fully developed countries. 
Madam Speaker, I think our institutions, as demonstrated recently – I will talk about it in a 
moment, Financial Services. In my own area, tourism, Madam Speaker, we had two accidents 
in the sea recently where three people died. Was enforcement as good as it should have been? 
Probably not!  I would say it was not! Coast Guards, my own Tourism Authority is not as 
good in enforcement of the rules that exist anyway. So, institutions can reduce the growth 
rate  by  not  allowing  you  to  benefit  fully  from  the  potential  that  we  have  and,  I  believe, 
Madam  Speaker,  the  whole  civil  service,  the  whole  institutional  framework,  has  to  be  re-
looked at for the 21st century so that we are able to surge ahead as a developed country. 

The BAI/Bramer Bank crash, Madam Speaker, is, of course, of national proportions 
and I believe now there are two things to be done. One is to re-ensure that the conservators, 
liquidator,  receivers  and  whoever  will  be  dealing  with  all  these  companies  preserve  and 
achieve as much value to the various stakeholders as possible so that the deposit holders in 
Bramer  Bank, the insurance policyholders in the British American  Insurance, the  creditors 
and everybody can retrieve as much of the debt as possible around the whole conglomerate. 
That is very important that we preserve as much as possible the value that exists. Even now, 
to  take  the  Bramer  Bank,  Madam  Speaker,  it  has  60,000  clients  and  that  has  a  value. 
Someone was telling me that you could sell one account for Rs10,000.  So, 60,000 accounts 
multiply by 10,000, that’s a lot. I am not valuing Bramer Bank. I am just saying that there is 
value and we must also try, obviously, to reduce as much of the economic hardship that will 
happen, and we are doing that, so that we can create and preserve as much value in each of 
these companies, so that we realise a maximum for the various stakeholders that exist. 

Of  course,  a  second  issue  which  is  a  double-edged  sword  -  one  is  to  preserve  our 
reputation overseas as a safe financial centre. We have to communicate very strongly on this. 
The other side of the sword is we have to leverage also on the fact that decisions have been 
taken  and  will  be  taken  so  that  we  remain  and  become  once  again  a  fantastic  financial 
services centre. So, we have to leverage on this new Government’s determination to do so. 

Madam Speaker, I had no intention to dwell too much on tourism, which I dealt with 
only  a  few  weeks  ago  when  I  spoke  on  the  President’s  Address.  I  mentioned  quickly  the 
investments in the Port. I will talk a little bit about the things happening in the airport in a 
moment. But, just on tourism, to say that, I think - touch wood, as we never know - barring 
any unexpected happenings, this should be a good year and we should be able to contribute 

 

 

16 

nicely to the growth that the Minister of Finance expects for this year. We have achieved up 
to now for the first three months a double-digit growth, 10.6 per cent, on the back of the new 
confidence that we are giving, but also on the back of economy picking up in Europe, etc. 
10.6 per cent growth is fantastic!  

I will give you some examples, Madam Speaker. In March last month, UK gave us a 
growth of 47.3 per cent; obviously, there was something to do with earlier Easter, but 47.3 
per cent for UK in March and 30 per cent overall since the beginning of the year. So, we have 
a  very  strong  recovery  in  the  UK  market  because  in  UK  the  economy  is  doing  well  and 
Mauritius  is  popular  once  again.  For  Germany,  Madam  Speaker,  it  was  34.6  per  cent  in 
March and  a cumulative of 18.2 per cent since  January.  For  India, it was 27.3 per cent in 
March  and  17.6  per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.  For  Italy,  it  was  26  per  cent  in 
March and 13 per cent for the beginning of the year. These are just a few figures. France is 
still struggling, but everywhere else we see fantastic figures, and 10 per cent is conservative 
and I hope we do better. We do not know and we do not want to overpromise.  

So, let us see how good we are, but it should be a good year for tourism.  Whether it is 
for tourism or for any other sector in Mauritius, I think we should not forget the new potential 
that exists these days, thanks to our  geographical positioning. The bunkering is happening 
these days not by accident; I myself took away a lot of charges in 2014 and it was not by 
accident. With the clogging up and congestion of the Suez Canal, it is getting bigger, but still 
the ships are now starting to use once again the Mauritian route through Cape up to Europe 
and  everywhere  else  into  Africa.  So,  we  can  be  once  again  the  star  and  key  of  the  Indian 
Ocean and that is the new meaning of the geographical positioning of Mauritius insofar as 
development of the marine economy is concerned. 

But let us not forget Africa next door. We should never forget the potential of Africa 
next door, in its own right, but also Mauritius, as a trait-d’union between Africa and India, 
Africa  and  China.  I  want  to  congratulate  the  Prime  Minister  for  achieving  a  very  strong 
statement from the new Government in India, the strongest statement as far as our financial 
services sector and the security of our double taxation agreement are concerned; the strongest 
statement that I have seen in a long time whereas Mr Modi was categorical in his support of 
Mauritius and in his support of our double taxation. Of course, we will see how this works 
out in practice, but, at least, we got there - much stronger statement than Mr Chidambaram, 
who did not like Mauritius, I think, and the other guys who were treating us. So, we have a 
different mind-set in India and that should help our financial services industry tremendously. 

17 

 

 
Now we see Mauritius as a trait-d’union between India, China and Africa. We made a 
third  way  with  India.  Africa,  of  course,  unlike  many  countries,  needs  everything.  Africa 
needs goods and services. We are talking about the diaspora coming back to Mauritius. They 
might  come  back  to  Mauritius  and  do  a  few  things,  but  let  us  say  they  have  tremendous 
opportunity in Africa. We have brilliant engineers.  Say they have to construct a new bridge 
in Zambia or in Ghana or something like that, they have tremendous opportunity that Africa 
can provide for our professionals, but also, I believe, for foreign professionals who choose 
Mauritius as a Centre of Excellence. Just like you would go to Singapore, maybe not for the 
light railway, but you would tend to go to Singapore if you wanted expert advice. Mauritius 
must be the place that Africans come to when they need expert advice, and we must agree 
that we will not be able to give this advice all by ourselves.  We will need the diaspora back 
and it will be good if they have the tax rates, but we will also need the foreigners to jump 
start this whole area of becoming the Centre of Excellence for Africa. 

Madam Speaker, wherever you look at, if it is the medical hub, Africa needs medical 
services.  If  you  look  at  the  educational  hub,  Africa  needs  quality  education  hubs.  For  the 
airport hub, we can be a little bit like the Amsterdam airport for Africa, transforming goods 
for re-export, and that is happening with the airport city and, obviously, the Freeport at the 
same time. I am happy that we are going to invest in a regional maritime company that will 
provide  the  much-needed  services  to  African  ports  and  that  we  are  extending  the  freight 
rebate  scheme,  Madam  Speaker.  But,  also,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  a  huge  potential  for 
tourism and we must tap that. 

But  there  is  something  else  and  that  is  headquartering.  Madam  Speaker,  the  Jinfei 
project has not worked out because of connectivity. It is more expensive to ship a container 
from Mauritius to save one of the African ports than it is from China to that same African 
port. So, it would never work - an extended Freeport or even a headquartering - because of 
the lack of air services. You don’t create a headquarters in Mauritius and then each time you 
travel you have to spend a night in Johannesburg. You might as well put your headquarters in 
Johannesburg or somewhere in Africa like Addis Ababa or Nairobi. So, that wouldn’t work. 
But, Madam Speaker, I am pleased to say that that may change. It has taken some years, but 
that may change. Two  weeks ago,  I  received the visit of the Director of Civil Aviation of 
China and I think - Government has to agree - that could be a major step forward, a game 
changer for Mauritius because at the moment our Chinese airlines can do up to 14 flights a 
week to Mauritius.  

18 

 

 
They want to double the potential from 14 to 20 flights a week and take these flights 
onwards to Mauritius and to Africa.  That, by itself, Madam Speaker, will change les données 
complètement.  This will change the whole connectivity issue of Mauritius.  Imagine a flight 
to  Maputo;  imagine  a  flight  to  Addis  Ababa;  imagine  a  flight  to  Luanda.    It  would  put 
Mauritius right back on to the African continent. 

A continent, as I mentioned, needs our professionals.  It needs our goods and services.  
It needs everything.  Madam Speaker, this is something that has to be worked out and the 
request has to be firmed up.  But it is in my view the greatest potential that Mauritius has 
because  we  do  have  this  connectivity  problem,  whether  it  is  regional  maritime  company  - 
very good; and I hope others also will follow - but also with aircraft, with air services, and 
that would change Mauritius.  That will make Mauritius into really this hub for the African 
continent, Madam Speaker.  It will make our airport into a real transit airport.  It will make 
the airport city come to life.  It will give a tremendous boost to duty-free shopping, because 
we all know that the Chinese love these bags; Louis Vuitton bags, etc., and it will be a great 
boost to shopping in Mauritius.  It would be a great boost to tourism in general and, as I have 
mentioned, it will make Mauritius truly part of Africa.  It would make, Madam Speaker, all 
the Smart Cities also to come to life.  This is the synergy that we have in Government and 
that will make Mauritius surge ahead. 

Madam Speaker, let me finish by saying that getting to high-income status is going to 
be a tough job. Make no mistake, it is not going to be easy, especially in situational change, 
especially change of mind-set, of productivity, etc., and that needs commitment.  The first 
economic miracle, Madam Speaker, took us from low-income to middle-income. Now, we 
are  on  the  verge,  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  of  the  second  economic  miracle  that  this 
Government will bring to life.   

Madam Speaker, it is a road that Government has chosen to take at the crossroads, 
and we decided to take this road.  It is now the duty, Madam Speaker, of all our citizens to 
participate  actively  in  what  we  have  described  as  a  Mauritius  of  tomorrow.  As  the  saying 
goes: ‘La parole est l’ombre de l’action.’ The  Budget, Madam Speaker, has shown a way 
forward.  Let us not be bystanders as our country surges ahead to newfound prosperity and 
prosperity  shared  by  each  and  every  Mauritian  irrespective  of  colour,  creed,  religion  or 
ethnicity.  Let us all work together, hand in hand, to achieve our destiny. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

 

(11.14 a.m.) 

 

19 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  my  main 
criticism  has  been  and  is  that  the  presentation  of  this  Budget,  three  months  after  the  last 
general elections, was the occasion de relancer l’économie, de prendre un nouveau départ, de 
donner  un  nouveau  souffle  à  la  croissance  et  à  la  création  d’emploi.  Mais,  le  nouveau 
gouvernement a fait le choix facile de sacrifier le Capital Budget du gouvernement et de ne 
pas tenir un langage de vérité à la population. Les chiffres du Capital Budget suffisent pour 
illustrer ce que je dis, Madame la présidente. 

Le  Capital  Budget  du  gouvernement  -  j’utilise  là  le  terme  technique  Acquisition  of 
Non-Financial  Assets,  en  d’autres  mots  les  dépenses  du  gouvernement  sur  les  projets 
d’investissements publics - était de R 9.5 milliards en 2014, et va passer de R 9.5 milliards en 
2014 à R 8.7 milliards en 2015-2016. Je crois que nous sommes tous d’accord de comparer 
l’année  2014  à  l’année  financière  de  2015-2016  qui  sera  la  prochaine  possibilité  de 
comparaison. Donc, le Capital Budget du gouvernement qui était de R 9.5 milliards en 2014 
baisse  à  R  8.7  milliards  en  2015-2016,  alors  que  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  qui  était 
ministre des Finances, avait prévu qu’il passerait à R 12 milliards en 2015 et à R 14 milliards 
en 2016. Ce sont là les chiffres officiels. Les dépenses totales du gouvernement augmentent 
de  15  %  en  2015-2016  par  rapport  à  2014,  mais  alors  que  les  dépenses  courantes  vont 
augmenter par 18%, le Capital Expenditure, including Special Funds, va diminuer par 9 %. 
Encore une fois c’est la vérité des chiffres, et cela veut dire que le gouvernement a choisi, à 
cause  du  déficit  budgétaire,  de  ne  pas  jouer  son  rôle  dans  la  relance  de  l’économie  et  la 
création d’emploi. Et cela, Madame la présidente, je le dis avec tristesse. 

Ayant  choisi  de  ne  pas  jouer  son  rôle  dans  la  relance  de  l’économie  et  la  création 
d’emploi,  le  gouvernement  a  fait  le  choix  de  compter  sur  le  secteur  privé  pour 
l’investissement.  Mais,  en  diminuant  drastiquement  le  Capital  Budget,  le  gouvernement 
donne  le  mauvais  exemple  et  envoie  le  mauvais  signal  à  ce  même  secteur  privé.  De  plus, 
Madame la présidente, les prévisions en termes  d’investissements dans ce secteur privé ne 
tiennent  pas  la  route.  Malheureusement,  les  prévisions  ne  tiennent  tout  simplement  pas  la 
route. Alors que l’investissement dans le secteur privé a diminué chaque année au cours de 
ces trois dernières années, et que le Capital Expenditure du gouvernement va diminuer par 9 
% en 2015-2016, il est prévu que le National Investment Ratio, l’investment rate dans le pays 
en général va augmenter de 5.2% de 2014 à 2015-2016. Il est prévu que les investissements 
dans l’économie en général - secteur public et secteur privé - vont passer de R 80 milliards en 
2014-2015 à R 105 milliards en 2015-2016, soit une augmentation de R 25 milliards. Alors 

 

 

20 

que  dans  le  secteur  privé,  ces  trois  dernières  années,  l’investissement  a  baissé.  Donc, 
malheureusement, Madame la présidente, ces chiffres ne tiennent pas la route. Et en plus, il 
est  inévitable  que  toute  l’affaire  Bramer/BAI  ait  un  impact  négatif  sur  l’investissement  en 
général et sur le Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) en particulier. 

Par ailleurs, Madame présidente, dans le budget, le gouvernement compte avant tout 
sur  huit  mega  projects  -  ce  qu’il  décrit  comme  des  mega  projects  -  pour  relancer  la 
croissance. La vérité est que cinq de ces huit mega projects sont des projets du secteur privé 
déjà en cours ou déjà annoncés. 

Il s’agit des projets d’Omnicane à Plaisance, de St. Félix dans le sud, de Médine dans 
l’ouest et de Azuri Phase 2 et Terra dans le nord. Dans le sixième cas, à Roches Noires, on 
sait maintenant qu’il s’agit d’un vieux projet d’IRS datant de 2007, en faillite et liquidation 
depuis  2011,  et  que  le  gouvernement  demande  maintenant  à  un  nouvel  investisseur  de  la 
Chine de transformer en projet Smart City, reste les projets Jin Fei et Highlands. Dans le cas 
de  Jin  Fei  à  Riche  Terre,  on  sait  maintenant  que  le  projet  initial  a  été  abandonné  et  que 
l’investisseur de la Chine, Jin Fei, n’aura plus que 20 % dans un management company et que 
ce sera, donc, maintenant au gouvernement mauricien de trouver des investisseurs locaux et 
étrangers dans le cadre du développement du port.  

Enfin,  Madame  la  présidente,  dans  le  huitième  cas,  Highlands,  la  vérité  est  que  le 
Public Sector Investment Programme lui-même - document officiel - présente ce projet, le 
projet Highlands City, et c’est le gouvernement qui aurait à développer et l’infrastructure et 
les bâtiments,  Mais, c’est présenté dans le Public Sector Investment Programme lui-même 
comme étant, je cite : ‘at preparatory stage and for which financing is yet to be secured’. En 
d’autres mots, très loin à l’horizon et c’est ce qui explique qu’aucune somme n’est prévue 
dans le budget 2015/2016, ni après d’ailleurs.  

Enfin,  Madam  Speaker,  si 

les  prévisions  du  gouvernement,  en 

termes 
d’investissements  à  venir  dans  le  secteur  privé  ne  tiennent  pas  la  route,  comme  je  l’ai 
démontré plus haut, ces prévisions en termes de GDP growth eux-aussi, malheureusement, ne 
tiennent  pas  la  route.  Le  GDP  growth  a  été  de  3.5%  en  2014.  Le  gouvernement  prévoit 
maintenant qu’il sera de 4.1 % en 2015 et de 5.3% en 2015/2016, puis de 5.7% en 2016/2017.  
Or, la vérité, Madame la présidente, c’est que même si le GDP growth est de 4% cette année, 
un  simple  calcul  montre  que  pour  passer  à  5.3  %  en  2015/2016,  il  faudrait  que  le  GDP 
growth soit de 6.5 % en 2016 alors qu’il était de 3.5 % en 2014. Si nous n’atteignons pas 4.1 
% en 2015, alors le GDP growth en 2016 aura à augmenter de plus que 7 % pour arriver au 
chiffre de 5.3%. 

 

 

21 

Madam Speaker, avant de parler des dangers qui, d’après moi, nous menacent, je dirai 
quelques mots ici sur toute l’affaire Bramer-BAI. Bien évidemment, ce qui nous préoccupe 
avant tout, nous autres dans l’opposition, c’est le sort des employés de la Bramer Bank et de 
la BAI, le sort des depositors de la Bramer Bank, de même que le sort des 135,283 ordinary 
pension  policyholders  et  des  24,175  so-called  Gold  Scheme  policyholders.  Nous  estimons, 
quant à nous, que le gouvernement a mishandled toute l’affaire dès le début, avec zigzags 
après zigzags et tiraillements sans fin au sommet du gouvernement. En tout cas, il est noté, 
Madam Speaker, qu’à ce stade, le gouvernement a garanti tous les emplois à la Bramer Bank 
et à la BAI - it’s on record - de même que tous les deposits à la Bramer Bank et aussi les 
135,283 ordinary pension policyholders. Mais le problème des 24,175 so-called Gold Scheme 
policyholders reste entier et tout cela risque de coûter très cher aux contribuables.  

Déjà  200  millions  de  roupies  de  fonds  publics  ont  été  dépensés  pour  lancer  une 
nouvelle banque, la National Commercial Bank, après que la SBM ait  déclinée d’absorber la 
Bramer  Bank.  Mais  ce  qu’il  faut  savoir  maintenant,  c’est  combien  cela  va  coûter  aux 
contribuables pour que le gouvernement tienne parole concernant les deposits de la Bramer 
Bank  que  la  National  Commercial  Bank  a  taken  over  et  concernant  les  contributions  des 
pension policyholders de la BAI, qu’une nouvelle entité est appelée à take over.  

Je  reviendrai,  bien  sûr,  sur  toute  l’affaire  Bramer-BAI  par  voie  de  PNQ  et  nous 
veillerons, quant à nous, sans relâche, à ce que le gouvernement tienne parole concernant les 
engagements  pris.  Mais  nous  veillerons  aussi,  Madame  la  présidente,  à  ce  que  les 
contribuables ne fassent pas les frais de tout cela comme cela fut le cas dans le scandale des 
hedgings à la State Trading Corporation et à Air Mauritius sous l’ancien gouvernement.  

Vous me permettrez, Madame la présidente, de passer maintenant aux dangers qui, de 
mon point de vue, nous menacent. Le premier que l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo, le ministre 
des  Finances,  souligne  lui-même  dans  son  discours  est  celui  d’un  dérapage  au  niveau  du 
current account de la dette publique et du déficit budgétaire. Dans le cas du current account 
de la balance des paiements, qui est, je crois, que nous pouvons tous l’admettre, le critère le 
plus  telling  quant  à  l’état  de  santé  réelle  de  n’importe  quelle  économie,  le  ministre  des 
finances lui-même souligne qu’il a dépassé 10 % du GDP en 2014, ce qu’il décrit lui-même 
dans son discours comme, I quote - 

“A precarious state that cannot be sustained.” 
Cette situation déjà dangereuse pourrait se dégrader dramatiquement si le FDI arrivait 
à ralentir ou si les capital flows vers l’Inde, à travers notre Financial Sector, grâce à notre 

 

 

22 

Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement avec l’Inde, arrivaient à ralentir encore plus qu’ils ne 
l’auront malheureusement déjà fait au profit de Singapour et d’ailleurs.  

Dans le cas du public debt, Madame la présidente, le ministre des Finances, souligne 

lui-même, qu’en 2014, il a atteint, I quote - 

“An alarming level of 61% of GDP.” 
Dans le cas du budget deficit, il a été, selon mes calculs - sans parti pris - de 4.2 % en 
2014, calculé à la FMI, c’est-à-dire, en incluant les special funds comme le fait la FMI. Donc, 
après avoir  été de 4.2  % en 2014, le ministre des Finances prévoit qu’il passe à 3.6 % en 
2015/2016 et à 1.4 % en 2017/2018. 

Madam Speaker, en 2015/2016 on a vu que c’est avant tout le capital budget qui a été 
sacrifié pour empêcher le déficit budgétaire de déraper après l’augmentation des pensions et 
des  salaires.    Et  on  sait,  par  ailleurs,  que  chaque  année,  dorénavant,  le  gouvernement  va 
encaisser R 1.3 milliards de hidden tax additionnelle sur le diesel et l’essence. Mais même 
cela  n’a  pas  empêché  les  prévisions  du  ministre  lui-même  à  l’effet  que  le  budget  deficit 
calculé à la FMI passera à 4.6% pour les premiers six mois de 2015. 4.6% pour les premiers 
six mois de 2015!  Pour faire baisser le budget deficit à partir de 2016, les chiffres du budget 
montrent que le gouvernement compte le faire en serrant les ceintures, côté augmentation de 
salaires et PRB.  Ainsi, alors que l’Employee Compensation, la masse salariale va augmenter 
de 12% en 2015-2016 - à cause du dernier PRB et des augmentations de pension de vieillesse 
et de salaires déjà accordés - le budget prévoit qu’il y aura seulement une augmentation de 
4% en 2016-2017 de la masse salariale et de 2.5% en 2017-2018 malgré les compensations 
salariales  annuelles  à  venir  et  malgré  le  PRB,  déjà  annoncé  et  prévu,  et  alors  que  la 
dépréciation en cours de la roupie fouette déjà les prix. Cela veut dire ce que cela veut dire.   
Donc,  l’intention  du  gouvernement  telle  qu’annoncée  par  les  chiffres,  mais  pas  en 
paroles, c’est de faire baisser le déficit budgétaire, en serrant les ceintures du côté des salaires 
et du PRB. Cela veut dire ce que cela veut dire, et explique peut-être pourquoi pas un mot 
n’est dit dans le budget sur un salaire minimum national pourtant promis à maintes reprises.  

Par contre, Madam Speaker, à la page 13 du discours du budget, il est dit ceci – 
“Madam  Speaker,  an  appropriate  wage  policy  is  an  essential  component  of  a 
favourable investment climate for attracting FDI. So, Government is carrying out a 
study of the labour market and the wage policy (…).” 
Et la petite phrase-clé –  
“(…) to bring it in line with the need to boost investment.” 

 
Il  n’est  pas  difficile  de  deviner  ce  que  le  gouvernement  a  en  tête  quand  il  utilise 

 

23 

cette petite phrase.  

Dans le cas des Special Funds, Madam Speaker – les Special Funds de Rama Sithanen 

- tant décriés dans le passé, le ministre des finances annonce à la page 42 que, et je cite – 

“(…)  all  Special  Funds  will  be  closed  by  end  June  2015  except  the  National 
Resilience Fund and the Build Mauritius Fund which will be phased out gradually.”  
And very gradually at that when we look at figures in the Budget !  Mais en même 
temps qu’il annonce - une déclaration d’intention de doing away enfin avec les Special Funds 
qui non seulement manquent totalement de transparence mais en plus faussent les chiffres du 
déficit  budgétaire  qui  sont  corrigés  par  le  FMI  -  la  fin  des  Special  Funds  à  l’horizon,  le 
ministre  de  finances  annonce  un  nouveau  Special  Fund,  le  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund,  qui 
recevra chaque année 1% of total Government revenue, soit près de R 1 milliard, alors que 
rien n’est dit sur les long term investments à être faits par ce nouveau Special Fund et qu’en 
fait  ces  long  term  investments  annoncés  devraient,  en  fait,  être  faits,  à  travers  le  Capital 
Budget lui-même. 

Madam  Speaker,  par  ailleurs,  si  pas  un  mot  n’est  dit  par  le  ministre  de  finances 
concernant un Gold Fund annoncé, à maintes reprises, dans le passé, dans les Explanatory 
Notes  pas  un  mot  n’est  dit,  mais  je  crois  qu’on  a  oublié  de  retirer  une  référence  dans  les 
Explanatory Notes, attachés au discours du budget puisqu’alors que le Gold Fund a disparu 
complètement, dans les Explanatory Notes – 

«A main provision to be included in the Finance Bill (…).” 

Il est dit donc que - 

“The Bank of Mauritius Act will be amended to:  
(a) enable the Bank to:  

(i) participate in the launching of the Gold Fund;” » 

‘The Gold Fund’ qu’on ne trouve aucune part dans le budget !  Mais je crois que nous 
avons  droit  à  au  moins  une  explication  concernant  beaucoup  de  points  que  je  soulève  ici, 
Madam Speaker. 

Le  deuxième  danger  qui  nous  menace,  d’après  moi,  est  celui  d’un  écroulement  de 
l’industrie sucrière à cause de la baisse dramatique du prix auquel nous vendons notre sucre. 
Of course, it is nobody’s fault, but it is staring us in the face.  On sait, Madam Speaker, que le 
nombre d’employés et de planteurs dans l’industrie sucrière est passé de 13,803 et 26,257 en 
2005  à  8,000  et  14,662 planteurs  en  2015.    C’est  dramatique  les  chiffres  confirmés  par  le 
ministre de l’agriculture en réponse à une PNQ l’autre jour. En même temps que les terres 

 

 

24 

sous cannes sont passées de 67,407 hectares en 2015 - une diminution de 20,000 - à 47,791 
hectares en 2014.   

Madam Speaker, c’est rien de moins qu’une menace de mort qui plane sur l’industrie 
sucrière et cela exige un véritable Master Plan pour la suivie même de l’industrie sucrière. En 
attendant,  je  trouve  déplorable  que  le  nouveau  gouvernement  discute  toujours  -  après  la 
réponse  du  ministre  de  l’agriculture  -  d’un  premium  waiver.    C’est-à-dire  que  les  petits 
planteurs  paient  moins.    Non  seulement  qu’ils  reçoivent  une  aide  financière,  mais  qu’ils 
paient moins au Sugar Pension Fund comme contribution.  Je trouve déplorable que, comme 
le ministre de l’Agriculture nous a dit, le gouvernement est en train de toujours discuter entre 
l’agriculture  et  les  finances  d’un  premium  waiver  pour  les  planteurs  et  autres  comme 
recommandé  dans  le  dernier  Actuarial  Review  d’octobre  2014,  mais  que  l’ancien 
gouvernement avait refusé de mettre en pratique. 

Le  troisième  danger  qui  nous  menace,  d’après  moi,  Madam  Speaker,  est  celui  d’une 
crise  dans  la  fourniture  d’électricité  avec  des  rolling  blackouts  comme  actuellement  en 
Afrique du Sud ou au Ghana.  Rolling blackouts qui auraient un impact terrible sur la vie de 
tous les jours, mais aussi sur l’économie et sur l’image du pays. Madam Speaker, le risque de 
rolling blackouts à partir fin 2015 est malheureusement bien réel. C’est pourquoi il est urgent 
que les 4 x 15 megawatt nouveau engines soient commandés et entrent en opération dès que 
possible et qu’une décision soit prise dès que possible, et que tout soit enclenché concernant 
les 50 à 100 megawatt de base load electricity dont nous aurons besoin – tout le monde est 
d’accord sur ces chiffres-là – à partir de 2017-2018. 

Madam Speaker, après avoir parlé des dangers qui nous menacent,  I will comment 
on a few other issues. SMEs – Small and Medium Enterprises. The Minister, himself, has 
described, I quote – 

“(…) making the SME sector the backbone of our economy.” 

I quote again – 

“(…) the most ambitious goal of this Government”. 

The Budget has provided for the launching of a new SME Bank – Small and Medium 
Enterprises Bank. But then, Madam Speaker, we want to know when is that bank going to be 
set  up  and  we  would  wish  to  know  what  is  going  to  happen  to  the  Development  Bank  of 
Mauritius.  There  have  been  contradictory  statements  from  Ministers  and  the  SMEs  are 
directly concerned by the fate of the Development Bank of Mauritius. So, what is going to 

 

 

25 

happen  to  the  Development  Bank  of  Mauritius,  but  also  to  the  Mauritius  Post  Office  and 
Cooperative Bank which was meant - when we put it on track - to be la banque des petites et 
moyennes  entreprises  et  des  petits  planteurs?  Mais  qui,  sous  l’ancien  gouvernement,  est 
devenue la banque des petits copains et copines ! What is going to happen to the Mauritius 
Post Office and Cooperative Bank? And we all would wish to know the details of the State 
Bank of Mauritius, of how the State Bank of Mauritius is going to provide working capital to 
young entrepreneurs in any new way, as announced by the Minister of Finance and Economic 
Empowerment. 

Madam Speaker, in the case of Port Louis harbour which this Government wishes to 

transform, I quote – 

“From a Destination Port to a Regional Hub”. 

I agree fully with that, as with many other things. With the Port Authority coming up 
with the new Master Plan for the whole Port area, the hard fact remains - and I listened to the 
hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  because  I  thought  maybe  he  would  provide  figures  -  Madam 
Speaker, that the number of containers  going through the harbour,  which was supposed to 
reach two million containers in 2030, has, in fact, according to my figures - I would wish to 
be corrected - gone down from 440,000 in 2011 to 370,000 in 2014. If that is true, there is a 
very serious problem, Madam Speaker. 

Concerning the harbour, the Government has avoided clarifying whether it is going 
ahead with a strategic partner for the Cargo Handling Corporation. It is good that the point be 
clarified because the unions want to know, everybody wants to know. 

Concerning our national carrier, Air Mauritius, Madam Speaker, which is already in 

trouble, the Minister of Finance has announced in the Budget Speech, I quote – 

“Government is taking a more liberal approach to open air access.” 

to the benefit of the tourism industry, but without giving any details. 

Madam Speaker, we  all  know that we have to be very  careful here and  to find the 
right balance between the interest of the tourism industry – vital interest – but also the interest 
of Air Mauritius which serves the country as a whole and the other sectors of the economy. 
That is why, Madam Speaker - of course, nothing personal meant - I would have preferred to 
have  Air  Mauritius  stay  with  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  and  not  be  handed  over  to  the 
Minister responsible for the tourism industry who thus becomes judge and party. But, I have 

 

 

26 

no doubt that the hon. Prime Minister, through the Chairperson appointed by him, will keep a 
very close – we all want the development of the tourism industry, we want more air traffic, 
but I do not think anybody wants Air Mauritius to come crashing down. 

Madam Speaker, in the case of the fight against poverty, nous sommes restés sur notre 
faim concerning the so-called Anti-Poverty Marshall Plan announced by the Prime Minister. 
According to the Minister of Finance, that will get rid of the problem altogether.  

In the meantime, Madam Speaker, the decision by the Minister of Finance to remove 

all existing CSR guidelines and to make, I quote - 

“Companies,  thereon,  will  be  free  to  allocate  the  2  per  cent  of  CSR 
according to their own set of priorities.” 
That decision announced by the Minister of Finance est contestée au sein même du 

gouvernement. Après que le ministre des Finances ait dit dans son discours – 

“Immediately  after  the  Budget,  I  will  start  meeting  with  major  companies  to 
participate in this national initiative.” 

The national initiative that we are talking about is getting the big firms to adopt, to parrainer, 
one of the 38 pockets of poverty identified in the Budget Speech. Well, I hope when he sums 
up, he will tell us what progress has been achieved, which are the big companies that have 
come forward, that he has already met. But I think the country also needs to know how were 
these 38 pockets of poverty identified whereas there were 229 pockets of poverty identified 
only three years ago in 2011 by the National Empowerment Foundation. 

Pour  sa  part,  le  ministre  en  charge  de  ce  secteur,  l’honorable  Roopun,  avouait 

spontanément dans une interview dans ‘Le Défi Plus’ du 28 mars, I quote - 

« ne  pas  savoir  quels  paramètres  ont  été  utilisés  pour  identifier  ces  38  pockets  of 
poverty. » 

I hope that the Minister of Finance éclairera notre lanterne à tous, y compris le ministre, à 
l’occasion de son summing-up. 

Dans ce contexte, Madame la présidente, il est déplorable que pas un mot n’ait été dit 
dans  le  budget  sur  la  mise  en  application  des  recommandations  du  Truth  and  Justice 
Commission. Et pourtant, répondant à une question parlementaire il y a 15 jours, le 31 mars 
dernier, et après avoir dit dans sa réponse que, je cite – 

“(…)  the  implementation  of  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission  would  require  an 
enormous budget.” 

 

 

27 

Hon. Xavier-Luc Duval said - et il avait informé la Chambre par la même occasion, donc, le 
31 mars dernier - qu’un nouveau ministerial committee avec lui-même comme Chairperson 
venait d’être nommé le 02 février dernier to implement the recommendations of the Truth and 
Justice Commission… 

Madam Speaker, in the case of cancer, Government has confirmed that the MedPoint 
Clinic  will  be  transformed  into  a  modern  cancer  centre  with  the  purchase  of  a  new  linear 
accelerator, that is, a new radiotherapy apparatus. I am, of course, in full agreement with that 
decision.  However,  it  seems  that  what  will  be  purchased  will  be  a  conventional  type  of 
radiotherapy  apparatus  costing  some  Rs100  m.,  which  is  a  lot  of  money,  whereas  I  am 
advised by the specialist concerned that what should be installed is the latest generation so-
called  Intensity-Modulated  Radiotherapy  Apparatus.  According  to  the  expert  advice  that  I 
have received, such a new generation so-called Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy would cost 
some Rs300 m. The choice of that apparatus will make all the difference, Madam Speaker, to 
patients in terms of results and of side effect like burns, in particular.  I, therefore, make a 
special appeal to Government and the Minister of Finance to make that extra financial effort. 
If  it  is  confirmed  that  there  is  need  to  make  an  extra  financial  effort  to  buy  this  new 
generation state-of-the-art apparatus,  I make therefore a special appeal to Government  and 
the Minister of Finance to make that extra financial effort which would alleviate immensely 
the sufferings of all the patients concerned.  

Madam Speaker, let me end by going back to fundamentals. Madam Speaker, I am 
sure that we have all been following attentively what has been happening in Greece, France, 
Italy, in the context of globalisation and of the international economic and financial crisis, 
including in the Eurozone. I am sure also that we have all been watching as Ghana, presented 
only a few years back as a showcase economic success, has had recently to turn to the IMF 
for help. Madam Speaker, taking into consideration, according to my assessment, of course –  
the  prospects  for  GDP  growth,  investment  and  employment  creation  in  the 
months and years ahead; 

(i) 

(ii) 

the current account, public debt and budgetary situation; 

(iii) 

the Bramer Bank/BAI crisis; 

(iv) 

the prospects for the sugar industry; 

(v) 

the looming electricity crisis, and 

 
(vi) 

 

the political situation in general, 

28 

it is, Madam Speaker, my considered view that Mauritius is in deep trouble. I hope I 
will be proved wrong.  Mais en tout cas, Madame la présidente, mon intime conviction c’est 
que  le  pays  ne  s’en  sortira  qu’avec  un  gouvernement  qui  parle  un  langage  de  vérité 
économique à la population à la Mendès France. Un gouvernement qui parle un langage de 
vérité à la population et qui prenne avec lucidité et courage et dans autant de consensus que 
possible des décisions parfois difficiles qu’il faut prendre, mais indispensable pour permettre 
au pays de prendre un nouveau départ et de donner un nouveau souffle à la croissance et à la 
création d’emplois. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister! 

(11.56 a.m.) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  first  of  all  congratulate  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance for the excellent first Budget of the ‘L’Alliance Lepep’ Government. For 
me, it is more than just a Budget; it is a well-thought out, long-awaited projet de société.  It 
indicates  our  firm  commitment  to  translate  into  reality  the  new  model  of  development 
proposed by my Government. 

Madam Speaker, our country was badly in need of a new projet de société. During the 
electoral campaign we have seen misery, unhappiness and discontent like we have never seen 
before in this country. The hon. Leader of the Opposition just mentioned, the country is in big 
trouble, but this is the inheritance left by the previous Government and with which the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition did not hesitate to associate himself. 

The nation had lost its moral bearing and the Mauritian people were lost with no sense 
of  direction  and  no  hope.  The  Mauritian  people  in  general  were  unhappy  because  of  high 
unemployment and low economic growth. They were unhappy because of increasing poverty 
and widening inequality.  The housing situation was only getting worse every  year for the 
past ten  years.   Our population was unhappy because of the deteriorating state of law and 
order.  

Our institutions were fast decaying, and corruption was at its peak and fast eating up 
the  fabric  of  our  society.    Week  after  week,  we  were  hearing  of  the  most  odious  crimes, 
especially  against  vulnerable  senior  citizens.    And  today  we  know  that  blue-collar  crimes, 
fraud and corruption in our corporate sector were being tolerated, even supported at very high 
levels. Our people were unhappy because social ills and social evils were infiltrating every 

 

 

29 

strata  of  our  society  and  all  aspects  of  life.      The  drug  problem  had  spread  even  to  our 
schools.  We had also become a ‘nation zougadère’. Over-indebtedness weighed dramatically 
on thousands of families.  

As pointed out in the Budget, the interest charge on hire purchase was equivalent to 
what can be called daylight robbery – in some countries they would call it highway robbery. 
Our  elders,  in  particular  pensioners,  could  hardly  make  ends  meet.    The  entire  nation  was 
totally unhappy about the water situation. I need hardly to delve on this, as the whole nation 
is too aware of the kind of indifference the previous Government has shown to the plight of 
people who could not get supply of clean tap water.  I cannot imagine that the water situation 
could have been left to deteriorate so much, in spite of the millions and billions that were 
spent  in  that  sector.  It  is  same  for  electricity,  for  public  transport  and  for  our  road 
infrastructure. 

The cracks and crevasses on the newly constructed Ring Road and the Terre Rouge-

Verdun roads speak volumes of how public money was dished out irresponsibly.  

And we also know what kind of drainage system we have in this country. Every year, 
hundreds  of  families  have  to  suffer  from  floods  that  destroy  their  foodstuff,  furniture, 
residence and even threaten their lives.  

In fact, the entire country was going down the drain. Clearly, the nation was in dire 

need of a new projet de société. 

As the House knows, Madam Speaker, we started work on that new projet de société 
immediately after the elections. We did not waste time. We started by honouring our promise 
to raise the pension of our elderly to Rs5,000 per month.  

In fact, we raised the Basic Retirement Pension by between 38% to 63%. We raised 
the basic pensions for widows and invalids by 53%. These actions are today benefiting some 
240,000 men, women and children in our country. They have more money in hand to meet 
their family obligations at the end of every month.  

To  improve  the  income  of  workers,  particularly,  in  the  lower  income  brackets,  we 
have provided an across-the-board salary compensation of Rs600 per month. The Leader of 
the Opposition just now criticised us that we have not been putting into practice the minimum 
wage. But, he must not forget that everything cannot be done in the very first Budget. We 
have another four years to go and I can give him the assurance that we are going to put into 
practice what we have promised.  

What I have just mentioned, Madam Speaker, this amount is almost the double of the 
compensation proposed by the former Government for all those employees earning a mostly 

 

 

30 

salary of up to Rs15,000. These two measures alone have put Rs9 billion in the pockets of 
low and middle-income families as rightly pointed out by hon. Minister Pravind Jugnauth. 
This  is  a  colossal  and  unprecedented  effort  by  my  Government  in  favour  of  our  fellow 
countrymen. These, Madam Speaker, were only the beginning of our actions to address the 
problems of poverty and inequality.  

The Budget contains numerous measures to further relieve the financial burden of the 

population and increase their purchasing power. These include – 

free water supply up to 6 m³;  

• 
•  100% subsidies on School Certificate and HSC examination fees;  
• 
• 
• 
•  compensation to small planters.  

full income tax deductions of interest on housing loans; 
increase of grant for casting of slabs; 
reskilling grants to unemployed graduates, and  

Just now, the hon. Leader of the Opposition said that the sugar industry is going to 

die and that we are not doing anything. But he must not forget… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, this is what I understood. Sorry, if I am wrong, I withdraw what I have said. 

(Interruptions) 

But, in fact, as I have just mentioned, we are giving compensation to small planters. 
I think they need our help most than others who are in the sugar industry. And significant 
reduction of interests charged on hire purchase transactions, amongst others. 

Madam Speaker, I am saddened to see that Members of the Opposition, especially the 
Leader of Opposition, have tried to side-line these unprecedented measures. They have been 
demagogical to the point of being ridiculous. I am sure the people out there have taken good 
note of their unwarranted criticisms. And I must remind the Members of the Opposition that 
it was the same chanson. Every budget that we were bringing from 1983 to 1995, telling the 
people that we were misleading them, we’re not going to achieve what we had promised and 
we all know the result; the first economic miracle, the prosperity of this country first brought 
after the Labour Party reigned from the time of independence. 

Madam Speaker, some Members of Opposition have tried to accuse Government of 
shirking its responsibilities as regards the fight against poverty. The far-reaching measures 
that I have highlighted alone prove them wrong. Never before has any Government allocated 

 

 

31 

so many billions of rupees in one single budget to the poorer sections of the population as my 
Government has done.  

The  flexibility  provided  to  the  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  mechanism  aims  at 
giving latitude to those who generate wealth to share it with the less privileged in order to 
motivate them to build a brighter future for themselves.  

I can assure Members and the population that the implementation of this measure will 
be  closely  monitored  and  in  case  it  does  not  yield  expected  results,  it  will  be  subject  to 
review, of course. 

Madam Speaker, besides the actions to support our more vulnerable citizens, we have 
also been taking actions to clean up our society. Well, I must tell the House, that we will keep 
going until we are fully satisfied that we have flushed out all the social ills and evils that have 
been besetting our country for so many years.  

From Betamax to Neotown, going through Jinfei and the State lands saga, we have 
been cleaning and cleaning indiscriminately. There is no communal bashing or whatsoever. 
Nobody, no lobby and no force can stop my Government from fulfilling its clean up mission. 
As we go along, we are more than ever determined to expose the ill-doings of those 
politicians of the previous regime and their chamchas who have been looting this country to 
fill  their  own  coffers.  We  will  find  those  coffers  wherever  they  are  found,  be  it  in 
Switzerland,  in  Bahamas,  in  Malta,  Gibraltar  or  elsewhere.  Not  later  than  two  weeks  ago, 
Madam Speaker, my Government has had the courage to unveil the biggest Ponzi scheme this 
country  has  ever  witnessed.    With  not  less  than  R  10  billion  of  public  money  siphoned 
through a complex well thought and pre-planned structure to the benefit of BAI’s ultimate 
beneficial  owner,  his  family  and  friends.  What  is  more  shocking  is  that  this  scandal  also 
extends to overseas jurisdictions. 

Madam Speaker, some Members of Opposition abundantly questioned whether BAI 
was  running  any  Ponzi  Scheme.  The  money  flow  speaks  for  itself.  It  is  shameful  that  the 
Opposition is now using the escape door in the name of political vendetta to cover for their 
friends  of  the  BAI.  I  strongly  maintain  and  reaffirm  that  BAI  fits  in  all  the  objective 
definitions  of  a  Ponzi,  as  defined  by  the  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  
Policyholders’ money, instead of being invested to generate future returns, as promised under 
the different investment schemes at BAI, had been instead fraudulently siphoned for - 

(i) 

the  construction  of  Diplomat  Gardens  for  the  benefit  of  Mrs  Soornack  and 
relatives of Mr Rawat; 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

 

32 

providing  security  for  the  disbursement  of  a  loan  for  the  purchase  of  a 
bungalow  at Roches Noires by the former Prime Minister and for  which no 
capital has been repaid until now; 
the transfer of - although coffers were full!  And if you know how much he 
has deposited in the local banks you will be surprised…  

(Interruptions) 

…transfer  of  up  to  Rs6  billion  to  BA  Investment  whose  ultimate  beneficial 
owner is Dawood Rawat. 
the purchase of a Baronial Castle outside of Rome for some Rs400 m., which 
has suffered a loss of some Rs120 m. and which brings no tangible returns to 
policyholders. 
purchase  of  properties  in  Romania,  London  and  the  United  States  for  the 
personal use of Dawood Rawat, family and friends. 

(Interruptions) 
Malheureux pé plorer, pé rode boire poison aster! 

(vi) 

payment  of  unsubstantiated  management  fees  of  up  to  Rs1  billion  prior  to 
2011 and not less than Rs1 billion between 2011 and 2015. 

Need  I  say  more,  Madam  Speaker!    But  one  thing  I  will  say  for  sure:  all  those 
responsible  for  this  financial  massacre  will  be  held  accountable  and  will  face  the 
consequences  of  their  terrible  act  which  could  have  brought  down  our  whole  financial 
system. 

Madam  Speaker,  today  the  headwinds  blowing  over  our  country  are  indeed  strong 
gales  that  could  have  had  devastating  consequences  on  our  social  fabric  as  well  as  our 
economy, had we not taken decisively surgical and timely actions. 

This is why my Government will stay on its toes, wary of anything that may still be 
hidden under the rug.  We have assumed our responsibility as a caring Government to protect 
the interests of depositors and policyholders.  This amply proves our  good faith.  We will 
spare  no  effort  to  bring  to  justice  those  who  have  embezzled  funds  entrusted  to  them,  or 
stealthily grown rich on the back of our hard-working people. 

Madam  Speaker,  contrary  to  the  hollow  statements  of  some  hon.  Members  of  the 
Opposition claiming that the Budget is one of missed opportunities, I can tell them they have 
missed  an  opportunity  to  dissociate  themselves  from  the  crimes  committed  by  the  former 
Prime Minister and the former Government. 

 

 

33 

Instead of throwing their filth at me and at my Government, they should have acted as 
true patriots, as the cleaning process we are pursuing is in the superior interest of our country. 
The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  no  credibility  at  all  to  try  and  play  smart  with  the 
population because he himself said that in his alliance with Navin Ramgoolam he is looking 
ahead, not backwards.  What does that mean?  It means that had the MMM/Labour Alliance 
won the elections, there would have been cover-ups everywhere and the crimes committed by 
the  former  Prime  Minister  and  his  Government  against  the  country  and  the  people  would 
have stayed unrevealed and unpunished. 

Madam Speaker, I have a mission, and I have been given a clear mandate to fulfil that 
mission.  No demagogy or filth can alter the course of action of my Government.  That is why 
I  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  I  am  very  satisfied  that  the  Budget  gives  more  concrete 
shape to our projet de société.  On the economic front, it looks at transforming our country 
into a vaste chantier de développement - not because we want more buildings all around our 
country. This project is about creating jobs, so as to solve the problem of high unemployment 
which has been eroding the confidence of our youth for so long. 

We said that we will create a second economic miracle - well, this Budget has set the 
foundations  for  this  second  miracle.    Mauritius  is  entering  its  next  logical  phase  of 
development  -  where  innovation  will  drive  growth  and  development.    That  is  why  I  have 
decided to set up a Ministry dedicated to technology, communication and innovation.  The 
new projet de société is also about ensuring a round-the-clock supply of clean tap water to the 
whole  population.    We  will  modernise  our  infrastructure,  and  I  can  assure  the  House  that 
there will no longer be unthinkable, unimaginable cost overruns in infrastructure projects like 
we have seen in the past.  We will clean up the mess. 

Going forward, it is no secret that higher growth will require increased investments 
and structural reforms to improve productivity.  It is with this at heart that my Government 
has mapped out its economic plan.  The 2015-2016 Budget lays the foundation for boosting 
quality investment in traditional, emerging, as well as new economic sectors. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  must  also  add  here  that  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  the  Capital 
Budget has been sacrificed and that it amounts to only Rs12.5 billion.  In fact, public sector 
investment for the period January to June 2015, when we  add the  Budget estimates to the 
investment that will be made through the Public Sector Investment Plan, amounts to Rs10.4 
billion, which is an increase of 5.2% over the amount for the corresponding period last year.  
And  for  the  fiscal  year  2015-2016,  total  public  sector  investment  is  estimated  at  Rs27.1 
billion,  which  is  an  annual  increase  of  6.2%.  Thus,  Madam  Speaker,  total  public  sector 

 

 

34 

investment  will  be  higher  not  only  in  nominal  terms  but  in  real  terms  as  well,  for  we  are 
expecting  inflation  to  remain  subdued.    In  fact,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  just  announced, 
following its Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, that it is expecting a rate of inflation of 
around 3% for the year. 

This Government is also being accused of relying too much on the private sector for 
investment in the economy.  Well, I think we have been very clear in setting the direction we 
want to go as a country.  Economic growth will have to be led by the private sector, and yes, 
we do rely on the private sector for increasing its investment and not only in private ventures 
but also in public infrastructure. Moreover, we are also opening up opportunities for private 
investment in public infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, we have had this experience before, from 1983 to 1995. The amount 
that we need to invest in public infrastructure will be huge.  And the House knows very well 
that with the kind of public sector debt we have inherited and the legal requirement to bring it 
down to below 50% by 2018, it will be an extremely challenging task for the Government to 
invest in public infrastructure without seeking private participation. 

Madam Speaker, my Government's energy, resources and time are being spent on two 
fronts,  the  vanguard  and  the  rear  simultaneously.    The  vanguard,  because  we  have  a 
commitment to leave a sound legacy to the next generation, a legacy that all Mauritians will 
be proud of.  And the rear guard, because we cannot build a new model on the rotten past 
bequeathed to us by the former regime.  

It is in this very spirit that the 2015/2016 Budget has been drafted. We have embarked 
on a new journey to re-energise development.  Our aim is to put our economy back on track 
and achieve growth rates much superior to the 5 per cent.    

Madam Speaker, in addition to ensuring social coherence and inclusion, the revamping 
of our economic engine is a key component of this Budget.  To this end, due consideration 
has  been  given  on  catalytic  forces  that  will  boost  development  and  progress  across  our 
economic sectors.  

Our  incentives  for  the  development  of  Smart  Cities  are  designed  precisely  for  the 
creation  of  self-sustained  cities  dedicated  mainly  to  knowledge-based  industries  in  which 
employees can flourish, businesses can succeed and local communities can prosper.   

Together  with  the  techno-parks,  we  are  looking  at  the  development  of  thirteen 
employment-rich mega projects which would create the ambit for new and higher investment 
threshold for Mauritius and bring about a new wave of development with the utilisation of 
7,000 arpents of land.  We are here talking about the creation of thousands of new jobs, the 

 

 

35 

development of a whole new value chain with respect to Smart Cities and techno-parks and, 
of course, unprecedented levels of investments.  Most importantly, these 13 Mega projects 
will rekindle our construction industry. 

Moreover, Madam Speaker, my Government is not limiting development to those 13 
projects. There are numerous other projects involving billions of investments that have been 
blocked  for  unexplained  reasons  during  these  recent  years  at  different  Ministerial  or 
Departmental levels. In order to address the problem of bureaucratic bottlenecks, I have set 
up a High-Powered Committee under the aegis of my Office to expedite the process so that 
these projects could be materialised to the benefit of the country. I will personally chair the 
High-Powered Committee. The first meeting will be held soon. 

Madam Speaker, along with the High-Powered Committee, I am setting up a National 
Advisory Council under the chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet to act as a think-tank. It 
will  provide  strategic  oversight  to  our  socio-economic  agenda  and  assist  in  elaborating  a 
VISION  2030  Blueprint  within  the  next  six  months.  The  National  Advisory  Council  will 
comprise resource persons and experts from both the public and private sectors. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  economic  success  of  a  country  is  closely  linked  to  its  ease-of-
doing-business environment.  For the first time in Mauritius, we have taken the courageous 
decision to streamline procedures by drastically abolishing 70 cumbersome permits.  At the 
same time, we are ensuring that the renewal process for the remaining ones be rationalised to 
facilitate the launching of business initiatives. 

Madam Speaker, no model of sustainable economic development can exist without a 
dynamic and strong SME sector.  This is why my Government has put in all necessary efforts 
in devising a strategy for enhancing an entrepreneurial culture in Mauritius.  This will not 
only lead to further wealth and job creation, but will contribute largely in creating a more 
balanced and equitable society, where all have a fair chance. We are, in fact, unleashing a 
new chapter in the democratisation process of our economy. 

The setting-up of a one-stop-shop to meet the needs of SMEs and along with this, an 8-

year tax holiday is unprecedented.  This truly is a first in our country.   

Furthermore,  the  creation  of  an  SME  Bank  with  a  capital  of  Rs10  billion  to  support 

entrepreneurs is a demonstration of our trust in hard working fellow countrymen. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  ICT  sector  remains  one  of  crucial  importance  in  which  we  see 
enormous  potential.    The  announcement  by  the  Prime  Minister  Sri  Narendra  Modi 
reaffirming India’s commitment to join hands with my Government in developing a second 
cyber city in Mauritius cannot go unnoticed.   

 

 

36 

In the early 2000s, under my leadership, we created the Ebène cyber city.  We are now 
embarking on a second phase of the development of our ICT industry.  Measures that have 
been announced will, no doubt, allow Mauritius to be transformed into a new generation and 
high value-added smart and digitally enabled island.   

Innovation is part and parcel of everything we do today, across any sector or field of 
activity.  The unflinching determination of my Government in graduating Mauritius into an 
innovation-driven economy is indeed reflected in most, if not all, measures announced in this 
Budget.    

Our exclusive waters equally hold a lot of potential and can become a major catalyst in 
determining  our  economic  evolution.    It  is  that  one  sector  that  regroups  a  whole  range  of 
activities from shipping and seafood processing to renewable energy and seabed exploration.   
It  is  in  this  respect  that  we  are  looking  at  furthering  the  development  of  the  ocean 

economy through the establishment of relevant and dedicated institutions. 

Another important policy direction relates to the transformation of Port Louis harbour 
into a regional Port with thousands of vessels dropping anchor in our region every year.  The 
project will necessitate  high investments over the next five  years and  extend the Port area 
from Grand River North West to Baie du Tombeau.  

Madam Speaker, Mauritius enjoys a reputation as a preferred tourism destination.  But 
one of the recurrent criticisms is the poor connectivity to the island, especially from our main 
markets, both traditional and emerging.   

My  Government  is,  therefore,  working  on  establishing  increased  connectivity  with 
countries like Austria, Germany and Australia in the first instance.  This will be followed by 
further air connections with Eastern Europe and Central Asia and other destinations within 
the framework of a new air access policy. 

At  the  same  time,  Mauritius  is  also  being  increasingly  recognised  as  a  key 

development and investment partner in mainland Africa.  

Our aim is to enhance our role as a key regional player as well as a trusted financial 
platform to further encourage investors, both local and global, to expand their footprint across 
the continent. 

In  view  of  broadening  our  economic  spaces,  my  Government  is  also  focusing  on 
bettering  the  investment  environment  in  Rodrigues  through  extensive  infrastructural 
developments. 

37 

 

 
Madam Speaker, my Government is fully committed to supporting the development 
of Rodrigues as an integral part of the Republic of Mauritius. The budget for the Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly has increased from Rs1.97 billion in year 2014 to Rs2.4 billion in year 
2015,  that  is,  a  total  increase  of  Rs511  m.,  representing  a  26%  increase,  which  is 
unprecedented. 

(Interruptions) 

Air  and  sea  connectivity  with  Mauritius  will  be  improved.  The  runway  of  the  Sir 
Gaëtan Duval Airport in Rodrigues will be extended to accommodate A319 aircraft serving 
regional routes. 

(Interruptions) 

Direct  flights  between  Reunion  Island  and  Rodrigues  will  very  soon  become  a 

reality, thereby opening new opportunities for tourism activities in Rodrigues. 

In regard to sea connectivity, action has already been initiated for the acquisition of a 
new vessel for merchandise and passenger transport in replacement of the Mauritius Pride. In 
the meantime, another vessel has been chartered for an initial period of six months to mitigate 
the  problem.    In  the  longer-term,  the  Master  Plan  2009  will  be  reviewed  with  a  view  to 
developing the Port Mathurin port area. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  support  provided  for  the  social  and  economic  development  of 
Rodrigues  will  be  consolidated  with  the  promotion  of  an  enhanced  business  climate  and 
boosting  up  development  in  the  field  of  agriculture,  more  specifically  organic  farming, 
apiculture  as  well  as  fisheries  and  artisanal  products.  To  this  end,  there  will  be  a  closer 
collaboration between the Agricultural Marketing Board and the planters in Rodrigues. 

The  water  problem  in  Rodrigues  will  be  addressed  with  the  construction  of  new 
reservoirs  for  irrigation  at  Graviers,  Montagne  Goyaves  and  Baie  Malgache.  In  addition, 
about Rs120 m. will be provided for the desalination of sea water. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  well-being  and  security  of  every  Mauritian  remains  a  key 
priority  of  my  Government.  This  explains  our  plans  to  reinforce  the  Police  Department. 
Accordingly, a total sum of Rs7.88 billion is being allocated to the Police Department. 

Government  is  determined  to  modernise  the  Police  Force  by  putting  in  place  the 
appropriate infrastructure and providing the necessary tools and equipment and training to the 
personnel. Provisions have been made in the budget to start the construction of new Police 

 

 

38 

stations at St. Pierre, Cent Gaulettes, Moka, Camp Diable, Pamplemousses, Trou Fanfaron 
and L’Escalier as well as a Police District Headquarters at Abercrombie and one Regional 
Detention Centre at Piton.  

We will invest massively in the acquisition of modern equipment and tools so as to 
enhance the operational efficiency of the Police and enable it to tackle cross border crimes, 
including maritime piracy. To do so, we need adequate manpower. In this regard, some 660 
new recruits have joined the Police Force some three weeks ago and it is envisaged to recruit 
another batch of around 500 Police Officers during the course of this year, itself. 

Madam Speaker, my Government reckons that drug is an acute problem, especially 
among youngsters. The fight against drugs requires a multi-pronged approach since actions 
must be geared towards demand, supply, consumption, rehabilitation and prevention. More 
and more synthetic drugs are being introduced in the market.  

The Police alone cannot fight the drug scourge. Other Ministries, departments, NGOs 
and the community at large must pool efforts together to successfully counter this issue of 
drugs. 

We  are  currently  finalising  the  procedures  for  the  setting-up  of  a  Commission  of 
Inquiry  which  will  address  the  problems  of  drugs  in  a  more  holistic  manner  and  help  to 
dismantle the drug barons. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Government  has  taken  a  strong  commitment  to  tackle  the 
problematic issue of nation zougadère, especially as it relates to addressing illegal activities 
and the widespread concerns of corruption linked to horse racing in Mauritius.  

As  I stated in the House recently, in line with the bold measures  announced in the 
Budget,  the  GRA  will  issue  guidelines  and  conditions  to  operators  with  the  objective  of 
cracking down on malpractices. Thereafter, taking into account the recommendations of the 
Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing and Government’s own assessment of the situation 
prevailing in the gambling industry, I will come forward with necessary amendments to the 
Gambling Regulatory Act in order to leave no loophole for the gambling mafia to pursue its 
illegal activities. 

Madam Speaker, let me come now to the Legacy Sovereign Fund. It is the first time in 
the history of our country that a Government has seriously had at heart what it will leave to 
the future generation.  

39 

 

 
The  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund  announced  will  ensure  that  proceeds  from  sale  of 
Government’s  assets  are  invested  in  secure  long-term  and  low-risk  portfolios.  This  will 
guarantee durable benefits and returns on the country’s existing assets. 

Madam Speaker, the key enabling factor for the success of our strategies and actions 

proposed is our human resources and talent pool. 

We cannot envisage achieving the second national economic transformation if we do 

not have a qualified, well-trained and employable pool of highly educated individuals.  

We are emphasising on  training and immediate  employability to respond to market 
demands.    Specialised  polytechnics  for  middle  management,  ICT  and  ICT-related  fields, 
tourism  and  hotel  management,  including  cruise  tourism  and  the  healthcare  and  medical 
sectors are being promoted.  

We  are  also  working  on  special  programmes  for  the  economic  fields  with  high-
employment  potential.    And  these  courses  will  be  fully  financed  by  Government  up  to 
Rs80,000 per student per year. 

A Chambre des Métiers will also be set up with a view to giving greater recognition 
to the skills and competencies of trade persons and other technicians. We are also reviewing 
the regulatory and institutional set-up for our education system, especially with the aim of 
positioning Mauritius as a knowledge hub. 

We are confident that these measures will better prepare our workforce in line with 

the economic trajectory that my Government has set up for the future of Mauritius. 

Finally,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  in  this  same  spirit  that  we  have  taken  yet  another 
landmark  decision  in  view  of  encouraging  our  professional  and  highly  capable  fellow 
countrymen who are living and working outside Mauritius to consider returning back home. 
We  have  proposed  a  highly  incentivised  scheme  for  homecoming  of  our  professional 
diaspora. I wish to convey a personal message to tell them that the country is in need of their 
experience,  professionalism  and  expertise,  come  back  home  and  together  let  us  build  a 
prosperous Mauritius for all.  

Madam Speaker, the 2015-2016 Budget has unveiled a series of measures charting out 
the right actions to shape a more sustainable future and achieve our desired targets. The seeds 
have  been  sown  for  the  growth  of  a  Mauritius  that  is  based  on  the  promise  of  inclusive 

 

 

40 

development, quality investments resulting in job creation, equity, social justice, transparency 
and good governance.  

Madam Speaker, I am confident that, within the next eighteen months, Mauritius will 
be  sharing  more  encouraging  and  more  positive  comments  about  the  management  of 
business, public affairs and the way the country is administered. More importantly, they will 
be reaping the first fruits of our collective efforts for the advancement of the nation.  

I will end, Madam Speaker, by quoting George W. Bush, I quote –  

“I would like to be remembered as a guy who had a set of priorities, and was willing 
to live by those priorities. In terms of accomplishments, my biggest accomplishment 
is that I kept the country safe amidst a real danger.”  

Madam Speaker, history will recall that I have saved this country from real dangers 
and  chaos  in  1982,  2000  and,  more  recently,  in  2014  from  serious  catastrophes  of 
unimaginable  consequences.  These  are  part  of  my  major  achievements  as  a  politician  and 
Prime Minister. 

I thank you for your kind attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister of Finance, do you think you will have for long? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, may I sum up after lunch? 

Madam Speaker: Okay then, I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for lunch.  

  

At 12.41 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming  at 2.20 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam Speaker, the pleasure is now for me to sum up this Budget. I will be brief because I 
think  that  the  message  has  gone  through.  I  will  be  brief  also  because  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, just before me, has taken up the main contentions that were taken up by Members in 
the  Opposition.  So,  I  would  just  like  to  thank  all  Members  who  have  participated  in  the 
debates.  There  have  been  criticisms,  there  have  been  suggestions  and  the  House  can  rest 
assured  that  the  suggestions  are  being  looked  into  and  would  be  taken  care  of  for 
implementation. 

41 

 

 
As far as criticism is concerned, it is not really criticism; it is very often more through 
misconception. I do think that when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister speaks of a projet de société, 
I think the crux of the  budget is there. When  we said that  we  are at the crossroad  - not a 
crossroad  -  it  was  for  us  a  matter  of  make  it  or  break  it.  It  was  a  matter  of  fundamental 
importance for the survival of our society, the people and the economy also. Why? Because 
we  were  right  to  think  before  the  election  that  the  system  was  so  rotten  in  our  country, 
institutions were so polluted that we could not continue on a business as usual basis.  

This Government would never have survived if hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth had said: 
okay, we take power and then we sit back and relax. We were very conscious that we were at 
the crossroad and we were chosen for the mission to put order in the House. Put order, but 
also, to ensure long-term sustainable development. Therefore, the philosophy of this Budget, 
ce projet de société is more about knowing what we want. Maybe here, I would like to point 
out  one  thing.  I  have  been  trained  as  a  militant  since  1975  altogether  and  we  have  been 
trained at times where it became very excessive because we were living in a dual world of 
good and bad, white and black, there was no in-between. I remember, in 1975 probably, Mrs 
Sheila Bappoo came up with a project to nationalise the 14 big families ruling the country. 
And  that  was  great.  In  fact,  we  really  were  looking  for  justice  and  equity.  We  were  not 
joking.  That  was  a  real  combat.  And  then,  we  took  power  in  1982  and  then  realised  that, 
finally, those people we want to kill, destroy, take their lands and what they have … 

(Interruptions) 

Kill financially, I mean! Our guns were arguments, not physical guns! 

In  1982,  we  realised  one  simple,  basic  thing.  We  had  to  face  reality.  Reality  was 
unemployment. Reality was lack of growth. Reality was that we couldn’t survive politically if 
we do not bring a solution to those we want to protect. Who did we want to protect? Well, 
since always we wanted to protect the most fragile, those who needed the most protection. 

(Interruptions) 

The most vulnerable, thank you! And this is where we had to decide. We said: okay, 
we have unemployment,  we need  employment for our people  and to help employment we 
need investment. But then, in 1982, who will bring the investment? Those same families we 
want to destroy. So, overnight people could not understand hon. Bérenger at that time nor the 
MMM because we were taking decisions which were contrary to what was promised. That 
was mostly done due to obligation. There was no way out of it. So, this is the first time when 
we had to say: my God, we need to know how to protect our people, that probably we are all 
one. This was the time when we started speaking the language of nou lors même bateau. Si le 

 

 

42 

bateau coule, tout le monde coule avec.  Si le bateau flotte, tout le monde flotte avec.  We 
were no longer in the dualistic mode, they are the bad and we are the good. We said: okay, 
we need all.  

After  the  crisis  of  March  1983,  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  personally  went  on 
television  to  tell  people:  look  here,  we  like  you,  we  want  to  help  you,  we  have  100,000 
unemployed, but the only way out is to get investments going in the country. It is just pure 
history  to  explain  why  we  are  here  today.  So,  that  was  a  time  when  we  became  more 
pragmatic, more realistic and more human also because we said: the white man is not that bad 
because we need him also. So, this concept of nou tout lors même bateau has become today a 
reality.  

When we speak of this new society we want to create, we no longer say that there are 
the goods and the bad, the evils, the wrongdoers and the good ones. No, we say we are all on 
the same boat. At the Chamber of Commerce dinner - last month, I think - I told the parterre 
there: ‘Look, here we are on the same boat. If we survive, we survive together.’ I opened the 
way for a strong corporation with what we call the conglomerates of the private sector. Some 
cannot understand that we are a Government that is asking the private sector to invest. This is 
why I am telling you about history, some parts of history. Maybe some friends there are too 
young  to  remember  it.  We  are  speaking  of  the  70s,  so  as  to  understand  how  we  evolved 
politically.  People  will  then  understand  why  today  we  say  we  have  no  shame  in 
understanding that development growth is a process at national level. This is why the Budget 
has two aspects – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  13  megaprojects  which  are  mostly  driven  by  the  private  sector.  This  is 
true, and  
the other one is the future backbone of the economy, the SMEs.  

And we are investing in both.  

Now,  my  second  problem  was  very  obvious  to  everyone.  You  know  the  former 
Government has indebted the nation to the maximum it can indebt a nation. We reached 61% 
of GDP, in terms of public sector debt. 61%, we are being asked to stay below 60% and Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth just pointed out, we had a legal commitment to reduce national debt as a 
percentage  of  GDP  from  61%  to  50%  in  2018  and  we  are  a  Government,  we  are  here  to 
govern, we are here to decide, we are here to respect also our commitments. I have very little 
leeway for investment because we are totally indebted. I can’t go beyond the ceiling of 60%. 
This is one of the reasons why you will find in the Budget un appel du pied au secteur privé, 

 

 

43 

because then to really reach the situation where we can invest, create employment, we need 
to rely more and more on two things: the private sector and FDI.  And that is what we are 
doing.    But  it  is  not  true  to  say  also  that  the  Capital  Budget  has  gone  down.  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth has explained it already.  In fact, when  you take it in the global PSIP, the Public 
Sector Investment Programme, you will see that the Capital Budget, in fact, has gone up. So, 
we are on an uptrend, but we are limited by the debt servicing. I needed to explain this for 
people to understand why we have said that we have a projet de société pour l’île Maurice de 
demain. Because it is a real projet de société.  

The second aspect which everyone will understand more and more now, is that we 
had to put order in the  house. Many of us here would never have dreamt, in their wildest 
dream, that we could discover coffers full of money in the ex-Prime Minister’s house, and 
indeed it was there. It shocked the whole nation. The BAI saga which just exploded in our 
face  as  Government  can  kill  a  Government.  Hon.  Bérenger  is  right  to  say  that  it  is  an 
earthquake  event,  and  if  we  had  not  moved  fast  enough  at  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  we 
would not be seated here today. I am saying it bluntly; we would have inherited one of the 
gravest  social  crises  in  the  country,  with  220,000  Mauritians’  money  in  the  bank  or  their 
money  in  insurance  policies.  So,  we  took  the  right  decisions  and  we  were  very  lucky.  At 
times,  you know,  I become superstitious.  I say:  My God! How did we  manage to do it? I 
lived it. We spent nights. We went to bed at 5.00 in the morning, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, 
Sunday, because we had to save the country. That was the issue. The issue was not to save us 
as politicians, but to save the nation, to save the country and to bring peace at a moment of 
great turmoil. This is why Sir Anerood Jugnauth was totally right to ask me.  He said ‘go 
ahead, put order now, because it would be too late later’.  Now we are saying that, in fact, he 
was totally right. The Ponzi scheme has screamed out of the country; financial system and 
people’s money - Rs21.6 billion. Those figures are so big that people just can’t imagine what 
it is. I can tell you today that if this scheme had lasted more than a few months more, it would 
have been Rs30 billion and the social crisis would have been still bigger. So, we took the 
right decision, and we avoided a major social crisis.  

I return back to the question of putting order in the house. I really feel that we have 
been given a broom to clean. The elections results have given this Government a broom to 
clean and believe me, at times, I get the impression that the shit is all over. But we are doing 
it. We are doing it because there is no way out for our children, for the future. This is, in fact, 
the mission, our mission today, and more specially Sir Anerood Jugnauth and I.  We are a 
transition. I am not here to stay, he is not here to stay, we are here only to ensure a transition 

 

 

44 

for the youth coming after us who can take over a cleaner country and Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
said it, he wanted to leave a legacy of which the nation would be proud. This is our ambition, 
this  is  our  mission:  transparency.  Without  transparency,  there  will  be  no  survival  for  the 
society.  

This concept, which has developed through the years, that life is a jackpot is not in 
our tradition; Opposition or Government. Our forefathers never came here to teach us that life 
is a jackpot, if you know how to play it, you win. We have been sent here to work hard and to 
earn what we have. So, people will understand that the cleansing process is also putting order 
in this ‘mentalité zougadère’ that developed in the country because some people made a lot 
of money giving licences. Who gave those licences? Me? Sir Anerood Jugnauth? Who was 
the Minister of Finance who dished out gaming licences that within one year ensured that the 
whole country was inundated with the gaming houses? Not this Government. That happened 
in 2007 and 2008 and it is all a question of who pays the most - mafia, prostitution, drug and 
game, betting - and those who got those licences paid a lot for this. To whom? I don’t know. 
But I can only become suspicious when I realise that those people took decisions which were 
detrimental  to  the  culture  of  this  country.  We  never  gave  even  once  in  between  1983  and 
1990!  We never gave even one licence to people who wanted to open casinos and gaming 
houses because we knew that this was contrary to a culture of work. We are very coherent.  

Now we are saying, we are telling people we want to do away with this culture of 
‘zougadère’ because this is not compatible with development, long term  growth. We want 
work, discipline, investment and effort. And this is the new society we are proposing to our 
children; a better Mauritius, a cleaner Mauritius, a place where it is safe to live. This is ce 
projet de société that we introduced.  It  was made up of, number one, ‘nou tous lor même 
bateau’, we are all Mauritians, one nation, one family, and I still believe that we all belong to 
the  same  nation,  the  same  country,  the  same  God,  that  we  have  the  same  right,  the  same 
responsibility in this country, and I practise it every day. We are all one. This is number one.  
Number two: a fair chance for all. A fair chance for all is the SMEs project. We bring 
in the money; we take the risk as Government to ensure that young people who have ideas 
can go ahead with their projects. We have also ensured that we protect the most vulnerable. 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth spoke about it. Would you think it is a pleasure for a Prime Minister, a 
Minister of Finance, to come and just dish out Rs7 billion? The former Government was right 
to put the question: where will we find this money? We all remember when we said that the 
gap between the rich and the poor has grown to an extent where social peace is threatened, 
and we said that we are going to increase the pensions of those who are the most vulnerable, 

 

 

45 

240,000, and the quantum of increase ranging from 38% to 53% was something that is very 
hard to digest financially. This is why, at that time, Government said ‘Impossible, they will 
never pay it, they are bluffing around’ and that we will have to increase VAT if we have to 
pay this type of money.  

Madam Speaker, we did it. Parole donnée, parole sacrée.  On the very next day of the 
results, we ensured that before New Year les 240,000 pensionnés got their treizième mois at 
the  new  rate.  This  is  something  that  people  think  it  is  easy,  but  it  meant  that  the  Social 
Security people, the postal system, had to work overtime all through Christmas.  But we did 
it. Parole donnée, parole sacrée. We gave a compensation where the Rs600 went to those 
who most needed it, those who have to buy rice and flour and oil. We did it.  Rs7 billion!  
And we came with a no tax budget on top of this.  At times, we might say, “My God!  How 
did they do it?”  We did it, and I am telling Members today that we are going to stick to the 
figures we have mentioned as far as budget deficit is concerned.  We will do it.  So, this is the 
background to a new way of living.  On one side, putting order in the house; on the other 
side, creating the right environment for long-term growth. 

There have been some questions, I think, which need explanation - the depreciation of 
the rupee.  I understand that laymen might confuse depreciation of the rupee and appreciation 
of  the  US  dollar.    But  when  economists  come  and  speak  of  the  depreciation  of  the  rupee 
when, in fact, it is the US dollar going up, then we are fooling around and misguiding people. 
What has happened is that, since a few months, the US dollar, which was in a bear 
market, suddenly moved into a bull market and just moved up nearly 20%.  And on the cross 
rates  -  forget  the  Mauritian  rupee,  we  are  nothing  -  when  the  US  dollar  appreciates,  other 
currencies  depreciate;  it’s  a  balance.    So,  what  has  happened  is  that  the  euro  went  down 
tremendously  as  a  counteraction  of  the  appreciation  of  dollar.    This  is  what  we  witnessed 
here.  We have witnessed the Mauritian rupee moving according to this balancing process of 
one currency going up and the other going down.  Do we have a control on this?  Can the 
Bank of Mauritius, the Government have any impact on the exchange rate of the US dollar 
and the  euro? We don’t have it! Not even central banks have it, because there  are market 
forces  which  are  so  powerful  that  no  one  can  fiddle  and  play  with  it.    So,  we  should  not 
confuse  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar  with  the  accompanying  depreciation  of  the  euro  or 
other currencies and the Mauritian rupee inclusive.   

Now, does the exchange rate of the rupee today the right one?  No!  I have the report 
of the IMF here - the latest one - which says that, according to their model, the Mauritian 
rupee is over evaluated by 7% on average. 7%!  The former Government has claimed to have 

 

 

46 

a strong rupee.  Well, the strong rupee has led to this report from the IMF saying that now, 
today,  the  Mauritian  rupee  is  overvalued  by  7%.    Now  people  come  and  say  as  if  we  are 
depreciating, we are devaluating the money, that prices will go up in the country, people will 
suffer,  that  what  we  have  given  with  one  hand  we  will  take  with  another.    It’s  all  shit!  
Excuse me the word!  It is not true at all, Madam Speaker.  We have not fiddled with the 
Mauritian rupee and we can’t fiddle with it also.  But, on the other side, if we want proof of 
it, let us look at the rate of inflation. 

If the rupee is depreciated, it must reflect on the price of products.  It must reflect on 
the  inflation  rate.    There  is  no  way  out  of  it.    This  is  depreciation.    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister just said that inflation rate, as calculated by the CSO for 2015, will not go beyond 
3%.  3%, c’est de l’enfantillage!  I have lived through periods of 15, 13, 12% of inflation, and 
in Mauritius the average rate of inflation inbuilt in the system is between 6% and 7%.  This is 
the inbuilt rate of inflation in our country since independence, and today it is down at 3%.  
So, I can tell the House if inflation rate by the end 2015 moves to 6-7%, then I will have to 
come back to this Assembly and say: “Sorry, I did a mistake.” 

But I can tell you one thing.  There has been no depreciation.  Therefore, we will not 
see any rise in inflation during the forthcoming months.  As long as we are within the band of 
3 to 4%, I am comfortable with it.  It is not a lesson I want to give.  I just want to be fair.  I 
want to be honest on this issue. We should stop speaking about depreciation of the rupee as if 
the Government is fiddling with our currency and trying to pull it down.  This is not true.  
Anyway,  the  Central  Bank  has  only  one  means  of  intervention  now.    If  the  Central  Bank 
wants to intervene, it is by injection of forex when there is pénurie of forex, and we are not 
doing it because when we do it, what happens, our reserve goes down.  Intervention is good.  
Russia did it a few months back, and Russia now is paying the price.  All its forex has gone in 
intervention to protect the currency.  So I wanted to make it clear.  On this issue which has 
been taken up quite often and related to inflation, I wish to tell the House that this is not the 
truth, and that on top of this the IMF - and I trust their figure - said that the Mauritian rupee is 
over evaluated by 7%.  That’s how it is. 

There are other issues which I would love to take, but most of them have been taken up 
by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  himself.    The  question  relating  to  parrainage  is:  have  we 
surrendered our responsibility as a Government at the social level?  Have we given away our 
power to help the poor?   Because with the parrainage, what  we are saying is that we are 
inviting  those  big  companies  which  have  a  big  CSR  Fund  to  use  part  of  their  funds  pour 
devenir des parrains, prendre en charge des poches de pauvreté.   Now, does this mean that 

 

 

47 

we are surrendering our right?  How can we?  How can a Government surrender its right to 
the poor when this Government just increased massively pensions; approved a compensation 
which  is  quite  high?      And  I  need  to  say  that  some  companies  in  the  private  sector  had 
problems  paying  those  Rs600.    So,  no  one  can  come  and  say  that  we  are  not  fair.    My 
colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education,  has  approved  and  is  going  ahead  with  the  full 
payment of school fees; university fees, school fees for SC and HSC are being taken care of 
100% by this Government. 

No one will ever be able to prove that we have been unfair towards the poor.  At times 
people might think that we are too caring.  People use to tell me: “Your social programme is 
too ambitious.”  But we have done it!  So, the question of parrainage goes far beyond what 
you see. 

You know, the moment that the huge conglomerate goes down to the cités, mix with 
those people, live with them, help them, I can tell you one thing; at psychological level, at 
social level, society will evolve.  The rich man will understand that he has got to share. This 
is what we are doing with this project.  Parrainage means I am le parrain of a child, l’enfant 
n’a pas d’argent pour aller à l’école, I pay for it.  This is le parrain.  Donc, le parrainage in 
this case is something that goes well beyond the money.  It goes towards a new relationship 
between the rich and the poor; reducing the psychological gap between those who have and 
the  have-nots.    In  ten  years,  you  will  find  a  much  better  relationship  between  those  two 
extreme classes because the rich would have learnt that there are poor people in this country 
that need protection.  And they will do it! 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition put the question whether there are companies which 
have come ahead to parrainer.  You will be surprised!  We haven’t worked for it recently, 
but just two days after the Budget, we already had eight companies which have come and are 
very excited.  You will be surprised.  The CSR, as it was, was looking like an obligation put 
on the private sector.  You do this because I want it this way!  This is not the way to do when 
it comes to solidarity, to charity.  Let the person himself decide what is his own priority.  

So, when we said CSR will no longer give guidelines and we spoke of parrainage, you 
will be surprised. One group - probably the second most important group in Mauritius - came 
and said they will take not one but four poches de pauvreté, and they are so mathematical, 
scientific in their mind, they are working out a programme now to ensure that this programme 
is  copied  by  others,  where  the  private  sector  can  intervene  in  a  scientific  way  to  improve 
quality  of  life  in  those  poches  de  pauvreté.  I  love  this  project!  I  love  this  project  because 

 

 

48 

those who will do it love to do it. I have met them and they are very excited, and those who 
will benefit from it will also be very happy down the road. It is a beautiful project, a beautiful 
experience on humanity; we are all one. So, I had to explain this question of parrainage just 
to remove the concept that, maybe, we are relinquishing our responsibility as a Government. 

I now come to the question of global situation. Since 2007, before the first financial 
crisis, and as Chairman de la Commission économique, I came out each week with only one 
thing,  I  said  “We  are  in  a  deep  financial  crisis.”  In  2014,  I  said  “The  crisis  is  not  over.” 
Because  no  country  has  managed  to  kick-start  the  economy!  They  have  injected  billions, 
trillions of dollars. All central banks: Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Reserve 
Bank of America have injected the maximum money you can put to kick-start it. It did not 
work. The reality is that the world economy is exactly at the same place as it was in 2008. 
The only difference is that now the world is more indebted. Global debt has doubled because 
so much money has been used.   So, when someone tells me that bright days are coming, I 
say ‘Let’s pray. I wish also that it be this way!” But at times, you know in life, as Minister of 
Finance, I have to plan for the worst and hope for the best, not the contrary. I cannot promise 
the best and then have to face the worst. So, I had to tell the nation that the world economy 
has not come out of the blues, has not come out of the woods, that if we had in Mauritius this 
black swan event - I talked of black swan event in the Budget. Well, the BAI Ponzi scheme is 
a black swan event. No one could expect that if it would just explode like this; it happened 
and  tested  the  capacity  of  this  Government  to  stand  to  it  and  we  are  doing  it.  We  also 
appreciate that there are people who are suffering. Yes, when people suffer, we suffer also. 
We are politicians, left, right; we are all! When we find suffering, we all suffer. Put it this 
way! 

So, I cannot change my views on the trend the world economy is going. I say we had 
to prepare ourselves for the worst.  This means that any black swan event which happened in 
Europe, in Japan, anywhere, and black swan events are incredible and impossible to predict. 
The world first huge depression of 1929 started in Austria. A small bank collapsed in Austria 
and the chain reaction was that the world banking sector nearly collapsed. Therefore, let us 
not think that things are easy. We are living in a world which has gone to extremes in terms 
of financial management. I prefer to prepare for the worst. If you find me working for food 
security, I do it because I think we have to prepare for the worst. When I say that we have to 
increase regional cooperation to the maximum now, it is because I feel that probably further 
down the road we might need it. If I am wrong, that’s okay. But then, what’s wrong if we 

 

 

49 

have better relations with our neighbours? Nothing wrong! If we have better food, better bio-
food! My friend and colleague, the Minister of Agro-Industry is going on a vast project of 
bio-food. Self-sufficiency! Depending less on the external world for survival is also one way 
of governing. I prepare for the worst, I do not prepare for the best.  

People say that I dream, well, my dreams also are limited in scope! Magic - there is 
no  magic,  except  hard  work.  People  say  how  we  managed  to  pay  the  pensions,  the  wage 
compensation, no tax-budget, we did it! It is just sheer hard work and imagination, that’s all 
and  then  a  Government  that  is  committed.  If  you  find  this  Government  here,  it  is  a 
Government that is committed and it is one. 

When the BAI Ponzi burst last week, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself was the first 
to go sur le front and said that this is a Ponzi scheme where the nation will lose Rs25 billion 
at least. The very same day, the whole Cabinet stood behind the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, and 
the next day all the MPs came and they were all behind the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. So, we 
are very unified on these issues; we are really one team; one team looking in one direction. 
So, I do not fear the future, because I think we can deal with it. But we understand suffering. 
We cannot promise anything. 

I know of friends, of family members, of people who have put money in this bloody 
scheme. Gold ‘machin truc’, what they call! One person died in Roches Noires last night and 
we  attribute  it  to  the  fact  that  this  old  lady  had  put  all  her  money  in  the  scheme.  So,  the 
criminals who are behind this project, and I say it again, this has been masterminded, there is 
no accident there! A sprint plan robbery! Nothing less than this! I can tell this officially that 
this  company,  that  Mr  Rawat  drained  his  own  companies.  People  should  know  about  this. 
People should know that in the last weeks, when people were buying those famous policies, 
you give one million, you are happy, you sign the papers. The chap takes the one million, 
puts it in the bank. The money disappeared the same day! The same day the bank debited the 
account and transferred it elsewhere! There is not one penny left of this Rs21.6 billion! This 
is criminal! High treason!   It is pre-planned, masterminded by crooks and the game is not 
over. We have seen the tip of the iceberg only. Mr Dawood Rawat would never have been 
able  to  do  what  he  has  done  without  accomplices  at  the  top  of  Government.  I  won’t  give 
names, but you all know of whom I am speaking here. There has been complot in this whole 
business. It will come out! If institutions could not work at times, it is because institutions 
were forced to take decisions from further up. So, we suffer with the suffering of people. 

50 

 

 
But how can we deal with it? We are not magicians. Rs21.6 billion, that’s a lot of 
money! So, the Government, even being good hearted, being compassionate, we cannot say 
we will refund, we do not have this money. So, we are in a situation which is difficult. I have 
to say, it is a difficult situation. For the country, it is a trauma. I was telling the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister well before that, that this event will be traumatic on the social structure.  And we are 
very lucky. In Trinidad and Tobago, in the Caribbean countries, it has destroyed the economy 
for years to come, destroyed the investment appetite of people. Even now! Trinidadians are 
even now living under the trauma of BAI Ponzi scheme in 2009.  In Trinidad, same thing! 
Those people, masterminded, copied what has been done in Trinidad, did it in Mauritius in 
the  same  way,  same  scheme.  They  are  doing  the  same  scheme  now  in  Malta;  Malta  will 
explode also. They are doing the same thing in Kenya. They are international crooks.  That’s 
what  they  are!  Using  poor  people’s  money  for  all  their  follies  and  all  their  ego,  buying 
castles, buying incredible apartments everywhere and thinking that they are at the top of the 
world. Criminals! 

(Interruptions) 

So, my message today - and the Prime Minister said it also - is that we are here to 
manage. We are Government and we are here to govern and manage. But I need to tell the 
nation that this is a difficult time for us. The nation should also realise one thing.  Had we not 
moved as fast as we moved within 48 hours - not one week - if we had not moved as quickly 
as we did on Thursday last, I am telling you, today, there would have been bloodshed in this 
country!  You  can’t  take  the  money  of  220,000  people,  confiscate  their  money  and  expect 
them to stay at home! So, we saved this country. This Government saved this country of an 
incredible social crisis and we are all proud we did it! 

(Interruptions) 

But now we have to manage with a difficult transition. We only hope to come with 
laws for the down the road.  That will prevent such horrible things to happen because I would 
not like my children one day to suffer from what those victims today are suffering through a 
very small fault of theirs. They have been stolen of all their reserves and all their savings. I 
am looking at them.  I will probably give this afterwards.  I have looked at the breakdown of 
the 24,000 plus something of people who have lost the Rs21.6 billion. There are VRS people. 
VRS are poor people, VRS are old people who spent their life working in sugarcane fields 
and chose VRS to get a lump sum; 5,000 have lost totally their money! Retraités, probably, I 
must  check  the  figure.    There  are  more  than  7,000  retraités  who  have  depended  on  this 

 

 

51 

investment for their own survival. They are now totally at a loss! This is criminal! What has 
been done by those people is high treason for them and  I weigh my words.  High treason 
means high treason, working against national interest. That is what they have done. So, we 
have a deep feeling for those who have lost their money. At the same time, I am just saying 
that we are dealing with drama of huge proportion. Very few governments have dealt with 
things like this and I say it because I believe in it, we are blessed. This nation is blessed. It is 
only a blessed nation which could have come out of this crisis in the way we did. We are all 
seated here; we have ensured social peace in the country. The word ‘blessed’ means totally 
what  it  means.  I  think  that  the  nation  méritait  un  gouvernement  qui  trouverait  la  solution 
d’une crise aussi profonde.  

So, I have gone a little out of the Budget, but this is what I had to say. I would like 
also to reassure my friends on both sides of the House that we have taken note of all their 
suggestions. Their criticisms are not criticisms. I take them as proposals. So, we are looking 
into them for the best of our country, for the best of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you. 
Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY - CONSIDERATION OF VOTE ITEMS  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I have to make an announcement for the guidance 

of hon. Members for the proceedings of the Committee of Supply.  

I wish at the outset to remind hon. Members that in accordance with Standing Order 
73 (3), discussions at the Committee of Supply are confined to the details of the Estimates 
and cannot refer to the general principles of Government policy and administration.  

We will consider the Vote items of the schedule to the Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. 
III of 2015) and the Estimates 2015, that is, for the first six months in the first instance for 
one Ministry and we will continue with the same Ministry and consider the Vote items of the 
schedule to the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill  (No. IV of 2015) and the Estimates for the 
one year 2015-2016.  

Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that I have under Standing Order 73 (4) 
had  consultations  with  the  Chief  Government  Whip  and  the  Opposition  Whip,  and  I  have 
decided  to  allot  10  minutes  per  Vote  item  for  each  Ministry  for  the  consideration  of  the 

 

 

52 

schedule to the Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Estimates 2015 for the 
first six months and 20 minutes for the consideration of Vote items of the schedule to the 
Appropriation (2015 -2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) and the Estimates for the one year (2015-
2016). Of course, I will be flexible where the need arises.  

I thank you. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 
(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

Vote 1-1 Office of the President (Rs24,200,000) (January-June 2015) was called and 

agreed to. 

Vote 1-2 Office of the Vice-President (Rs6,900,000) was called. 
Mr Uteem: I just wanted to have a clarification on item 22030 - Rent under the Vote 

Office of the Vice-President. I just wanted to have an indication where…   
The Chairperson: Which page is the hon. Member referring to?  

Mr Uteem: Page 2. 
The Chairperson: Yes.  
Mr Uteem: Under item 22030 - Rent, I just wanted to have an indication from the 

hon. Prime Minister what does that relate to. Where is the Office of the Vice-President? 

The Prime Minister: According to information that I have, it is provision made for 
payment  of  rent  of  Rs70,000  per  month  for  the  Office  of  the  Vice-President  situated  at 
Avenue Farquhar in Quatre Bornes to the landlord, Mr D. Ramful. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the same Vote, the last item 
22900 - Other Goods and Services, there is an amount of Rs300,000 that is budgeted. May 
we know the details? 

 The Prime Minister: The provision represents uniforms, personal secretariat of the 
retired Vice-President, payment of monthly allowance of one Clerk and one Typist and one 
Office Attendant employed by the retired Vice-President, hospitality and ceremony, expenses 
in connection with all hospitality and functions held by the office of the Vice-President. 

Mr Hurreeram: On page 2, under item 22030, can we know since when this building 

is being rented and whether tender procedures have been followed? 

53 

 

 
The Chairperson: We have gone back to item 22030 – rent! 
The Prime Minister: Well, the first contract was signed for a period of three years 
with  effect  from  03  January  2009  and  was  subsequently  renewed  from  January  2012  to 
December 2014. The contract has again been renewed from January 2015 to December 2015. 
Vote  1-2  Office  of  the  Vice-President  (Rs6,900,000)  (January-June  2015)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 1-3 National Assembly was called. 
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Chairperson, on page 3, Capital Expenditure, item 31112(421) 
- Upgrading and Refurbishment of Old Government House.  This is the present building. I see 
that there is a vote of Rs1.5 m. Can I make a request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, if his 
Government can open an enquiry on the whole  procedure for the refurbishment of the old 
Government House? If a list can be provided with details - later on - of the whole project, 
how much has been spent, whether there was a resident engineer, and if he is still in office. 
This  building  is  leaking  everywhere  because  of  the  quality  of  work  and  even  in  the 
Committee room of the Public Accounts Committee we have a lot of problems.  Ti bizin servi 
seau. We had to use all sorts of containers to keep water. Can I make a request to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, at least, to have an official enquiry being done into the whole project and 
give us the information? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  it  is  again  a  contract  where  somebody  from  BAI  is 

involved. We will certainly have an enquiry. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Yes, on the same expenditure, that is, under item 22900 - Other 
Goods and Services, there is an amount of Rs4,285,000 which is budgeted. Can we know the 
breakdown of this figure? 

The Prime Minister: It is provision for uniforms which is Rs35,000; catering Rs 4 m. 

and hospitality and ceremony Rs260,000. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22100 – Publications  and Stationery. I note that the amount 
budgeted is pro rata to last year. So may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 
there is any reduction in the cost of printing now that we are using iPad and everything is 
communicated paperless. We are supposed to move towards paperless. Has there been any 
amount of reduction to take into account that we are not getting all the printed copies now? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  it  is  provision  for  printing  and  stationery  Rs750,000; 

publication Rs175,000. This is all I have. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On the last item on Capital Expenditure, under item 31132(401) e-
Parliament Project. We see that there is no amount budgeted this year. Maybe we have to 

 

 

54 

understand that this project of e-Parliament Project has been fully implemented and that it is 
now fully operational? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the information that I have here is that provision has been 
made for implementation of Parliamentary Documentation Management System Phase II in 
the estimates for 2015/2016. The project is completed. 

Vote  1-3  National  Assembly  (Rs94,800,000)  (January-June  2015)  was,  on  question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote  1-4  Electoral  Supervisory  Commission  and  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission 

was called. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22040 - Office Equipment and Furniture, may I know from 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the Electoral Supervisory Commission has an office and, 
if they don’t, why are we paying for equipment and furniture? 

The Prime Minister: The information that  I have here is for office equipment and 
furniture.  The  provision  for  purchase  of  office  equipment,  purchase  of  one  photocopier, 
office furniture, office tables and chairs.  It is found in the Max City Tower. 

Mr Uteem: Since they are in Max City Tower, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister why there is no provision for rent. Are they staying free of charge there? 

The Prime Minister:  Maybe free of charge. 
Vote  1-4  Electoral  Supervisory  Commission  and  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission 

(Rs1,200,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner was called. 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  5,  under  item  22120.016  –  fees  icw 
Elections, Rs10 m. is earmarked. Can we have some details whether this is the whole amount 
earmarked for the Municipal elections or is it a part of the expenditure to be incurred? 

The Prime Minister: Provision is for the training of staff, fees in connection with the 

registration of electors and fees in connection with elections. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under item 22030 - Rent, there is an amount of Rs5.4 m.  May we 

know for which building and where is it?  Is it rented and to whom is it paid? 

The Prime Minister: It is for rental of Max City building - for office premises at 3rd, 
4th,  5th,  6th  and  9th  floors;  for  FV  Property  Management  Ltd  and  the  amount  payable  is 
Rs71,490  per  month  for  25,952  square  feet  at  Rs29.83  cents  per  square  foot  inclusive  of 
service  charge  of  Rs4.02  cents  per  square  foot  and    Fatima  Building  is  especially  for  the 
storage of ballot boxes.  The owner is Sunni Cutchi Maiman Society, the Jummah Mosque, 

 

 

55 

and the amount payable is Rs97,538 per month for 3,896 square feet at Rs25.03 per square 
feet inclusive of service charge of 0.88 cents per square feet. 

Vote  1-5  Office  of  the  Electoral  Commissioner  (Rs45,400,000)  (January-June 

2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 1-6 The Judiciary was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  I  refer  to  item  28211  -  Transfers  to 
Non-Profit institutions, Council of Legal Education. I see that there is an amount earmarked 
of Rs900,000. It was Rs1,696,000, it is now down to Rs900,000. Is there any provision made 
in the Budget for hardship cases for people who are sitting for the exams head by the Council 
of  Legal  Education  or  does  that  relate  only  to  the  operation  expenses  of  Council  of  Legal 
Education? 

The Prime Minister: I am sorry, I don’t have the information. There is no mention of 

hardship case here. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  7,  item  31112.415  Non-Residential  Buildings  -  Upgrading  of 
Courts,  there  is  an  item  (a)  Supreme  Court,  there  is  an  amount  of  Rs3  m.  earmarked  for 
upgrading of Supreme Court. So, may  I know from the hon. Prime Minister what was the 
total contract value of the improvement?  Because I see there is Rs7,933,000 already spent in 
2014 and now, there is Rs3 m. budgeted for the six months. Can I know the total contract 
value? 

The Prime Minister: I don’t have that information here. All that I have is according 
to Government Programme 2015-2019.  All court premises will be renewed and upgraded to 
ensure better services to all stakeholders. An amount of Rs3 m. has been allocated for the 
initial phase of the project in relation to the Supreme Court project. There is a New Court 
House and other courts also for which provision has been made in the estimates. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  I  refer  to  item  22060  - 
Maintenance, on page 6. Last  year, the actual figure for the whole  year was Rs16,837,000 
and for the six months this year an amount of Rs13,004,000 has been budgeted. That is, if 
you roll it for the whole year, it would be Rs26 m. May I ask the hon. Prime Minister why 
there  is  this  increase  in  maintenance,  if  we  can  have  the  breakdown,  and  what  is  being 
maintained? 

 

 

56 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  see  the  heading  is  provision  for  maintenance  of 
buildings, provision is made for the maintenance of all District Courts in respect of minor 
works, purchase of materials, payment for treatment against rodents, termites and other pests 
at Supreme Court and all District Courts. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  At  page  7,  last  item,  Upgrading  of  ICT  Infrastructure  –  e-Judiciary 
Project - Phase 1. There is an amount of Rs10.8 m. scheduled for the coming six months.  
May  I  know  whether  this  e-Judiciary  Project  relates  only  to  the  Supreme  Court  or  is  that 
going to be extended to other courts? 

The  Prime  Minister:  From  the  information  that  I  have,  for  Upgrading  of  ICT 

Infrastructure … 

Mr Uteem: Which court are we talking here, is it limited to the Supreme Court or 

 (Interruptions) 

extended to other courts? 

The Prime Minister: The Supreme Court. 
Vote 1- 6 The Judiciary (Rs255,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

The following Votes (January-June 2015) were called and agreed to - 

Vote 1-7 Public and Disciplined Forces Service Commissions (Rs29,600,000)  

Vote 1-8 Public Bodies Appeal Tribunal (Rs5,900,000)  

Vote 1-9 Office of Ombudsman (Rs5,800,000) 

Vote 1-10 National Audit Office was called. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Chairperson, at page 11, item 22180 - Overseas Travel (Mission 
and Capacity Building). Being given that in the past questions have been raised in this House, 
may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  who  now  determines  who  will  be  going  on 
overseas mission for the National Audit Office? 

The Prime Minister: Well, this is for travel, mission and capacity building. I wonder 

whether we can question that. 

The Chairperson: The question is who can determine. 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

57 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On item 22120 - Fees, there is an 

amount of Rs1,655,000 budgeted. May we have the details and breakdown of these fees? 

The Prime Minister: Provision includes rent, fees for training, for local workshops 
and  training  of  the  audit  staff  for  their  growth  and  development  in  connection  with  new 
approaches  and  methodologies.  Fees  to  consultant  for  consultancy  services  required  in 
connection  with  testing  of  slabs  and  other  materials  taken  during  the  audit  onsite. 
Subscription fees to professional bodies, subscription fees paid by technical staff, inspection 
and audit fees. The financial account of the National Audit Office is independently audited by 
KPMG to demonstrate transparency and good governance of the state of the financial affairs 
of the office. 

(Interruptions) 

Vote 1-10 National Audit Office (Rs66,600,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote  1-11  Employment  Relations  Tribunal  (Rs11,100,000)  (January-June  2015)was 

called and agreed to. 

Vote  1-12  Local  Government  Service  Commission  (Rs12,700,000)  (January-June 

2015)was called and agreed to. 

Vote 1-13 Independent Commission Against Corruption was called. 
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Under item 26313.026 - ICAC of which 
Staff Costs, Rs67,500,000, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether there has 
been any reduction in staff cost from what used to be the staffing costs of ICAC? 

The Chairperson:  It is on page 14.  I will ask the hon. Members to say which page is 
it when asking they are asking questions, please. Page 14, item 26313.026 - ICAC Staff Costs. 
The  Prime  Minister:    I  have  been  told  it  is  not  the  practice  to  reply  to  questions 
regarding ICAC.  However, the sum of Rs36 m. provided is to pay for construction cost of 
new  ICAC  Headquarters  at  Réduit,  acquisition  of  furniture  and  other  machinery  and 
equipment.  

Mr Ameer Meea:  On page 14, item 26323.026 - ICAC (a) New ICAC Headquarters 
(Reduit).  Last year there has been an amount of Rs138 m. that has been spent and this year 
for the six months, another amount of Rs22 m. is budgeted.  May we know what would be the 
total cost of the ICAC Headquarters?  Is this Rs20 m. amount the full amount that has been 

 

 

58 

budgeted or there will be more amount to be budgeted for this Headquarters in the coming 
years? 

The Prime Minister:  According to the figure I have here is Rs36 m.  
Mr Uteem:  On the same item, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 

this new building will be used exclusively by ICAC or for other purposes?  

The Prime Minister:  From what I know it is for ICAC.  I don’t know of any other 

users. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    If  I  may  come  back  to  my  previous  question,  that  is,  Rs36  m. 
budgeted for the six months.  Is this a last payment, the amount that is being budgeted or this 
building will have further costs that we will be budgeting? 

The Prime Minister:  I hope it is the last one.  
Vote  1-13  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption  (Rs123,000,000)  (January-

June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  1-14  National  Human  Rights  Commission  (Rs9,100,000)  (January-June  2015) 

was called and agreed to.   

Vote 1-15 Office of the Ombudsperson for Children (Rs4,600,000) (January-June 2015) 

was called and agreed to.   

Vote 2-1 Prime Minister’s Office was called. 
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On page 18, item 22030 - Rent.  The 
actual amount spent is Rs1.8 m. for 2014 and now there is no amount budgeted.  May I know 
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister this rent is related to what office? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Provisions  were  made  for  payment  of  rental  of  office  space 
occupied  by  the  Commission  for  Democratisation  of  the  Economy  and  Drug  Assets 
Forfeiture Office at Ken Lee building for a total amount of Rs1,805,000.  No provision has 
been  made  as  from  January  2015  because  the  Drug  Assets Forfeiture Office  has  been 
transferred to the Emmanuel Anquetil building which is a government building.  Moreover, 
the Commission for the Democratisation of the Economy has been disbanded and no longer 
exists.  Nita! 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr  Bhagwan:   Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  20,  under  the  same  vote,  the  National 

Security Services .. 

The Chairperson:  Which vote item, please? 
Mr Bhagwan:  Last vote, item 22090.002 - National Security Services.  

 

 

59 

The Chairperson:  It is the Recurrent Expenditure, item 22090.002. 
Mr Bhagwan:  Sub-head 2-104.  We have been asked to vote …. 
The Chairperson:  Page 20. 
Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  20,  item  22090.002  -  National  Security  Services.    Madam 

Chairperson, are we going item by item or sub- head? 

The Chairperson:  No, because it is the same vote. 
Mr Bhagwan:  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether it would still be the duty 
of  the  NSS  -  since  the  coming  of  this  Government,  at  least,  to  cease  these  bad  habits  of 
following political opponents?  Even in front of my office daily they are standing there.  I 
have to feed certain of them.  I am not saying it in a very bad manner, but these people are 
harassing us, unfortunately.  

The Prime Minister:  I will see to it that it is no longer so.   
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  At page 19, under Sub-head 2-102, the 

last item 22900 - Other Goods and Services .901 National Day Celebration.  

The Chairperson:  Which item are you referring to? 

Mr Uteem:  Item 22900, the last line. 

The Chairperson:  Item 22900. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 22900.901 - National Day Celebration, Rs26m.  May I know from 
the  hon.  Rt.  Prime  Minister  a  breakdown  of  what  this  Rs26  m.  refers  to  and  who  were 
awarded the contract? 

The Prime Minister:  I have no details.  

The Chairperson:  The National Day Celebration. 

The Prime Minister:  I don’t have the breakdown. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  18,  item  22180  - 
Overseas Travel (Mission and Capacity Building).  Last year there was an amount of Rs37 m. 
and this year there is an amount of Rs15 m. which has been… 

 

 

The Chairperson:  Page 18! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  I said it!   

60 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  It is page 18, item 22180. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 18, Overseas Travel, there is an amount Rs15 m. which has 

been budgeted this year.  May we know the details of this overseas travel? 

The Prime Minister: It is such a long list.  I will table it. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea, please do not make comments.  Allow the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister to reply.  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  One  last  question.  On  page  19,  item  22900.901  -  National  Day 

Celebration, a sum of Rs26 m. is being earmarked. 

Madam Speaker,  I am not challenging this Rs26 m. What I am telling the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister is the way MPs were treated during the last ceremony at the Champ de Mars.  
It is a shame.  We are being asked to vote Rs26 m. Je me fais le porte-parole de tous les 
membres  de  l’Assemblée  nationale ;  je  pense  aux  députés  and  even  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition.    The  way  we  were  treated  at  that  particular  function  is  a  shame  for  us  as 
Members  of  Parliament;  even  Ministers.  So,  can  I  make  a  request  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister to make sure that he gives instructions to the Minister concerned  – perhaps he is 
new,  il  n’est  pas  habitué  –  and  the  officers,  so  that  for  the  next  celebration,  Members  of 
Parliament, even the Leader of the Opposition and Ministers are treated in a most respectful 
manner and according to established protocol? 

The Prime Minister: We will look into that. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  20,  item  26313  –  Extra-Budgetary  Units  –  .020  Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority.    I  see  that  there  is  a  budget  of  Rs11,800  m.  earmarked.    So,  may  I 
know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this takes into account the recommendations 
of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  that  was  set  up  to  look  into  horse  betting  and  other  things; 
whether the recommandations have been factored in when reaching that figure? 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  No,  I  do  not  think  so.  All  that  I  have  here  is  a  completely 

 

61 

different matter; not that. 

Mr  Ameer  Ameea:  On  page  19,  item  22900.909  –  Expenses  related  to  Counter 

Terrorism Unit.  May we know the number of staff in this Unit and who heads this Unit? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not have the number of staff.  Apparently there are 

about 13. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  19,  one  but  last  line,  item  22900.929  –  Equal  Opportunities 
Tribunal.  We are voting an amount of Rs200,000 and last year it was Rs376,000.  May I 
know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  how  many  cases  have  been  heard  by  the  Equal 
Opportunities Tribunal so far? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not have that information. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  22,  Government  Information  Service,  item  26313.048  – 
MediaTrust Fund, Rs1 m.  We have heard recently there have been elections at the Media 
Trust.  Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether Government has appointed its 
representative and whether the Chairperson has been appointed - the name of the Chairperson 
- and whether this Media Trust is now operational? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  think  the  hon.  Member  must  come  to  the  House  with  a 

specific question.  I do not have the information. 

The Chairperson: Time is over on this question! 

Vote 2-1 Prime Minister’s Office (Rs1,540,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 2-2 National Development Unit was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  26,  item  22120.008  –  Fees  to  Consultants  icw  Studies  and 
Project Preparation.  May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to which study the sum 
of Rs2.5 m. relates? 

The Prime Minister: Here, I have provision for fees to Chairperson and members of 
the Board and Committee; provision for the payment of fees to Chairperson and members of 
Departmental Bid and Bid Evaluation Committees, fees for training, provision for training of 
officers in  ICT  and other short courses,  fees to  consultants in connection with studies and 

 

 

62 

project  preparation,  provision  for  fees  payable  to  consultants  for  project  preparation, 
monitoring and supervision, refund of subscription fees to professional bodies. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  27,  item  31113  –  Other  Structures,  there  is  a  series  of 
breakdown of works to be carried out, budgets for different works by NDU.  May I ask the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is prepared to lay a copy in respect to each of these items, 
whether  it  is  construction  of  roads,  construction  of  drains,  construction  of  cemeteries,  and 
what are the areas that will be affected by these items of expenditure? 

The Prime Minister: We will have to see it in due course, because we do not have all 

the final items. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 27, item 31113, there is a series of sub-items, including 
upgrading of roads, upgrading of sports facilities, maintenance and cleaning of drains, and 
upgrading of cremation grounds and cemeteries.  Compared to last year, where there has been 
an amount of Rs250 m. that was spent, in this six-month Budget, there is only an amount of 
Rs20 m. which is budgeted.  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister why this drastic decrease 
in the amount that has been budgeted for drains, roads and repairs? 

The Prime Minister: There are projects which have not been completed and payment 

will be made in the future. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  27,  NDU  –  Capital  Expenditure  -  022  –  Construction  of 
Cremation Grounds/Cemeteries. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether, from 
that vote of Rs4 m., there are ongoing works with regard to the construction of incinerators 
and whether incinerators still fall under the jurisdiction of the NDU? 

The Chairperson: On page 27 - Construction of Cremation Grounds/Cemeteries. 
The  Prime  Minister:  Yes,  what  I  see  is  provision  required  for  the  payment  of 
contractors for the construction of cremation grounds and the ceremonies undertaken in the 
previous year. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  On  the  same  page,  same  item  31113.403  -  Upgrading  of  Roads.    Last 
year, there was Rs168 m. and for the six months, the sum of Rs168 m. has gone down to 
Rs10 m. So, even if we had half of it, it would still be around Rs80 m. and not Rs10 m. May I 
know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister why is there such a drastic fall in the upgrading of 
roads? 

 
The Prime Minister: This is provision required for the payment of contractors for the 

 

63 

upgrading of roads undertaken in previous years and which are still ongoing. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank  you, Madam Chairperson. On page 27, item 31113.015 - 
Construction of Drains, where last year there has been an amount of Rs412 m. spent and this 
year there is an amount of Rs250 m. which has been budgeted. May we have a breakdown, a 
list where those drains will be built? If the Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not have it, he can 
circulate it. 

The Prime Minister: I will try to get the information and circulate it. 
Vote 2-2 National Development Unit (Rs388,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 2-3 Police Service was called. 
Mr Ameer Meea: On page 29, under item 22030.007 – Rental of Lines for CCTV and 
other Security Network Systems there is an amount of Rs34 m. May we have some details as 
to  which  company  this  amount  is  being  paid  and  whether  there  have  been  any  tender 
procedures? 

The Prime Minister: They are Mauritius Telecom, MCML, CEB in connection with 

CCTV (closed-circuit television) and digital radio communication system. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  30,  item  31132.401  –  e-
Government projects (b) Crime Occurrence Tracking System (COTS) - Phases 1 and II. Last 
year, the amount spent was Rs106 m. and this year the amount budgeted is Rs30 m. May I 
know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  what  the  Crime  Occurrence  Tracking  System 
relates to and whether it is operational? 

The Prime Minister: The implementation of e-Business Plan for the Traffic Branch. 
The first phase of the implementation of the business for Traffic Branch which consists of the 
Penalty Point Management System is already implemented.  

The contract of the implementation of the Penalty Point Management System was 
awarded to Leal Communications and Informatics Ltd. for the amount of Rs8,744,877 on 04 
September 2012. The system is operational. 

Mr  Uteem:  I  am  sorry,  hon.  Prime  Minister,  but  that  was  not  the  question.  The 
question  was  in  relation  to  item  (b)  and  not  (a).  Item  (b)  relates  to  Crime  Occurrence 
Tracking System. 

The Chairperson: Crime Occurrence Tracking System! 

64 

 

 
The Prime Minister: Crime Occurrence Tracking System, Phases I and II? 
The Chairperson: Phases I and II, yes. 
The  Prime  Minister:  The  first  phase  was  completed  in  December  2012  and  the 
system is operational. Well, the second phase started in 2014 with the project value of Rs191 
m.; the contract for the second phase was awarded to FIL in 2014. The amount provided is 
for payment to be made by 30 June 2015. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  30,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31112.012  -  Non-Residential 
Buildings - Construction of Police Stations. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - 
because I cannot see it - whether any provision has been made for the construction of a Police 
Station in Vallée Pitot? 

The Prime Minister: There is no mention of that. 
Vote 2-3 Police Service (Rs4,276,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 2-4 Government Printing (Rs62,600,000) (January-June 2015) was called and 

agreed to. 

Vote 2-5 Meteorological Services was called. 
Mr Bhagwan: On page 37, item 21110 - Personal Emoluments.  Since we are talking 
about the Meteorology Department, can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what is the 
situation regarding the radar which was to come from Japan, which was to be installed?   Can 
we be informed of the situation? 

The Prime Minister: There is no mention of it. 
The Chairperson: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not have it. 
Vote  2-5  Meteorological  Services  (Rs38,900,000)  (January-June  2015)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 2-6 Prison Service was called. 
Mr  Uteem:  On  page  38,  item  31112.011  -  Construction  of  Prisons,  I  see  that  no 
amount  is  budgeted  for  the  construction  of  prisons.  Do  I  take  it  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister that the three prisons have already been completed and delivered to satisfaction? 

The Prime Minister: There is no mention of it; no construction. 
Vote 2-6 Prison Service (Rs353,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

The Chairperson: We will now take the 2015-2016 Budget! 
Vote 1-1 Office of the President was called.  

65 

 

 
Mr Uteem: I have one question at page 2 regarding item 22180 - Overseas Travel 
(Mission and Capacity Building). I see that there is no amount budgeted. I know that for the 
other Ministers, there is Central Government. 
The Prime Minister: It is centralised. 
Mr Uteem: Even the President will have now to go to the Ministry of Finance to get 

the approval. 

Vote 1-1 Office of the President (Rs60,600,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 
Vote 1-2 Office of the Vice-President (Rs14,100,000) was called and agreed to. 
Vote 1-3 National Assembly was called. 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  5,  I  would  like  to  talk  under  item 
Speaker  itself.  Madam  Chairperson,  for  years  we  have  been  asking  for  an  office  for  the 
Leader  of  the  Opposition.  We  were  told  that  when  this  building  will  be  refurbished,  there 
would be a good space in the refurbished building to be used by the Leader of the Opposition. 
Just to inform the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that even the Chairperson of the Public Accounts 
Committee has an office. I think it is right time now that the Leader of the Opposition has an 
office.  He has to work and receive Members of the Opposition. Can I know from the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister if provision can be made now within the refurbished building for an office for 
the Leader of the Opposition? 

The Prime Minister: I think it is a good question. We will look into that. 
Mr Ameer Meea: On page 5, under the first item 21110 - Personal Emoluments, my 
question is that, compared to 2014, all the posts, that is, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Leader of 
the Opposition, there has been an increase.  From 2014 to Estimates 2015/16, that is, on the 
amount that has been budgeted, only for the post of the Leader of the Opposition the amount 
has remained the same. Even for the Chief Government Whip, it has increased.  He is very 
lucky; for the Opposition Whip as well. My question is: why for all these posts, the budget 
that has been budgeted for next year has increased, but only for the post of the Leader of the 
Opposition it has remained the same? 

The Prime Minister: The information that I have just been given is because it is a flat 

(Interruptions) 

salary. 

Vote 1-3 National Assembly (Rs170,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 
Vote  1-4  Electoral  Supervisory  Commission  and  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission 

was called. 

66 

 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  9  item  21110  -  Personal  Emoluments  of  the  Electoral 
Supervisory Commission.  The last report of the Electoral Boundaries Commission was made 
by that Commission and it was not applied. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
whether  the  Commission  is  working  on  a  new  Boundaries  Commission?    From  what  I 
understand, it is every five years. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether there 
would be a new report? 

The Prime Minister:  I have no answer because it is a policy matter. 
Vote  1-4  Electoral  Supervisory  Commission  and  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission 

(Rs2,200,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner (Rs64,700,000) was called and agreed 

to. 

Vote 1-6 The Judiciary was called. 
Mr Uteem: On page 13, under item 21110 - Personal Emoluments, I see that there is 
only a marginal increase in the emoluments from 2014 onwards. May I know from the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  any  amount  has  been  budgeted  for  persons  who  would  be 
employed by the Court of Appeal that has been announced in the Government Programme? 

The Chairperson:  Item 21110  - Personal Emoluments. 
The  Prime  Minister:  In  the  context  of  the implementation  of  the  judicial  reforms, 
five new posts of Justices of Appeal have been created for the Court of Appeal, which will be 
the highest Appellate Court sitting permanently in Mauritius with the Judicial Committee of 
the Privy Council remaining as the last Court of Appeal. 

Mr Uteem: On page 15, under item 27 - Social Benefits, sub-item 27210.010, Legal 
Assistance in “in forma pauperis”, I see for 2015/2016 there is only a marginal increase in 
the amount of “in forma pauperis”, whereas the previous Government had announced that 
there would be actually a substantial increase. I think up to Rs5 m. was announced in one of 
the budgets for increase of “in forma pauperis”.  So, may I know whether this has been taken 
into consideration and there is a reduction now in the amount that is going to be voted? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: This is according to previous claims made in the previous year. 
Vote 1-6 The Judiciary (Rs600,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 
The following votes were called and agreed to - 

1-7   Public and Disciplined Forces Service Commissions (Rs85,500,000)  
1-8   Public Bodies Appeal Tribunal (Rs12,300,000)  
1-9   Office of Ombudsman (Rs10,700,000) 

 

 

67 

1-10   National Audit Office (Rs142,800,000) 
1-11   Employment Relations Tribunal (Rs23,200,000)  

1-12     Local Government Service Commission (Rs31,000,000)  

1-13    Independent Commission Against Corruption (Rs201,000,000) 

1-14    National Human Rights Commission (Rs34,300,000)  

1-15    Office of Ombudsperson for Children (Rs10,400,000)  

Vote 2-1  

  Prime Minister’s Office was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  It  is  in  relation  to  the  Information 

Department. I am just going to… 

The Chairperson: Yes, but which page, please? 

Mr Uteem: At page 54. 

The Chairperson: Yes, page 54, which item? 

Mr Uteem: It’s actually on page 55. 

The Chairperson: Page 55. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 22100 - Publications and Stationery.  May  I know from the hon. 
Prime Minister what is the criterion that is now being used by the Prime Minister’s Office to 
allocate publication of official public notices in different newspapers?  Because I understand 
in the past there were some newspaper groups which complained about being discriminated 
against. 

The Prime Minister: Well, we have had no time to look into that yet. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I come to page 55, Media Trust Fund. 

The Chairperson: Which item? 

Mr  Bhagwan:  item  26313.048  -  Extra  Budgetary  Units,  Media  Trust  Fund, 
Rs2,700,000.  For  the  first  six  months,  I  asked  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  the 
Chairperson  has  been  appointed;  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  asked  me  to  come  with  a  PQ.  I 
think we can have an answer from the officers, whether we had election from the journalists, 

 

 

68 

whether Government has appointed its representative and the Chairperson must be appointed 
by Government. 

The Prime Minister: Not yet. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  59,  item  28211.015  -  Transfers  to  Non-Profit  Institutions, 
Muslim Family Council.  May I know from the hon. Prime Minister whether he has received 
any request to increase the budget allocation to the Muslim Family Council? 

The Chairperson: On page 59, item 28211.015 - Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions, 

Muslim Family Council. 

The Prime Minister: We are looking into all this. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  50,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31121.801  -  Transport 
Equipment,  Acquisition  of  Vehicles,  there  is  an  amount  of  Rs20,500,000  which  has  been 
budgeted.  May we have details of this amount? 

The Chairperson: On page 50, item 31121. 

The Prime Minister: Defence and Home Affairs - Rs1,500,000; Security Division - 

Rs12 m.; National Security Service - Rs7 m. 

Vote 2-1 Prime Minister’s Office (Rs3,587,200,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 2-2 National Development Unit was called. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  65,  there  is  Construction  of  Drains,  and  an  amount  of 

Rs300 m. has been budgeted. 

The Chairperson: On page 65. 
Mr Ameer Meea: On page 65, item 31113.015 - Construction of Drains… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: On page 65, item 31113.015 - Construction of Drains. 
Mr Ameer Meea: May we have the breakdown of this Rs300 m, a list where those 

drains will be constructed? 

The Prime Minister: Unfortunately, I don’t have the details. 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

 

 

69 

Mr  Bhagwan:  At  page  65,  NDU,  I  will  take  the  whole  vote,  starting  from 
Construction of Roads. We have a total amount which is earmarked for several sub-items, but 
each  constituency  will  have  its  share  unlike  it  was  before.    Before,  there  were  certain 
constituencies - I won’t mention names, No. 9 and others – which were having the lion share 
of all the votes with regard to each items, be it cemetery, be it lighting, be it roads. So, can I 
make a request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, under this item, that each and every constituency 
will be on the same footing? 

The Prime Minister: We will try to be as fair as possible. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 65, I have a specific question 
in  regard  to  item  31113.006  -  Other  Structures,  Construction  of  Sports  Facilities.  May  I 
know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  any  amount  has  been  budgeted  for  the 
construction of a football playground in Tranquebar?  Because land had been acquired for 
this purpose.  So, is any sum budgeted in 2015/2016 for the construction of the playground in 
Tranquebar area? 

The Prime Minister: Well, from the information that I have here, this provision is 
required  for  the  payment  of  contractors  for  on-going  construction  of  sports  facilities 
undertaken by the NDU in previous years. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 65, item 31113.415 - Other Structures, Maintenance and 
Cleaning  of  Drains,  there  is  an  amount  of Rs20  m.  which  is  budgeted  for  maintenance  of 
drains. As the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is well aware, in my constituency there is the problem. 
Canal Anglais is leaking and is causing much havoc. May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
whether an amount has been budgeted to repair this Canal? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t have that information.   

(Interruptions) 

I have been told that Tranquebar has been completed, and Canal Anglais is for the future. 

Vote 2-2 National Development Unit (Rs945,000,000) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

Vote 2-3 Police Service was called. 
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Chairperson, on page 68, item 21110.001 - Commissioner of 
Police.    Can  I  take  it  upon  this  vote  to  ask  a  question  which  I  have  been  asking  over  the 
years? Je veux faire le porte-parole de tous ces motards de la police. Durant ces dernières 

 

 

70 

années  -  motorcycles,  la  selle  en  bas,  guidon  la  haut  -  all  these  poor  Police  Officers  and 
traffic officers are having kidney problems and back pain. Can I make a request to the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister to make a formal directive to the Commissioner of Police, so that, firstly, 
all these police officers could have medical treatment and check-up and, secondly, to replace 
all these motorcycles’ boards from China ?  

The Prime Minister:  Well, we will try to do our best.  
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:    Madam  Chairperson,  I  am  not  sure  whether  I  am  reading  it  correctly. 
Under page 68, item 21110 - Trainee Police Constable, there is nothing budgeted.  Yet, In 
Post 2014 – 1,627, Funded 2015/16 - 1,300, and then there is no sum allocated.  I just wanted 
to understand that. 

The Prime Minister:  Well, they have already been appointed as Constables.  
The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea:  On page 73, item 31112.012 - Construction of Police Stations, there 
is an amount of Rs8.5 m. budgeted.  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this sum 
includes the construction of a new Police Station at Trou Fanfaron? 

The Prime Minister:  Yes.  I had mentioned it in my speech. It is there. 
Vote 2-3 Police Service (Rs7,881,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 
The following votes were called and agreed to - 
 2-4   Government Printing (132,400,000) 
   2-5   Meteorological Services (Rs360,500,000)  

Vote 2-6 Prison Service was called.  

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  90,  item  21110.001  -  Commissioner  of 
Prisons, can  I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the Melrose Prison is fully 
operational and whether there will be a modification to send a few of the VVIPs who have 
been named in the Police cell there?  

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I would have waited for the inauguration, but the answer is yes.  

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Under the same item, on page 93, (a) New Prison at Melrose, the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister told us that all the prisons had already been completed, but I see that there is 

 

 

71 

an additional amount of Rs47 m. earmarked for the New Prisons at Melrose.  May I know 
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what this Rs47 m. relates to? 

The Prime Minister:  Based on the Construction Price Index (CPI) issued by Mauritius 
Statistical Office, provisions for fluctuations are made for the Eastern High Security Prison 
Project at Melrose.  Out of the Rs47 m. earmarked for the EHSP, Rs35.5 m. are meant for the 
payment of the remaining balance pertaining to fluctuations in cost of materials based on the 
CPI. The remaining Rs11.5 m. would cater for preliminaries and general cost for one-month 
extension period, additional works, including plumbing, enhancement of the Hindu and Tamil 
temples, signage for security management system, and fibre optics. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  92,  under  item  22900  -  Other  Goods  and  Services 

Rs93,200,000, may we know the details and breakdown of this sum? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  it  is  provisions  for  uniforms,  catering,  sports  equipment 
and  materials,  medals,  prizes  and  rewards,  to  cater  for  clothing  and  bedding,  enhanced 
earning for detainees, animal feed and miscellaneous. 

Vote 2-6 Prison Service (Rs825,500,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

The Chairperson:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

  At 4.27 p.m the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 5.04 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
Vote  3-1  Deputy  Prime  Minister’s  Office  &  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External 

Communications was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: External Communications, Madam Chairperson, page 40. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  but  I  will  be  asking  question  on  page  40.  Item  26313.047  -  Mauritius  Tourism 
Promotion Authority – MTPA. 

The Chairperson: Which page hon. Bhagwan? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Page 20, Item 26313.047 - Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority – 
Operating Costs. First of all, can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether, in the 

 

 

72 

amount budgeted for the coming year, there is a vote for the rebranding again of the MTPA? I 
have heard somewhere that that is the case. 

Secondly,  concerning  the  representative  in  UK,  whether  in  that  vote  we  can  know 

who is the representative in UK representing the MPTA. What is his salary? 

Thirdly,  the  Mauritius  Golf  open,  a  sum  of  Rs12,500.  Can  we  know  when  the 
activities are scheduled, whether it will cover only one golf course and whether it will be held 
in several official golf courses? 

 I ask, on the same item, a last question - 26313.089 Tourism Authority.  There again, 
I think, according to my opinion, that that Unit was doing quite a good job some time back 
when the hon. Deputy Prime Minister first initiated that project. Can we know whether there 
will be a rebranding of that Unit?  When I say rebranding, I mean, if you look after all the 
lorries  and  vans  of  the  Unit,  I  think  it’s  for  the  purpose  of  the  environment.    They  are 
responsible for the environmental matters concerning tourism sector. I think there is urgent 
need for the rebranding and relooking of the status of all the vehicles, even the uniforms of 
that Unit. Can we know whether this sum of Rs35 m. is earmarked for such expenses, as I 
mentioned? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, our representative in UK is Mrs 
Hills Balfour. I do not have the amount for them. The golf this year will be at Bel Ombre and 
next year somewhere else, but this year it is at Bel Ombre. There is no amount for rebranding, 
but we may tweak the existing branding exercise that had been done. As far as the Tourism 
Authority is concerned and the Cleaning Unit, they have new T-shirts and stuff, and certainly 
we can make sure that the vehicles are cleaned, painted and repaired. 

The Chairperson Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  40,  item  22900  -  Other  Goods  and  Services  of  which 
Implementation of Blue Flag Programme.  May I know from the Deputy Prime Minister what 
is the Blue Flag Programme? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The Blue Flag is a programme that aims at upgrading 
and maintenance of beaches, in particular water quality, but I understand it includes 33 items 
that have to be up to standard so that the beach gets a Blue Flag.  We have taken consultants 
for  that,  and  they  are  preparing  the  report.  There  are  three  beaches  to  start  with,  and  the 
analysis  of  their  needs  will  be  done.  There  will  be  the  maintenance  and  upgrading  of  the 

 

 

73 

beaches and then an NGO will look after the beaches, so that they maintain their quality - 30 
beaches. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  the  same  page  40,  Madam,  Capital  Expenditure  vote  31, 
Acquisition of Non-Financial Assets, item 31113.016 - Construction of Touristic and Leisure 
Infrastructure  -  Tourism  Signage.  We  are  being  asked  to  vote  Rs600m.    Can  the  Deputy 
Prime Minister inform the House whether a survey has been made … 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I wish it were Rs600m!  
Mr Bhagwan: Rs600,000.  Can the Deputy Prime Minister inform the House whether 
a list of where the signage will be placed has been made and also where the construction of 
infrastructure has been done?  With regard to item 31113.431 - Zoning of Lagoons, can we 
know whether the area on which we shall be spending this Rs1,300,000 has been identified?  
Can we be provided with a list of all places where this zoning has been effected? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I understand that, for the signage, routes 1 to 7 have 
been done, and now it is route 8 which is basically linking up all the other routes.  So, these 
routes 1 to 7 have already been done. 

As  far  as  the  other  question  relating  to  the  zoning  of  lagoons  is  concerned,  I  will 
circulate the list of the lagoons that have been zoned (swimming, mooring, speed limit, ski 
lanes, snorkelling, etc.) to the Members. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Item number 22120 – Fees, there is an amount of… 
The Chairperson: Which page? 
Mr Ameer Meea: There is only one page; page 40.  Item 22120 – Fees, there is an 
amount of Rs530,000.  May we have a breakdown of these fees, their purpose, and to whom 
it is being paid? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: It’s fees in connection with staff proceeding on training 
overseas.    The  payment  of  fees  to  the  members  of  the  Department  Bid  Committee  is 
Rs30,000, short training courses for staff up to June 2015 is Rs500,000. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mohamed! 
Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you  very  much,  Madam  Chairperson.    With  regard  to  the 
Zoning of Lagoons again, item 31113.431, could the hon. Deputy Prime Minister inform us 
whether with regard to the money that is earmarked - I have not seen the document yet - there 
is any provision made for a place where boats or small boats will moor instead of mooring 
everywhere? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Not yet, but this is something that we must look into.  I 
would like to inform the House, Madam Chairperson, that at present for all licenses that are 

 

 

74 

delivered  for  private  crafts,  people  are  not  supposed  to  moor  in  the  sea  now.  They  are 
supposed  to  take  it.    But  that  is  not  always  respected  obviously.    Commercial  crafts  are 
moored in the sea.  But we are looking at, maybe, marinas and stuff like that. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Under  Personal  Emoluments,  item  21110,  is  there  any  provision  made 
under that item for the monitoring of the zoning of lagoons?  Is there any staff dedicated to 
ensure this? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: We have an issue with monitoring and enforcement, as 
I mentioned in my speech earlier.  I believe it is the Tourism Authority which does that.  We 
only have four enforcement officers, and that is far insufficient.  So, we will be recruiting 
new enforcement officers.  We can actually pass a law and regulation, but if we don’t enforce 
it, it is pointless. 

Vote 3-1 Tourism (Rs286,500,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

Vote 3-2 External Communications was called. 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: Item number 22030 – Rent. 
The Chairperson: Which page? 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  There  is  only  one  page,  Madam,  for  External  Communications; 

page 41.  

The Chairperson: Yes, but please, for the benefit of the Deputy Prime Minister. 
Mr Ameer Meea: Page 41, for Rent, there is an amount of Rs1.8 m.  May we have 

some details to whom this rent is being paid, what is being rented, and the area rented? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  have  all  this  information.    The  rent  is  payable  to 
BELEM Ltd. for office space of 6,225 square feet at Rs40 each, at first floor, Newton Tower.  

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: Thank you.  Under Personal Emoluments, item 21110, may I know from 
the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether in the budgeted amount, fees payable to officers to 
sit  on  public  companies  like  Air  Mauritius  Ltd  and  other  parastatals  which  fall  under  the 
aegis of that Ministry are also provided? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  No,  if  there  is  a  Board  or  parastatal,  the  fees  to  the 

Board members are paid by that organisation and not by the Ministry. 

Vote  3-2  External  Communications  (Rs8,000,000)  (January-June  2015)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

75 

 

 
Vote 3-3 Civil Aviation was called. 
Mr Ameer Meea: On page 42, item 22060 – Maintenance.  For last year, 2014, there 
has been an amount of Rs36 m., and for January to June, that is, for half of a year, there is an 
amount  of  Rs31  m.  There  has  been,  therefore,  a  substantial  increase  in  the  amount  of 
maintenance. May we know what is the reason for such an increase? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I think, firstly, maintenance is not regular; it can occur 
at intervals.  Provision is made for maintenance of DCA buildings, Rs700,000; maintenance 
agreements  for  equipment  used  for  provision  of  air  navigation  services,  Rs24  m.; 
maintenance agreements for radio and electronic equipment, Rs4.6 m., and repairs and spare 
parts for 18 vehicles, Rs255,000. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Mr  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  42,  item  28217.001  - 
Insurance, may we know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to whom the insurance is paid 
and what objects are being insured? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  It  is  paid  to  SICOM  Ltd,  I  am  told.  The  insurance 
covers  the  Department  of  Civil  Aviation  providing  air  traffic  services  -  52.5%  of  the 
payment.  It also covers the operations of the CAA at AML and in Rodrigues.  It covers legal 
liabilities also for body injury and property damage and aviation liabilities. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  42,  under  item  21110  - 
Personal Emoluments, may I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister who is the Director 
of the Civil Aviation at the moment? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The post is vacant.  We have declared the post vacant 
to  the  PSC,  and  we  expect  it  to  be  filled  any  time  now.    But  there  is  obviously  an  acting 
person. 

Vote 3-3 Civil Aviation (Rs139,100,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

The Chairperson:  We’ll take Budget for 2015-2016. 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External 

Communications. 

Vote 3-1 Tourism was called. 
Mr  Quirin:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  97,  under  item  26313.089  -  Tourism 
Authority of which (b) Green Hotels and Eco-Tourism, there is a sum of Rs10 m. earmarked 

 

 

76 

for  Green  Hotels  and  Eco-Tourism.    Can  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  give  us  some 
details concerning this project? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  The Tourism Authority (TA) has, with the financial 
assistance  of  MID,  developed  a  scheme  to  support  tourism  businesses  to  implement  eco-
project at the level of their enterprises. The scheme provides matching grants equivalent to 
50% of certification cost. 13 applications have been received so far by the TA and are being 
examined. So, we are paying 50% of the certification costs for green tourism. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  97,  Tourism  Authority  again,  under  item  26313,089,  (c) 
Tourism Sites Cleaning and Embellishment Programme. When we are talking about tourism 
sites, there are also gardens, for example, the Balfour Garden which is within the trajet of the 
operators and the Marie Reine de la Paix. Can I make a request to the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister that, whilst preparing the list for the coming  year for the uplifting of the tourism 
sites, places like Balfour Garden and Marie Reine de la Paix site be included and to have a 
fresh look of the inception itself with professionals, so that these sites can be upgraded in the 
national interest? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Chairperson,  firstly,  I  must  say  that  all  the 
people are out on the coast. Now people are not at Curepipe; everybody is out on the coast. 
Secondly, we mustn’t do work that, supposedly, somebody else has been contracted to do. 
We find that there are lots of places like the beaches, etc., which already have contractors. So, 
what we have done, we spoke to all the contractors of the public beaches, and we have been 
very strict with them as to their responsibilities. Thirdly, we are also helping in some areas 
where we feel that, maybe, Municipalities do not have enough staff and we can provide. For 
instance, we are helping in Pamplemousses Gardens at the moment. But I will also look at the 
Balfour Garden and see what can be done. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  the  very  same  item.  The  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister has answered ‘partially’. I just wanted to know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister 
- there is a grant of Rs17 m. budgeted - how the coordination is done with the NDU, with the 
Ministry of Environment and how do you identify and prioritise where to put that money? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: As I have mentioned, the first thing is to see whether 
there is a private contractor that has been assigned the area for cleaning and he is not doing it.  
Obviously, we would not do it; we would go back to the private contractor and ensure that he 
does it. There are other works that we can do. There are sites where it has been allocated to 
local government staff and the Municipalities maybe. If the work is not done properly, they 
complain that they do not have enough staff or they don’t have enough means, so we help 

 

 

77 

out. So, these are our priorities. Obviously, the Ministry of Environment does its work; we 
meet regularly. I met regularly with my colleague, the Minister of Environment, to see where 
we can help. We obviously avoid the double counting of work, and we do not do the same 
work. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  97,  under  item  26313.047  -  Extra  Budgetary  Units  - 
Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority, (b) Promotion and Destination Support, there has 
been a substantial increase of Rs175 m. compared to last year. May we have some details as 
to why there is such an increase and whether there are new markets that are being targeted? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I can’t see any increase. In fact, what the hon. Member 
should  understand  is  that,  previously,  some  of  the  amounts  were  paid  directly  from  the 
National Resident Fund (NRF), etc. For instance, on China, a lot of money was paid directly 
from the NRF. Now, it is all back to the Ministry and, in fact, it is the Ministry which makes 
the payment. In fact, there is no substantial increase. 

Mr Bhagwan: One last question on Tourism Authority. Can I ask the hon. Deputy 
Prime  Minister  whether,  in  that  particular  vote,  he  can  give  consideration  for  employees 
recruited by the Tourism Authority who were doing a good job? On two occasions, they have 
been laid off for political reasons; one for political reason and the other one when there was a 
remaniement  or  whatever.  There  are  some  poor  people  who  have  been  working  in  that 
Authority as labourers, painters, etc. Some are actually still on contracts and some have been 
laid off. Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister give consideration, within this financial year, to 
put some order, at least, on humanitarian grounds? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, I have given instructions so that 
the older employees are taken on a full-time basis. The hon. Member is right. They can’t stay 
on a contract for five years; it is not fair. So, we have now to put the employees, provided that 
they perform well, on a full-time basis. Obviously, priority will be given to ancestry. 

Mr Bhagwan: But what about those who have been laid off completely? 
The Deputy Prime Minister: We will look at that. 
Mr  Uteem:  Page  98,  item  31113.416  -  Upgrading  of  Touristic  and  Leisure 
Infrastructure.  Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister lay a copy of the tourist infrastructure 
place that has been identified for upgrading and tell us if that includes La Citadelle? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  I’ll circulate it.  We want to convert La Citadelle, with 
the collaboration of my colleague, the Minister of Arts and Culture, into a Centre Culturel for 
artists, painters, etc.; a bit like Covent Garden, like Quai de la Seine. We are trying to turn it 
into something more attractive for the people in Port Louis. 

78 

 

 
Mr  Mohamed:  Again,  at  page  97,  with  regard  to  item  26313.089  –  Tourism 
Authority.  Could the hon. Deputy Prime Minister tell us whether the funds that have been 
allocated will take into account the people – according to my information – who have had 
their  contracts  for  employment  terminated  on  the  reasons  that  they  were  appointed  after 
August 2014?  If the hon. Deputy Prime Minister could give us an explanation as to how this 
has been taken into account in the provision of this budget and why those people have had 
their contracts terminated.  What is the logic? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  It is a good question.  It is Government policy. Madam 

Chairperson, you did mention that we would not deal with policy issues. 

Mr Mohamed: Is this also a policy issue with regard to the one month notice to be 
given to them? This one month had not been  given to them in contractual provisions and, 
financially,  that  has  to  be  looked  into.  Has  provision  been  made  with  regard  to  that 
possibility?  That is not a policy issue. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  am  sure  that  everything  has  been  done  strictly 

according to law. 

Vote 3-1 Tourism (Rs746,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 
Vote 3-2 External Communications was called. 
Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  100,  under  item  32145.120  –  Loan  to 
Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd, may I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister what the 
amount of this loan relates to and what are the terms? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Acquisition  of  state-of-the-art  equipment  by  Cargo 
Handling Corporation Ltd in line with the Mauritius Ports Authority Extension Project to the 
tune  of  Rs1.4  billion,  which  will  be  financed  by  the  Agence  Française  de  Développement 
through  Government,  and  partial  funding  of  two  ship-to-shore  cranes  and  six  rubber  tyre 
gantries.  

Mr Uteem: What are the terms? 
The Deputy Prime Minister: It is a complicated term. The hon. Member can ask a 

specific question, I will provide him. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: Once again, not to try to take the hon. Deputy Prime Minister away 
from what he has just been answering with regard to the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd, 
could he tell us what is being done of the equipment that we are talking about? First of all, 
productivity at the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.  As far as the number of containers that 
are manutentionnés, handled has gone down drastically and thereby affecting the productivity 

 

 

79 

of the company, what exactly could be done - budgetary wise not policy wise - in order to 
encourage productivity and make us a competitive destination? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I must firstly say that, on productivity issue, strategic 
partners are no longer on the table.  It’s not happening. Second thing, productivity  reached 
about 20 cranes moves per hour - 20 to 21.  It has been severely affected by the works that 
are being done at the moment at the port and that is why the productivity is down. Obviously, 
we  want  to  increase  it  back  to  25  or  something  like  in  Reunion  Island,  etc.  So,  once  the 
equipment is there, the dredging has been done  and everything is back to normal, we will 
ensure - because that is essential - that productivity goes to 25 or more. 

Vote 3-2 External Communications (Rs182,200,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 3-3 Civil Aviation (Rs322,700,000) was called and agreed to. 

Vote 4-1 Vice Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Housing and Lands was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  45,  Madam  Chairperson,  under  Sub-Head  4-102:  Social 
Housing Development, item 28212.023 NHDC - Syndics for maintenance of NHDC housing 
estates.  Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, if we can be provided with a list of all the 
syndics that are operational?  

(Interruptions) 

From my information, there are certain, and this can be circulated.  What is the amount of 
subsidy given to each of them?  

Secondly,  on  page  46,  item  31132.101  -  LAVIMS  Project,  can  the  hon.  Minister 
inform the House whether this  LAVIMS Project is fully operational and whether the local 
authorities  can  have  access  now  to  all  the  data  which  have  been  recorded  through  the 
LAVIMS Project? 

Mr Soodhun: We have 41 syndics now existing and the Government spent Rs1.2 m. 

All the syndics are on, and there is a monitoring committee at the NHDC.  

Concerning  LAVIMS,  we  have  just  presented  to  Cabinet.    My  hon.  colleague  has 
rightly pointed out that for the LAVIMS this is a problem that we had since long ago because 
there is no plan.  We don’t know what exactly is going to happen to the development of each 
village and each town.  But now it is nearly available. We have spent a lot of money; we have 

 

 

80 

already asked for a consultant to work on it and very soon the whole country will be provided 
with all the necessary plans. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  46,  last  item,  31410.801  -
Acquisition of Land, there is an amount of Rs200 m. budgeted. May I know from the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  where  are  these  lands  located  and  for  what  purpose  they  are  being 
acquired? 

Mr Soodhun: Item? 

Mr Uteem: Item 31410, the last item. 
The Chairperson: At the bottom of the page. 
Mr Uteem: Yes. I would like to know where they are situated and for what purpose 

they are being acquired. 

Mr Soodhun: We have acquired the land.  We have two different types.  One that we 
already  have,  as  you  are  aware,  is  2,000  arpents,  and  in  this  2000  arpents  we  have  630 
arpents.  In  fact,  now  we  are  acquiring  lands  at  Pointe-aux-Sables  to  cater  for  all  the 
Tranquebar squatters and also in the north and in the south. I don’t have the exact figure, but 
we have nearly about 260 arpents of lands. 
The Chairperson: Hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr Lesjongard: Thank  you, Madam Chairperson. On page 45, under  Sub-Head 4-
102: Social Housing Development, Capital Expenditure, item 28222.015 - Transfer of Title 
deeds of ex-CHA houses. 

The Chairperson: On page 45, at the bottom of the page. 
Mr Lesjongard: Can the hon. Minister report on progress in terms of percentage of 

title deeds that have already been given to those owners, please? 

Mr Soodhun: Since three months, we can say that there are about 642, but for the 

whole I’ll have to circulate it. I don’t have the exact figure. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister  regarding  the  LAVIMS  Project  on  page  46,  item  31132.101  (a)  LAVIMS 
maintenance support, whether it is an ongoing project to the tune of about Rs33 m. per year 
and it is ongoing for years or will that stop somehow, and who are the beneficiaries? 

 

 

81 

Mr Soodhun: I would just like to inform my good friend, hon. Lesjongard, that the 
title  deeds  for  CHA  houses  are  more  than  10,352  out  of  19,442;  the  cases  are  already 
finalised. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 
Mr Ganoo: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Ganoo,  ask  your  question,  then  he  will  come  back  to  the 

previous question. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  45,  Social  Housing 
Development,  last  item  28222.016  -  Transfer  of  Title  deeds  of  land/houses.  Can  the  hon. 
Minister inform the House or give a progress report on the transfer of the title deeds of the 
land and the houses, and why is this sum budgeted? 

Mr Soodhun: Under item transfer of the title deeds, it is provision for notary fees, 

which is about Rs300,000, survey fees, Rs300,000, and affidavit fees is about Rs800,000.  

Concerning LAVIMS, we have an IT system of such magnitude that maintenance and 
support services are of great importance. The hon. Member asked for the details.  For the first 
year, from 2011 to September 2012, we have spent about 900,050 US dollar.  It is equivalent 
to  Rs20  m.;  from  October  2012  to  September  2013,  Rs28  m.;  from  October  2013  to 
September  2014,  Rs29  m.,  and  from  October  2014  to  March  2015,  Rs14.5  m.  LAVIMS 
maintenance  support  contract  has  been  already  renewed  for  a  six  months’  period  and, 
therefore, open tender will be launched. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Reza Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: On page 45, item 28 - Capital Expenditure.  May I know from the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister whether there is any amount budgeted - because I cannot find it here - 
for the construction of social housing? I can see only transfer of deeds.  Is there any amount 
budgeted for construction of social housing for the six months? 

Mr Soodhun: According to information that I have, Rs700 m. are being provided for 
financial  year  2015/2016  for  social  housing.    Out  of  this  amount,  Rs470  m.  represents 
Government’s contribution towards the construction costs of the housing units for those who 
are economically vulnerable.  The remaining amount of Rs230 m. represents a loan which 
will be paid back gradually, as the beneficiaries of the housing units pay the purchase price 
monthly and instalment over time. It is to be pointed out that the payment of the instalment is 
to be made to the NHDC and the latter will remit the amount collected to the Government.  
This is the mechanism. 

82 

 

 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: Thank you very much.  Once again, with regard to the same issue - 
instead of changing vote issue - social housing  construction, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
will recall, Madam Chairperson, that there were approximately 17 people, the squatters who 
were on Old Route Militaire State land. I am informed that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has 
legalised  their  situation  by  giving  all  of  them  letters  of  intent,  and  he  said  it  here  in  this 
august Assembly.  They have to construct on this piece of land that has been given to them, 
which I had located, the Minister has finalised.  Would the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell us 
what provision has been made therein for infrastructural works on these particular plots of 
land  to  make  them  constructible  for  those  17  households  of  Route  Militaire,  Cité  Martial, 
Plaine  Verte?  It  has  to  be  made  constructible.    Therefore,  what  does  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister propose in terms of infrastructural works?  

Mr Soodhun: In fact, I met all the persons concerned, and we are in touch with the 
National  Development  Unit  and  with  NEF  to  see  to  it  how  we  are  going  to  set  up  the 
infrastructure.    These  people  will  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  when  we  are  going  to 
transfer,  it  should  be  as  in  Pointe-aux-Sables  and  other  sites.    The  hon.  Member  can  rest 
assured that we are going to take this into consideration.   

Mr Ganoo: On the same page, social housing development, item 25110.004 NHDC (b) 
Housing Loans.   I see the sum of Rs9,500,000 has been budgeted.  Can the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister tell us what is the purpose of this item and explain what use will be made of that 
money  which  has  been  budgeted  –  especially  as  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  publicly 
recently  expressed  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  NHDC?    I  see  that  only  this  sum  has  been 
reduced.  How many houses are we talking about?   

Mr Soodhun: In fact, this item was meant for the payment of exchange losses arising 
from the fluctuation in the rates of exchange in connection with Malaysian loans and EXIM 
loans contracted by NHDC.  The loans were cleared in October 2013 and October 2014. 

Mr Ganoo: The amount under (b) Housing Loans? 
Mr Soodhun: In fact, the hon. Member will recall the model of the housing units under 
the previous Government, with which I always disagreed.  We are changing all the types of 
houses. In three months’ time, we are going to have another type. The amount earmarked is 
meant for payment of the mortgage and administration fees and interest on loans undertaken 
by the NHDC.  I can give the details if the hon. Member wants: in June - as I mentioned - the 
mortgage  administration  fees  on  Shell  and  Firinga  projects  was  Rs5,200,000;  for  January-
June 2015, it is for interest differential on Malaysian loan.   

 
Vote  4-1  Vice  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands 

 

83 

(Rs364,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 4-1 Vice Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Housing and Lands was called.  
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  109,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  31113.037  -  Off-site 
Infrastructural  Works  for  Social  Housing.    We  are  being  asked  to  vote  Rs23  m.  for 
2015/2016.  I raised the issue last time concerning water drain problem in the new housing 
estates of Chebel and Barkly and other amenities.  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister promised he 
would have a look. Can I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he has had the 
opportunity to look into that problem and let us know what is in the coming budget, at least, 
before delivering the houses to the occupiers and that all the infrastructures will be taken care 
of?  

Mr Soodhun: Yes, Madam Chairperson.  I totally agree with my colleague.  It is a 
fact, but  yesterday itself  I visited Chebel,  and  I  have taken the decision  on the spot that a 
drain must be connected with the existing river to avoid floods. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you  Madam  Chairperson.  Under  Vote  4-1  page  111,  item 
22130.003 - Land Use Planning and Management.  Under sub-item (a), we are providing for 
the studies for reviews of Urban Outline Schemes.  May we know which are the towns that 
are  concerned  for  review,  and  under  sub-item  (b)  Review  of  District  Outline  Planning 
Scheme, may we know which are the Districts concerned under that review?  

Mr Soodhun: All the towns are under review of  five Municipal Councils. 

Mr  Mohamed:  If  I  could  go  back  to  page  109,  item  28222.017  -  Contruction  of 
Social Housing Units. They show capital expenditure again. I know - once again, if I am to 
talk about my constituency - there was a project that had gone quite far in its conception and 
almost towards a stage of implementation. It was the construction of social housing units at 
corner Rue Marata and Penang, in Constituency No. 3, next to Centre de Jeunesse de Plaine 
Verte. That land belongs to Government; there was a former dispensary of the Ministry of 
Health in those days. Madam Chairperson, you remember, we went there together. 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

84 

You  were  there  as  well.  What  is  happening  with  regard  to  that  particular  construction? 
Because the inhabitants of that constituency are expecting that those houses be built on State 
land.  It  has  been  promised  to  them.  I  believe  that  the  National  Housing  Development 
Corporation has also taken the names of people who would be interested to go and live there. 
So, could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell us what provision would be made?  Because this 
is a project that is going as far back as - then, Madam Chairperson, not to embarrass anyone 
who was Minister of Health.  It has been quite a long time and I would hope that under this 
Government it would go ahead. 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, I have to thank the hon. Member. Let me inform him that we 
are going to use all the State land available. This, he can rest assured. By June, next year, we 
are going to build 3,000 units. As the hon. Member is aware, we are going to get rid of all the 
squatters in Port Louis, and we are going to utilise the State land. I am coming to Parliament 
with  a  statement  to  inform  all  the  hon.  Members  about  squatters  in  Port  Louis.  The  hon. 
Member  does  not  have  to  worry.  The  matter  is  under  consideration  according  to  my 
information. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 112, the very last item 31410..801 - Acquisition of Land. There 
is an amount of Rs400 m. scheduled for 2015-2016. May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister whether any provision is made in that Budget for the acquisition and the payment of 
compensation to any inhabitants of Vallée Pitot who will have to be displaced as a result of 
the Ring Road Project? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, regarding Vallée Pitot, the hon. Member knows we are coming 
with a plan where we are going to, at least, remove all the squatters, and those we are going 
to be regularised, we are going to regularise. But it depends on the ring road and it depends 
on the hon. Minister of Infrastructure. He can rest assured, we are going to be in contact, and 
with  the  collaboration  of  all  hon.  Members  concerned,  we  are  going  to  have  the  right 
development. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 112, item 31132.101 - LAVIMS Project. What I can see is 
that for this project, there are payments that are scheduled for several years, 2016, 2017 and 
2018, whereas retention money is planned to be paid for next year, Rs13 m.  My question is 

 

 

85 

whether  it  is  proper  to  pay  this  retention  money  whereby  the  project  itself  is  not  yet  at  a 
completion stage. 

Mr  Soodhun:  In  fact,  there  is  about  Rs13  m.  retention  money.  I  understand  the 

project has already been completed. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  come  back  to  page  109,  Capital  Expenditure,  item  28222.017  -
Construction of Social Housing Units. I see that the sum of Rs470 m. has been budgeted. Can 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister indicate to the House the regions where the social housing units 
would  be  built,  whether  he  has  already  decided  on  a  programme,  and  how  many  does  he 
consider  his  Ministry  or  the  NHDC  will  be  able  to  build  within  the  sum  which  has  been 
budgeted,  that  is,  Rs470  m.?  Since  it  is  construction  of  housing  units,  may  I  ask  the  hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister whether this sum which has been budgeted can be used to rebuild the 
houses made of asbestos in the different CHA Estates which, I think, we all agree should be 
pulled down and should be reconstructed? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, as I mentioned, thanks to the hon. Minister of Finance who has 
been very generous to this country and has given us nearly about Rs1m. that is going to be 
used  for  the  construction  of  about  1,000,  not  only  in  his  constituency,  but  there  are  four 
places that have already been identified. According to me, we have 83 arpents of land that 
have  been  identified.  I  can  circulate  where  exactly  the  land  is  situated.    We  have  to  see 
whether the plot of land is suitable or not, but nowadays we  are sure of 83 arpents where 
1,000 units around the island will be constructed. I am going to circulate it. Those four places 
have been identified in your own constituency.  If you want five, we can discuss. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: At page 109, Capital Expenditure, under item 28222.013 - Rehabilitation 
of Infrastructure of NHDC Estates, a sum of Rs175 m. has been earmarked for this project. I 
would like to know if all the NHDC Estates are concerned by this project. 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, it is meant for the repayment of waterproofing where required.  
We cannot say the whole because we have nearly 41 NHDC Estates. I have been informed 
that  it  is  for  the  wastewater  disposal  system,  waterproofing  works,  repairs  of  cracks  and 
pipelaying  to  the  sewerage  system,  structural  remedial  works  at  Beau  Vallon  and  Camp 
Levieux, La Tour Koenig, and construction for a new stormwater network at NHDC Estates 
at Vuillemin and Batimarais. 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Mohamed! 

 

86 

Mr  Mohamed:  Once  again,  on  page  109,  Capital  Expenditure,  28222.017  -
Construction of Social Housing Units. Out of what is budgeted for in the several years, I see 
on this document that much is being budgeted for the people who are squatters in an area in 
Roche  Bois  called  en  bas  la  rivière.    Could  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  inform  us  how 
much is being budgeted for the people who are squatters in an area in Roche Bois called en 
bas la rivière? These are people who, once upon a time, originally came from Rodrigues and 
were relocated by the Ministry of Housing and Lands at some stage.  New people have come 
into the same structures that had been built en bas la rivière, and people are living in very, 
very poor conditions. What provision is made therein for those people to find new houses?  

May  I  humbly,  Madam  Chairperson,  take  advantage  of  this  situation  to  suggest 
something.  At some stage,  you will recall, there was a programme to move the Mauritius 
Meat Authority to Richelieu, and these several acres of land, therefore,  would be freed up 
within the centre of Roche Bois.   Since it is the policy of Government to use State lands, this 
could be used to relocate those people and also to help the hundreds of people in Roche Bois 
who are still expecting for houses. 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, Madam Chairperson, as I mentioned, we are going to relocate 
all the squatters of Port Louis and I will be very glad to see to it that under the bridge - be it 
Rodriguans  or  Mauritians,  all  are  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  -  we  have  the 
criteria. I am sure that if they don’t respect the criteria, it will be very difficult.  But, in fact, if 
there is any problem, I am in contact with my colleague the Minister responsible for the NEF. 
We are going to see to it whether we are going to have social housing. We are now looking 
into all the State lands situated in Port Louis so that we can utilise them for construction. The 
hon. Member can rest assured, but if there is any request, I will be very pleased to take it into 
consideration. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Lesjongard!  
Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Again,  under  the  same  item  at 
page 111, item 22130.003 – (c) which deals with the Review of National Land Development 
Strategy,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  now  the  Planning  and 
Development Act is fully implemented? That is the first question… 

The  Chairperson:  Have  you  been  able  to  find  yourself  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister? 

Page 111. 

Mr Soodhun: Page 111, which item? 

87 

 

 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Under  item  22130.003  –  part  (c)  Review  of  National  Land 
Development Strategy. Since we are talking of the National Land Development Strategy, may 
I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the Planning and Development Act has 
now been fully implemented?  If the answer is  yes, may  I know from the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister why at item (b), which talks of the Review of the District Outline Planning Schemes 
for the year 2015/2016, where provision has already been made, but also in 2016/2017 and 
onwards, when we should be talking of the preparation of local plans? Does this mean that 
we still have to make provision for the Review of the National Land Development Strategy 
and, at the same time, review the outlined planning scheme? 

Mr  Soodhun:  In  fact,  we  are  going  to  review  the  whole  because  if  we  go  in  the 
previous one, we will still have the big problems, as the hon. Member is aware. Consolidated 
planning legislation is being worked upon and consultation services are being procured. 

Mr Uteem: Page 108 item 31132.401 - Upgrading of ICT Infrastructure. There is an 
amount  budgeted  of  Rs7  m.  and  then  of  Rs3  m.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister what this upgrading relates to and whether the contract has already been awarded to, 
and if so, to whom? 

Mr Soodhun: According to my information, it is meant for the upgrading of the ICT 
infrastructure for the whole Ministry. The present computerised system is in operation since 
2005  and  it  comprises  a  Sun  Fire  V40z  Server  and  application  system  based  on  a 
client/server environment using Oracle 7 RDBMS. 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

You are always condemning the Chair, hon. Ameer Meea! I am proceeding by turn; each one 
has his turn! Okay? 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Chairperson, you are not looking at me! 

 (Interruptions) 

On page 109, item 28222.017 - Construction of Social Housing Units, there is an amount of 
Rs470 m. which is budgeted. May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister if consideration will be 
given to the region of Roche Bois for the construction of social housing, as there is an urgent 
need for social housing there and also that a State land is already available there? 

Mr Soodhun: The other hon. Member had asked the question and you should ask the 
same  because  the  mandates  are  going  to  ask  you  why  you  did  not  ask  the  same  question! 
Anyway, it is the same reply. I am going to take into consideration all the State lands, and we 
have to utilise the State lands instead of just buying land for construction. Why should we go 

 

 

88 

to buy land when we have State land? The hon. Member can rest assured that, as I have just 
mentioned, we are going to be in touch and work together to see where the State lands are 
available. We have enough money; my colleague has already given us Rs10 billion for five 
years, and I hope that for 2016/2017 we will have the same money and we are going to be 
able to build the houses. 

Vote  4-1  Vice-Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands 

(Rs1,800,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 5-1 Vice-Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities was 

called. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  48,  under  Sub-Head  Energy  Services,  item  25  Subsidies, 
25110.008 (b) Subsidy for Renewable Energy Projects, we are being asked to vote Rs10m. 
for (i) Biomass and (ii) Rs23.5 m. for Solar. Can we be provided with a list of projects which 
have  been  identified  for  subsidy?  How  many  projects  which  have  been  completed  are 
actually in the pipeline for each type, be it biomass or solar? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Item 25110.008, yes, Madam Chairperson. First of all, we have 
biomass, we have the Sotravic project at Mare Chicose which is a waste to energy project. I 
can give details if the hon. Member wishes. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Circulate it. 
Mr Collendavelloo: Later I will circulate it.  Then there are solar schemes which I 

will also circulate later, because it is very… 

Mr Bhagwan: What about the Sarako project? 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  am  coming  to  the  Sarako  project.    The  point  is  that  the 
Government subsidy is the price differential between CEB average cost of production and the 
feeding tariff.  The subsidy for Sarako is Rs37 m. per year.  That started in February 2014, 
and it is a contract period of 20 years.  Sarako is generating 20.4 GW hours.  Of course, if the 
hon. Member wishes more information, I will be at liberty to circulate.  There are other solar 
projects, namely Alteo, Sinove, and Harel Mallac.  But they are going to be operational in 
2016. There are ongoing - when  I say ongoing, they are under consideration - projects for 
other  types  of  renewable  energy.  Many  of  them  are  quite  interesting,  which  might  be 
beneficial to the country. 

Dr. Sorefan: May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister … 
Mr Collendavelloo: Quelle page? 
Dr. Sorefan: Page 49, Capital Expenditure, item 31113.002 - Construction of Dams.  
May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether Rivière des Anguilles Dam is on the 

 

 

89 

shelf?  Because I don’t see any amount earmarked.  With regard to Arnaud (Diversion Dam), 
which is a very old project, three or four years ago, I see that there is an amount of Rs41 m. 
earmarked.  Can we get clarification as to why Rs41 m. now?  Concerning item 31113.402 - 
Upgrading of Dams - La Ferme, I do not see any amount earmarked.   But, for last year, there 
is an amount of Rs10 m. which is going to be paid from the Build Mauritius Fund.  Can I 
know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether this is in order to go retro for payment from 
the Build Mauritius Fund, which is set up this year? 

Mr Collendavelloo: When we reach Build Mauritius Fund, we shall deal with this.  I 
have  the  information  for  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund,  but  perhaps  we  could  just  see  your 
questions one by one because you have asked many questions. 

First  of  all,  the  hon.  Member  asked  on  Rivière  des  Anguilles.    Concerning  this 
provision,  I  replied  to  my  very  good  friend,  hon.  Uteem,  when  he  mentioned  this  in  his 
speech.    The  provision  is  only  for  the  consultancy  services,  and  we  will  probably  start 
construction in 2016.  Let me just repeat that the former consultant was terminated and now 
we have to start all over again. 

The contract was an invitation for expression of interest for another consultant, which 
was  launched  in  November  2014.    The  closing  date  was  21  January  2015.    Now,  an 
evaluation exercise is ongoing at the Central Procurement Board. 

The Arnaud (Diversion Dam) has been completed.  The consultant was  Luxconsult 
and the contractor was Sinohydro.  The project value was Rs24 m.  There is a sum of Rs41 m. 
retention money for the Arnaud project. 

I am sure I must have missed one of the matters that the hon. Member has asked.  If I 

did, please remind me. 

Dr. Sorefan: La Ferme. 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  The  question  is  to  rehabilitate  La  Ferme.    We  are  holding 
consultations with the various Ministries before going on to stakeholders. The problem, of 
course, for La Ferme - hon. Ganoo and hon. Lesjongard know that very well - is that there are 
many people who have built houses, some on private land and others on Government land, 
and we can’t rehabilitate the dam unless we ask them to go.  But as much as you will ask 
them to go, they will never accept to go. So, we have to come up with a plan of incentives, 
which includes the building up of a new nice housing project, perhaps in Beaux Songes, for 
relocation and rehousing. 

Mr Uteem: At page 48, item 25 - Subsidies, sub-item 25110.008 - Central Electricity 
Board (a) Electricity Supply and Displacement of Electric Lines/Poles for Hardship Cases.  

 

 

90 

May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether there is any amount budgeted for 
reconnection for those  who have not been  able to pay their bills?  Secondly, what are the 
criteria used to help the hardship cases? 

Mr Collendavelloo: What I have been given as information is that household income 
up to Rs17,500 is the first criterion.  Secondly, you must be the first-time owner of the house.  
So, you won’t fall under any of these two categories. Then, for income less than Rs8,500, the 
grant is Rs65,000; for income of Rs5,500 to 12,500, the grant is Rs50,000., and for income of 
Rs12,500 up to Rs17,5000, the grant is Rs35,000. 

In  2014,  in  Mauritius,  for  low  voltage  extension  and  displacement  of  poles,  the 
amount  was  Rs2,109,000  and  for  Rodrigues  it  was  Rs258,000.    The  amount  voted  is  for 
supply of electricity and not for reconnection. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, on page 48, item 22130 - Subsidies and Surveys, 
sub-item .001, Studies and Project Preparation (a) Energy Planning, (b) Energy Efficiency 
and (c) Power sector study, the sums budgeted  are listed for  each of these three proposed 
studies.  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House who are going to conduct these 
studies and whether the consultants have already been recruited?   

I  have  another  question.  Under  item  22900  -  Other  Goods  and  Services  of  which: 
Removal of Barriers for Solar PV Project, I see that a sum of Rs2 billion has been budgeted 
for this item.  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister give the House a breakdown of this amount 
of money which has been budgeted?  Does that include the programme which the CEB called 
the SSDG?  The programme which was encouraging small households to have a solar PV on 
their roof?  At one time, there were many applicants who had solicited the help of the CEB 
and so on. There was a list of people waiting.  Does that item include the installation of PV 
on individual houses and if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, therefore, could explain the raison 
d’être of that item budgeted? 

Mr Collendavelloo: For Energy Efficiency Management, I participated in a Seminar 
held  by  the  private  sector  on  Energy  Efficiency,  and  the  conclusion  was  that  it  would  be 
opportune  for  the  consultant  to  be  appointed  in  consultation  with  the  UNDP  because  the 
UNDP  is  studying  this.  The  studies  are  on  strengthening  capacity,  and  secondly,  Energy 
Efficiency  Audit  Management.  So,  from  this,  I  conclude  that  the  consultants  have  not  yet 
been  appointed.  Then,  I  need  to  know  about  these  solar  projects.  I  have  the  answers 
somewhere. This is to fund the removal of barriers for solar PV - I understand that was the 
hon. Member’s question - that is, to build capacity in the financial assessment of solar PV 
projects, and then we have got to study the CEB grid. The whole thing is that, according to 

 

 

91 

CEB, their grid cannot take that much solar PV. As you know, a new General Manager has 
just been appointed who is an expert on these matters. He will advise us very soon on what to 
do. I have a new Adviser and they are both working on this upgrading of the grid to a smart 
grid so that we can accommodate as much solar PV energy as we can. 

Apart  from  that,  we  need  to  assist  in  the  placing  of  roof  top  solar  PV  which  will 
encourage households, but more importantly buildings like schools and supermarkets. If you 
take Jumbo, for instance, they are using up a lot of electricity. They could use their parking to 
put  solar  PV  rooftop  tile  and  feed  the  electricity  to  the  whole  centre  commercial  without 
using the CEB.  I don’t want to make a speech, but CEB came up with the brilliant idea on 01 
December  2014  to  charge  people  who  were  doing  solar  PV.  I  have  given  instructions  to 
revoke these stupid regulations as quickly as possible.  I understood from my Senior Chief 
Executive that the needful is being done. 

(Interruptions) 

It was a sort of levy on production of electricity. We have, according to what I understand, 
266  such  small  producers  in  Mauritius  and  17  in  Rodrigues.  I  hope  that  answers  your 
question. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  48,  Sub-Head  5-102: 
Energy Services under item 25110.008 (b) Subsidy for Renewable Energy Projects, (ii) Solar. 
Two questions - one with regard to the Project Sarako.  We understand they have benefited 
from subsidy to the amount of, I think, Rs34 m. or Rs58 m. per year. This was an unsolicited 
project.  May  we  know  what  were  the  criteria  for  Sarako  to  benefit  from  these  subsidies? 
That’s the first question. The second question is: has Government already retrieved the excess 
land that was given to Sarako for implementing its project? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  the  second  part  I  have  already  discussed  with  my 

colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands.  

(Interruptions) 

As  you know, he is very  efficient. He won’t waste much time on that - to take land from 
others, he’s very good. So, there is no problem.  

Now,  as  for  the  criteria  which  led  Government  to  give  such  bounty  to  Sarako,  of 
course, I do not know. I can guess just as you can guess, and we all know, probably, what is 
the answer.  But it is contractual, and let us not waste much time about it. To be fair to the 
promoters of Sarako, they are producing electricity, they are doing their job. So, let us not be 

 

 

92 

too  harsh  on  them.  They  have  been  lucky.  They  have  got  a  good  price,  they  have  got 
subsidies.  But what can you do?   Those were the good old labour days! 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer  Meea: Thank  you, Madam Chairperson. On page 49, item 31113.002 -
Construction of Dams (a) Bagatelle, there has been more than Rs1 billion spent last year and 
for next year there is an amount Rs400 m. which is budgeted. May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister,  at  present,  what  would  be  the  total  cost  of  the  project  and  also  when  will  the 
Bagatelle Dam come into operation? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The coming into operation of the Bagatelle Dam depends on the 
termination of the Bagatelle Water Treatment Plant. With regard to the contract value, I think 
I have answered a question on this.  The contract value was Rs3,300,000,417. The contractor 
was CWE, China International Water and Electric Corporation. The cost of the project has 
increased from Rs3.3 billion to Rs5.6 billion.  But one must hasten to add that it was because 
the consultants - with which we are in arbitration for the moment; well, almost on a dispute/ 
resolution issue - according to us, had failed in their duty when they analysed the land, and 
two major design changes had to be brought to the spillway and to the foundation.  So, all this 
has cost us a lot of money. I don’t know who was to blame. We have not gone into blame 
games. We are paying the cost, of course. The total cost is expected to be Rs5.6 billion, and 
the completion date has been revised to December 2016. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 
Mr Mahomed: Madam Chairperson, thank you. In regard to the smart grid, page 48, 

item 22130 and item 22900 respectively. My question is as follows:  with regard to… 

The Chairperson: Can the hon. Member go item by item, please? You have got two 

different items. 

Mr Mahomed: I am not too sure which one of them will fall under this vote.  That is 

why I will refer to both of them. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Ask it and then we will try and accommodate. 
Mr  Mahomed:With  regard  to  the  grid,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  will  surely 
concur that our grid for the Smart Cities to become a reality needs to be smart as well.  I just 
heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioning that we will need to study the grid.  Anyway, 
whatever is left of 2015, the study to convert our grid into a smart one will occur… 

Mr Collendavelloo: Give time to my advisers to work on it!  My adviser is in office.  
Today is the first day.  The GM today is his third day.  So, let us give them some time.  I will 
certainly come with a statement to the House on this matter, which is of national importance. 

93 

 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr  Mahomed:  My  question  was  not  about  the  work  itself,  but  whether  budgetary 

provision has been made for the study. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Whether budget provision has been made!  Well, it is going to be 
CEB budget.  It is not going to be a consolidated fund.  So, we are going to work it out with 
CEB on CEB budget items. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan:  On page 50, Wastewater Services, Capital Expenditure, item 32145. 
Mr Collendavelloo: Which item? 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  Sub-Head  5-104:  Wastewater  Services,  item  32145.517  (d) 
Verger  Bissambar  Sewerage  Project.  I’ll  take  both  financial  years  together,  Madam 
Chairperson.  On Verger Bissambar Sewerage Project, work has started.  Can I know from 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether, within the budget vote, the contract is awarded? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Suddenly, il cesse de parler fort! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: No, it’s  my normal voice.  Can  I  ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
whether, within the projects, rehabilitation of the roads and the construction of drains have 
been  provided  within  the  project  value  so  that  when  works  on  house  connections  are 
completed, at the same time roads and drains are rehabilitated?   

Under the same vote, I’ll take another item, Cité Marcel Cabon Sewerage Project. This 
is some good news; I congratulate the hon. Vice-Prime Minister.  This is where there is an 
acute problem of pollution.  I raised the issue last time.  Can I make a request to the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  that,  pending  allocation  of  contracts  and  designs  and  so  on,  the 
Wastewater Management Authority  could see to it, on a regular basis, for these 5-10 poor 
families,  that  their  septic  tanks  are  emptied  at  regular  intervals,  more  so  that  there  is  a 
Government Primary School adjoining the housing estate? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  On  Cité  Marcel  Cabon,  I  don’t  know  whether  we  can  have  a 
permanent solution, but we can have these regular pumping, although I understood from the 
Wastewater Management Authority that this was not the policy of the Authority to do this.  
But when I went there, I was so shocked by the vicinity of the primary school and of other 
inhabitants that I said: “At least, some attention should be paid to this.”  

With  regard  to  Verger  Bissambar,  the  project  includes  rehabilitation  of  roads,  but  I 
don’t know whether it includes construction of drains.  This, I don’t know.  Apparently not!  
Apparently, it does not! 

94 

 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  make  a  point,  Madam  Chairperson,  on  that  score?  I  make  a 
request to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister.  During the construction works, you have the natural 
drains which are being turned upside down.  So, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister see to it 
with the Wastewater Management Authority that within that project, if funds are available, to 
have these natural drains which have been put upside down for construction purposes - for 
good reasons - be rehabilitated? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  am  immediately  asking  the  Senior  Chief  Executive  of  my 
Ministry  to  make  a  note  of  the  hon.  Member’s  request  and  I  will  certainly  look  into  it 
personally. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Leopold, last question on this! 
Mr Leopold: On page 48, item 25110.008 - Central Electricity Board (a) Electricity 
Supply and Displacement of Electric Lines/Poles for Hardship Cases.  Could it be possible as 
regards  Rodrigues  for  simplification  of  procedures,  as  it  is  very  complex  and  time-
consuming? I would like to ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he could see to it that 
the Rodrigues Regional Assembly works together with the CEB, as a joint committee, just to 
simplify this procedure, as it takes a long time, especially for the poor. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I shall look into it.  

Vote  5-1  Vice-Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities 

(Rs1,307,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 5-1 Vice-Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities was 

called. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: On page 120, item 32145.503 - Loan to CWA (a) Pailles Water Treatment 
Plant,  I  see  that  the  project  value  is  Rs639 m.; already  spent  Rs300  m.,  and  the  budgeted 
amount for 2015/2016 is Rs104 m. May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what was 
the  original  contract  amount  for  this  Treatment  Plant,  whether  there  has  been  any  cost 
overrun, and when will that Treatment Plant be operational? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the second answer is easy; end April 2015, that is, in a few 
days. According to information given to me, there has been a delay. Amount actually spent in 
2014 is Rs301.6 m. The contract price was Rs725,814,684.41.  That is the contract price.  We 
are so much talking of billions these days that you can’t know what to do.  I think I have 
answered the question of the hon. Member.  

Mr Uteem: The cost overrun! 

95 

 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: The cost overrun! Yes, there has been a delay.  But I have got no 
information on cost overrun, although the contractor was Sotravic.  So, it seems a bit strange.  
Is there information missing?  I see somebody is furiously noting down; if the hon. Member 
would be patient with me.  I think there was a provision in the contract. Yes, that’s right.  No 
cost overrun, but we have to look into the possibility of  claiming liquidated damages as a 
result of the delay in providing the works.  

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On page 120, may I know from the 

hon. Vice-Prime Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

It is on Capital Expenditure, item 32.  At page 120, item 32145.503 - Loans to Central Water 
Authority (f) Other old and defective pipelines. I do not see any sum earmarked, although in 
the Budget Speech there is a huge sum that has been allocated. May I know from the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister why we do not see any sum earmarked? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, we are talking under this item of a loan to CWA. I 
trust I am absolutely correct when I say that. So, we are not going to have a loan, we are not 
going to lend money to CWA for this. If I am wrong, I will be corrected.  That’s right!  The 
fund should be under the Build Mauritius Fund. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  have  a  few  questions.  At  page  117,  item  25  -  Subsidies,  25110.008 
Central Electricity Board (i) Subsidy on Biomass Energy Projects. I see that the sum of Rs 20 
m. has been earmarked for this item.  

Mr Collendavelloo: Can the hon. Member come again on the page? 

Mr Ganoo: Page 117, item 25 Subsidies, middle of the page, 25 non-Financial Public 
Corporation, CEB, then it is Subsidy on (i) Biomass Energy Projects – Rs20 m. Can the hon. 
Minister provide the House with the breakdown, of the way in which the sum will be used? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. I just gave the information a few minutes ago. Rs100 m. 
over five years for landfield gas to energy project operated by Sotravic at Mare Chicose since 
2012, installed capacity is 3.35 MW, energy exported in 2012: 17.8 GWh; 2013: 20; 2014: 
21.3. Rs60 m. have been paid up to now. That is for biogas. We are going to go into other 
projects. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Lesjongard! 

96 

 

 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you  Madam  Chairperson.  At  page  117,  item  22900.099  - 
Miscellaneous Expenses, at part (b) Energy Efficiency Management Office. May I know from 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is the status of that office? And at item (c) Sensitisation 
for Energy Efficiency Audit, can I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister how many such 
audits have been carried out and the factories or industries concerned? 

Mr Collendavelloo: We are talking, of course, of government building. The PNEE, 
which is the private sector parallel to our Energy Efficient Management Office, is doing for 
the private sector like factories and buildings.  I  do not have the figures  off-hand;  I do not 
think that my officers will have the figures now, but it is an interesting matter. I am sure the 
hon. Member will not hesitate to ask a full parliamentary question, because we need to have 
good details and to be able to have time to consider this answer. The only thing we can say 
for now is that the UNDP will be working in collaboration with Government. We are going to 
see how not to waste so much energy, as it is being wasted in this House, as everyone can 
see, or in Government buildings, and that is energy efficiency. 

To be a bit un peu plus savant, it is under a joint Government, JEC - Joint Economic 
Chamber,  AFD  -  Agence  Française  de  Développement,  National  Energy  Efficiency 
Programme  –  PNEE:  energy  audit  will  be  carried  in  100  energy  intensive  private  sector 
enterprises. Government contribution on the project is Rs8 m. spread over three years with 
Rs3 m. to be spent on 2015-2016. The funds will be used for awareness raising, press notices, 
sharing of information on the project outcomes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: At page 121, Acquisition of Financial Assets - (i)  Tranquebar/Vallée des 
Prêtres Sewerage Project. In the past four years, I have been asking the question and I am 
asking again. The only amount budgeted is Rs1m. So, when does the Government intend to 
implement the sewerage project in Tranquebar? 

Mr Collendavelloo: It would not surprise me that you get the same answer. We will 
try  and  see  and  compare  notes.  Consultancy  Services  for  feasibility  study  and  design  for 
Tranquebar/Vallée des Prêtres Sewerage Project, the consultancy cost to Servansingh Jadav 
&  Partners  is  Rs5.8  m.  The  status  is  that  the  process  of  way  leave  acquisition  has  been 
initiated,  the  final  preliminary  design/report  submitted  and  approved,  amount  spent  up  to 
March  2015  is  Rs3.36  m.  How  does  that  compare  to  the  four  previous  answers,  I  do  not 
know, but you will tell me. 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Ganoo! 

 

97 

Mr Ganoo: I have two questions, Madam Chairperson, if you will allow me. On page 
120, item 32 - Acquisition of Financial Assets - 32145.503 (d) Non Revenue Water Projects 
in Upper Mare aux Vacoas System, the sum of Rs139m. has been budgeted. Can the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister tell us what will be the total value of this project, that is, eliminating 
non-revenue water in the Mare-aux-Vacoas water system, and if he can indicate to the House 
also by what percentage will the non-revenue water be reduced at the end of the project. 

Since I am on the same page, but this one concerns wastewater, at the bottom of the 
page – Loan to Wastewater Management Authority, (d) CHA Estates & Low Cost Housing 
Sewage  Project.    This  is  a  project  which  started  years  ago.  I  suppose  it  was  discontinued 
because in 2014 we can see no funds were budgeted. But then, for the year 2015/2016, it is 
Rs12 m., for 2016/2017 it is Rs5 m., and then for 2017/2018 it is Rs65 m. I suppose because 
the  elections  will  be  nearer!  But  the  question  that  I  am  asking  is  since  Rs12  m.  is  being 
budgeted for 2015/2016, does the hon. Vice-Prime Minister have an idea of which are the 
CHA Estates which have been selected and where this project will be carried out? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Non-revenue water will reduce from 60 per cent to 44 per cent in 
Upper Mare-aux-Vacoas.  Those are the figures that I have. For the CHA Estates & Low Cost 
Housing Sewage Project, I am afraid I don’t have the detailed information which the hon. 
Member wishes to obtain. I will certainly look into it and provide an answer in due course. 

Mr Ganoo: Does the hon. Vice-Prime Minister have the total value of the Mare-aux- 

Vacoas project? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The total value of the Mare-aux-Vacoas project is - I am sorry, 
let me come back to the CHA Estates, let me come with the last question - Rs1 billion. For 
the CHA Estates I can provide the answer now.  It is for detailed design and preparation of 
bid documents and supervision of works. Luxconsult (Mauritius) Ltd. has been appointed in 
association  with  Naidoo  &  Associates.  It  started  on  December  2012.  The  completion  date 
will depend on the work schedule, and the contract value is Rs26.7 m. Up to now, Rs5.1 m. 
has  been  spent.  The  bid  for  works  will  be  launched  by  June  2015  for  one  estate.  For  the 
moment, the list of estates being subject to that sewage project is as follows –  

(i) 

Malherbes (B) 

(ii) 

Atlee; 

(iii) 

Palmerston; 

98 

 
(iv) 

 
Paul et Virginie; 

(v) 

Vallée des Prêtres, and  

(vi)  Cité La Cure. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  117,  item  25110.008  -  Central  Electricity  Board  (a) 
Electricity Supply and Displacement of Electric Lines/Poles for Hardship Cases, will the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  agree  with  me  that  a  sum  of  Rs4  m.  which  is  budgeted  is  a  bit  low 
compared  to  the  number  of  cases  that  needs  to  be  addressed?  Secondly,  on  the  same 
paragraph  regarding  (b)  Renewable  Energy  Development  Programme  (iv)  Other  Projects, 
there is Rs15 m. May we know the details of this Rs15 m. and what are the other projects? 
My last question on the same paragraph is regarding item 26  Grants, the last item 26.139 
Mauritius  Renewable  Energy  Agency,  Rs5  m.  May  we  know  what  is  this  Mauritius 
Renewable Energy Agency? Is this a new agency, headed by whom and how many staff it 
has, etc.? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Let  us  start  with  the  easiest  one,  which  is  the  hardship  cases. 
Yes,  this  is  the  sum  which  is  allocated.  Yes,  this  is  not  enough  and  yes,  the  CEB 
complements from its own budget to pay for the additional money. That is an easy one to 
answer. Then the hon. Member asked me a question.  On which page are we? 

(Interruptions) 

Page 117! I don’t know; is there any age limit for Ministers to be allowed to sit when they 
answer? 

The  Chairperson:  If  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  wants  to  be  seated,  please,  be 

seated! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Alright, for the next question I will do that. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: We will now allow only two more questions! 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  In  the  meantime,  I  will  answer  on  the  Mauritius  Renewable 
Energy  Agency.  That  is  not  an  agency  that  has  been  set  up.    It  is  now  being  considered. 
Mauritius  is  part  of  what  is  called  IRENA,  which  is  the  International  Renewable  Energy 
Agency. It is an offshoot of the United Nations and it is based in Abu Dhabi. We are going to 
obtain  assistance  from  that  agency.  In  order  to  do  that,  we  need  to  set  up  our  own  local 
agency, which will be called MARENA, and the purpose will be to consolidate, centralise 

 

 

99 

and promote renewable energy under all forms. Instead of having the Ministry doing it itself 
with all sorts of difficulties, we will have MARENA which will be set up. We will identify 
the staff and we will come with a Bill to the House, of course, when this will be discussed.  

Other projects are coming. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Can we pass on to the next question in the meantime?  
Mr Collendavelloo: 20 seconds! That means new renewable energy projects. I have 

done. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  You,  Madam  Chairperson.  At  page  116,  item  26313.098  - 
Utility  Regulatory  Authority,  I  see  that  now  provision  has  been  made  in  the  Estimates  for 
2015/2016. I have been putting that question year in year out to the former Minister and his 
reply has been that he is looking for l’oiseau rare. We voted that piece of legislation in 2004, 
amended in 2008, and I understand that that Authority is still not operational. Do we have the 
assurance of the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that this will be the case next year, that is, that 
Authority will be fully operational? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Yes,  it  will  be.  The  rare  bird  has  been  found,  we  hope.  N’en 
déplaise my good friend, hon. Ameer Meea, he is not a proche, but he is competent as all 
persons  whom  my  Ministry  approaches  to  perform  duties.  I  think  he  has  signified  his 
approval a few days ago; we need to set it up, and the House will be informed in due course. 
It is my priority to have that Utility Regulatory Authority as soon as possible. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I refer to page 117, item 25110.008 
(b) (ii) Subsidy on Solar Energy Projects and (iii) Subsidy on Wind Energy Projects.  As far 
as I recall, projects launched by the previous Government required a subsidy of about Rs235 
m. yearly when all projects, be it solar and wind, will be fully implemented, including the 
Small Independent Power Producers Scheme (SIPPS).  

Now, in year 2018, in the last column, when one adds up, solar and wind, the total is 
only Rs181 m.  Does that mean the Ministry will not launch any new renewable project in the 
meantime? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  No,  it  does  mean  that  at  all.    We  are  certainly  on  expansion 
mode of renewable energy projects.  The fact that the figures are as quoted in the Budget does 
not  mean  that  there  is  a  consequence  that  only  the  old  projects  are  going  to  be  put  into 
operation.  The old projects, when they have been approved, will have to be continued.  There 

 

 

100 

is  nothing  wrong  with  these  old  projects.    We  have  looked  at  the  price.    There  are  new 
projects which will come, but under MARENA, and not under the Ministry. 

Vote  5-1  Vice-Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities 

(Rs3,249,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-1 Finance and Economic Development was called. 
Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  page  52,  under  item  21  -  Compensation  of 
Employees,  sub-item  21110  -  Personal  Emoluments,  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister the amount budgeted for advisers to his Ministry and whether there is any amount 
budgeted in the emoluments for the advisers. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Sorry! 
Mr Uteem:  Can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is any amount in the 

Budget with respect to advisers appointed by the Ministry of Finance? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  have  one  item  for  advisers  which  covers  the 

provision for the payment – extra assistance.  Is that so? 

Mr Uteem:  It is not the question that I have asked. 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  But then I have a problem.  Can you give me the page and 

the item number? 

Mr  Uteem:  Yes,  it  is  item  21110.  The  question  is:  whether  under  personal 

emoluments in the Budget, there is an amount of Rs150 m. that is budgeted… 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: How much? 
The Chairperson: Rs150 m.  It is item 21110. 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The reply is yes.  It is Rs13.3 m. 
Vote  6-1  Finance  and  Economic  Development  (Rs1,104,600,000)  (January-June 

2015)was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-2 Central Procurement Board was called. 
Mr Ganoo:  Madam Chairperson, on page 127 … 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Non, nous sommes à la page 53. 
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Chairperson, on page 54, item 22120 - Fees, there is an 

amount of Rs4.1 m. budgeted.  May we know the details of this? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, page 54.  Which item? 
Mr Ameer Meea: Item 22120 – Fees.  There is an amount of Rs4 m. which has been 

budgeted for January to June.  May we know the details of this amount? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Fees to assessors of bids and it is Rs4 m. It is as follows – 

 

 

101 

(i) 

(ii)  
(iii) 

fees are paid according to number of sittings per hour as approved by 
the Board; 

fees for training Rs50,000, and 
fees  for  legal  assistance;  provision  made  for  the  payment  of  a 
composite fee for both legal advisory and for court litigation services.  
It is Rs120,000. 

Vote  6-2  Central  Procurement  Board  (Rs30,000,000)  (January-June  2015)was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-3 The Treasury (Rs52,200,000) (January-June 2015)was called and agreed to. 
Vote 6-4 Statistics Mauritius was called. 
Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Chairperson,  on  page  56,  under  item  22130  -  Studies  and  Surveys, 
there is a reduction.  May we know which studies and surveys are being provided for in the 
six months? 
 

 Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I will give you the answer that I have. Surveys – 
• 
• 
• 
• 

provisions made for payment in respect of census of agriculture, Rs1.4 m; 
census of economic activities, Rs500,000; 
surveys of inbound and outbound tourists, Rs1.5 m., and  
continuous multipurpose household survey, Rs7,268,500. 

Vote  6-4  Statistics  Mauritius  (Rs79,000,000)  (January-June  2015)was,  on  question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-5 Valuation Department was called. 
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Chairperson, on page 57, item 22030 - Rent, there is an 
amount of Rs8.2 m.  May we know what is being rented and from whom this is being rented, 
and also the area that is being rented? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: This item covers the rental of building.  Provision is made 
for the rental of office space of 3,000 square metres, including parking area for 40 vehicles at 
NexTeracom, Ebene, at Rs1,350,000 per month. 

Vote 6-5 Valuation Department (Rs55,000,000) (January-June 2015)was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-6 Corporate and Business Registration Department (Rs52,200,000) (January-

June 2015) was called and agreed to. 

Vote 6-7 Registrar-General’s Department was called. 

102 

 

 
Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, on page 59, the last item 31132.401 - Upgrading of 
ICT  Infrastructure,  the actual  amount  was  Rs64  m.  and  there  is Rs17 m.  planned.    May  I 
know from the hon. Minister what does this relate to and to whom the contract was awarded? 
Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  This  is  a  provision  made  for  phase  II  of  the  Mauritius  e-
Registry  project,  which  will  offer  the  submission  payment  and  delivery  services  of  the 
Registrar-General’s Department online, scheduled for 30 June 2015. 

Mr Uteem: To whom was the contract awarded? 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: To whom?  The information will be circulated. 
Vote 6-7 Registrar-General’s Department (Rs62,000,000) (January-June 2015) was, 

on question put, agreed to. 
 

Vote 6-1 Finance and Economic Development was called. 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am on page 125, under item 21110 - 
Personal Emoluments. I see that the total posts filled in 2014 were 385 and for 2015-16 the 
figure funded is 489, that is, 25% increase.  May  I know from the hon. Minister why 100 
more Analysts and other employees? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: More Analysts? 
Mr Uteem: When you look at the breakdown, there are a few Analysts.  There is a 

number of additional staff, but it comes to 100 more people. The total is on page 127. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Anyway, filling of vacancies, new posts at different levels 

and Analysts. That’s what I have. 

Mr Uteem: The question was why the increase.  Was it because it has not been filled 

for a long time or is it that now they are recruiting new people? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The posts could not be filled because of schemes of service 

which were being reviewed. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 127, item 22120 - Fees. 
There is an amount of Rs21.6 m.  May we have the details and the breakdown for this figure?  
Another question on the same page is on item 26313 – Current Grant to Extra Budgetary 
Units. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Can we start one by one? 
The Chairperson: Yes. 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It’s a long reply; the one on item 22120. 
The Chairperson: One by one. 

 

 

103 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: With regard to fees of Rs21,650,000, the breakdown is: fees 
to Chairman and members of Boards and Committees, Rs3.2 m.; provision made for payment 
of  fees  to  officers  attending  the  following  committees:  the  Public  Pension  Advisory 
Committee,  Departmental  Bid  and  Bid  Evaluation  Committees,  and  Truth  and  Justice 
Commission.  The  sum  of  Rs10,200,000,  fees  for  training,  relates  to  provision  made  for 
payment of fees to UTM for officers of the Financial Operations, Procurement and Supply, 
and  Internal  Control  Cadres  following  the  Diploma,  BSc  courses  and  for  local  training  of 
other staff; fees to consultants, Rs2,750,000; fees in respect of the Resident Advisor and the 
Risk Assessment Consultant for Debt Management Capacity Building Project; Rs500,000 for 
refund  of  subscription  fees  to  professional  bodies;  provision  made  for  the  refund  of 
subscription fees to professional bodies in line with the recommendations of the PRB and the 
EOAC Reports 2013; Rs5 m. Capacity Building Programme, provision made in relation to 
procurement of technical expertise both locally and abroad where specialised skills will be 
required. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister with regard to page 127, Assessment… 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Item No.? 
Mr Ganoo: It is on top of page 127, first line, item 21110.001 - Assessment Review 
Committee, Chairperson, Assessment Review Committee.  I see that the emoluments of the 
Chairperson,  Assessment  Review  Committee,  are  the  same  for  the  years  2014,  2015-16, 
2016-17 and 2017-18 unlike the Vice-Chairperson of the same Board. Can the hon. Minister 
inform the House whether the incumbent is on contract or is he on establishment?  Because 
for  all  the  coming  four  years  the  emoluments  are  the  same.    With  regard  to  the  measure 
announced in the Budget concerning the deposit required for a taxpayer when he lodges an 
objection before the ARC - before this same Committee - which has been reduced from 30% 
to 10%, may I ask the hon. Minister if he can inform the House whether that also will apply 
to somebody who has purchased property and who does not agree with the assessment made 
by the Registrar-General’s Department? Does this apply also in that case or does it concern 
only taxpayers? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: As far as I know, this concerns only taxpayers because only 

taxpayers have to make a down payment of 30%. Then… 

Mr Ganoo: For assessment also, you have to make a deposit. 

 

 

104 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I will ask the officers at the back to help me. For the hon. 
Member’s first two questions, I have two replies which look very funny.  One is flat salary, 
and the second one is contract. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Rutnah, please don’t disturb the hon. Minister. You are not 

(Interruptions) 

supposed to. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Since  I  get no reply  from my officers,  I will circulate the 

answer. 

Mr Ganoo: If I may enlighten the hon. Minister, in his speech he said ‘assessment 
made by the MRA or by the Registrar-General’s Department’. These are the two cases when 
the deposit has been reduced. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It could mean then that the down payment is being reduced 

from 30% to 10% for taxpayers and also for companies. 

(Interruptions) 

I hope so. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  127,  item  26313  -  Current 
Grant to Extra Budgetary Units, sub-item .004 - Board of Investment. The budgeted amount 
is almost 30% more than in 2014.  May I know the reason for the increase in the grant to the 
Board of Investment? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It looks like being quite substantial.  The answer I have here 
is  that  it  is  provision  made  to  meet  the  recurrent  expenses  of  the  Board  of  Investment  as 
follows – 
• 
• 

staff cost, 105 funded positions, Rs92.8 m.; 
cost  of  utilities;  provision  made  for  electricity  charges  for  additional  rental 
space on the eighth floor of the One Cathedral Square Building, Rs7.1 m. rent, 
increase in provision due to rental of additional space as from August 2015, at 
the rate of Rs431,000 per month; 
fees  to  Chairperson  and  Members  of  Board  and  Committees  have  been 
increased  from  Rs1.9  m.  to  Rs3.6  m.    A  new  Board  has  been  constituted 
comprising  one  Chairperson  and  10  Board  Members.    The  fee  for  the 
Chairperson is Rs50,000 and Rs25,000 per Board Member.   It includes also 

• 

 

 

105 

mission expenses, which move from Rs20.2 m. to Rs37.5 m. - this is the item 
which has increased. 

Provision for major events and missions is as follows – 
• 
• 

Major Mauritius road shows: Rs14 m.; 
overseas  targeted  and  follow-up  missions  and  participation  in  overseas 
conferences.    Countries,  amongst  others  are  China,  India,  Middle  East,  UK, 
France, Monaco, Switzerland, South Africa, US and others – Rs23.5 m;  
investment promotion – this is being reduced. Provision made for the review 
of old BOI promotion material from Rs6.5m. to Rs3 m.;  
consultancy fee is also provision made for studies in new sector of activities, 
such  as  Ocean  Economy  and  Petroleum  Support  Services,  which  is  stable, 
from Rs5.1 m. in 2014 to Rs5.5 m.;  
conference, Workshop/Seminar, the item has been reduced from Rs22.8 m. to 
Rs12 m., and  
Other operating expenses from Rs19.6 m. to Rs20.39 m.  

• 

• 

• 

• 

Now I come to the reason why it has increased.  Foreign Office Representatives: this 
item in the Budget is being increased from Rs3.3 m. to Rs51.36 m.  Provisions made for the 
salary and other associated cost of BOI representatives in eight foreign offices, namely Paris, 
London, Geneva, Mumbai, China, South Africa, USA and Russia.   

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 
Mr Ameer Meea: On page 125, under item 21110 - Personal Emoluments, the first 
line.    Just  a  clarification  and  nothing  personal  in  it,  the  salary  for  the  Minister  is  being 
doubled. Last year, it was Rs1,113,000 and for the next year it would be Rs2.3 m. and, in 
comparison to that, the Financial Secretary’s salary remains the same, Rs1.8 m. for 2014, and 
2015 same figure of Rs1.8 m.  Just a point of clarification! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  No Minister was in post in 2014.  Yes, aussi simple que ça; 

il fallait y penser, mon cher Watson! 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  127,  item  26313.043  - 
Mauritius Revenue Authority.   There is an increase of Rs150 m. to the MRA. I would like to 
know what this relates.  Since we are on the same MRA, on the next page, there is Capital 

 

 

106 

Grant and there also an increase from Rs60 m. to Rs192 m.  So, may I know why the increase 
to the grants to MRA?  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  don’t  find  any  substantial  increase  because  the  current 
grant  is  almost  Rs1.3  billion  around  to  Rs1.438  billion.    So,  it’s  Rs100  m.    The  increase 
comes mostly from staff costs.  The staff cost moves from Rs1.094.435 to Rs1.223 m.  So, 
maybe, this is the item.  The increase in provision is due to the payment of salary review with 
effect from 01 July 2014 to 1,495 officers and then normal increment. I think this is the item. 
For Capital Budget, what is the question? 

Mr Uteem:  On page 128, item 26323.043 - Capital Grant to Extra Budgetary Units, 

Mauritius Revenue Authority. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes, you are right! It has been increased from Rs66.6 m. to 
Rs192 m.  Machinery and equipment increases from Rs17 m. to Rs115 m.  Provision made 
for the procurement of a boat and a new X-ray scanner to reinforce the implementation of the 
Drug  Interdiction  Programme.    Then,  we  have  also  a  new  item  of  Rs16.7  m.,  which  is 
provision made for the study on monitoring system for gaming activities, implementation of 
performance appraisal in FIN-HR – I don’t know what this means – and taxpayers’ services 
through  mobile  devices.  There  is  another  increase,  which  is  substantial,  from  Rs9.6  m.  to 
Rs30.6 m.; provision made for network and security enhancement that will provide protection 
against  sophisticated  malware;  extending  storage  infrastructure;  clustering  of  Tax  Payer 
Online Services (TPOS); enhancement of the time, attendance and access control at Ehram 
Court;  enhancement  of  main  core  for  IP  telephony  and,  finally,  ORGAP  Portal  int.  facing 
with Customs Management System, CMS.  

Vote  6-1  Finance  and  Economic  Development  (Rs2,606,800,000)  was,  on  question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-2 Central Procurement Board (Rs63,400,000) was called and agreed to.   
Vote 6-3 The Treasury was called.  
The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Just for clarification, on page 132, item 
21110 - Personal Emoluments.   There is an increase in staffing again, 21 new staff, and the 
most important ones are Management Support Officers.  There are around 11 new posts being 
created for Management Support Officer.  May I know the reason for the increase in posts? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Sorry, which job is that? 

 
Mr Uteem:  Generally, there is an increase of 21 new staff, but out of this, 11 relates 

 

107 

to Management Support Officer (MSO). 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: MSO centrally posted from MCSAR to cope for increased 

workload.  

Vote 6-3 The Treasury (Rs128,500,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 6-4 Statistics Mauritius (Rs154,700,000) was called and agreed to. 

Vote 6-5 Valuation Department was called. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether provision has been made for 
the payment of the salary of Mr Bissessur, the Valuation Officer who lost his memory and 
then got it back?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It has been done so quickly. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Yes, as he has been reintegrated. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes. 

Vote 6-5 Valuation Department (Rs121,500,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

The following votes were called and agreed to - 

6-6 Corporate and Business Registration Department (Rs110,000,000) 

6-7 Registrar-General’s Department (Rs108,100,000) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  beg  to  move  that  you  do  report 

progress and ask leave to sit again. 

Question put and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now  adjourn  to  Thursday  16  April 
2015 at 10.30 a.m. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo rose and seconded. 

 
 Question put and agreed to. 

 

108 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 7.31 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 16 April 2015, at 

10.30 a.m. 

