 

 

1 

 

 

 

No. 29 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 08 SEPTEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Family Welfare 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of  Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

 

4 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

            Hansard Editor 

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 29 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 08 September 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 
                                                                         PAPERS LAID 
 
       The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 
 

 

 

A.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

                    

  (a)  Retrospective  Virement  Warrants  Nos.  39  to  47  for  the  year  2015 

(January- June). (In Original). 

 

 

 

 

 

 (b) 

The Income Tax (Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in 
Tax  Matters)  Regulations  2015.    (Government  Notice  No.  166  of 
2015).  

(c) 

The Annual Digest of Statistics 2014. 

(d)  The Digest of Industrial Statistics 2014. 

(e) 

The Digest of Statistics on Rodrigues 2014. 

B.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Imports)  (Amendment  No.  2) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 167 of 2015). 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  21)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 168 of 2015). 

 

 

 

 

(1) 
(2) 

8 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITEE - HON. J.C. BARBIER – RESIGNATION 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - VIP GALLERY 
(a) 

SRI  SHYAM  JAJU,  VICE-PRESIDENT  -  BHARATIYA  JANATA 
PARTY 
REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA 
LEGISLATURE – DELEGATION 

(b) 

-  GAUTENG  PROVINCIAL 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that by a letter dated 02 
September  2015,  hon.  Jean  Claude  Barbier,  MP  has  resigned  from  the  Public  Accounts 
Committee. 

I  also have to inform the House that we have in our VIP Gallery today  Sri Shyam 
Jaju, the Vice-President of the Bharatiya Janata Party and his spouse Mrs Jaju and we also 
have a delegation from the Gauteng Provincial Legislature of the Republic of South Africa 
who are on a benchmarking visit to Mauritius. 

On behalf of this House and in my own name, I extend a warm welcome to them and 

wish them a fruitful visit. 

 

 

 

 

9 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CAMP DIABLE - AMMA TOOKAY KOVIL - INCIDENTS  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent incidents which occurred at the 
Tookay Temple and elsewhere, he will -  

(a)  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to -  
(i)  

the  number  of  arrest  effected  in  connection  therewith,  as  at  to  date, 
indicating if the arrested suspects have criminal/legal antecedents;  
the  localities  where  the  incidents  occurred,  including  the  ones  which 
occurred during the weeks preceding the Tookay incidents, and  
if  cases  of  incitation  à  la  violence  through  the  internet  have  been 
established, and  

(ii)  

(iii)  

(b)  

state if he has discussed same with the Commissioner of Police and if he is 
satisfied with the work of the Police in relation thereto, as at to date. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that on 05 September 2015, at 06.45 hours, one Mr P. C., President of Amma Tookay Kovil 
situated  at  Camp  Diable  reported  that  during  the  previous  night,  unknown  persons  had 
damaged several idols at Amma Tookay Temple. 

Police initiated an enquiry immediately. 
I am informed that Mr P. C. showed to the Police the footages of the Kovil CCTV 
cameras, from which it was confirmed that the incident had taken place at 23.35 hours on the 
previous  night.    Two  suspects  were  identified  in  the  footage.    The  two  suspects  had  been 
loitering on the main road near the temple, seen by Police Officers on patrol on the night of 
the incident. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  (i),  (ii)  and  (iii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commissioner of Police that on the same day, two suspects, one Police Officer residing at 
Vallée Pitot and one hawker residing at Rivière des Anguilles were arrested in relation to the 
incident at Amma Tookay Temple.  They were provisionally charged for “stirring up civil 
war” in breach of section 62 of the Criminal Code Act.  They appeared before the Bail and 
Remand  Court  on  06  September  2015  and  they  have  been  remanded  to  Police  cell.    They 

 

10 

again appeared before the Savanne Court on 07 September 2015 and were remanded to Police 
cell up to 11 September 2015. 

One  of  them,  namely,  Mr  A.  B.  has  record  of  two  previous  convictions,  namely 

“stolen property” and “possession of counterfeited bank note”. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed that prior to that incident, no other incident of 

the same nature either in Camp Diable region or elsewhere, has been reported. 

From 05 to 07 September 2015, nine incidents causing damage to mosques, houses 
and  vehicles  have  been  reported  in  the  regions  of  Camp  Diable,  Rivière  des  Anguilles, 
Batimarais,  Rose  Belle,  Nouvelle  France  and  Chemin  Grenier.    According  to  the  Police, 
seven persons have been arrested so far, in relation to those incidents.  They appeared before 
Court, and have been remanded to Police cell and they are still in Police custody. 

Madam Speaker,  I  am further informed that on  07 September 2015, the Permanent 
Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  reported  to  the 
Police  that  racial  comments  had  been  posted  on  Facebook,  which  could  lead  to  interracial 
problems.  An enquiry was instituted immediately by the CCID to trace out the identity of the 
Facebook account holders and those who had commented on the post.  Nine such posts have 
been identified and one person has been arrested so far.  He has been provisionally charged 
for the offence of “stirring up civil war” and remanded to Police cell.  He will appear before 
the District Court today. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, since the incidents have been 
reported, the Commissioner of Police has been in constant touch with my Office and myself.  
I have given strict directives to the Commissioner of Police to take all operational measures 
and to be ruthless against all ill- intentioned people and troublemakers who are putting at risk 
social harmony and public safety. 

The  Commissioner  of  Police  has  informed  that  the  following  measures  have  been 

taken - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the whole Police Force, including the Special Mobile Force, Special Support 
Unit, Police Helicopter Squadron, National Coast Guard, have been mobilised 
for a demonstrative and permanent presence on ground;  
patrols have been deployed around the whole island to deter any other  such 
incident;  
road blocks and vehicle checkpoints have been set up at strategic places round 
the clock;  

 

11 

(iv) 

(v) 

all other Units of the Police, including the Cyber Crime Unit, are on the alert, 
and 
a series of community policing activities and actions are being taken at various 
levels. 

Madam Speaker, I am fully satisfied with the work of the Commissioner of Police and 

his team, and the situation is being monitored round the clock. 

As I stated at a press conference yesterday, as Prime Minister I will not tolerate any 

conspiracy against the State and the people of Mauritius.   

I wish to remind the House and the population in general that our legal framework 
already caters for such situations.  For instance, sections 62 and 282 of the Criminal Code 
provide for custodial sentences going up to 60 years.  Regulations are also being made under 
the  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  Act  to  curtail  harmful  and  illegal 
communication services. 

I shall personally ensure that we kill the demon today so that we do not face the devil 

tomorrow. 

Our country has a solid reputation of a tolerant society, but we must not underestimate 
the fragility thereof.  On the contrary, we must strive for it to be protected as well as further 
consolidated. I, therefore, call upon the population to act responsibly. 

We must also not forget that such incidents may have serious negative repercussions 

to our country as a tourist and investment destination. 

Madam Speaker, in the wake of the incident that occurred at Rivière des Anguilles, 
Her  Excellency  the  President  of  the  Republic  met  the  members  of  the  “Conseil  des 
Religions”, a few Religious Heads and inhabitants of Camp Diable, Tyack and Rivière des 
Anguilles, Britannia at the State House on Monday 07 September 2015 at 16.30 hours in the 
presence of the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun.  Around 100 persons were present.  The 
Press was also invited to attend the meeting. 

Her Excellency reminded those present at the meeting that ethnic groups in Mauritius 
live in peace and harmony and have all contributed to the socio-economic development of the 
Island.  She urged those present not to give way to needless debates and retaliation to isolated 
cases and to think about nation building. 

She invited all Heads of Religious bodies to take the pledge to put a stop to violence 

and to spread the message of love and brotherhood. 

 

12 

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, we have inherited a rich tapestry of different 
cultures knitted together which has given birth to a nation that is forward looking while being 
deeply attached to the great cultures and religions of the world. 

As  a  responsible  Government,  we  are  making  every  effort  to  rally  all  Mauritians 
around  a  national  project  and  garner  all  our  will  power  and  energy  to  shape  a  prosperous 
nation  where  our  unique  cultural  mix  remains  a  source  of  pride,  inspiration  and  strength 
rather than a constraining factor in our development process. 

I  make  an  appeal  to  one  and  all  to  join  us  in  the  task  of  nation  building  and 

maintaining social stability, peace and harmony. 

Madam Speaker, let me again reassure the House and the population at large that I 
shall  see  to  it  that  all  perpetrators  of  these  despicable  acts,  whoever  they  might  be,  are 
brought to justice. 

I  am  convinced  that  these  incidents  have  been  politically  masterminded  with  the 
intention of destabilising my Government and thwart the ongoing clean up exercise, and the 
development of the country. 

This can be testified by the statement of Mr Rama Valayden at Vallée Pitot and Rose 
Hill in the course of nocturnal public meetings where he exhorted the public to come to the 
street, I quote him - 

“ziska nou fer sa gouvernmant la aller”.   
This same sort of provoking statements were made in 1999 prior to the sinister Kaya 

episode. 

But he has to be careful this time!  I warn him! 

(Interruptions) 

Let me also be very clear. As long as I am Prime Minister, I shall not tolerate any 
such reprehensible acts by anybody that imperil social peace and harmony and jeopardise the 
safety and security of our nation. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, I think I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that 
in  all  eight  persons  have  been  arrested;  seven  around  the  violence  committed  and  one  in 
relation to internet prevention offences.  Is that the case, eight in all and will he table a list of 
those arrested? 

The Prime Minister: I will table the list. 
Mr Bérenger: We have been told, Madam Speaker, that among those arrested, there 
is a Police Officer.  Can I know whether that Police Officer has been suspended, whether he 
has precedence? 

 

13 

The Prime Minister: Well, he has no precedent; otherwise I would have said it in the 
answer.  Only one has precedent. Insofar as suspension is concerned, naturally the enquiry is 
still on and action will be taken and I have asked the Commissioner of Police that we must 
get rid of such people in the Force. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  know  as  far  as  those  arrested  are  concerned,  is  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister aware of one gentleman – if I can call him that - from Bois Chéri - I won’t 
give  his  name  at  this  stage  -  who  has  been  arrested,  who  is  an  employee  of  Mauritius 
Telecom  and  he  was  supposedly  involved  in  a  case  of  stealing  a  vehicle  from  Mauritius 
Telecom and coincidence, coincidence when the Police went to arrest him in that case, they 
found the vehicle at his home and secured the vehicle, and this gentleman is reported by the 
Police, itself, of damaging places of worship in the recent past? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Apparently,  this  has  been  tolerated  by  the  previous 
Government.  Apparently, he was in the habit of taking that vehicle to his place, but we are 
going to see to it that this is stopped and any severe action that can be taken, will be taken 
against this fellow. 

Mr Bérenger:  Well, I am a bit surprised by the Prime Minister’s answer as far as 
incidents weeks before the Tookay Temple.  It seems that the Police has not provided the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister with information in relation thereof.  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
take the trouble to look at it, including, for example – I’ll quote one example - at Goodlands, 
on 01 September, a temple was attacked and an idol destroyed, the head was left behind and 
then two days ago, same thing again at Goodlands, but this time the head disappeared; they 
smashed  the  statue  and  the  head  disappeared?    This  has  happened  in  Goodlands  and, 
according to my information, in several other places. 

The Prime Minister: Maybe the Police does not have this information.  If the case 

had been reported, the Commissioner would have certainly given me the information.  

Mr Bérenger:  If the Rt. hon. Prime Minister wants the dates when it was reported, I 
have the dates, the Police Station and everything. At first, it was reported on 01 September to 
the Police Station of Goodlands and then, on 07, a few days ago, again, there was a report to 
the Police Station.  You want another example!  Grand’ Baie! At Grand’ Baie also, there was 
an incident.  In that case, reported on 07. 

 
The Prime Minister:  Well, I will certainly ask the Commissioner of Police to look 

into these cases. 

 

14 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has 
had the opportunity to congratulate and thank, specifically the leaders of the Tookay Temple, 
the leaders of the mosques concerned and some socio-cultural organisations that have been 
very helpful in trying to cool things down?  Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister found the time to 
thank them, congratulate them and encourage them in the same direction? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  have  been  thankful  to  everybody  who  has  been 

cooperating with the Police. 

Mr Bérenger:  Including me, I am sure!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been advised by the 
Police,  by  the  State  Law  Office  or  by  his  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and 
Innovation  that  the  law,  as  it  stands,  specifically  three  Acts:  the  Criminal  Code,  the 
Information and Communication Technology Act and the Computer Misuse and Cybercrime 
Act of 2001, that these Acts need to be further amended, strengthened so that this problem of 
inciting  racial  hatred  or  incitation  à  la  violence  or  communalisme,  including  on  radios  be 
better tackled? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, we are aware of all this and it is being looked into. 
Mr  Bérenger:    Madam  Speaker,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  said  that  he  is  fully 
satisfied;  can  I  put  it  on  record  that  my  feedback  also  is  that  the  Police  needs  to  be 
congratulated,  but,  at  the  same  time,  can  I  appeal  that  we  improve  on  performance,  for 
example, that family that was aggressed in Rivière des Anguilles had to wait for hours before 
a sentry, Police assistance was provided? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, maybe the Police Officers were taken up. They were so 
busy that it took some time. But, generally, I must say, in many cases, this is how it happens.  
Police always come quite late!   

I will ask the Commissioner of Police to see to it and to see that there is acceleration 

(Interruptions) 

in the Force. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 
Mr Bérenger:  If I can have one last question and then I will give the floor.  The Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister has said, I am sure we’ll all agree, something very serious concerning an 
organised  plot  behind  the  events  that  have  taken  place.    Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

 

15 

report further, Madam Speaker - one name has been mentioned, but the accusation is larger 
than one person - can we have more enlightenment on that? 

The  Prime  Minister:    I  can’t  give  any  enlightenment  on  that,  but  I  must  say  one 
thing,  that  what  I  have  been  saying  here  is  what  is  officially  communicated  to  me  by  the 
Police.  But I get many information from inside, even what goes on in conversation among 
agents, leaders, especially in the Labour Party these days.  When I come and say that it is a 
plot by politicians, I am serious, I know what I am talking about. 

Mr Mohamed: As  I said,  I have two questions. The first one will be –  I am quite 
amused anyway by hearing the Rt. hon. Prime Minister talk about the Police coming in late. 
But, to pick up from where the hon. Leader of the Opposition left off, there is an information 
that  I  received  that  at  the  time  in  question,  the  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Police  Station  was 
greatly undermanned and that is why it explains the delay in having to attend certain reported 
cases  like  Rivière  des  Anguilles.  But,  coming  to  my  question,  could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister consider the possibility of having the relevant amendments brought to the Criminal 
Code as well as procedures pertaining to criminal law that would enable the Police to enter 
provisional  information,  at  the  same  time  keeping  confidentiality  as  to  the  name  of  the 
accused  because,  in  this  particular  case,  had  the  Police  been  able,  legally  and  logistically 
speaking, to keep confidentiality about the name as is possible in the United Kingdom, there 
would not have been the name made public and perhaps this would not have allowed people 
without any logic and without any love for their country to go into a haphazard retaliation 
which  was  unacceptable?  Could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  the  possibility  of 
amending  the  law  to  give  this  tool  to  the  Police  to  keep  confidentially  of  such  sensitive 
issues? 

Madam Speaker: You have made your point, hon. Mohamed. 

The Prime Minister: Well, that the Police Station is undermanned, not sufficiently 
provided with Police Officers, has this happened yesterday or since December? Was it not 
there and were you not in Government? What have you been doing? 

Mr Mohamed: I was not Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: But, we… 

Madam Speaker: Please do not reply from a sitting position! 

 

16 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  are  working  to  remedy  the  situation.  About  the  second 

question also, we are looking into all this, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has rightly said that, in spite 
of long years of nation building, the social fabric of our country is still fragile. Doesn’t the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister think he should arrange for the Heads of the different religions to come 
on TV and together make an appeal to the whole population of the island so that the situation 
might cool down? 

The  Prime  Minister:  The  President  of  the  Republic  has  done  already  a  good  job. 
This has gone to the public. About information going to the public, when something takes 
place  in  a  region,  in  a  village  especially,  can  you  keep  that  secret?  Is  that  what  the  hon. 
Member wanted to make us believe? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ganoo,  Please!  You  have  made  your  point.  The  Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister has already replied. Hon. Uteem, please! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, during the Press Conference, the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister was quite forceful; not only making an appeal to the public, but also 
threatening about measures he would be taking. One of the measures that he alluded to was 
the state of emergency and he stated that he has the majority to give him this. So, may I ask 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to give a reassurance to the House and the population that we 
have  not  reached  this  state  of  affairs  which  would  call  for  a  state  of  emergency  and  this 
would only be used in a very dramatic situation? 

The Prime Minister: I was very clear when I said: if we reach that situation and if we 

reach that situation, I would not hesitate. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one last question: on this side of 
the House, we do not want to politicise such a very, very dangerous situation and we are all 
for what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said, not on all fronts but on part of it. Since the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  has  made  very  serious  allegations  -  not  only  here  today,  but  also 
yesterday according to my information - when talking about some political complot, may we 
know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister intends to make use of the information that he has 

 

17 

and, by all means, give a declaration to the Police and communicate it to the Police for an 
enquiry to be carried out, instead of just simply throwing out allegations, but an enquiry must 
be made? 

The Prime Minister: We are still having discussions on that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  My  last  question,  if  you  would  allow  me,  Madam  Speaker!  It  is 
addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and follows up through  what  my colleague, hon. 
Reza  Uteem  has  just  said.  Will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  with  me  that  the  way 
forward  is  through  national  appeals,  national  action,  unified  action  by  Government,  the 
Opposition, the trade unions, the Forces Vives, everybody, appealing for calm and so on, and, 
if required, through the kind of national appeal which, we were in Opposition, both the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister and myself went on television, the then President, the Government and 
so  on,  in  the  1999  dramatic  situation  that  we  went  through,  to  appeal  to  the  population  at 
large. Does he not agree with me that this is the way forward and not threats about a possible 
état d’urgence? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  have  appealed  for  the  cooperation  on  the  part  of  the 

whole nation and that includes everybody. 

Madam Speaker: Are  you done, hon.  Leader of the Opposition. That’s it. Time is 
over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary  Question  B/419  in 
regard to the allocation of the contract to Airway Coffee Ltd. addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and 
External  Communications.  Furthermore,  Parliamentary  Questions  B/429,  B/430  and  B/432 
have been withdrawn. Hon. Bhagwan, you may ask your question! 

 

MR R. G. – ALLEGED CRIMINAL OFFENCES  

(No.  B/414)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr R. G., he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the reasons 
why no Police action has been initiated against him as at to date although serious allegations 
of criminal offences have been levelled against him, namely, regarding the – 

18 

 

(a) 

(b) 

excessive  loans  and  dealings  with  the  Mauritius  Co-operative  Central  Bank 
Ltd.; 
shops  and  restaurants  at  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International 
Airport; 
State Insurance Company of Mauritius Ltd. Tower; 
allocation of State lands; 
Roche Noire case, and 

(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f)  Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd. 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  on  27  April  2015,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
reported  alleged  acts  of  malpractice  and  abuse  of  power  at  the  Mauritius  Post  and 
Cooperative Bank (MPCB), following which Police initiated an enquiry. 

I am further informed that the enquiry is still ongoing at the level of the MPCB to 
collect relevant documents pertaining to the case.  Mr D.G. is not required for investigation 
for the time being, but will be convened in due course, if need be. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to parts (b), (c) and (d) of the question, I am informed by 
the  Police  that  there  is  no  enquiry  being  carried  out.    However,  I  am  informed  that  the 
Independent  Commission  against  Corruption  has  initiated  an  investigation  on  Mr  D.G 
following  a  complaint  against  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd  in  relation  to  the  allocation  of  a 
contract  to  Airway  Coffee  Ltd  for  the  operation  of  its  Food  and  Beverages  Service  and 
Lounge Management at Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (e) of the question, I am informed by the Police that 
the case of larceny armed with offensive weapon reported by Mr D.G. was re-opened in the 
light of fresh information obtained.   In the course of the enquiry, three persons have been 
arrested and provisionally charged for the offence of conspiracy to commit an unlawful act to 
wit: effecting public mischief. 

The enquiry has been completed and referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions 

on 25 June 2015 for advice. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (f) of the question, I am informed by the Police that it 
started  an  enquiry  on  the  Mauritius  Duty  Free  Paradise  Ltd  following  receipt  of  an 
anonymous  letter  on  25  January  2015.    During  the  course  of  the  enquiry,  Mr  D.G.  gave 
statements to the Police on five occasions.   

 

19 

One person has been provisionally charged before the District Court of Curepipe on 
04  June  2015  for  the  offence  of  conspiracy  to  commit  money  laundering  and  bribery  for 
procuring contract.  The enquiry is still in progress. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption  is  also 
investigating into an alleged act of corruption in the allocation of contract to Dufry AG by the 
Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Co. Ltd. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will see to it, despite 
what we have heard from the reply, and he will give directives, that no interference should 
occur at any level - even at any of the political level - that Mr D. G. can escape scot-free from 
all the murders he has committed? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Anyway,  if  there  had  been  murder  he  would  have  been  in 
already! I must say that for the time being we need Mr D. G. as a witness in one of the most 
important cases that the CCID is dealing with. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether,  in  fact,  he  is 

confirming that the gentleman has not and will not benefit from any immunité? 

The Prime Minister: For the time being he is being used as a witness. 

Mr Mohamed: There is one thing I would have to pick up.  The tenor of the question 
talks about excessive loans and dealings with the Mauritius Co-operative Central Bank Ltd. 
Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell us in relation to the words “excessively used” at the 
time when loans were made available to, they call him, Mr D.G. - and here I see Mr R. G.; I 
guess they are the same person - would not it be possible for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
tell  us  whether  any  special,  unusual,  abnormal  facilities  were  given  in  terms  of  interest  or 
otherwise to Mr R. G. that would make it suspicious or whether it was normal as any other 
client, as far as banking facilities and interest for the repayment of the loans are concerned? 

The Prime Minister: The enquiry is still on. In any case, I need a specific question to 

this. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I have one last supplementary question, Madam Speaker? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, would you, please, move on to the next question? 

 

20 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  important  question!  One  last 

supplementary question, please! 

Madam Speaker: I will allow you one last, but nobody else! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  make  a  request  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  taking  into 
consideration the excessive loans taken at the MPCB Ltd, we have been made to understand 
that all these loans have been transferred to the DBM Ltd? Can the House have a guarantee 
from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  through  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, that there will not be any write-off of all these loans at the level of the DBM 
Ltd.? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we need specific questions from the hon. Member. We 

cannot answer it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

 

HORSE RACING - COMMISSION OF INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT 

(No.  B/415)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 
on Horse Racing in Mauritius which was set up on 24 September 2014, he will state if he is in 
presence of the confidential Interim Report thereof submitted to the President of the Republic 
on 28 April 2014, as stated at paragraph 6 of page 11 of the Executive Summary in relation 
thereto  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  any  action  has  been  initiated  for  the  urgent  carrying  out  of 
investigations into alleged cases of cheating and, if not, why not. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  informed  the  House,  while  replying  to 
Parliamentary Question No. B/57, I have not seen any interim report. I have been told that an 
interim report was forwarded to the former Prime Minister. What he has done with it, I don’t 
know.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: Being given the remarks made by the Commissioners at paragraph 6 
of the report concerning urgent criminal investigation, can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime 

 

21 

Minister  whether  his  Office  has  asked  for  a  copy  of  the  interim  report  from  the 
Commissioners? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have not got any, I have not seen any. 
Mr  Bérenger:  My  information  is  that,  in  fact,  the  Commissioners  had  submitted  a 
confidential interim report to the then President of the Republic who transmitted it to the then 
hon. Prime Minister. I am sure if that is the case, there must be a copy at the State House. Has 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  enquired  at  the  State  House  with  the  now  President  of  the 
Republic whether such a document does exist? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if that is so, the State House should have given it to me. 
Mr Mohamed: Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider - I would not go as far as 
to suggest that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister contacts the former Prime  Minister to ask him 
whether he could give him his copy, may I humbly suggest - the possibility of carrying out an 
in-depth enquiry to find out that interim report, at least, pour faire taire les rumeurs? Because 
there is information that I have, that is circulating out there and I am not saying it is true, that 
there is a discrepancy or a difference between the interim report and the final report. Which is 
which?  If  that  is  not  the  case,  then  it  is  important,  at  least,  that  the  hon.  Members  of  this 
House see that there has been no change or editing made to the interim report as opposed to 
the  final  one.  So,  would  he  consider  the  possibility  of  carrying  out  an  enquiry  to  get  that 
report? 

The Prime Minister: There are already too many enquiries being carried out.  One 
document had disappeared, but there are many other documents, even in the Prime Minister’s 
Office, which have disappeared. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I will insist again on the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether his Office 
could - because we have paid from public funds for the commissioning of this report, perhaps 
millions  of  rupees!  It  is  a  very  important  report  which  recommends  urgent  criminal 
investigations and actions. Can I make a request, in the public interest, that the Government 
of Mauritius writes to these Commissioners to have a copy of that interim report so as to take 
urgent actions as recommended by them? 

The Prime Minister: The former Prime Minister has been  a very  good ally of the 

hon. Member, can’t he ask him for a copy? 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t make comments from a sitting position! 

 

HORSE RACING – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/416)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 
on  Horse  Racing  in  Mauritius  which  was  set  up  on  24  September  2014,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority, a list of the actions 
initiated, if any, especially in respect of alleged cases of -  

(a)  

cheating; 

(b)  

taxes not paid to the Mauritius Revenue Authority by SMS Pariaz; 

(c)  

under invoicing on the importation of horses; 

(d)  

the Police des Jeux, and  

(e)  

live monitoring of bettings. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am replying to part (a) 
of  the  question.  I  am  informed  that,  for  any  offences  committed  under  Part  XXIV  of  the 
Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act  2007,  as  subsequently  amended,  the  Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority  (GRA)  has  recourse  to  the  assistance  of  the  Police  des  Jeux.  Any 
alleged case of cheating is, therefore, referred to the Police des Jeux, for further investigation 
and necessary action. 

In addition, regular meetings, in relation to cases of alleged malpractices, are held by 
the  GRA  with  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  (MTC)  for  safeguarding  the  integrity  of  the  horse 
racing industry and upholding public confidence.  

As stated in the Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in Mauritius, 
the GRA lacks competency in the reading of horse race running and determining any case of 

 

23 

cheating.  To overcome this competency problem, the GRA is in the process of enlisting the 
services of an expert from the horse racing industry, abroad, for - 

i. 

the  reading  of  horse  race  running  and  determining  any  case  of  cheating  not 
detected by the MTC, and 
building capability, both, at the GRA and the Police des Jeux. 

ii. 
Moreover,  my  Office  is  enlisting  the  services  of  Messrs.  Benn  Gunn  and  Paul 
Scotney, the two assessors of the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in Mauritius, to 
assist  in  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  thereof.  One  of  their  responsibilities 
will, also, be to build capacity at the GRA and the Police des Jeux, for better monitoring of 
illegal activities related to horse racing.   

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question  in  relation  to  tax  dues  of  SMS  Pariaz  Ltd,  the 
Mauritius Revenue Authority has advised that SMS Pariaz Ltd, has submitted all its returns 
during the last five years, and paid the taxes due as per return submitted. For period August 
2008 to now, the Mauritius Revenue Authority has collected an  amount of Rs193,432,777 
from SMS Pariaz Ltd. 

I am, further, advised that, as to date, the tax audit of SMS Pariaz Ltd, undertaken by 
the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority,  has  not  been  completed,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  SMS 
Pariaz  Ltd  did  not  grant  access  to  its  computer  system  for  details  of  bets  placed,  to  the 
officers of the Mauritius Revenue Authority. 

The GRA was consequently informed of this development. However, in view of the 
legal implications arising under the Data Protection Act of 2004, as subsequently amended, 
and over which the GRA has no authority/jurisdiction, the Mauritius Revenue Authority has 
been advised to lawfully resolve the issue with SMS Pariaz Ltd. 

I am now answering part (c) of the question. The matter of Importation of horses falls 
under the purview of the Mauritius Revenue Authority. I wish to refer the hon. Member to the 
reply I made to a question, at the sitting of 28 April 2015, as regards the process involved in 
the importation of horses for horse racing.  

I  am  informed  that,  following  an  investigation  carried  out  in  2007,  the  Mauritius 
Revenue Authority uncovered an undervaluation of racehorses imported from South Africa 
for period 2003 to 2007, which resulted in the payment of additional VAT by the Mauritius 
Turf Club amounting to approximately Rs15 m. 

I  have  been  advised  by  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  that  no  further  case  of 
undervaluation  of  racehorses  has  been  detected  by  Customs,  subsequent  to  the  above 
mentioned investigation. 

 

24 

I  have  also  been  apprised  that,  as  a  means  to  monitor  under  invoicing,  a  reference 
price chart devised by the Mauritius Revenue Authority (MRA) and the Mauritius Turf Club 
is used as a risk management tool to assist Customs in establishing the value of racehorses 
according to their categories (A, B, C and D), which are based on the age and the merit rating 
of the time of import. 

In line with recommendation 15 of the Commission of  Inquiry on Horse Racing in 
Mauritius, the bills of entry for the importation of racehorses are being submitted to Customs 
by  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  through  its  Customs  Broker  with  the  name  of  the  consignee 
(name of owner or stable) clearly mentioned in the Customs Declaration Form. 

The  current  process  regarding  the  importation  of  horses  is  being  included  in  the 
Terms of Reference of the assignment given to Messrs. Benn GUNN and Paul SCOTNEY, the 
two assessors of the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in Mauritius, who will assist in 
the implementation of the recommendations thereof. 

I  am,  now,  replying  to  part  (d)  of  the  question.  The  Police  des  Jeux  has  been 
restructured  and  reinforced  with  additional  manpower.  There  has  also  been  a  cleanup 
exercise. There is now a better co-operation and synergy among the GRA, Police des Jeux 
and the Mauritius Revenue Authority, at all levels. 

As I stated earlier, both my Office and the GRA are enlisting the services of experts to 
build  competency  and  capacity  at  the  Police  des  Jeux,  for  better  monitoring  of  illegal 
activities related to horse racing.   

As regards part (e) of the question, as I informed the House, while replying to PQ No. 
B/255 and PQ No. B/305, the Gambling Regulatory Authority Betting Control System which 
was  transferred  to  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority,  in  March  2013,  is  still  being  used  to 
monitor horse racing betting and football betting.   

With the enhancements made to the system, the Mauritius Revenue Authority is, now, 

in a better position to - 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 
iv. 

do more timely comparison of betting turnover declared in tax returns with the 
information on the system; 
in  case  of  non-compliance,  such  as  non-submission  of  returns,  raise  timely 
assessments; 
verify whether betting receipts are being correctly declared, and 
analyse the database of betting information to detect any abnormal pattern. 

 

25 

As regards the Central Electronic Monitoring System, a two stage bidding exercise, in 
line  with  the  Public  Procurement  Act  2006,  is  in  progress,  at  the  Mauritius  Revenue 
Authority, to shortlist potential bidders for the implementation of this system. 

I have also been informed, by the Mauritius Revenue Authority, that the outcome of 
the pilot testing exercise of Electronic Fiscal Device of a bookmaker stall was comparable to 
the current Gambling Regulatory Authority Betting Control System and, therefore, there is no 
compelling reason to use the Electronic Fiscal Device in the horse racing sector for the time 
being. 

I wish to reassure the House, here, of my commitment to take appropriate actions to 
redress  the  horse  racing  sector  as  recommended  by  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Horse 
Racing in Mauritius. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  one  of  the  main  recommendations  of  the 
Commission of Inquiry was the setting up of a Mauritius Turf Authority. Can I know from 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether preliminary work has started for the setting up of that 
Mauritius Turf Authority? 

The Prime Minister: No. I must be honest, I am not aware. I don’t know whether 

work has started. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed us that La 
Police des Jeux has been restructured.  Can I know who is at present at the head of the Police 
des Jeux? 

The Prime Minister: One Mr Gérard. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know him, I don’t know who he is. 

 

JUDICIAL COMMITTEE OF THE PRIVY COUNCIL - MR G. C. – FEES PAID 

(No. B/417) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr G. C., he will state the 
assignments for which his services were retained by Government, over the period July 2005 
to 10 December 2014, indicating in each case, the - 

 

26 

(a)  

amount of fees paid out thereto, giving a breakdown thereof and,  

(b)  

number of visits he has effected to Mauritius in connection therewith, further 
indicating - 

(i)  

the dates thereof; 

(ii)  

the purposes therefor;  

(iii)  

the expenditure incurred in connection therewith in terms of air tickets, 
accommodation and other allowances, if any, and  

(iv)  

if Government car facilities had been provided thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, during the period July 2005 to 10 December 
2014, the services of Mr G.C. had been retained by the Government in connection with cases 
before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.  His services were also retained in 2013 
in  the  Michaela  Harte  case.    The  total  fees  paid  to  Mr  G.C.  for  these  cases  amounted  to 
Rupees fourteen million two hundred and sixty thousand two hundred and eight and forty-
seven cents (Rs14,260,208.47). I am tabling the information requested by the hon. Member in 
respect of each of these cases. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, Mr G. C. visited Mauritius on 
16 occasions between September 2008 to 10 December 2014.  He did not travel to Mauritius 
between 2005 to 2007.   

His  visits  from  September  2008  to  2012  were  mainly  in  connection  with  matters 
related  to  claims  made  against  the  Government  in  regard  to  land  at  Le  Morne.    For  these 
cases, Mr G.C. had been paid an additional fee of £47,000.  Other expenditure in relation to 
the visits of Mr G.C. and his family members were as follows -  

Air tickets  
Accommodation  

(i) 
(ii) 
I  am  tabling  the  detailed  information  requested  by  the  hon.  Member  in  regard  to 

- 
- 

Rs2,464,413.00 
Rs1,497,214.59 

expenditure incurred on air tickets and accommodation.   

As regards Government car facilities, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that Mr G.C. was provided with a chauffeur-driven car by the VIPSU during each of his visits 
to Mauritius. 

 

27 

Madam Speaker, I am not in a position to provide information on the purpose of the 
visits of Mr G.C. during the period October 2012 onwards as I am informed by the Private 
Office of the Prime Minister’s Office that no record is available. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  his  service  was 
retained  in  the  case  of  Bangalia?  I  know  that  many  documents  have  disappeared  from  the 
PMO. 

(Interruptions) 

May I ask the hon. Prime Minister whether he can confirm whether his services were retained 
in the case of Bangalia?  

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  it  may  be  there  in  the  document  that  I  am  producing. 

Sincerely, it is not to my knowledge; I cannot answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

OFFENCE OF MURDER CASES - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/418)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the offence of murder, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 
the  number  of  reported/detected  cases  thereof,  since  2005  to  date,  indicating  the  number 
thereof which -  

(a)  
(b)  

are still under inquiry, and  
have  been  tried,  indicating  the  outcome  thereof  in  terms  of  conviction  and 
acquittal. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  information  requested  for  is  being 

compiled and will be tabled in the Library of the National Assembly. 

Mr Uteem: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. There have been lately some high profile 
cases of murders which have resulted in acquittal by the Jury. May I know from the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister whether he will agree that it is time for our Police to be trained to stop relying 
on confession to secure a conviction? 

 

28 

The Prime Minister: Do I understand that confession should no more be taken into 

consideration? 

(Interruptions) 

Well, if it is proved; we know that already it is in the law. If the confession is not obtained 
legally, the Court will not allow it to be admitted. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Being given the number of cases that have 
led to acquittal in the case of murder because of unsoundness of confession made, would the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  give  the  assurance  to  the  House  that  the  Police  and  Criminal 
Evidence  Act  which  has  already  been  prepared  by  the  previous  Government  would  be 
presented  this  session  so  that  there  is  an  improvement  in  the  law  regarding  the  taking  of 
confession? 

The Prime Minister: I have been told it is being looked into. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – AIRWAY COFFEE LTD. - CONTRACT 

(No. B/419) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the allocation of the contract 
to  Airway  Coffee  Ltd.  for  the  provision  of  catering  services  at  the  Sir  Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam International Airport, allegedly to the detriment of Tropical Times, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from Airports of Mauritius Ltd., information as to if the case 
has been referred to the Commissioner of Police for inquiry and, if so, indicate the outcome 
thereof and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

 

29 

MAURITIUS POST & COOPERATIVE BANK LTD. – CHIEF EXECUTIVE 

OFFICER - INQUIRY 

(No. B/420) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Mr  R.K.B.,  former  Chief 
Executive Officer of the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd., he will, for the benefit of 
the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  where  matters 
stand  as  to  the  inquiry  being  carried  out  in  relation  thereto,  indicating  the  charges  lodged 
against him, if any. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that on 27 April 2015, the  Bank of Mauritius reported a case of malpractice  and abuse of 
power in sanctioning loans and overdrafts to various customers against Mr R.K.B., former 
Chief Executive Officer of the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank.  An enquiry was then 
initiated by the Police. 

During the course of the investigation, Mr R.K.B. was interviewed and arrested on 08 
July 2015.  On the next day, he appeared before the District Court of Port Louis (South) and 
was  provisionally  charged  with  “Conspiracy”  and  “Failing  to  comply  with  the  banking 
guidelines and instructions issued by the Central Bank”.  As at to date, two persons from the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  and  one  from  the  Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank  have  given 
statements to the Police.  

On  10  July  2015,  Mr  R.K.B.  was  granted  bail  and  his  next  appearance  in  Court  is 

scheduled for 12 November 2015.   

I am further informed that the enquiry is still in progress. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  several  documents  have 

disappeared from the bank after the election? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that’s what I have been told, yes. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/431 addressed to the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister has been withdrawn. Time is over! 

 

30 

 Questions  addressed 

that 
Parliamentary  Question  Nos.  B/443,  B/451,  B/452,  B/454,  B/455,  B/471,  B/472,  and  also 
B/465 and B/466 have been withdrawn.  

to  hon.  Ministers!  The  Table  has  been  advised 

The Table has been further advised that PQ No. B/436 in regard to the forthcoming 
Hajj pilgrimage addressed to the hon. Minister of Arts and Culture will now be replied by the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

OFFSHORE COMPANIES - MODI GATE SAGA/IPL CRICKET LEAGUE, INDIA - 

MONEY LAUNDERING 

(No.  B/433)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the Lalit Modi 
Gate Saga/IPL Cricket League, India, he will state if the Indian authorities have sought the 
assistance of the Mauritian authorities in relation to the inquiry it is carrying out regarding the 
transfer of black money through offshore companies in Mauritius and, if so, indicate where 
matters stand, indicating the - 

amount of money allegedly involved, and  
name of the companies allegedly involved therein. 

(a)  
(b)  
Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  State  Law  Office  that  the 
information  requested  is  privileged  under  section  20  of  the  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal 
and Related Matters Act 2003 which provides that documents exchanged between States and 
international Tribunals cannot be disclosed. 

I am further informed, Madam Speaker, by the Financial Services Commission that 
information relating to offshore companies is confidential under section 83 of the Financial 
Services Act 2007. This information can only be obtained following an order for disclosure 
by  the  Supreme  Court  under  section  83(5)  and  this  order  can  only  be  obtained  upon 
application of the Director of Public Prosecutions for the purpose of any enquiry or trial into 
or  relating  to  the  trafficking  of  narcotics  and  dangerous  drugs,  arms  trafficking  or  money 
laundering under section 83(6). 

 

31 

I also wish to draw the attention of the hon. Member to the fact that information held 
by  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  is  confidential  under  section  30  of  the  Financial 
Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2002 and can only be disclosed to third parties 
to enable the FIU to carry out its functions (under section 30(2)(a)), in the interests of the 
prevention or detection of crime (under section 30(2)(b)) or in connection with the discharge 
of any international  obligation to which Mauritius is subject (section 30(2)(c)).  

Regarding requests from overseas FIUs, Mauritius and India are both members of the 
Egmont  Group  of  Financial  Intelligence  Units  and  exchanges  of  information  within  the 
Group are governed by the Egmont Principles for Information Exchange. These principles are 
incorporated into our domestic legislation under section 20(2) of the FIAMLA and only cater 
for information to be disseminated for administrative, investigative, prosecutorial or judicial 
purposes (as approved by the foreign FIU).  

Regretfully, Madam Speaker, the information sought by the hon. Member cannot be 

obtained in view of the legal restrictions that I have mentioned. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has taken cognizance 
of the last speech made by the Leader of the Opposition at the Lok Sabha?  While intervening 
on Lalit Modi’s case, he made mention of one company, Wilton Associates, situated at Ebène 
Skies  Building  where  millions  of  black  money  was  being  transferred  to  that  company.  I 
would like to know whether he is aware of that speech, whether he has taken cognizance of 
that and what action is being taken. 

Mr Bhadain:  Yes, Madam Speaker,  I have taken cognizance of the speech in the 
Lok Sabha by the Leader of the Opposition and I refer the hon. Member to the answer that I 
have given before.  Unfortunately, because of the legal restrictions, none of these issues can 
be disclosed. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I have two supplementary questions being given the importance.  Can 
I ask the hon. Minister whether he has inquired into the Lalit Modi’s scandal, that somebody 
who has been involved, in one way or another, in the companies which have been mentioned, 
has been appointed as Member or Chairperson in one of the Government-owned companies? 

Mr Bhadain: The investigation is being conducted and because of legal restrictions, 
we cannot get into that.  But I am not aware of the issue which has been raised by the hon. 
Member. 

 

32 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inquire whether one of the persons is involved 
in  all  these  transactions  which  are  associated  with  this  company,  Wilton  Associates  or 
another  company  situated  at  Ébène?  If  it  is  found  true,  immediately  that  person  must  be 
sacked  as  Chairperson  of  that  very  important  banking  institution  with  regard  to  our 
reputation. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, Mauritius is un État de droit.  I don’t know whether 
there are any persons who are involved in banking institutions, who are the subject matter of 
the case that the hon. Member is mentioning, but, as I stated, inquiries are being conducted 
and  because  of  legal  restrictions  -  I  wish  I  could  explain  more  to  the  hon.  Member,  but  I 
can’t. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Please,  don’t  use  unparliamentary  expressions!    Next  question! 

Hon. Uteem, you have a question? 

Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please!  Can you allow hon. Uteem to ask his question? 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, please, carry on! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I note that there is a change in the attitude 
of Members of this House answering questions on offshore companies because previously, 
before this very House, at the beginning of the year, the hon. Leader of the Opposition asked 
a question about Belvédère which is a global business company and, at that time, the hon. 
Minister concerned did not have any problem answering on this matter.  There was no issue 
of  confidentiality.    Being  given  that  last  week,  in  this  very  House,  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development referred to Mauritius as being a land where crooks put 
their money, being given that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development went 
on  radio  and  one  of  these  newspapers  and  talked  about  the  time  of  Mauritius  being  a  tax 
haven is over.   

 

33 

Madam Speaker:  The hon. Member must ask his question. 

Mr Uteem: Would the hon. Minister give the assurance to the House that the FSC and 
the regulatory authorities would be ruthless against all Directors and Management Companies 
involved in all these scandals? 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, as a lawyer, the hon. Member should know that the 
case of Belvédère  was not subject to section 20  of the Mutual Assistance in Criminal and 
Related Matters Act 2003.  We are talking about different things.  Now, with regard to what 
he has said about the offshore sector, I think the hon. Member should know by now that this 
Government is all about transparency and good governance and we are cleaning up the mess 
which has been left behind and the offshore sector is one sector where we are inculcating a 
new  vision  of  substance,  of  transparency,  of  good  governance  which  is  going  to  take  this 
country forward. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

CATTLE (LIVE) - EID-UL-ADHA FESTIVAL - IMPORTATION 

(No.  B/434)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection 
whether, in regard to live cattle, beef, goats and muttons, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain information as to the number thereof imported since January 2015 to date, indicating 
the – 

(a) 

names of the - 

(i) 

importers  

(ii) 

sellers, and  

(iii) 

resellers thereof;  

(b) 

number  of  complaints  received  at  the  Consumer  Protection  Unit  in  relation 
thereto;  

 

34 

(c) 

number of contraventions established in relation to the importation thereof in 
anticipation of the forthcoming Eid-Ul-Adha festival, indicating the - 

(i) 

price per kilogram thereof of each, indicating if same is fixed, and 

(ii) 

countries of origin thereof, and 

(d) 

if Government is proposing to acquire a cattle carrier therefor and, if so, where 
matters stand. 

Mr Gungah:  Madam Speaker, with your permission, I propose to reply to PQ Nos 

B/434 and B/459 together as they relate to the same matter. 

Madam Speaker, in my reply to PQ B/162 in March 2015, I informed the House that 
the importation of live cattle, beef, goats and muttons has been liberalised and subject to an 
import  permit  from  the  Veterinary  Services  of  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 
Security, any person may import live cattle for the purpose of Eid-Ul-Adha Festival and any 
other purposes. 

I am informed by the MRA that the number of live cattle, goats and sheep imported 

from January 2015 to 31 August 2015 is as follows - 

Cattle:   

9,689; 

Goats:   

631, and 

Sheep:   

352. 

As regards part (a) (i) of question B/434, the importers are Bosmara Cattle Breeders 
Co. Ltd, Sains Product Ltd and Socovia Belle Vue Ltée.  However, for the forthcoming Eid-
Ul-Adha festival, I am informed by the Veterinary Services of the Ministry of Agro-Industry 
and Food Security that only Socovia Belle Vue Ltée has imported 4,696 cattle and 983 goats 
and sheep. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (ii),  I  am  informed  that  there  are  some  18  resellers.  With  your 

permission, Madam Speaker, I am tabling a list thereof.  

Madam  Speaker,  concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  22  complaints,  including  five 
anonymous  ones  have  been  received  at  the  Consumer  Affairs  Unit  of  my  Ministry,  out  of 

 

35 

which 21 refer to the sale of cattle at prices higher than the fixed price of Rs125/Kg, and one 
on the age of the cattle being less than two years old.  

As regards part (c), no contravention has been established as none of the complainants 
produced documentary evidence to support the complaints in respect of higher prices being 
charged. 

In  August  this  year,  the  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Sale  of  Imported  Live 
Animals for Home Slaughter) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 was gazetted to fix the retail 
selling  price  of  live  cattle  imported  from  South  Africa  for  the  forthcoming  Eid-Ul-Adha 
festival at Rs125 per kilogram. 

In the beginning, after the gazetting of these regulations, some confusion arose on the 

type and grade of cattle being put on sale. 

In order to remove this confusion, last Friday, Government took the decision to the 
effect that only one price of Rs125/Kg shall be charged in respect of live cattle imported from 
South  Africa  for  slaughtering  on  the  occasion  of  the  forthcoming  Eid-Ul-Adha  festival, 
irrespective of their type and grade. Purchasers of live cattle who have already been charged a 
higher price will be reimbursed the difference. 

Regarding  the  complaint  that  the  cattle  might  be  less  than  two  years  old,  as 
prescribed, officers of my Ministry accompanied by Veterinary Officers of the Ministry of 
Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  carried  out  a  verification  exercise  through  random 
sampling. The Veterinary Officers checked the teeth of the cattle. I was informed that they 
were all above two years old.  

The  Veterinary  Officers  are  also  effecting  spot  checks  regularly  to  verify  that  the 
cattle offered for sale in relation to Eid-Ul-Adha festival 2015 are above two years old. The 
Veterinary Officers will also be posted to attend to any complaint regarding the age of the 
cattle on the scheduled dates of sale of cattle as from 17 September. Furthermore, officers of 
the Legal Metrology Services of my Ministry are also ensuring that duly assized weighing 
instruments will be used for weighing of cattle for the forthcoming Eid-Ul-Adha festival.  I 
wish also to inform Members of the House that a constant presence of the Police on the farms 
will be ensured during that period. 

 

36 

4,839 live cattle, 352 live sheep and 631 live goats have been imported from South 
Africa. The other countries of origin are Australia and Kenya from where 1,903 and 2,947 
live cattle have been imported respectively. 

Madam Speaker, the possibilities of affreighting a cattle carrier for the transport of 
live cattle for Eid-Ul-Adha festival has been examined and has not been found to be viable, 
as I explained in my reply to PQ B/162 in March 2015. Regarding the acquisition of a cattle 
carrier,  the  Governmental  institutions  concerned  will  look  into  the  feasibility  of  such  a 
project.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, there has been so much confusion regarding the 
prices of live cattle recently and one of the reasons was that the main importer, Mr Peerbux 
from  Socovia  Ltd.  has  stated  that  he  had  an  agreement  with  the  Ministry  concerning  the 
prices and that prices would be Rs125 and for different types of cattle, that is, the charolais 
would be sold at Rs140. Can the hon. Minister confirm the existence of this agreement and 
make it public? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  no  agreement  between  Socovia  Ltd. 
and the Ministry concerning prices. In fact, when negotiations were carried out together with 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, it was decided to fix the price at Rs125 per kilo for all cattle 
that are imported from South Africa and that is in the regulation. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, now that it is clear that there would be only one 
price for all the cattle, may I ask the hon. Minister how the reimbursement will be done for 
those who have already paid for the higher prices? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, those, who have already reserved, have been issued an 
invoice.  They  have  to  present  their  invoice  at  the  counter  and  they  will  be  refunded  the 
amount. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Referring  to  the  past  PQ  that  the  hon.  Minister  just  stated  was 

asked by myself in March this year, I will quote part of the reply of the hon. Minister – 

“However, I am informed by the Mauritius Meat Authority that it intends to 
import  live  cattle,  goats  and  sheep  to  regulate  the  market  to  control  unfair 
practices.” 

May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  where  matters  stand  regarding  the  Mauritius  Meat  Authority 
importing live cattle? 

 

37 

Mr  Gungah:  As  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  beginning,  the  possibilities  of 
affreighting a cattle carrier was found not to be viable and concerning the acquisition of cattle 
carrier, the govermental institutions, concerned with it, are going to look into the feasibility 
of the project. 

Mr Mahomed: I understand from the hon. Minister that a sampling has been done as 
regards the age of the cattle and they are found to be okay. I also understand that, as from 17 
September,  an  officer  of  the  Veterinary  Division  will  be  full-time  present  on  site.  Will  he 
ensure that each and every cattle that is being sold pass the age of two years at the material 
time? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I do not know the procedures that take place normally 
because I never assisted such a procedure, but I think it is a well-established protocol. I am 
sure the veterinarians of the Agro-Industry will do their work as they have already done it in 
the past and it should be fine according to me. 

Mr Uteem: I thank the Government for clarifying the situation on the Rs125 kilo. The 
regulations  apply  to  cattle.  Would  consideration  be  given,  maybe  not  for  this  year,  but  in 
coming years, to also fix the price of sheep and goat so that there is no exploitation during 
Eid-Ul-Adha? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, the Committee that was set up under the presidentship 
of the Vice-Prime Minister, myself and the Minister of Agro-Industry, is still working. I can 
inform the House that we are working with the aim to reduce the others, that is, goat, sheep, 
muttons and we are trying to do it this year. Most probably, very soon, we will announce it to 
the public. 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

DOMAINE LES PAILLES LTD - LOSSES 

(No.  B/435)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the Domaine Les Pailles Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
State Investment Corporation, information as to – 

(a) 

the amount of profit or loss thereof, as the case may be, since January 2014 to 
date; 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

38 

the number of persons presently employed thereat; 

if the assets thereof are being disposed of and, if so, give details thereof, and 

if the sale thereof is being envisaged and, if so, give details thereof. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question,  I 
am informed by the State  Investment Corporation  Ltd (SIC) that Domaine  Les Pailles  Ltd 
(DLP) has been making losses for years. In fact, the total losses of DLP as at 31 December 
2014 stood at Rs422 m. For the period January 2015 until the cessation of operations in July 
2015, the Domaine Les Pailles has incurred additional losses of Rs21 m., that is, an average 
of Rs3 m. monthly. 

In relation to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the SIC gave 
DLP  six  months  to  turnaround  this  loss  making  company.  However,  DLP  continued  to 
accumulate  losses  due  to  its  high  overhead  cost  and  its  inability  to  generate  additional 
revenue.  Following  consultations  with  the  employees  and  the  union,  the  142  permanent 
employees  of  DLP  have  opted  to  voluntarily  leave  the  company  against  payment  of  two 
months  compensation  per  year  of  service.  The  total  compensation  paid  to  the  employees 
amounted to Rs49 m. As at date, there are no permanent staff on the payroll of DLP. 

Concerning  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  tendering 
exercise was carried out in 2012 under the previous Government for an outright sale of the 
land  and  buildings  belonging  to  DLP.  Yihai  International  Investment  Management  Ltd,  a 
Chinese Company, which offered Rs441 m., was selected. Accordingly, action was initiated 
for the sale of those assets. 

Madam Speaker, after the 2014 General Election, Government decided not to sell the 
DLP  land  and  buildings.  Instead,  SIC  entered  into  a  Joint  Venture  Agreement  with  Yihai 
International Investment Management Ltd to undertake a mixed infrastructural development 
project  with  Smart  city  components.  SIC  will  contribute  30%  of  the  equity  of  the  Joint 
Venture in the form of land and buildings which were to be sold to Mr Yihai while the 70% 
will be held by Yihai International Investment Management Ltd. 

Regarding  part  (d)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  reaffirm  Government  intention  not  to 

dispose of the land and buildings of DLP. 

Mr Ameer Meea: From the figures that the hon. Minister of Finance just gave us, the 
SIC would contribute to 30% of the shareholding by bringing the land and the assets of the 

 

39 

company. Can I ask the hon. Minister how much the structure shareholding has been valued 
and how much this 30% represents and in parallel the 70% that Yihai would bring, how much 
does it amount? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The 30% of SIC equity is represented by the land that was 
going to be sold to Yihai which means that the 70% that will be paid by Yihai is equal to the 
value of those lands. It must be Rs441 m. 

You are right. 

(Interruptions) 

And plus 18 Arpents which was valued at Rs57 m. by the Evaluator. There was an 

additional acreage of some 18 Arpents.  

Following  an  evaluation  exercise  carried  out  by  NP  Jeetun  Chartered  Valuation 
Surveyors,  the  extra  land  was  valued  at  Rs55.7  m.  This  amount  was  proposed  to  be  high. 
However, Yihai International Investment Management Ltd. was prepared to pay only Rs1.8 
m. This was in 2014. 

The  former  management  of  SIC  agreed  to  the  price  of  Rs1.8  m.,  that  is,  each  acre 
were being sold for Rs100,000. Naturally, this was well below the price. This amount also 
has been added to the Rs441 m. of the lands which were to be purchased by the company. 
Am I being right or is there any question? 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: We have been informed that under the previous Government the tender 
exercise was carried out, but the new Government decided to cancel that tender exercise and 
we have been informed that discussions are on between SIC and, I take it that it is a company 
from China, Yihai International Investment Management Ltd. I would like to know whether 
Yihai  International  Investment  Management  Ltd.  was  amongst  those  companies  who 
tendered in under the previous Government and, if not, who approached, who chose and who 
carried out discussions with that company? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  There  was  a  tendering  exercise  carried  out  by  the  former 
Government whereby this company won the tender to buy all the lands. In fact, when we took 
over we said that we would not sell those lands at any cost. That was the first decision not to 
sell lands to a foreigner. Then, it was clear that there were interventions, the former Secretary 

 

40 

General of the Labour Party was involved in it. So, it was for obvious reasons and for clarity 
also that we said we would not sell. Then, the buyer was to go to Court because he was the 
one who was selected. This is where I said: okay, let us go for a joint venture. The land would 
not  be  sold  but  it  would  go  into  a  joint  venture  whereby  Yihai  International  Investment 
Management Ltd. will invest more money. In fact, it is a huge project. This new project will 
total an investment of Rs11 billion and in the process of discussions, it is clear now that SIC 
will get two or three times more than the money agreed upon if the land was sold. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask on a point of clarification, is the hon. Minister telling us that 
Yihai  International  Investment  Management  Ltd.  won  the  tender  under  the  previous 
Government and is now negotiating with SIC, the same company? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  it  is  the  same  company.  In  fact,  the  purchase  was 
nearly  completed.  It  was  just  that  on  the  day  of  the  election,  one  director  of  SIC  was  not 
present  on  the  site.  So,  that  was  our  chance  that  the  land  was  not  sold.  It  is  the  same 
company. In fact, the same company was going to prosecute Government because there was a 
legal commitment by SIC to sell.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Do I take it from the hon. Minister, if I understood him properly, that the 
bidder  offered  the  sum  of  Rs400  m.  approximately  during  the  last  Government?  The  hon. 
Minister also said that the outstanding debt, now, left by Domaine Les Pailles Ltd. is more 
than  Rs500 m. so that, in fact, Domaine Les Pailles Ltd. has become more or less a toxic 
asset because there are more debts than the value itself? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The hon. Member is right. In fact, the auditor’s report came 
to conclusion that the debt of Domaine Les Pailles Ltd. was higher than its assets and that the 
company could no longer go on. 

As usual! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

41 

Mr Ameer Meea: Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will come back to the figures 
because there is no quarrel that the Rs441 m. was not a good price that was signed by the 
previous Government. On this, there is no quarrel. But, according to Press statement le Defi 
Quotidien  of  25  June  2015,  it  was  stated  that  the  present  Government  est  en  train  de 
renégocier à ce niveau et espère pouvoir obtenir plus de R800 millions pour céder les 70% 
de ses parts dans la  compagnie gestionnaire du Domaine Les  Pailles. So, my question is, 
now that 70% has been given to this Chinese company, but at what price? Because we agree 
that the Rs441 m. was a much lesser price and not worth the value of the assets. What I want 
is a clear answer from the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development on what is 
the value. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Maybe  I  explained  myself  wrongly.  The  land  that  was 
supposed to be sold to this company was not sold. So, SIC used this land as equity which 
represents 30% of the company. The 70% is represented by all the investments that the new 
company will bring in. It is an Rs11 billion project. Therefore, the new company which is the 
Yihai  International  Investment  Management  Ltd.  will  bring  in  70%  of  new  assets  or  new 
equity. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I would ask the hon. Member to put question. We don’t sit 

down and put question and say cadeau. Put your question! 

Madam Speaker: Okay, hon. Ameer Meea, next question, please! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I don’t understand this gentleman. He says 

‘free’ and then he sits down! Stand up and put your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t make comments from a sitting position!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, please sit down! 

(Interruptions) 

 

42 

Hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  please  sit  down!  I  have  already 
ordered the next question. Would you, please, allow hon. Ameer Meea to ask his question? 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Yes.  But,  Madam  Speaker,  it  was  a  question  of  national 
importance and public funds. That was why I wanted to ask a last supplementary question on 
this  issue  because  there  has  been  so  much  confusion  from  the  answer  given  by  the  hon. 
Minister. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  I  have  asked  you  to  ask  the  next  question, 

please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

HAJJ MISSION - COMPOSITION 

(No.  B/436)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
forthcoming Hajj pilgrimage, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Islamic 
Cultural Centre, information as to –  

(a)  

the composition of the – 

(i)  

pre-Hajj mission, and  

(ii)   Hajj mission, and 

(b)   measures  that  have  been  or  will  be  taken  to  avoid  shortcomings  in  the 

organization thereof which arose in the previous pilgrimages. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this Parliamentary Question. 

I am informed that the pre-Hajj mission was effected by Mr Abdool Gaffoor Kassim 

who is the Officer-in-charge of the Islamic Cultural Centre. 

Regarding the Hajj mission, the delegation was made up of the following - 

(i) 

Mr Samioullah Lauthan 

-   Chairman of ICC is the Head of  

 

 

 

43 

  Delegation  

(ii)  Mr Fareed Jaunboccus 

-   Board Member of ICC 

(iii)  Mr Abdool Gaffoor Kassim 

-   Officer-in-charge of ICC  

(iv)  Mr Ahmad Faizee Khodabaccus 

-  

Interpreter  

(v)  Mr Twahair Budullah 

-   Hajj/Programme officer of ICC, and  

(vi)  Mr Aboo Bakar Manjoo 

- 

as a person with long experience in 

 

 

  Hajj missions. 

There is no political agent. I would like to inform the House that all the 1040 visas 
provided  for  the  benefit  of  Mauritian  Hajjis  have  already  been  issued  according  to  the 
Register of the ICC. 

As for part (b) of the question, I have to inform that Hajj concerns about 3 million 
people  from  around  the  whole  world.    There  is  a  constant  effort  on  the  part  of  Saudi 
authorities to improve the conditions in which Hajj is performed. 

At our level there is still room for improvement, especially as regards expectations of 

Mauritian Hajjis and attitudes of Operators. 

However, the following measures have been taken to improve the situation further - 

1. 

2. 

greater stress on Hajj Awareness Programme organised by the ICC attended 
by the prospective Hajjis to take note on role and responsibilities of each Hajj 
stakeholder, viz ICC, Muassassah, Saudi authorities, Operators and Hajjis; 

to ensure that accommodation is of required standard as laid down hereunder 
by  the  ICC,  the  Officer-in-Charge  of  the  ICC  was  sent  to  Saudi  Arabia  to 
inspect  buildings  booked  in  Makkah  and  Madinah  prior  to  finalisation  of 
contracts by operators. 

The  standard  which  is  required  for  accommodation  requires  that  the  hotels,  duly 
approved by Saudi Ministry of Commerce and listed on the Saudi Electronic System, are 3 
stars up.  The amenities should include - 

•  single beds,  

 

44 

•  air conditioner in each room, 
•  attached bathroom, table, wardrobe/hanger. 
The hotels should also be provided with lifts and necessary fire escapes.  

The number of pilgrims per room as per Tasreeh and not exceeding five in any case. 

It is also required that the distance to Haram should be reasonable, that is 800 metres 

maximum. 

Following  complaints  from  the  operators  and  pilgrims  performing  Hajj  in  2014, 
accommodation  in  Makka  will  be  in  three  buildings  this  year  instead  of  two  last  year  and 
accommodation in Madina will be in four buildings instead of three last year. 

To avoid all misunderstanding and prevent undue expectations, all clauses in contract 
between  Hadjis  and  Operators  have  been  spelt  out  and  explained  clearly  in  details  during 
meetings  held  at  ICC  prior  to  signature  of  contracts  especially  as  regards  components 
included in the package/s, location and type of accommodation and all other services offered 
in  Saudi  Arabia.  In  fact,  the  packages  offered  to  pilgrims  include  all  costs  including  air 
tickets and all charges in Saudi Arabia and exclude only qurbani and food. 

Facilities  provided  during  the  five  days  of  Hajj  have  already  been  upgraded  to 
category B this year instead of C plus last year.  This will hopefully give more comfort to our 
brothers, sisters and elderlies to performing hajj and also ensure provision of food and drinks 
during the five days of the pilgrimage. 

I would also like to specify that food on flight will be served according to the wish of 

Mauritian Hajjis. 

As for the selection of Operators, a notice was published in the local Press inviting all 
those  interested  to  act  as  operators  to  register  themselves  with  the  ICC.  More  than  30 
applications were received. ICC carried out a selection exercise by interview of all those who 
applied for a licence.  Provisional licences were issued to 16 of them and pilgrims were free 
to choose an operator.  After the latter exercise, a final list of 11 operators were given a final 
licence.  

All operators have also submitted a performance bond of Rs275,000 and Rs500,000 
depending on the number of pilgrims in their group to ensure they respect all the clauses in 
their agreement with the pilgrims. 

 

45 

With such arrangements, I am confident that Hajj 2015 will be performed in the best 

conditions.  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Now,  that  the  ICC  has  been 
transferred to the Ministry of Housing and Lands, can I ask the hon. Minister whether the 
number of visa compared to last year has increased or decreased and also the free tickets that 
will be issued either by the ICC or from free tickets received from the Saudi Authorities may 
he table a list of the beneficiaries? 

Mr Soodhun: Thank you for this pertinent question and I will just like to inform my 
friend,  hon. Uteem, who visited the Mecca Haram this year and he is aware that construction 
is going on and it is not possible to cater with the satisfaction of the whole world. This year 
1040  visas  will  be  issued  and  we  hope  ‘insha  allah’  next  year  will  be  more  than  that. 
Concerning the free tickets, there is no free ticket this year, it was only last year, but not this 
year. There is no free ticket. 

Mr Mahomed: With regard to the number of Hajjis, my question is as follows – what 
is the backlog being given that not everybody could go this year? What is the back log that is 
left behind? 

Mr Soodhun: Nearly 4000. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister mentioned that the accomodation will be according to 
criteria, mainly, it has to be hotel standard and within a radius of 800 metres. My information 
from  the  Hajj  organisers  who  went  there,  is  that,  we  were  not  going  to  get  hotels,  but 
dormitories with the basic amenities and it is not going to be within the 800 metres radius and 
the reason for that according to these organisers is the delay from the Mauritian mission to go 
there and to book these accomodation. May I ask the hon. Minister whether he has the same 
information as I had? 

Mr Soodhun: No, it’s different because what we have done is that we have sent an 
officer from our ICC department for the first time and at the same time when the organisers 
are looking for the buildings and so on. So, the officer has checked and confirmed on the spot 
and then he gave us all the information. According to my information, it is exactly what I 
have already mentioned in my statement. 

 

46 

Mr Ameer Meea: One of the recent numerous Press conferences made by the hon. 
Minister, he stated that he will do surprise check there. May we know what is he going to 
check there? 

Mr Soodhun: If needed, why not! 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/419 which was to be 
replied by the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communication has 
been  withdrawn.  I  think  it  is  high  time  for  lunch.  I  suspend  the  sitting  for  one  and  a  half 
hours.  

At 1.17 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.53 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

PORT LOUIS & ROCHE BOIS - FISHERMEN - MARINE POLLUTION 
(No.  B/437)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands whether, in regard to the fishermen of the Port Louis and Roche 
Bois regions, he will state if he has been informed of the inconveniences they are facing due 
to  marine  pollution  being  caused  by  the  port  development  works  and,  if  so,  indicate  if 
consideration will be given for the setting up of a ministerial committee to look thereinto with 
a view to finding solutions thereto and, if not, why not. 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority 
(MPA) that it is fully complying with the EIA Licence for the extension and strengthening of 
the Mauritius Container Terminal Quay Project. Furthermore, MPA is not in the presence of 
any complaint lodged by any fisherman on any pollution caused to the environment by the 
port development activities.  

However, during the execution of the port development project, the fishermen have 
made  representations  that  their  fishing  activities  are  being  affected.    In  this  respect, 
discussions  were  held  between  the  MPA  and  the  fishermen  and  it  was  agreed  that  their 
representations  would  be  referred  to  a  mediation/arbitration  process.    The  former  Chief 
Justice  Mr  B.  Sik  Yuen  was  appointed  as  Mediator/Arbitrator  and  a  Mediation/Arbitration 

 

47 

Agreement  was  duly  signed  between  the  parties  on  07  July  2014.    Mediation  was  not 
successful  and  it  was  therefore  agreed  to  proceed  for  arbitration  which  was  scheduled  for 
November 2015.   

However, around June 2015 some 220 fishermen out of the 278 registered fishermen 
who  had  signed  the  Mediation/Arbitration  Agreement  signified  their  intention  to  quit  the 
arbitration process. 

The  fishermen  contacted  me.    At  their  request,  I  chaired  a  meeting  with  the 
Association des Pêcheurs on 14 May 2015 in the presence of representatives of the MPA, 
Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  and  also  the  Ministry  of  Environment, 
Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management.   

In the light of discussions, I was informed by the Association des Pêcheurs about a 

petition signed by some 250 fishermen to withdraw from the arbitration.  

My  Ministry  held  a  further  meeting  with  the  Association  des  Pêcheurs  on  29  July 
2015.    During  that  meeting,  the  fishermen  requested  for  a  speedy  settlement  of  the  issues 
involved. 

Further  discussions  were  held  with  the  representatives  of  the  fishermen  and  an 
agreement was reached between the MPA and the fishermen.   Discussions are still going on 
and I learned even today that they have almost arrived at a conclusion, at an agreement, and 
maybe in a couple of days they will be given a substantial compensation.  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  In  my  question,  I  asked  the  hon. 
Minister whether he is aware of the marine pollution caused by the port development and, 
whether consideration will be given for the setting up of a ministerial committee. I did not 
receive any answer through this specific question. 

Madam Speaker: If the hon. Minister has answered… 

 (Interruptions) 

He has answered. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  my  question  is  specific  to  the  issue  of  marine 

pollution.  EIA is something different. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, maybe you can repeat what you have just said about 

marine pollution. 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  For  the  information  of  the  hon.  Member  -  I 
repeat - I said that MPA is not in the presence of any complaint lodged by any fisherman on 
any pollution caused by the environment. 

(Interruptions) 

 

48 

Mr Ameer Meea:  The hon. Minister said that he received representations. 
Mr Koonjoo: Yes, I met the fishermen. I discussed with them.  
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 
Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Minister, the negotiations now are between only 
those who are registered fishermen. There are around 29 fishermen, people who are earning 
their  living  by  fishing  and  they  have  produced  certain  evidence  to  show  that  they  are 
fishermen  but,  unfortunately,  they  are  not  registered.  The  mediation  did  not  take  them  on 
because the terms of reference of that mediation were only for those who were registered.  
Now that there is direct negotiation between the fishermen and the Ministry, can I ask the 
hon. Minister whether he is prepared to, at least, listen to these 29 people who were earning 
their living by fishing, but are not registered, so that they can have a compensation? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, the negotiations have been going for more than one 

year.  

Ultimately,  the  fishermen  themselves  have  agreed  on  this  agreement  for  a 
compensation. I said just now that they have already agreed and, maybe, in a couple of days 
they are getting the money. The hon. Member is asking me to see the persons who are not 
registered as fishermen; I don’t have any problem to see them. 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Just  on  a  point  of  clarification!  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  refer  to 
l’Association des Pêcheurs as representing the fishermen. Now, the organisation existing and 
claiming to represent them is le Syndicat des Pêcheurs. Are we talking about the same thing? 
Because,  the  official  name  is  Syndicat  des  Pêcheurs  and  the  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned 
l’Association des Pêcheurs.  Is it the same organisation and is the hon. Minister giving the 
wrong name? 

Mr Koonjoo: I presume it is the same association, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  The hon.  Minister stated that an agreement is being reached; may 

we know the quantum, the amount that would be paid to each fisherman? 

Mr  Koonjoo:    To  answer  to  the  question  of  the  hon.  Member,  there  will  be  a 

substantial compensation. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Barbier! 

 

49 

Mr Barbier:  The hon. Minister mentioned that 278 fishers are concerned with the 
problem.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether it includes fishers from Tombeau Bay, 
Roche Bois, Les Salines, Sable Noir, Grande Rivière and Pointe aux Sables or only parts of 
these regions?  Because all these regions are concerned with the port development actually.  
Furthermore, I have a question which I don’t think we will have time… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Barbier… 

Mr Barbier:  May I ask the hon. Minister, at least, to clarify out of these 278, which 

regions are concerned with the compensation? 

Madam Speaker:  You will note that the question is in regard to fishermen of Port 

Louis and Roche Bois regions.  

Mr Koonjoo:  I need notice of this question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

BRAMER ASSET MANAGEMENT LTD – INVESTORS - REPAYMENT 

(No.  B/438)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
investors who have invested into or through the Bramer Asset Management Ltd., he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, information as to 
how the debentures to be issued thereto will be repaid. 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Property Fund Ltd. 
that  eligible  claims  from  Bramer  Asset  Management  Ltd.  investors  who  have  registered 
amounted to Rs3.08 billion.  To date, the National Property Fund Ltd. has repaid a total of 
Rs240  m.  to  these  investors  and  the  remaining  amount  of  Rs2.84  billion  will  be  settled 
through debentures issued in five annual tranches as from 30 June 2016.   

These  debentures  will  be  repaid  through  sale  of  immoveable  properties  including, 

inter alia – 

 

1. 

2. 

50 

disposal  of  properties  held  by  Bramer  Property  Fund,  which  is  currently 
valued at Rs1.24 billion, and 

disposal of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital property, which has been valued by 
the previous Special Administrators at Rs1.60 billion.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  be  making  a  statement  later  on  today  on  the  BAI  Ponzi 
scheme,  where  matters  have  reached  and  the  payment  of  debentures  with  respect  to  the 
victims of Super Cash Back Gold policyholders and investors of Bramer Asset Management 
Ltd. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  application  for  debentures  which  investors  in 
Bramer Asset Management Ltd. were requested to file, mention is made that they would be 
repaid only the aggregate principal amount invested, less 20%. So, they will get 20% less 
than what they have invested.  May I know from the hon. Minister why this figure of 20% 
and whether the same principle applies to Super Cash Back Gold also? 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, with regard to Bramer Asset Management Ltd. and 
the  related  funds,  including  the  Bramer  Property  Fund  and  Discretionary  Portfolio 
Management  Fund, the  special Administrators had informed us that they  would be  able to 
recover 27 cents in the rupee, but when we had representations from all the relevant people 
who  had  lost  their  money  through  this  huge  scam  and  they  explained  to  us  how  their 
investment were no different to Super Cash Back Gold and how agents had come into their 
houses with the forms to say that this is Super Cash Back Gold, this is Bramer Property Fund 
products,  there  was  no  difference  whatsoever.    So,  we  had  to  make  a  special  effort.  
Government  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  took  the  decision  that  we  had  to  be 
compassionate with these people because they were  going to be left out.  So, after having 
worked out all the figures, we came to the conclusion that people who had invested less than 
Rs500,000 in Bramer Asset Management Ltd products, could be repaid 85%.  So, 85 cents in 
the rupee instead of 27 cents in the rupee and there was a deduction of 15%, whereas people 
who  had  invested  Rs500,000  or  more,  then  the  deduction  would  be  20%;  hence,  the  80% 
which is being reimbursed.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes. 

Mr Bhadain:  And just to say, Madam Speaker, it is not the same for Super Cash 

Back Gold.  

 

51 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, on Friday, in an interview, the hon. Minister of Finance 

and Economic Development stated, and I quote - 

“Il est clair qu’actuellement l’argent dont on dispose ne suffira jamais à remplir nos 
engagements  vis-à-vis  de  tous  ceux  qui  se  sont  fait  prendre  par  le  jeu  malsain  de 
Bramer  Property  ou  de  Super  Cash  Back.    Mais  à  l’heure  qu’il  est,  les  actifs  ne 
suffisent pas pour que je puisse remplir mes engagements auprès de ceux qui ont joué 
à la loterie.” 

So, in the light of the statement made by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development that the assets will not be sufficient to repay to all policyholders, may I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  how  Government  intends  to  come  up  when  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development, himself, said that – 

“On ne dispose jamais suffisamment pour remplir nos engagements.” 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Speaker,  the  imperative  word  in  that  statement  by  my 
colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is ‘maintenant’, meaning 
that  at  this  present  moment  in  time,  it  is  true  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  fulfil  all  the 
commitments in relation to the huge fraud which has happened.  However, we have a well-
defined plan in terms of how we are going to meet those commitments and I am going to 
explain that today in the statement that I am going to make later. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: I have a last question on the debenture, Madam Speaker.   

Madam Speaker:  The hon. Minister will make a statement later on. 

Mr Uteem: No, this is pertaining to the debenture holders. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  I will allow you a last question. 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The conditions attached to the debentures 
state, at item 7, that the debentures shall not be transferrable.  May  I know from the hon. 
Minister,  I  know  he  made  a  statement  himself  to  say  that  he  would  be  handing  out  those 
debentures  so  that  people  could  use  the  debentures  as  guarantee  to  get  loans  from  various 

 

52 

banks.  So, if the debentures are not transferrable, what use will those debentures be to the 
debenture holders? 

Mr Bhadain:  The purpose of the debentures, Madam Speaker, is for people to be 
repaid  over  a  period  of  five  years  and  they  are  at  zero-coupon  rate,  no  interest  and  it  is 
redeemable over a period of five years, so 20% every year.  Now, I don’t have a copy of the 
form, but what is meant by transferrable, I believe, in the form is that you cannot transfer it to 
another person and by ‘person’ I mean, another individual.  Now, the question as to whether 
they can be redeemed with a bank, MCB factors, for instance, which wants to do factoring, 
probably that is possible.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISE BANK – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/439)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
proposed creation of a Small and Medium Enterprise Bank, he will state where matters stand. 

Mr Lutmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, in my Budget Speech, 
I  stated  that  the  most  ambitious  goal  of  this  Government  is  to  make  the  SME  sector  the 
backbone of our economy.   

In this respect, I announced the launching of the Small and Medium Enterprises Bank 
(SME  Bank)  to  provide  seed  capital  to  entrepreneurs  without  need  for  personal  guarantee. 
Accordingly, an amount of Rs10 billion would be made available to the Bank over the next 
five years.   

Madam Speaker, after wide consultations, it was found that creating a new bank, a 
dedicated  SME  Bank,  was  not  the  right  solution  given  that  Government  already  owns  the 
Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank and the National Commercial Bank Ltd. with all the 
infrastructure and facilities to service the SME sector.   

In this context, Government has found it more appropriate to merge these two banks 
under which there will be, among others, a dedicated SME Banking Department. This will 

 

53 

allow  SME  banking  activities  and  services  to  be  embedded  in  a  stronger  institution  with 
much larger asset base, bigger market share and broader spectrum of products and services.   

Accordingly, Government has incorporated a wholly owned company under the name 
of  MauBank  Holdings  Ltd.  on  03  September  2015.    MauBank  Holdings  Ltd.  will  be  the 
holding  company  of  both  the  National  Commercial  Bank  Ltd.  and  the  Mauritius  Post  and 
Cooperative Bank Ltd.   

The necessary procedures have already been initiated for the above merger exercise, 

which is expected to be completed by 01 January 2016.  

SME Banking activities will in due course be delivered in all the branches of the new 
bank.  In the meantime, both the National Commercial Bank Ltd. and the Mauritius Post and 
Cooperative Bank  Ltd.  will be providing financing for SME projects through their various 
branches.   

I wish to inform the House that a Launching Ceremony will be held this Thursday.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  order  to  provide  sustained  support  to  young  entrepreneurs  and 
ensure  that  their  projects  are  well-prepared,  bankable  and  successful,  an  SME  “One  Stop 
Shop” has already been set up under the aegis of the Ministry of Business, Enterprise and 
Cooperatives to work with the new bank.  

In  fact,  the  “One  Stop  Shop”  will  be  providing  under  one  roof,  all  the  support, 
financing  and  information  as  well  as  the  delivery  of  all  permits  and  licenses  that  SMEs 
require to start and grow their businesses.  

The  “One  Stop  Shop”  will  be  located  in  Port  Louis  as  it  is  more  accessible  and 

convenient. 

Mr Bérenger: I want to understand that clearly. So, I take it that as far as branches 
are concerned, there will no longer be branches of the former Post Office Bank or the new 
bank,  there  will  be  only  MauBank,  and  a  new  bank,  there  would  be  only  officers  of  that 
MauBank across the country. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  in  a  transition  it  opens  on  Thursday.  In  fact,  all  the 
branches of NCB and MPCB will change name to MauBank. Now, all the branches will be 
functional. There are, in fact, 35 branches which would be functional and 700 experienced 
employees. Then, the rationalisation of the merging process will take 3 months. In those 3 

 

54 

months,  naturally we will ensure that the best merge is possible in the interest of MauBank. 
Anyway, we have injected money in the equity because the cash adequate ratio is too low for 
both banks and they could not survive. So, we will have to inject more capital in those banks 
to make them really viable. 

Mr Bérenger: So, I take it that there is no longer talk of Special, Small and Medium 
Enterprise Bank, we are now talking of MauBank, the bank like any other with a department 
dedicated to Small and Medium Enterprises as in the State Bank of Mauritius and elsewhere.  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  This  one  is  specialised.  In  fact,  the  new  bank  has  a  triple 
objective. One is to be a simple retail banker like all banks. The second aspect will be mostly 
in offshore, it will be an important component of the new bank, and number three, this bank 
will also specialise in SMEs. In fact, each branch will have one officer dedicated to meeting 
with potential small scale investors and help them in the process. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister, this new bank, being given that, 
from what we see, the Mauritius Post Office and Corporate Bank has billions of rupees of 
toxic loans. What is going to happen to those toxic loans? Does the new bank, as a result of 
the merger, inherit those toxic loans? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  No.  In  fact,  as  with  the  National  Commercial  Bank,  we 
helped to eliminate all the toxic assets from Bramer and NCB was, therefore, set up without 
the  toxic  assets;  the  same  thing  is  with  MPCB.  The  Rs1.7  billion,  which  have  been  lost 
through loans given to petits copains, will not be written off, it is being transferred to a new 
agency which is not the DBM and which will ensure that money which have been borrowed, 
will have to be paid by law. 

Mr Léopold: During the last Budget Speech given by the hon. Minister of Finance, 
he mentioned that Rodrigues will have a SME Bank. I just want to know where matters stand 
and whether he has already had consultations with the local authorities in Rodrigues?   

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  In  fact,  Rodrigues  will  not  only  have  a  branch  of  a  new 
bank, but will also have a One Stop Shop. Measures that we have taken up with Rodrigues 
will be fulfilled totally.  

Mr Uteem: The NCB and MPCB are commcercial banks with commercial objectives. 
Now,  we  are  told  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  that  there 
would  be  a  section  dedicated  to  SMEs,  and,  in  his  own  Budget  Speech,  he  mentioned  a 
dedicated bank because the objective is not to make profit, but to help SMEs. So, how would 

 

55 

that new bank reconcile the objective of making profit from commercial entities and helping 
small and medium enterprises? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I like this question because finally the commercial banking 
activities are commercial, the second bid is commercial. The mission of the bank as far as the 
SMEs are concerned, is within a channel to small investors, the Rs2 billion earmarked in the 
Budget each year. Therefore, this is a specialised bank. There is no doubt that the bank will 
not be able to sustain losses that can come out of the management of their services, but then it 
is public funds that should go and finance them. 

Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Minister, following the merger of these two 

banks, whether there would be any loss of employment? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  In  fact,  from  the  01  of  January,  we  would  have  been 
completing the merging process at the level of the information system to ensure that all bank 
accounts are working. Number two, we have also considered the question of employment. In 
fact, employment will stay the same or there will be an increase in view of the new mission 
of the bank itself. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

 

MINISTRY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD GOVERNANCE AND 

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM – ADVISERS & CONSULTANTS 

(No. B/440) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reform, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
advisers and Consultants whose services have been retained in connection with the various 
investigations carried out under the aegis of his Ministry, since January 2015 to date, he will 
state, in each case, the – 

(a) 

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

names and qualifications thereof; 

terms and conditions of appointment thereof;  

amount of fees/allowances paid out thereto, and  

criteria used for the selection thereof. 

 

56 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, reviews and investigations are connected by the staff 
of the Office for Public Sector Governance (OPSG) which was previously set up under the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office  by  the  previous  Government  and  also  the  newly  created  Public 
Sector  Efficiency  Bureau  which  is  headed  by  the  former  Director  of  Audit,  Mr  Rajun 
Jugurnath.  These  two  departments  are  now  integral  part  of  my  Ministry.  The  services  of 
advisers or Consultants have not been retained for the conduct of any specific investigation. 

Mr Uteem: Being given that he has just mentioned that no special advisers have been 
retained for specific investigation, would the hon. Minister be prepared to table a list of all 
advisers and Consultants within these two Public Sector Bureaux and the other bureau that 
works permanently to carry out these investigations? 

Mr Bhadain: In those two offices, there are no advisers or Consultants, they are all 
staff  who  were  there  under  the  OPSG  and  also  staff  who  have  been  transferred  from  the 
Ministry of Finance - auditors and Internal Control staff, who are now operating under Mr  
Rajun Jugurnath, the former Director of Audit.. 

With  regard  to  the  structure  of  the  Ministry,  Madam  Speaker,  because  it  is  a  new 
Ministry,  it  did  not  exist  before  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, we had to take people on contract to resource ourselves and these people have been 
taken on contract because in the public sector, it is either the PSC or in an advisory capacity, 
so it is in an advisory capacity. Now these people do not work on investigations. They are 
people  who  work  with  me,  in  my  Ministry.  However,  as  from,  I  believe,  next  month,  the 
proper structure is being sent to the PSC now for recruitment on a permanent pensionable 
basis as in any other Ministry. 

Mr Bérenger: If they work with the Minister, they are paid out of public funds, will 
the  Minister  lay  a  copy  of  all  those  advisers  by  whatever  name  called  who  have  been 
recruited, who are working - as requested in the question -  a complete list of all these people 
and the conditions attached to their employment. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker,  I am a bit confused. Are we talking only of people 
who are working on investigations as the question originally was or are we talking about the 
full Ministry? If it is the full Ministry, there is no problem. I will send a list of everybody 
who works in the whole Ministry. 

 

 

 

57 

MAURITIUS POST AND COOPERATIVE BANK LTD - LOANS 

 (No. B/441) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
allegation of various  cases of approval of loans  without proper prior investigations having 
been carried out by the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd., he will state and obtain 
information  as  to  the  measures  that  have  been  or  will  be  taken  to  prevent  the  recurrence 
thereof. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that upon the 
appointment of the new Board of the MPCB Ltd, it was found that the financial situation of 
the bank was in a precarious state. As a result, the new Board retained the services of Ernst & 
Young Mauritius (EY) to carry out a Strategic Review of the loan portfolio of the MPCB Ltd, 
with special focus on its non-performing loans.  

The  findings  of  the  Review  confirmed  that  the  problems  of  non-performing  loans 
have arisen due to reckless lending decisions by the previous management of the MPCB Ltd. 
In fact, an amount of around Rs1.7 billion, which is a significant share of the loan portfolio, 
has been made without proper assessment and without sufficient collaterals.  

Madam Speaker, despite the disastrous financial situation of the Bank, Government 
decided  to  protect  the  345,000  customers,  including  depositors  as  well  as  some  330 
employees of the MPCB Ltd. In this regard, Government injected Rs500 m. as fresh capital in 
a bid to redress the financial situation of the bank and to preserve employment. As I have 
mentioned earlier, Government is now proceeding with the merger of the MPCB and NCB 
which would result in a more robust and financially sustainable bank. 

As at date, I am informed that four suspected cases have been referred to the Police 

for enquiry. 

In addition, the bank has taken several measures to prevent recurrence of past reckless 

banking practices. These measures are being tabled for the benefit of the House. 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development aware that 
one  Mr  Prameshwar Gooljaury  had  been  granted  several  loans  since  year  2010  to  2012 
amounting to Rs200 m. and it is only in March 2015 that the same loan was duly registered? 

 

58 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  have  to  clear  that  questions 
concerning clients of banks cannot be divulged. I am held by the banking law and will never 
release. I am trying just to cooperate the maximum. This will also, for the SIC I wanted to 
make things clear but, naturally, I don’t master all the figures there. It is very far from the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  but  we  are,  therefore,  trying  to  give 
information which might éclaircir the House. But, I cannot reveal information which cannot 
be revealed under the Banking Act.  

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  state 
whether  it  is  a  practice  of  the  banking  law  that  a  loan  which  is  taken  in  year  2010  be 
registered several years after? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I would need notice of this question. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can we know whether interest has been paid for the loan taken since 

year 2010 and, if so, can we know what amount and, if not, why not? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  am  being  hard  pressed  but  I  have  to  reply  that  those 
information  cannot  be  released.  What  we  have  said  is  that  there  has  been  Rs1.7  billion  of 
toxic assets. Those toxic assets have been removed from the balance sheet of the bank. But, 
naturally, it implies that there are people inside who have misused their management powers 
to give loans to those who should not have been given. But, I cannot release. Other questions 
are coming that will hit to customers, but I will not be able to answer. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Concerning this Mr R.G. and Co. Ltd., can the hon. Minister give the 
guarantee to the House, the country and the nation that all these toxic loans that have been 
transferred to the DBM Ltd. and henceforth for recovery, that not a single cent will be written 
off and he will make sure to submit a return to the National Assembly regularly? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The principle is simple. In fact, when we decided to remove 
the toxic assets from the bank I said that we will chase those who owe this money until they 
refund it totally. Secondly, DBM Ltd. also has got a lot of toxic assets as you know. So, I 
can’t ask DBM Ltd. to claim other toxic assets. We are setting up a new institution. I will be 
coming  to  the  House  for  a  new  institution  that  will  be  specialised  in  debt  collection  for 
Government. 

 

59 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Minister, what entity are we talking about? When 

will it be set up and under what name to recover those loans? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  we  need  some  patience  because  we  are  working  it 
with the Bank of Mauritius. In fact, we are working on two projects. One is to have only one 
Central Government Agency that will be responsible for debt collection, whether it be from 
the MRA or any other institution. Secondly, we are also working on a Bill that will guarantee 
depositors in banks. Both Bills are being prepared together and it will come to the National 
Assembly. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether there are three loans taken by 
the  former  Executive  Chairman,  Mr  Rajiv  Kumar  Beeharry;  for  year  2006  an  amount  of 
Rs2.4 m.; in year 2008 it was Rs12 m.; in year 2010 Rs1.2 m.? Can the hon. Minister tell us 
whether all these loans are toxic loans taken by Mr Rajiv Kumar Beeharry? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I see that my friend is very well informed. I won’t know. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I have allowed. Okay, hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, I am here to rule! If there is anything wrong I will rule out. Hon. Mohamed! 
I think you have to respect the Chair at least! 

(Interruptions) 

If you are talking about the Standing Orders, Standing Orders are for me to apply! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rughoobur!  

 

MELVILLE - KOKI BAY PROJECT - PROMOTERS 

(No. B/442) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 

 

60 

Management whether, in regard to the Koki Bay Project in Melville, in Grand Gaube, he will 
–  

(a)  

state the; 

(i)  

name of the promoters thereof, and  

(ii)  

date  on  which  the  State  land  was  allocated  therefor,  indicating  the 
conditions of the renewal thereof, if any, and  

(b)  

table copy of the Environment Impact Assessment license in relation thereto. 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to 
inform the House that an Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) application was received at 
my  Ministry  on  13  October  2006  for  a  proposed  hotel  project  at  Pointe  Oscorne,  Grand 
Gaube.  The promoter of the project was BR Property Ltd which was represented by Mr B. 
Ramloll, Managing Director.  

With regard to part (a) (ii), I am informed by the Ministry of Housing & Lands that 
BR Property Ltd was granted an Industrial Site Lease for a Hotel Development Project over 
three portions of State land of a total extent of 4ha7172m2 being part of Pas Géométriques at 
Melville for period starting 9.01.08 to 30.06.27.   

In line with the then Government policy, BR Property Ltd opted to enter into a new 
Industrial  Site  Lease.  Accordingly,  the  lease  mentioned  above  was  cancelled  as  from 
30.09.2009 and the company was granted a new 60 years Industrial Site Lease at Melville for 
period starting 01 October 2009 to expire on 30 September 2069.   

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am tabling a copy of the EIA licence issued 
to BR Property Ltd on 31 January 2007 for the construction of a four-star hotel comprising of 
174 bedrooms. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  have  two  questions  for  the  hon. 
Minister. I would like, first of all, that the hon. Minister assures the House that the conditions 
of the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) are strictly complied with the project. Will the 
hon. Minister conduct a sort of a communication exercise with the fishermen and the people 
of the region - because they are very sceptical about the project, I must tell you that most of 

 

61 

them  are  against  the  project  -  to  assure  them  that  the  access  to  the  beach  would  not  be  a 
problem  because  I  am  made  to  understand  that  there  is  a  diversion  there?  Will  the  hon. 
Minister, please, look into these two issues? 

Mr Dayal:  Madam Speaker, for the first part of the question, all the conditions are to 

be applied in toto and I see to it that all the projects done are in the national interest.  

Concerning  the  second  part  of  the  question,  I  come  from  a  Government  known  as 
L’alliance Lepep. We are close to the community and all our projects are community based. 
We  work  for  the  high  interest  of  the  people.    Therefore,  I  will  be  very  happy  to  meet 
anybody,  any  society,  any  group  wishing  to  meet  me,  but  then  I  want  to  reassure  my 
colleague that, in that particular project, I make it a point like I do for other projects to have a 
site visit with all my technical staff and to see to it that everything is being done as per track. 
Thank you very much. 

Mr Bérenger: May I ask the hon. Minister, since he made a site visit, what stage has 
this project reached?  Is it being built? Are construction works on within delay provided for 
in the lease? 

Mr Dayal: During my site visit, I made a constat de visu of the works in progress, 

Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

 

DISTRICT COUNCILS – FUNDS  

(No. B/443) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the district councils, he will 
state if he is in presence of representations therefrom to the effect that funds are lacking to 
meet the demands for the carrying out of infrastructural works and  for the organisation of 
welfare activities thereat and, if so, indicate if remedial measures will be taken in  relation 
thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

62 

VERDUN TERRE ROUGE HIGHWAY LINK ROAD – REPAIRS  

(No. B/444) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport whether, in regard to the Verdun 
Terre Rouge Highway Link Road, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road 
Development Authority, information as to - 

 (a)  

(b)  

 (c)  

(d)  

the number of engineers thereof having been suspended, indicating why and if 
the grant thereto of six vehicles is being investigated into, and if so, indicate 
where matters stand;  

the cost of repairs of the fissures following the landslide between Ripailles and 
Valton;  

if geological studies had been carried out prior to the construction thereof and, 
if so, indicate by whom and table copy of the report thereof, and  

the  findings  of  the  preliminary  technical  reports  undertaken  by  the  South 
African and Réunion Island Consultants and table copy thereof, indicating the 
quantum of fees paid out thereto. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  refer  to  the 
reply I made to a Private Notice Question at our sitting on 20 February last, when I informed 
the House that following the embankment failure observed on 18 January 2015, Government 
had decided to request the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms  to  carry  out  a  technical  and  financial  audit  into  all  the  contracts  awarded  by  the 
Road Development Authority since 2010. I had also informed the House that the RDA Board 
had decided to suspend two Officers who were directly involved in the implementation and 
monitoring  of  the  project  and  to  set  up  an  enquiry  under  the  chairmanship  of  Me  Ravin 
Chetty to investigate and to situate responsibilities of the officers of the RDA. 

I  am  informed,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Investigative  Committee  under  the 
chairmanship  of  Me  Ravin  Chetty  submitted  its  report  on  19  March  2015  wherein  it 
concluded  the  two  officers  of  the  RDA  had  indeed  committed  acts  of  negligence  and  that 
disciplinary proceedings should be instituted against them.  

 

63 

Subsequently, the RDA Board proffered two charges against the two officers and set 
up  a  Disciplinary  Committee  to  investigate  further  into  the  matter  and  to  establish  the 
responsibilities of the officers of the RDA.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Disciplinary  Committee  held  eight  hearings  where  several 
officers of the RDA were called upon to depone and to produce records and documents. The 
two suspended officers were also given the opportunity to defend themselves. The Committee 
submitted its report on 15 July 2015 and it concluded that the two charges proffered against 
the two officers were proved and they were found guilty of serious acts of negligence in the 
performance of their duties.  

In  the  light  of  the  findings  of  the  Disciplinary  Committee,  the  RDA  Board,  at  its 

meeting on 16 July 2015, decided to dismiss the two officers with immediate effect. 

Madam Speaker,  I  am also informed that, in its report, the Disciplinary  Committee 
highlighted the responsibility of what it called the ‘collective failure’ of the management of 
the RDA in the matter. Consequently, the RDA  Board,  at its meeting on 10 August 2015, 
decided to suspend the General Manager and the Deputy General Manager and to set up an 
Investigative  Committee  to  investigate  into  the  various  major  road  infrastructural  projects 
contracted  by  the  RDA  since  01  January  2010  to  date.  The  terms  of  reference  of  the 
Investigative Committee have already been prepared by the Attorney General’s Office and 
the Committee is being set up very soon.  

Regarding  the  issue  of  grant  of  six  vehicles  to  the  officers  of  the  RDA  by  the 
Contractor,  I  am  informed  that  this  was  within  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract. 
However, we consider this issue as an abusive facility and the Investigative Committee will 
also look into this aspect. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Consultant 
ARQ  Consulting  Engineers  from  South  Africa,  appointed  by  the  RDA  to  undertake  a 
geotechnical investigation to determine the causes of the failure of the embankment and to 
recommend remedial measures has not yet submitted its final report. However, a preliminary 
report has been submitted on 03 July 2015 and the final report, including cost estimates and 
options for the repair works will be submitted by next week.  

 

64 

Madam Speaker, concerning part (c) of the question, I am informed that Consultant 
Egis  BCEOM  carried  out  geological/geotechnical  studies  prior  to  the  design  of  the  Terre 
Rouge-Verdun Link road. I am tabling a copy of the report submitted by the Consultant.  

It is clear, Madam Speaker, that the tests which were carried out as part of the study, 
particularly, at that site which is sloppy, complex and very wet were totally inappropriate and 
inadequate. This was confirmed by the first signs of instabilities in 2010 and the first cracks 
in 2013. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed that the RDA 
Board  has  appointed  only  one  Consultant,  that  is,  ARQ  Consulting  Engineers  from  South 
Africa to undertake the geotechnical investigation to determine the causes of the failure and 
to  recommend  remedial  measures.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Consultant  has  submitted  its 
preliminary  report.    The  report  indicates  the  presence  of  a  soft  layer  underlying  the 
embankment  at  the  place  of  the  cracks.  This  soft  layer  does  not  possess  adequate  bearing 
capacity for the road. I am tabling a copy of the report.  

I am also informed that, as to date, 50% of the fees, that is, Rands 265,364 have been 

paid to the Consultant. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister in a question B/49 answered about 

the same issue and he said – 

‘I am tabling a copy of each of the report”. 

But up to now I have never got the report. May we know from the hon. Minister, like 

he said he is going to table it, that this time I get the report?  

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the reports are here, in fact, we had some problem to 

recover them at the Road Development Authority. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether the former Minister of Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport was chairing a Committee to look after the project of Terre 
Rouge-Verdun Road and, if so, can we know whether he was made aware of the cracks on 
this particular road and, if so, when and what action has been taken? 

Mr Bodha: I can’t answer this question, Madam Speaker. 

 

65 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for his very clear answers 
and to have found the report. All along, we hear issues about Engineers, could I ask, Madam 
Speaker, that we know who was the Consultant responsible for this whole work because it 
seems as though we have Civil Servants or Engineers who are made to pay consequences of 
what  happened,  may  wrongly  pay  the  consequences,  but  we  don’t  hear  at  all  about  the 
responsibilities of the Consultants. Is it that one is being made to pay for a situation whereas 
the others are being forgotten altogether? Why is it that we don’t hear about the Consultants? 

Mr Bodha: Not at all, Madam Speaker. Egis and BCEOM were the Consultants who 
did the test and designed the roads and supervised the works together with the RDA. Now, 
we are going to have the final reports on the embankment failure which occurred at Valton 
and  we  are  now  going  to  proceed  to  claim  damages  for  all  that  has  happened  to  the 
embankment, Madam Speaker. The works, first of all, started at Rs2.1 billion ended up at Rs3 
billion and at Rs4 billion. Now, we don’t know how much it is going to cost us to repair the 
embankment which is 18 metres on 250 metres. So, once we have this final report as regards 
the cost of repairs and the technology which we are going to use for the repair, we are going 
to  put  up  a  case  to  claim  damages  to  the  Consultants  and  the  company  which  was  Colas 
which, in fact, undertook the works. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!  

Mr Bérenger:  We have been told that the Head of the RDA - can we have the names 

of those at the Head of the RDA now? 

Mr Bodha: We have the Officer-in-Charge, Mr N. Veerapa. 

(Interruptions) 

No, he was on the list of the Engineers, he was No. 3. We have Ms J. Alimohamed who was 
No. 4. So, they are in charge of the RDA at present. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the hon. Minister state that this 
was a turnkey project based on design and build. May we know who had the responsibility to 
check the design of the project and also the construction phase of the project? 

 

66 

Mr Bodha: No. it was not a design and build. The test and the design were done by 
Egis  BCEOM.  The  construction  was  done  by  Colas  and  the  supervision  was  done  by  and  
Egis BCEOM and the RDA. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can we know whether tender procedures had been used to choose for 
the  Consultant  and,  if  so,  can  we  know  what  amount  had  been  earmarked  to  pay  the 
Consultant and what amount has been paid so far? 

Mr Bodha: May I ask which Consultant? 

 (Interruptions) 

Well, what has been surprising, and I have always said so in Parliament, Madam Speaker, the 
geotechnical tests of a project which cost Rs2.1 billion was 12,000 euros. That is where we 
failed from the very start. 

Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! Last question on this issue! 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Minister, now that we have paid loads and 
loads of money to the Consultant, geotechnical, etc., whether he will give the guarantee to 
this House that there would not be any landslide in the near future? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha: Well, Madam Speaker, this is a  guarantee that is not  easy to give, but 
what I can say is that the works which are being done now at Terre Rouge/Verdun at that 
spot, which is a very complex one, we are taking all the precautions, and I am convinced that 
the permanent works are going to be adequate. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

M1 HIGHWAY - LIGHTING  

(No. B/445) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  M1 

 

67 

Highway, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to if it has been reported 
that the lamps found along same, heading south, have been intermittently out of order over 
the past three years and, if so, indicate - 
the reasons therefor, and  
if consideration will be given for the introduction of legislation for the setting 
up of a Road Lighting Authority. 

(a)  
(b)  

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 
that,  at  present,  the  role  of  the  Road  Development  Authority  (RDA)  is  limited  to  the 
commissioning and installation of the street lighting network on classified roads, that is, on 
motorways and main roads which the RDA subsequently hands over to the Local Authority 
concerned  for  maintenance  and  for  the  payment  of  the  related  electricity  bills.  The  street 
lighting  network  along  rural  and  urban  roads  is  put  up  and  is  maintained  by  the  Local 
Authority concerned which also has the responsibility to make payment to the CEB for the 
electricity consumption. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  problems  of  lamps  being  intermittently  out  of  order 
along  different  segments  of  the  motorway  M1  have  been  reported  to  the  Local  Authority 
concerned. The main reasons for such problems being – 
loss of underground electric cables by theft;  

• 
•  blackouts due to solar switch because of  faults  on the networks, heavy  rainfall, 

• 

wear and tear of wires, loose connections, amongst others, and  
in some cases, where loss of underground electric cables have been reported, they 
have been replaced by overhead cables. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  in  view  of  repeated  criticisms 
received from various quarters in regard to the defective lighting system along roads, and to 
ensure more homogeneity in the maintenance of the street lighting network, my Ministry is 
proposing  to  take  over  all  the  responsibility  of  a  new  entity  to  be  set  up  under  the  Road 
Development Authority.  

Hon. Members of the House will agree that an effective street lighting system is not 
only  one  of  the  prime  conditions  for  road  safety,  but  is  also  a  major  requirement  for  a 
modern, reliable and safe land transport system. In this connection, I have already initiated 
discussions with stakeholders on the most effective and efficient legislative and institutional 
framework to be set up for the commissioning, installation, maintenance and payment of the 
appropriate bills in relation to the street lighting system.  

 

68 

In  fact,  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  has  already  worked  out  a  draft  Road 
Development Authority (Amendment) Bill by amending section 4 of the Act to provide for 
the RDA to be responsible for the lighting of all the motorways.  

My Ministry, however, considers that it will be more appropriate that the new entity 
under the RDA takes over the responsibility of street lighting for the entire road network over 
the island, including rural and urban roads and to use the solar system. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister say that RDA will take over 

the lighting.  

(Interruptions) 

New entity! We would like to know from the hon. Minister whether this is in the pipeline and 
the time frame that he will come to it, because this has been going on for the last three years 
and we are suffering on the tourist level and when we go to the north or to the south it is the 
same thing - blackout.  

Well,  let’s  hope  that  blackout  does  not  start  today  because  it  is  a  must.  The  Road 

Authority is doing the road, but the lighting is really creating havoc. 

Mr Bodha: I totally agree with the hon. Member, Madam Speaker. This is an urgent 
matter and we have whole segments of the motorway and classified roads which are out of 
power and they can be a cause for concern for road safety, for road traffic and we are going to 
give it all the urgent attention it needs. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to cable theft; will it not be 
more  appropriate  to  have  the  street  lighting  replaced  by  solar  powered  ones,  therefore 
discarding the need of having cables? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is right. We have now solar system 
where the battery, in fact, is put in a cement case underground. So, we are moving towards 
this. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have, in relation to the issue 
of  whether  lights  should  be  used  or  not,  since  the  issue  is  about  wires  disappearing,  bad 

 

69 

connections and  what not.  I have driven over  many  roads, be it in France, be it in United 
Kingdom  or  Germany  and  there  are  many  long,  hundreds  of  kilometres  of  sections  where 
there are no lights on highways.  It has no lights there and it is the trend, because at night 
people  drive  over  those  highways  and  have  headlights.  So,  what  is  the  point  of  having 
headlights  and  lights  at  the  same  time?  So,  it  is  only  at  intersections,  residential 
agglomerations  that  there  are  lights.  Could  the  hon.  Minister  consider  the  possibility  of 
reducing  wastage  by  not  necessarily  having  to  have  lights  at  areas  where  there  are  no 
residential agglomerations and one can very well see very clearly using headlights because 
since this is the practice in Europe, since this is the practice in countries that are developed 
why, therefore, do we, as an island, have to be a country… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr  Mohamed:  …where  proportionately  to  the  number  of  kilometres  and  lights 

thereto, we are paying much more than in European countries? 

Mr  Bodha: We  will  see  to  it that  we  have  a  system  which  is  efficient.    There  are 
many accident-prone segments on the road. So, we will have to see in such a manner that the 
funds are spent judiciously and we have an effective system. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: With regard to the loss of electrical cables in motorway M1, may we 
know whether these cases have been reported to the Police by RDA and what amount has 
been  involved  so  far,  and  what  measures  are  envisaged  by  RDA  to  prevent  this  from 
happening in the future? 

Mr  Bodha:  What  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  the  installation  and  the 
commissioning was the responsibility of the RDA. The maintenance and the payment of the 
bills are under the responsibility of the local authority. That’s why we say that we have to 
coordinate the whole thing and I am sure that the theft has not been reported. So, this is where 
we have to find a solution to see to it that we have an effective system. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

70 

RING ROAD PHASE I – REPAIR WORKS 

(No. B/446) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Ring Road 
Phase I, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road Development Authority, 
information as to - 

(a) 

(b) 

the reasons why the services of an Expert Consultant from Reunion Island to 
confirm the viability thereof is being sought, and  
who  is  supervising  the  repair  works  undertaken  by  the  contractor  therefor, 
indicating if - 
(i) 
(ii) 

the Arab consulting company is involved therein, and  
who prepared the scope of works therefor and if copy thereof will be 
tabled. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by 
the  Road  Development  Authority  that  it  has  not  appointed  any  Consultant  from  Reunion 
Island for the Port Louis Ring Road Phase I. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the repair works undertaken by 
the contractor Rehm Grinaker-Colas are on a “design and build” basis. The Consultant for the 
contractor  is  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd.  from  South  Africa  and  Arab  Consulting  Engineers  (ACE)  is 
supervising the works on behalf of the RDA.  

The  House  would  also  like  to  note  that  when  the  first  defects  occurred  in  January 
2014, the whole road infrastructure was still within the defects liability period of one year.  In 
fact, the project was completed on 31 January 2013 and the defects liability period was up to 
31 January 2014.  Consequently, the contractor was made to remedy the defects at his own 
costs. 

With regard to part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that ACE is still providing 
consultancy  services  and  its  involvement  will  continue  up  to  the  completion  of  the  repair 
works which are scheduled now for February 2016.  The fees for ACE are being met from the 
balance of contract amount which is still in the custody of the RDA.   

As regards part (b) (ii), the design and scope for the reconstruction of the works have 
been prepared by ARQ Consulting Engineers (Pty) Ltd. and I have no objection in tabling a 
copy thereof. 

 

71 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  also  like  to  inform  the  House  that  on  29  January  2015, 
Government  appointed  Dr.  J.  P.  Lourens,  an  independent  Geotechnical  Expert  from  South 
Africa to assess the adequacy of the remedial measures proposed by the contractor, that is, 
Rehm  Grinaker-Colas.    In  his  report,  which  he  submitted  in  March  2015,  Dr.  Lourens 
concurred  with  the  assessment  made  by  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd.  in  regard  to  the  reasons  for  the 
failure of the Ring Road and its inference that the original design was inadequate.  He also 
concluded that the reconstruction design submitted by ARQ (Pty) Ltd. was adequate. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister, in a recent site visit, said that he is 
going to recruit a Consultant from Reunion Island to see the viability of that road.  That’s 
why I came with that question.  Will the hon. Minister confirm whether he said that in the 
recent site visit he did and that was reported on the MBC? 

Mr Bodha:  This is not what I said.  In fact, I had gone to visit the site after a visit I 
had made to Reunion Island where they are doing - ce qu’on appelle the new coastal road 
which is going to be one of the most expensive infrastructural roads in the world.  And I said 
that we will send somebody from our team to go and visit Reunion Island and not vice versa. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Yes.  In an earlier question in Parliament with regards to the next 
stretch of the Ring Road, the hon. Minister mentioned that possibilities were being looked 
into to have an elevated platform along Boulevard Victoria in Port Louis.  Is this proposition 
still on? 

Mr Bodha: Yes, but this has nothing to do with the Ring Road Phase I. 

Madam Speaker:  The question relates to Ring Road Phase I.  So, the hon. Member 

must come with a specific question, next time.   

Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions)  

Mr  Jhugroo:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  RDA  has  got  a 

geotechnical Consultant, and, if not, would RDA consider to employ one? 

 

72 

Mr Bodha:  No, the RDA does not have a Geotechnical Consultant.  But what we are 
doing now, in view of the new projects, the projects which are coming, we are training some 
of  our  staff.    We  are  doing  this  capacity  building  to  be  able  to  provide  consultancy  for 
geotechnical tests for tunnels, for viaducts and for all the coming projects.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Minister whether the damaged part on the 
other side is also being taken into consideration for repair because adjacent to the damaged 
side, the lane going towards the mountain and the one coming from the mountain is next to 
the damaged side?  Has there been any study to know whether this part also has not been 
cracked underneath? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, we had the collapse at one point, but we have to see to 
it that the whole segment of the road is roadworthy.  In fact, there are cracks at the end of 
Ring Road I.  That is going to be another phase. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

QUATRE BORNES - WASTEWATER SEWERAGE NETWORK PROJECT 

(No. B/447) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Wastewater Sewerage Network Project in Old Quatre Bornes, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Wastewater Management Authority, information as to where matters 
stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating - 

(a) 

(b) 

if all the households have been connected to the network and, if not, why not, 
and 
the amount of money paid to the contractor for the variation works, as at to 
date. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, the Wastewater Management Authority informs me that 
part  of  Old  Quatre  Bornes  has  already  been  sewered  under  the  Plaine  Wilhems  Sewerage 
Project Lot 2 which was completed in March 2015.  

 

73 

The number of connections which have been carried out amount to some - I lay stress 
on the approximation – 2,620 house connections.  The remaining part of Old Quatre Bornes 
is  being  sewered  under  the  ongoing  contract  Lot  1A.    Some  536  approximately  house 
connections have been completed and the remaining approximately 616 connections will be 
completed by November 2016. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Authority  that  the 
original  contract  price  for  sewerage  project  Lot  2  was  Rs2.49  billion  for  a  total  of  12,200 
connections.  This was increased to Rs2.86 billion at the end of the project.   

The  Lot  IA  contract  was  awarded  in  October  2009  for  the  sum  of  Rs2.84  billion 
comprising 11,600 connections. In view of the significant increase in the cost of the project 
from Rs2.86 billion to Rs3.92 billion, this Government, after having looked into it, decided to 
complete only Lot 1A North and to close/secure Lot 1A South. The contract value will be 
Rs3.15 billion, that is, an increase of around Rs330 m. over the original one.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Madam  Speaker,  I  have  asked  for  a  specific  site  at  Rue  Anthelme 
where  all  the  households,  except  one  part,  that  has  not  been  connected  and  it  seems  that 
everything is in order there.  When I phoned them, they were lost.  They came and you know 
– I will say it in the House – it happens to be my residence and my household and… 

(Interruptions) 

As if everything has been done except at my place.   

Madam Speaker:  The hon. Member is declaring interest! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Sorefan:  If the hon. Minister could intervene to see that this is done. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order!  

Mr Collendavelloo:  I am sure ...  

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

74 

Mr Collendavelloo: …the hon. Member knows  that he should not further his very 
cause in Parliament. I will look into it, of course, but if he sees me privately, I will certainly 
look into it and deal with him directly. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Ramano: Est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre pourquoi malgré le fait que les 
travaux sont partiellement terminés, est-ce que les travaux d’asphaltage sont concernés dans 
le scheme of work du contracteur? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Yes, they should be and in all the contracts, it is a condition that 
the road should be re-instated, but I will look into it if there are any particular areas.  I know 
and I have seen that there are many places where this was not done.  I personally intervened 
normally to get this done very quickly 

Madam Speaker:  Yes. 

Mr Ramano: C’est vrai de savoir que malgré le fait que les travaux sont terminés 

depuis maintenant plusieurs mois, les travaux d’asphaltage n’ont pas été faits. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I take note. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

 

MINISTRY OF ARTS AND CULTURE – ADVISERS  

(No.  B/448)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  whether,  in  regard  to  the  advisers  attached  to  his 
Ministry, he will state the number thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

names and qualifications thereof; 

post held, and 

 

75 

(c) 

monthly salaries and allowances drawn. 

Mr  Baboo:  Madam  Speaker,  two  advisers  are  attached  to  my  Ministry  and  one 
adviser is attached to the “Centre de Lecture Publique et d’Animation Culturelle”, which is a 
unit  of  my  Ministry,  operating  under  an  agreement  signed  with  the  “Organisation 
Internationale de la Francophonie”. 

All the advisers are employed on a contract of one year. 

With  regard  to  parts  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  the  information 

regarding the names, respective qualifications, monthly salaries and allowances drawn. 

 

CEB - CONSULTANT MOTT MAC DONALD COMPANY – CONTRACTS  

(No.  B/449)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Consultant Mott Mac Donald Company, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the  Central  Electricity  Board,  information  as  to  the  number  of  contracts  awarded  thereto, 
since 2005 to date, indicating - 

(a) 

(b) 

the amount of money paid out thereto in respect of each contract, and 

if  all  of  them  were  awarded  thereto  following  a  bid  exercise  and,  if  not, 
indicate the reasons therefor. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  First  of  all,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  Madam  Speaker,  the 
CEB tells me that since 2005, it has awarded 7 contracts to Mott Mac Donald Company. I am 
tabling the information on the amount paid under each contract. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, according to the information from the CEB, 5 
contracts were awarded. Following the restricted bidding, one contract was awarded directly 
on the basis of continuity of service for Fort Victoria Phase II Project, that is, after Phase I 
and one contract was awarded following an expression of interest and a request for proposals. 

Mr Lesjongard: Regarding the contract that was awarded on the basis of continuity, 
may we know whether this was for the technical assistance for the implementation of the Fort 
Victoria Power Station redevelopment? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Actually, it was. 

 

76 

Mr Lesjongard: Is it normal that this was done the way it was done or should the 

CEB have gone through a tendering procedure? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I also asked that question. I was told that it is a normal procedure 
that,  for  continuity  of  service,  they  sometimes  award  a  contract  to  the  same  Consultant.  I 
would not be able to say more, so please, do not ask me supplementary questions. 

 

RIGHTS MANAGEMENT SOCIETY – BOARD MEMBERS – ELECTION 

(No.  B/450)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the Rights Management Society, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

if the election of three artists to represent the interests of the artists on the 
Board thereof has been carried out and, if so, indicate when and, if not, why 
not; 

the qualifications and experience in copyright, related rights and intellectual 
property in general of the two Board Members appointed by the hon. Minister; 

the subcommittees to which the above mentioned Board members have been 
appointed, and 

(d) 

the total amount of money paid thereto as at to date in terms of  – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Board Member fee, and 

Committee Member fee. 

Mr  Baboo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Copyright  Act  2014,  which  provides  for  the 
establishment  of  the  Rights  Management  Society  was  passed  in  the  National  Assembly  in 
April 2014 and proclaimed in July 2014. However, the Board of the RMS was constituted 
only on 06 March 2015. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Society  initiated 
procedures for the holding of elections for the three representatives of artists to form part of 
the Board in accordance with section 43(4)(h) of the Copyright Act 2014.  

The  election  of  the  three  members  of  the  RMS  to  the  Board  was  fixed  on  12  July 

2015. 

 

77 

In  the  meantime,  a  Court  case  was  entered  by  a  member  regarding  payment  of 
membership fees to be eligible to stand as candidate of the RMS. During the hearing of the 
Court case, it was found that there was no legal basis for the levy of Membership fees in the 
Copyright Act 2014. Hence, the election was postponed. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  line  with  Government  2015-2019  to  review  the  Act  for  better 
representation of the rights holders, my Ministry is in the process of amending the Copyright 
Act 2014, in collaboration with the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  

The  amended  Act  will  include  a  section  for  the  levying  of  membership  fees.  The 
election of the three representatives of the members of the Society will be held thereafter. I 
can assure the House that the current Board of the RMS has the required quorum to make 
decisions for the smooth running of the institution. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b), section 43(4) (g) of the Copyright Act 2014 
empowers  me  to  appoint  two  members  having  knowledge  and  experience  in  the  field  of 
copyright and related rights. Accordingly, two members were appointed.  

Both appointed Board members have been for more than ten years, members of the 
then MASA, now RMS. Moreover, one Mr A.C. was an elected member of the Board from 
2011  to  2014.  The  other  member,  Mr  A.R.,  was  member  of  the  Musical  Works  and 
Membership Committee, that is, a sub-Committee of the then MASA during period 2013 to 
2014. Hence, both Members have ample knowledge and experience to serve the Board. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed by the RMS that Mr A.C. has been 
member of the Human Resource Committee for period March to June 2015, whereas Mr A.R. 
is member of the Finance Committee since 13 August 2015 to safeguard the interest of the 
artists. Both are also members of an ad hoc committee set up on 14 May 2015, to look into 
the day to day running of the Society in the absence of the Director who was interdicted on 
30 June 2011.  

The information requested to part (d) of the question, I will table it. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  si  le  ministre  des  arts  et  de  la 
culture  trouve  normal  que  le  Board  Rights  Management  Society  fonctionne  sans  les 
représentants des artistes? 

Mr  Baboo:  We  have  nominated,  as  I  just  mentioned,  the  two  members  who  came 

from the artist representatives. 

 

78 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  les  deux  personnes  qui  ont  été  nommées  pour 
siéger au Board du Rights Management Society  sont des nominés politiques choisis par le 
ministre  lui-même  et  qui  ne  représentent  pas  les  artistes.  Ils  représentent  les  intérêts  du 
ministre, de son ministère d’après le Copyright Act. Donc, là on comprend et le ministre vient 
de  nous  informer  qu’il  va  amender  la  loi,  c’est  à  dire,  le  Copyright  Act  et  par  la  suite  il 
reviendra avec la tenue des élections en ce qui concerne les représentants des artistes et des 
créateurs. Je trouve cela une aberration, Madame la présidente. On aimerait savoir quand il 
compte amender le Copyright Act, combien de temps cela va prendre, parce que le Board du 
Right Management Society ne peut pas fonctionner sans les représentants des artistes? 

Mr Baboo: Well, as I said, we are working together with WIPO on that Act and it is 
coming very soon. But the Board is on, as they already have a quorum and they are working. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  the  Director  has  been  suspended. 
Can I know since when and why? Who is replacing the suspended Director and what is going 
to happen next? 

Mr Baboo: Well, he has been interdicted on 30 June 2011 and Court proceeding is 

still going on. 

Mr  Barbier:  Since  the  hon.  Minister  is  envisaging  amending  the  law,  would  he 
consider the possibility, the advice, as artists always claim that they need to have, as it was in 
the MASA, more representatives, which number was 7 under the past legislation and which is 
now  3.  So,  will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  also  while  amending  the  law  to  increase  the 
number of artists to be elected by the artists on the Board of the RMS. 

Mr Baboo: Well, I will take the hon. Member’s advice into consideration, but let me 

tell the hon. Member that the law will be in favour of the artists and for the artists. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I have a second question. We heard the Minister say 
that elections were going to take place and the Ministry was advised that it is illegal to claim 
membership  fees,  and  therefore,  the  whole  thing  was  cancelled.  Can  I  know  whether  this 
legal advice or advice was received from the State Law Office and whether - I am not asking 
for the legal opinion, I am saying that legal advice which the Minister referred to, was it from 
the State Law Office and can it be laid on the Table of the Assembly? 

Mr Baboo: Well, it was from the State Law Office and I will table it. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Teeluckdharry! 

 

79 

 

STRAY DOGS & CATS  

(No.  B/451)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet)  asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
stray dogs and cats, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the number 
thereof  which  have  been  exterminated  by  the  former  Mauritius  Society  for  Prevention  of 
Cruelty  of  Animals  and  the  Mauritius  Society  for  Animal  Welfare  (MSAW)  respectively, 
since 2005 to date, indicating if consideration will be given for the – 

(a)  

(b)  

introduction of legislation to do away with the practice of catching and killing 
same, and  
closing  down  of  the  MSAW  and  the  setting  up  of  another  institution  in 
replacement thereof with one of the objectives being to adopt a humane and 
empathic approach to solve the problem thereof in Mauritius. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

BIOMETRIC IDENTITY CARDS PROJECT - DATABASE 

(No.  B/452)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Biometric Identity Cards Project, he will state – 

(a)  

(b)  

(ii)  

the  cost  incurred  for  the  implementation,  setting  up  and  maintenance  of 
databases therefor, and  
if Government proposes to do away with the – 
(i)  

practice  of  compulsorily  requiring  Mauritian  citizens  to  give  their 
fingerprints  and  other  biometric  data  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a 
national identity card, and  
features  contained  in  the  biometric  card,  namely,  the  contactless 
integrated  micro-chip 
and 
integrated  Radio  Frequency 
Identification Device (RFID). 
(Withdrawn) 

the 

 
 
 

 

80 

ADDITIONAL STIMULUS PACKAGE SCHEME – BENEFICIARIES  
(No.  B/453)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Additional Stimulus Package Scheme, he will state the –  

(a)  

(b)  

names of the direct and indirect beneficiaries thereof since the implementation 
thereof to date, and  
amount  of  public  expenditure  incurred  in  relation  thereto  since  2005  to 
December 2014. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, in December 2008, 
the  then  Government  introduced  the  Additional  Stimulus  Package  Scheme  to  assist 
manufacturing enterprises which were affected by the 2008 global economic crisis. 

As at December 2014, 69 companies have benefitted from direct support for a total 
amount of Rs2.86 billion and 5,608 enterprises were assisted through indirect support for a 
total amount of Rs4.16 billion. Details are being tabled. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  following  an  assessment  of  the 
direct and indirect support under the stimulus package, it was found that certain companies 
have been making abuse of the scheme.  In spite of the support provided, these companies 
failed to recover and hence had to close down, resulting in significant job losses and financial 
losses. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  we  have  the  names  and  the  identity  of  those  firms  which  had 

abused the scheme? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  am  circulating  a  list  of  those  who  have  benefited 
from  those  loans.  I  don’t  think  the  amount  has  been  given.  But,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition is very well aware that there are two notorious cases; one is RS Denim and RS 
Fashion where we lost more than Rs349 m. in the process as well as the other notorious case 
of Jean Suzanne. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
whether in the list of names of the companies just tabled there is a former Member of the 
National Assembly who is the Director of a company and can we know what is the amount of 
the stimulus package involved and whether this amount of money has been refunded?  

 

81 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  former  Member  of  Parliament  was  involved  in  RS 
Denim and RS Fashion and those are the two companies where we have directly lost Rs349 
m. outside losses made by DBM Ltd. also, through other loans given to him.  

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Rughoobur! 
Mr Rughoobur: The hon. Minister mentioned more than Rs350 m. that were public 
funds.  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  is  no  possibility  of  recuperating 
those funds or bringing those people and companies to the Court to recuperate the funds? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  there  are  ongoing  procedures  to  recoup  those  lost 

funds. 
 

REGISTRAR OF ASSOCIATION - SPORT FEDERATION – OPERATION 

(No. B/454) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether  he  will  state  if  he  has  received  a 
correspondence from the Registrar of Association concerning a sport federation which -  

(a)  
(b)  

is operating outside the legal framework prescribed therefor, and  
has not participated in the Indian Ocean Islands Games, since 2003 to date. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

SPORTS COMPLEXES – RENTAL  

(No. B/455) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sports  complexes  of  the 
Ministry of Youth and Sports, he will –  

(a)  

(b)  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council, 
information as to the reasons why the quantum of the rental thereof has been 
increased, and 
state if he is aware of the prejudices that the increase of the quantum of rental 
thereof are causing to the sports practitioners who use these facilities and, if 
so, indicate if he proposes to take any action in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 
Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/469 

has been withdrawn. Time is over! 
 

 

 

(4.15 p.m.) 

82 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

MADAGASCAR – PLAGUE - OUTBREAK 

The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 
wish  to  inform  the  House  that  on  26  August  2015,  WHO  was  notified  by  the  Ministry  of 
Health of Madagascar of an outbreak of plague. As at 30 August 2015, 14 cases have been 
reported in Madagascar with 10 deaths.  

All  necessary  measures,  as  recommended  in  the  National  Action  Plan  for  the 
Prevention  and  Containment  of  Plague  in  Mauritius  and  in  Rodrigues,  are  already  being 
implemented. Increased surveillance of incoming passengers from Madagascar is in place at 
all entry points both in Mauritius and Rodrigues namely, the air force and the sea force. 

As at present, WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions based on the 

information available. 

Madam Speaker: Next statement! 
 

(4.16 p.m.) 

STATE TRADING CORPORATION - PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - 

TRANSPORTATION  

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Madam Speaker, with your permission, I propose to make a statement on the transportation of 
petroleum products for the State Trading Corporation (STC) as from May 2011. 

In November 2009, the STC signed a Contract of Affreightment (COA) with Betamax 
Ltd for the transportation of petroleum products over  a period of 15  years at  an estimated 
minimum cost of Rs10 billion which do not include the cost of bunker fuel, demurrage fees, 
port dues, and the element of escalation rate.  The COA was effective as from May 2011. 

I have been informed by the STC that our annual requirements of petroleum products 
arrive  at  some  1.2  million  metric  tons  while  the  Red  Eagle,  vessel  of  Betamax  Ltd,  could 
transport only around 992,000 tons by effecting 16 trips annually. For the balance of some 
200,000 tons, Betamax Ltd had recourse to additional tankers, whose costs, according to the 
COA, had to be borne by the STC.  

Since  the  start  of  the  COA  in  May  2011  up  to  January  2015,  Betamax  Ltd  had 
transported 4,067,703 tons of petroleum products for the STC for which the STC had paid the 
sum of 125,244,128 USD to Betamax Ltd, that is, an average of 30.79 USD per ton.  

 

83 

From  February  to  August  2015,  STC  has  imported  608,529  tons  of  petroleum 
products through spot charters and has paid 16,197,269 USD for that purpose, i.e. an average 
of 26.62 USD per ton.  

Thus, since the STC has stopped having recourse to the services of Betamax Ltd, the 
STC  has  been  paying  an  average  of  4.17  USD  less  per  metric  ton  for  the  transport  of 
petroleum products.  Over a period of one year, that would represent a sum of some USD5 m.   
If the STC would have continued with the Contract of Affreightment with Betamax 

Ltd up to 2026, the country would have incurred a loss of not less than Rs2 billion.  

I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  STC  has  initiated  procedures  for  the 
allocation  of  a  Contract  of  Affreightment  to  cover  the  period  up  to  the  end  of  the  current 
contract of supply of petroleum products between the STC and the MRPL. It is assumed that, 
for such a contract, the cost would be lesser than the cost of spot charter.   

Madam Speaker, I thank you. 
Madam Speaker: Next statement! 

 
(4.19 p.m.) 

BAI – FINANCIAL SCANDAL 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam 
Speaker,  I  shall  make  a  statement  on  the  BAI  affair  to  explain  how  this  Government  has 
brought finality to this financial scandal which could have seriously jeopardised the financial 
soundness and social stability of our country. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  must,  at  the  very  outset,  state  that  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition raised the alarm bells during his PNQ dated 21 November 2013, on the concerns 
repeatedly expressed by the International Monetary Fund in relation to an insurance company 
which  was  operating  with  a  substantial  proportion  of  its  assets  invested  in  its  related 
companies.  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  quoted  paragraph  55  of  the  report  and  he 
stated and I quote -  

“(…) it suggested that the Bank of Mauritius and the FSC should carry out what it 
called ‘war games’ in a prevision of a possible financial crisis.” 
The hon. Leader of the Opposition also referred to and I quote – 
“a Ponzi Pyramid scheme” [End quote].  

Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  the  then  Government  did  not  react  to  those  red  flags  and 
during the following year, in 2014, billions of rupees were continuously taken from insurance 

 

84 

policyholders  through  ‘Super  Cash  Back  Gold’  and  other  people  who  invested  in  other 
products of ‘Bramer Asset Management Ltd’ and its related funds. 

The position of the then Government was that BAI is a group that is regulated by the 

Financial Services Commission and has regulators. 

Madam Speaker, last week, I tabled a copy of the report of KPMG, the auditors of the 
BAI Group, which was presented to its Audit Committee and several of its directors, as far 
back as 29 March 2011. KPMG showed that the insurance company ... 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members  are  reminded  that  they  can’t  bring  their  mobile 

(Interruptions) 

phones in the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  KPMG  showed  that  the  insurance  company  had 
collapsed  in  2009  and  explained  the  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  deficits  and  also  and  I  quote 
‘round tripping transactions’ effected as book entries and creative accounting. 

In April 2015, the Bank of Mauritius identified that the conditions prevailing at the 
Bramer  Banking  Corporation  posed  serious  risks  to  the  domestic  financial  system,  and 
revoked its banking licence, thereafter the Ponzi scheme being operated through the BAI Co. 
(Mtius) Ltd and its related companies came to light. Similar to what happened in the case of 
Lehman  Brothers  and  AIG  insurance  in  2008,  it  is  a  known  fact  that  the  malpractices  of 
Lehman Brothers brought the downfall of AIG, an associated insurance company, much in 
the same way.  

The  Financial  Services  Commission,  the  regulator  of  the  insurance  sector  and  the 
stock exchange, promptly appointed ‘Conservators’ under section 106 of the Insurance Act 
and their final report showed the state of specific assets and liabilities of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd 
and its related subsidiaries, as at 30 April 2015. 

Madam Speaker, following the PNQ of the hon. Leader of the Opposition addressed 
to  me  on  Tuesday  01  September  2015,  I  forwarded  a  copy  of  the  final  report  of  the 
Conservators to him, on Thursday 03 September 2015. The hon. Leader of the Opposition 
then commented on the Conservators’ report, which I had provided to him.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Conservators  did  not  attribute  a  value  to  the  then  insurance 
company,  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd  and  the  then  Bramer  bank,  as  it  was  operating  a  Ponzi 
scheme, with Rs13 billion excess liabilities over assets at the time the crisis was identified, 
which could not be valued in April 2015. 

Madam Speaker, this Government straightaway took bold decisions as follows - 

 

(i) 

85 

to protect regular premiums policyholders, who had invested 135,283 policies 
with maturity dates unfolding over the next 20 years. These policies have been 
transferred  to  a  new  insurance  company,  National  Insurance  Co.  Ltd  and  a 
new  company  NIC  General  Insurance  Co.  Ltd  was  also  created  by 
Government.  These  cleansed  companies  are  currently  operating  without  any 
unnecessary  expenditure  or  liabilities;  they  have  been  licensed  by  the 
Financial Services Commission after rigorous and appropriate due diligence; 
they are operating over 135,000 clean policies which represent 30% of the life 
insurance market in Mauritius and carry substantial value;  

(ii) 

with regard to the toxic single premiums Super Cash Back Gold, the liabilities 
of the 24,690 policies have been extracted and to prevent the undue suffering 
of these policyholders, Government has taken the commitment to repay them 
their capital amounting to Rs19.2 billion, without the abnormal interest rate of 
10%, 12%, 14% which was promised to them by the BAI group, and  

(iii)  with regard to Bramer Asset Management Ltd and its related funds, in order to 
provide  relief  to  6,362  investors  who  had  been  induced  to  enter  into  these 
investments, Government has taken the commitment to repay them also, after 
a net deduction at source of 15% for those who invested less than Rs500,000 
and 20% for those who invested Rs500,000 or more. The total amount payable 
to those who have registered with the National Property Fund Ltd is Rs3.08 
billion. 

Madam Speaker, Government has undertaken to repay a massive amount of Rs19.2 
billion  regarding  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  and  Rs3.08  billion  regarding  investors  of  Bramer 
Asset Management Ltd. In total this amounts to Rs22.3 billion, indeed a huge commitment 
taken to alleviate the suffering of these people. 

To date, Rs6 billion has already been repaid to Super Cash Back Gold policyholders 
and Bramer Asset investors. These repayments have been made from the realisation of Rs2.5 
billion  worth  of  liquid  assets  by  the  Special  Administrators  and  a  line  of  credit  of  Rs3.5 
billion which has been granted for a period of one year by the Bank of Mauritius on the back 
of shares held in Britam Kenya, which has not yet been realised.  

The total maximum amount of Rs16.3 billion, which remains to be paid to Super Cash 
Back Gold policyholders and Bramer Asset investors, will be effected as from 30 June 2016, 

 

86 

through  zero  coupon  debentures  redeemable  in  five  equal  instalments  of  Rs3.26  billion 
ending on 30 June 2020.  

It  is  important  to  note,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  current  realisable  values  of  the 
insurance  company,  i.e.  NIC  Life  Insurance  and  NIC  General  Insurance,  the  value  of  the 
National  Commercial  Bank  and  the  value  of  the  land  and  buildings  of  Bramer  House  and 
other properties of Bramer Property Fund, were not the subject matter and were therefore not 
included in the final report of the Conservators, Messrs Mustaq Oosman and Andre Bonieux. 
Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Special Administrator, Mr Yacoob Ramtoola 
of  BDO,  that  Rs13.6  billion  is  recoverable  from  the  above-mentioned  assets  and  other 
recoveries to be made.  

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that several parties have expressed interests to 
participate  in  the  equity  of  the  National  Insurance  Company  Ltd,  including  two  local 
insurance companies; a major UK based insurance company and a leading local bank, which 
is expanding in banking insurance as a platform to its future investments in Africa.  

I am further informed that the interested parties have identified equity participation in 

NIC for the following main reasons –  

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

the  NIC  provides  an  excellent  opportunity  through  its  portfolio  of  135,000 
policies  to  either  enter  the  domestic  market  or  consolidate  existing  market 
share; 

NIC is currently generating a premium income of Rs100 m. monthly, i.e. over 
a  billion  rupees  annually,  which  will  contribute  to  dividend  income  of  any 
strategic partner; 

NIC  also  provides  opportunity  to  build  a  platform  for  offerings  of  wealth 
management services and also general insurance; 

strategic partners will be able to exercise significant influence on the Board of 
NIC  and  develop  a  common  and  aligned  expansion  strategy;  NIC  generates 
the premium income of Rs100 m. monthly which will contribute to dividend 
income, as I have stated; 

NIC is also the only insurance company in Mauritius which has 14 branches 
and is planning to expand to 22 branches. This network coverage will facilitate 
any strategic partner to benefit from greater market penetration, and 

 

6. 

87 

NIC  has  a  general  insurance  licence  which  is  yet  to  be  exploited  and  a 
business plan which gives a value to the whole industry and creates synergy of 
cross selling with an international outlook. 

Madam Speaker, Government intention has always been to safeguard the interest and 
alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the  distressed  policyholders  and  investors  but  not  to  run  this 
insurance company in the long run. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  there  are  already  two  firm  offers  which  have 
been received by NIC Ltd. for participation in its equity. The first offer is for around 33% 
equity  and  the  second  offer  is  for  an  initial  minority  stake  of  20%  with  an  option  to 
subsequently  increase  to  a  majority  shareholding,  subject,  of  course,  to  appropriate  due 
diligence  and  the  FSC  giving  approval.  I  am  also  informed  that  the  UK  based  insurance 
company  will be conducting a due diligence  exercise in a few days prior to submitting its 
proposal.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  current  Special  Administrators  and  BDO  have  identified  a 
possible total amount of Rs13.8 billion which is recoverable over the next four years for the 
payment  of  debentures  from  the  sale  of  the  National  Insurance  Company  Ltd.  (Life  and 
General),  immovable  properties,  including  Bramer  Property  Fund,  land  and  buildings  of 
Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital,  17  apartments  and  17  parking  lots  of  the  Diplomat  Garden 
properties,  recovery  of  specific  assets  at  Pailles,  Plaine  Lauzun,  Phoenix  Les  Halles  and 
Montebello,  amongst  others.  This  will  contribute  Rs13.8  billion  towards  repayment  of  the 
debentures, which will then leave a net shortfall of Rs2.5 billion.  

Madam Speaker, Government’s vision is to streamline investment holdings through a 
consolidation to allow economies of scale, efficiencies, access to market and enhance product 
offerings  in  the  market  place.  It  is  in  this  perspective  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  announced  the  merger  before  today  of  the  NCB,  MPCB  and  the 
proposed SME Bank. 

The  transaction  will  inculcate  a  greater  sense  of  competition,  which  will  boost  the 
financial sector and will be beneficial to the end consumers. Government expects a partial 
disposal throughout a private equity, a strategic partner or a listing in four years to recoup the 
remaining Rs2.5 billion, which will be contributed to finance the last payment of debentures 
in June 2020. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Special  Administrator  that  further  amounts 

will be recovered as follows -  

 

(i) 

(ii) 

88 

personal assets seizure of all those who had knowledge and were involved in 
the fraud; 

professional  indemnity  insurance  for  specific  policies  taken  by  directors  of 
BAI; in fact it was discovered by the Administrators that  all these directors 
had  taken  specific  insurance  policies  to  protect  themselves  -  professional 
indemnity  insurance  for  a  total  amount  of  Rs2  billion,  Madam  Speaker,  so 
they knew what they were doing, and 

(iii) 

fines and compensations to be obtained by professional service providers who 
have contributed directly or indirectly to the fraud and that includes KPMG as 
auditors. 

Madam Speaker, the debentures issued to Super Cash Back Gold policyholders who 
have not disclosed their source of funds in their respective forms which were submitted, will 
be subject to a net deduction of 15% of the amount of debentures. This potential recovery 
will be quantified by BDO when the debentures are issued and this will reduce the amount 
payable. 

Madam Speaker, under the leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, this Government 
has done its best, the best it could in the last five months to protect our fellow citizens and 
prevent a social and financial crisis in our beloved country.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE MAURITIUS RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY BILL  

(No. XI of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

(4.34 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Mauritius  Renewable  Energy  Agency 
(MARENA) Bill (No. XI of 2015) be read a second time. 

The main object of this Bill is to create an agency to promote renewable energy.  

 

89 

Madam Speaker, such institutions have been established in several countries. A few 
examples are the Indian Renewable Development Agency in India set up as far back as 1987, 
the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, the Danish Organisation for Renewable Agency 
and  the  New  &  Renewable  Energy  Authority  in  Egypt.    We  have  been  inspired  by  these 
models while drafting the Bill being presented today. 

At the international level, in 2009, the International Renewable Energy Agency was 
created to promote widespread and increased adoption of renewable energy.   Today, IRENA 
- that international agency - has 143 members and is a leading voice on renewable energy. It 
has to its credit, significant achievements in developing renewable energy data and statistics; 
providing advice on best practices, policy development and insights on financial mechanisms 
and technological expertise and supporting capacity building programmes. In preparing this 
Bill, we have been guided by the broad guidelines offered by IRENA. Indeed, the definition 
of “renewable energy” in the Bill is based on the definition found in the IRENA Statutes. 

Another collective institutional mechanism is the SIDS Dock set up by Small Island 
Developing States which is assisting small islands to transform their national energy sectors 
into a catalyst for sustainable economic development and help create financial resources to 
address  adaptation  to  climate  change.  It  is  worth  noting  that  SIDS  Dock  is  now  being 
formally  provided  with  headquarters  in  Samoa  -  that  country  where  we  did  not  attend  the 
SIDS Conference unfortunately. 

Madam Speaker, IRENA has underlined that renewable energy has moved from the 
margins to the majority in both investment and new capacity additions and is growing at an 
unprecedented  scale.  It  has  pointed  out  that  there  is  the  need  to  rethink  energy  and  move 
away from conventional thinking on energy.  

I must state that though there has been a strategy for the energy sector with a target of 
35% renewable energy set for the year 2025, our legislative framework has not been updated 
to cater for renewable energy.  

 Today we have three main institutions. First of all, the Ministry which is responsible 
for  formulating  policies  and  strategies  in  the  sector.  Second,  the  CEB  which  generates, 
transmits  and  distributes  electricity  and,  thirdly,  the  EEMO,  that  is,  the  Energy  Efficiency 
Management Office, which is developing and encouraging energy efficiency strategies. We 
all  know  that  CEB  finally  is  judge  and  party  in  this  sector  because  it  is  at  the  same  time 
generating, transmitting and distributing electricity whilst at the same time negotiating with 
all partners who want to invest in renewable energy.  

 

90 

The Utility Regulatory Authority Act enacted in 2004, has remained un-proclaimed, 
mainly  because  of  the  inaction  of  the  previous  Government.  Mauritius  is  among  the  three 
countries in SADC which still does not have a regulatory body for utilities.  I have to inform 
the House that I am taking the necessary steps to appoint the Board of the URA which should 
be operational early next year. 

This leaves a missing link and a very important one as there is neither a regulatory 

framework nor an institutional structure to deal with renewable energy.  

You will recall, Madam Speaker, that the National Energy Commission reported that 
there was currently a void in terms of formal institutional setup for “ensuring that renewable 
energy  projects  are  recorded  via  a  transparent  process  and  undergo  a  multi-criteria 
sustainability assessment.” It, therefore, recommended the setting up of an independent body 
under the aegis of my Ministry.  

This is the purpose of the Bill that is being introduced today.  

The objective of the Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency (MARENA) Bill is mainly 

to create the enabling environment for renewable energy technology in Mauritius.   

The  new  agency  will  have  very  complex  challenges  to  address,  namely  elaborating 
every five years a renewable energy strategic plan; establishing the necessary mechanism and 
framework  to  increase  the  use  of  renewable  energy;  assessing  the  feasibility  and 
competitiveness of renewable energy projects; encouraging research on the renewable energy 
technologies; compiling and analysing data on use and benefits of renewable energy; devising 
incentive  mechanisms, 
including  subsidisation  mechanisms  based  on  principles  of 
competitiveness  and  specific  technologies  and  lastly,  defining  a  funding  strategy  for 
renewable energy projects.  

In fact, Madam Speaker, the recent expressions of interest carried out by the CEB has 
been  immensely  successful.  It  has  shown  that  there  is  considerable  interest.    CEB  has 
received 260 proposals, received for a total of more than 1,500 MW and a wide diversity of 
technologies.  British  renewable  energy  companies  who  visited  Mauritius  last  week  on  the 
invitation  of  the  British  High  Commission  have  expressed  the  view  that  the  Mauritian 
renewable  energy  market  offers  appealing  opportunities.  They  stressed  to  me  their 
appreciation of the clean-up of our financial sector and expressed keen interest in the setting 
up of their regional headquarters here. I hope that with MARENA, this will soon become a 

 

91 

reality. I have told the Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance that this sector 
was highly dependent on the existence of a clean, modern financial services centre. Investors 
have welcomed the statements made by the Minister of Finance as well as the Minister of 
Financial Services in that connection without forgetting the statement made by the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister at his last communication. 

This  further  justifies  the  need  for  an  organised  approach  and  right  institutional, 

technical and financial mechanisms. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed agency will be called upon to address the barriers to the 
development  of  renewable  energy  in  terms  of  administrative  procedures  and  financial 
mechanisms. The Bill makes explicit provision for regulations to be made for the setting of 
standards  and  guidelines  relating  to  renewable  energy  technologies  and  accreditation 
mechanisms in respect of operators in the sector of renewable energy. 

It is good to add at this stage, Madam Speaker, that my Ministry is currently engaged in 
the revision of the existing legislation namely the CEB Act, the Electricity Act to address the 
developments  in  the  electricity  sector  and  the  new  sustainable  energy  objectives  and  to 
review the procedures for applications to produce electricity from renewable sources. 

Madam Speaker, allow me now to delve into the model of the structure I am proposing 

for the proposed agency. 

As I said earlier, the EEMO has encouraged a networking with the private sector and 
other  institutions  to  promote  energy  efficiency.  One  example  is  the  ‘Programme  National 
d’Efficacité  Energétique’  (PNEE)  implemented  in  collaboration  with  the  Joint  Economic 
Council and the Agence Française de Développement, with a potential of reducing some 40 
MW in electricity demand, and reducing our import bill by about Rs1.2 billion. This project 
will be replicated for public buildings. 

I  expect  that  MARENA  will  create  a  public/private  sector  –  NGO  synergy  in  a 
structured  manner.  That  is  why  I  have  taken  care  to  move  away  from  the  conventional 
membership  of  boards  of  parastatal  organisations  to  include  people  from  diverse  groups, 
including the private sector, NGOs and even two representatives of this House which I hope 
will be one Member of the Opposition and one Member of Government to be appointed by 
yourself, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of some representations made privately to me 
and publicly in the press. In spite of the outrageous tone adopted by some people who like 

 

92 

being “intéressant”, I have taken some of their suggestions on board as notwithstanding the 
tone in which they were made, some of them were quite serious suggestions and I will, at 
Committee Stage, come  with some amendments regarding the composition of the Board.  I 
will move, for instance, that two Members from Rodrigues be included on the Board. But I 
do  not  wish  this  Board  to  be  an  accordion  Board  with  so  many  people  that  it  becomes 
unmanageable. 

While  this  is  an  innovative  approach,  I  believe  that  we  need  to  be  daring  to  bring 
changes to the way we work, as things have greatly evolved in our new globalised world. We 
should not be fixated with old institutional models, some dating back to colonial times. Let us 
together do things differently, with, of course, better and improved governance standards. 

I  am  sure  that  the  two  Members  to  be  appointed  by  the  Speaker  as  well  as  the  two 
Members  from  Rodrigues  will  bring  valuable  contributions  to  MARENA.  Let  us  give  this 
new model a chance to work. I am sure institutions in other spheres can follow the example, 
as we build our experience with the MARENA. 

Let me,  at this stage, bring some clarifications  on the inclusion of  Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG) in the mandate of the new agency. This has purged some comments in the press 
and  amongst  my  friends  and  colleagues.    I  have  here  to  refer  to  the  resolutions  of  the 
International Rio + 20 Conference held in 2012 on sustainable development.  

The relevant part of Paragraph 127 of the report on the resolutions reads as follows, I 

quote - 

“We reaffirm support for the implementation of national and subnational policies and 
strategies,  based  on  individual  national  circumstances  and  development  aspirations, 
using  an  appropriate  energy  mix  to  meet  developmental  needs,  including  through 
increased use of renewable energy sources and other low-emission technologies, the 
more efficient use of energy, greater reliance on advanced energy technologies - and 
may  I  stress  -  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies,  and  the  sustainable  use  of 
traditional energy resources.”  

It would have been an abuse to try and create an agency just for LNG. This is why there 
is a specific provision for LNG in this Bill although it is not renewable energy.  It is fossil 
fuel energy, but although it is not, strictly speaking, renewable energy by way of exception - 
those who are used to parliamentary drafting will understand what I mean – it is put in the 

 

93 

MARENA  and  this  is  a  matter  of  policy  which  has  been  decided  and  which  is  the  safest 
course to adopt.   

It is clear from this resolution that Member States, including Mauritius, have agreed to 

have greater reliance on advanced energy technologies, including cleaner technologies.   

The  US  National  Renewable  Energy  Laboratory  has  highlighted 

that  many 
opportunities exist for Renewable Energy technologies and LNG to be integrated at multiple 
levels,  such  as  hybrid  Concentrating  Solar  Power  (CSP)  and  natural  gas-fired  power 
generation  systems;  biogas  and  natural  gas  co-fired  combined  cycle  gas  turbines;  systems 
integration  through  co-optimised  system  integration.  Opportunities  for  natural  gas  and 
renewable energy technologies to support the other’s role should be examined by the agency 
as part of our long-term strategy to gradually shift to increased use of clean and/or renewable 
energy sources.  

Madam Speaker, I do reckon that LNG introduction will pose some challenges which 
are,  however,  not  insurmountable,  particularly  if  we  get  the  assistance  of  our  international 
partners. MARENA will focus also on how to address these challenges effectively and advise 
on the expeditious introduction of this clean source of fuel in our energy portfolio. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude by drawing attention to the fact that we are already 
late in developing the required institutional structure for renewable energy. We need to move 
faster and once we have a properly constituted agency, it should be the focal point to deal 
with IRENA and other similar organisations and for the sustainable energy agenda. In fact, I 
have to inform the House that we have  already  put up a project proposal under the Green 
Climate Fund to support the operationalisation of the Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency.  

Since 2009, the target of 35% renewable energy has been set for the year 2025.  We 
still have a long way to go. This is probably due to the unstructured and the ad hoc approach 
adopted since 2009 favouring unsolicited bids and opaqueness. The new agency will no doubt 
bring a systematic and coordinated methodology in dealing with renewable energy and most 
importantly  more  transparency  and  clarity.  Actually,  as  a  precursor  of  this  Bill,  we  are 
already working on the renewable energy road map with the support of the Agence Française 
de Développement. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  personally  proud  to  contribute  to  the  establishment  of  a 
comprehensive framework for the development of renewable energy and I have no doubt that 

 

94 

both the private sector and the NGOs will give their full support to this agency. I shall be 
eagerly awaiting the contributions which my colleagues in the House may wish to bring for 
the betterment of this Bill. 

With these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Mr  Berenger:  In  view  of  the  Père  Laval  pilgrimage,  I  think  we  will  end  early, 

therefore I move that the debates be now adjourned.  

Mr Uteem rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

Second Reading 

THE ROADS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XII OF 2015) 

The hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr  N. Bodha) gave 
notice of his intention not to proceed with the second reading of the Roads (Amendment) Bill 
(No. XII of 2015) today.  
 

THE PHARMACY COUNCIL BILL 

(NO. XIII OF 2015) 

The hon. Minister of Health and Quality of  Life (Mr A. Gayan) gave notice of his 
intention not to proceed with the second reading of the Pharmacy Council Bill (No. XIII of 
2015) today. 
 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

ADJOURNMENT 

adjourn to Tuesday 15 September 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 

95 

Question put and agreed to. 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 
 
At 5.00 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 15 September, 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD – TURNOVER 

(No. B/421) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Ltd., he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the total turnover generated 
on its cargo operations over the past two years ending 31 March 2014 and 2015 respectively, 
indicating in each case, the - 

(a) 
(b) 

amount of profit and loss realised in relation thereto, and 
impact thereof on the overall performance of the company. 

Reply: Since the information sought relates to commercial matters of Air Mauritius 
Limited,  it  could  be  prejudicial  to  the  interest  of  the  airline  for  such  information  to  be 
released. 

 

CAMP CAROL, GRAND’BAIE & PEREYBERE – DRAINS – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/422) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the construction of drains at 
Camp Carol, Grand’Baie and Pereybère respectively, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the National Development Unit, information as to – 

(a) 
(b) 

if a Consultant has been appointed therefor and, if not, why not, and 
in each case, the – 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

expected start and completion dates thereof; 
name of the contractor therefor, and 
project value thereof. 

 

96 

Reply: I am informed by the National Development Unit (NDU) that the construction 
of  drains  and  ancillary  works  at  Camp  Carol,  Grand’Baie  and  Pereybère  are  in  the  list  of 
projects to be implemented during this Financial Year for Constituency No. 6. 

These areas were considered as prominent flood prone areas in a study carried out by 

a Greek consultancy firm and which was funded by the World Bank. 

The detailed designs reports and cost estimates in respect of these 2 projects are ready 
and are being sent to the Project Plan Committee (PPC) for approval, following which NDU 
will be launching the tenders through an Open Bidding Exercise. 

 

BETAMAX SHIPPING LTD & THE STATE TRADING CORPORATION – 

PETROLEUM PRODUCTS – CONTRACT 

(No.  B/423)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  contract  between  the 
Betamax Shipping Ltd. and the State Trading Corporation for the transportation of petroleum 
products  from  India  to  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if, in the course of the inquiry being carried out 
thereinto, all the – 

(a) 

(b) 

persons  allegedly  involved  therein  have  given  statements  in  relation  thereto 
and, if not, why not, and 
documents related thereto have been secured, indicating the expected date of 
completion of the inquiry. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  an  enquiry  has  been 
instituted by the Central CID following receipt of a letter dated 12 February 2015, from the 
Ministry  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  regarding  malpractice  in  the 
allocation  of  the  contract  of  affreightment  between  the  State  Trading  Corporation  and 
Betamax Shipping Ltd. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that 34 persons have so far given statements to the Police in connection with this case.  Police 
will convene other persons, if need be, for their statements in due course. 

 

97 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that various documents from the State Trading Corporation and correspondence exchanged 
between different Government bodies which are related to the enquiry, have been secured by 
the Police. 

This case will require in-depth and protracted examination of numerous confidential 

documents and interview of various persons allegedly involved or incriminated therein. 

It is, therefore, inappropriate at this stage to give an indicative date of completion of 

the enquiry. 

 

BEAU BASSIN & PETITE RIVIERE – SYNTHETIC DRUGS 

(No.  B/424)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No. 20, Beau 
Bassin and Petite Rivière, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner 
of Police, information as to if an alarming and rapid proliferation of synthetic drugs has been 
reported thereat and if so, indicate if he has recently received a letter addressed to him by the 
Coalition  des  Acteurs  Sociaux  de  Barkly  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  actions  taken  in  relation 
thereto, if any. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  two  cases  of  synthetic 
drugs  have  been  detected  by  the  Police  in  the  Constituency  No.  20  from  2013  to  04 
September 2015. Although the Police does not consider this figure as alarming, the situation 
is being closely followed with a view to preventing the proliferation of synthetic drugs not 
only in that region but throughout the island. 

I am also informed by the Commissioner of Police that he did receive a copy of the 
letter from the Coalition des Acteurs Sociaux de Barkly, addressed to me, on 13 August 2015, 
in which the following priority issues related to the proliferation of synthetic drugs among the 
youth in the locality, were listed – 

•  Lack of Police Officers at the Barkly Police Station; 
•  The review of the Dangerous Drugs Act; 
•  Prevention campaigns in Barkly, and 

 

98 

•  The setting of a Day Care Centre for the Youth. 
With regard to the first issue, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the 
Barkly Police Station covers the region of Cité Barkly, La Confiance and Mont Roches and 
although it is adequately staffed, it has been reinforced. The Police Station is also supported 
by  the  Emergency  Response  Service,  the  Divisional  Support  Unit;  the  Divisional  Traffic 
Police, the Field Intelligence Officers, the Anti-Drug and Smuggling Unit and other divisions 
of the Police Force. 

With regard to the Dangerous Drugs Act, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply 
I  made  to  Parliamentary  Questions  B/359  and  B/372  on  01  September  2015,  wherein  I 
announced that necessary measures would be taken to amend the Act so as to criminalise the 
consumption of and dealing in the new synthetic drugs which have appeared on the market.  
The  relevant  Regulations  to  the  Act  have  already  been  drafted  by  the  Attorney  General’s 
Office and will soon be made operational by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. 

Regarding the prevention campaigns in Barkly, Police Officers of the Barkly Police 
Station  trained  in  community  policing,  have  conducted  several  sensitisation  campaigns  and 
engage in door-to-door contact with inhabitants of the locality, more specifically the parents, 
with a view to combating the proliferation of synthetic drugs.  Regular Community Policing 
meetings to address drug related issues are also being held. 

I am informed that one such meeting was held on 22 July 2015 and was attended by 
the Members of the National Assembly of that  constituency, and  also by  certain Municipal 
Councillors, among others. 

The  ADSU  also  have  been  carrying  out  sensitisation  campaigns  in  educational 

institutions, including those in the region. 

Moreover, regular sensitisation programmes are being conducted in the locality by the 
National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and  Rehabilitation  of  Substance  Abusers  (NATReSA), 
targeting  more  particularly  the  youth.    From  January  2015,  such  activities  have  been 
conducted  by  the  NATReSA  in  7  educational  institutions  and  6  other  organisations  in  the 
constituency. 

Concerning  the  setting-up  of  a  Day  Care  Centre  for  the  youth,  I  have  referred  the 

proposal to the concerned Ministries for consideration and appropriate action. 

 

99 

SMF & SSU – PATROLS 

(No.  B/425)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Special Mobile Force 
and  the  Special  Supporting  Unit,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if the Officers thereof will be deployed to effect 
regular patrols and organise check points in sensitive zones with high crime rates. 

Reply: In regard to the Special Mobile Force and the Special Support Unit, these two 

units have distinct and highly specialised responsibilities as compared to the regular Police. 

The Special Mobile  Force is the only paramilitary unit which ensures the safety of 

mainland Mauritius, Rodrigues and the Outer Islands from outside threats. 

The Special Support Unit is responsible for public order policing in the local context. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  over  and  above  their  normal 
duties,  the  personnel  of  the  Special  Mobile  Force  and  the  Special  Support  Unit  are  being 
deployed on a daily basis on patrol duties in support of the regular Divisional Police.  They 
carry out vehicles check operations throughout the island in a targeted manner, particularly in 
crime prone areas. 

Furthermore, the Special Mobile Force conducts nocturnal patrols as well as vehicle 

checks and road blocks everyday in the southern part of the island. 

As  regards  the  Special  Support  Unit,  several  of  its  teams  carry  out  patrols  in  the 

northern part of the island on a daily basis. 

Since January up to 04 September this year, 1,590 and 987 stop and search operations 
have been carried out by the personnel of the Special Mobile Force and the Special Support 
Unit respectively together with the regular Police whereby  a total of 31,586 vehicles were 
checked.  A total of 1,821 contraventions were established. 

 

POLICE FORCE – SYNDICATE – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/426)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

 

100 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Police Force, 
he will state if Government is considering authorising the setting up of a syndicate therefor 
and, if so, indicate the proposed – 

(a) 
(b) 

legal framework to be established to govern same, and 
date of coming into operation thereof. 

Reply: I wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply to Parliamentary Question B/157 
at  the  sitting  of  the  National  Assembly  of  10  March  2015  wherein  I  mentioned  that 
preliminary consultations had started with a view to formulating a proper framework within 
which the Police Officers would be allowed to syndicate, as announced in the Government 
Programme 2015-2019. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, amendments will be brought to the Police Act and 

the Employment Relations Act to enable the setting-up of a syndicate for Police Officers. 

As  for  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  consultation 
process  with  all  stakeholders  has  been  completed,  and  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  is 
presently working on the draft Bill. Some minor issues have yet to be sorted out, and as soon 
as  these  are  cleared,  the  draft  Bill  will  be  finalised.  It  is  expected  that  the  Bill  will  be 
introduced in the present session of the National Assembly. 

 

TRANQUEBAR – FOOTBALL PITCH – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/427) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  football  pitch  at 
Tranquebar,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  National  Development 
Unit, information as to the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

start and completion dates of the construction works thereof; 
contract value thereof, and 
when activities in relation to football will be held thereat. 

Reply: I am informed by the NDU that the football pitch at Tranquebar is a project 

consisting of three phases namely – 

 

(i) 

101 

earth  works,  masonry  walls,  construction  of  French  drains,  levelling  and 
turfing; 
fencing and fixing of gates, and 
lighting of football ground. 

(ii) 
(iii) 
The contract for Phase I was awarded to the contractor, Modern Jurassic Building and 
Construction Ltd on 07 November 2012 for the sum of Rs3,957,328 (VAT inclusive). The 
starting date was scheduled for 10 January 2013 with a completion date of 10 June 2013. 

However, I am given to understand that the contract was terminated on 30 July 2014 
due to delays and non-performance on the part of the contractor.  As a result, the levelling 
and turfing of the football ground remained outstanding. 

On 01 August 2014, the NDU awarded a contract for Phase II of the project to Safety 
Construction Co. Ltd. for the sum of Rs7,095,688.60 (VAT inclusive), without including the 
outstanding works in Phase I, namely the levelling and turfing of the football ground.  Phase 
II of the project started on 01 September 2014 and was completed on 27 February 2015. 

A tentative handing over exercise of the site was effected on 14 April 2015 by the 
relevant Project Manager with the Ministry of Youth and Sports.  However, given that the 
ground was not properly levelled and the turfing was not to standards, the exercise could not 
take place. 

The NDU has included the outstanding works in its list of projects to be implemented 
during this Financial Year.  The football ground is expected to be completed by December 
2015. 

 

POLICE FORCE – LAM PO TANG & LEGEND CASES 

(No. B/428) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  that  criticisms  have  been 
levelled against the Mauritius Police Force in the aftermath of the Lam Po Tang and Legend 
cases and, if so, will he state if consideration will be given for the – 

(a) 

modernisation and upgrading thereof, and 

 

(b) 

102 

setting up of a High Powered Commission to be presided by a former Judge to 
inquire thereinto and propose the necessary reforms to enhance the efficiency 
and credibility of the Mauritius Police Force. 

Reply:  I  have  not  been  officially  made  aware  of  any  criticism  levelled  against  the 
Police in the aftermath of the Legend and Lam Po Tang cases. However, it has come to my 
knowledge that in the wake of the verdicts in those two cases in July 2012 and July 2015, 
respectively, criticisms were made especially in the Press against the Police, particularly in 
regard to the manner in which investigation had been carried out in those cases. Given that 
the  two  cases  have  each  been  heard  before  a  Judge  sitting  with  a  Jury  panel,  it  would  be 
inappropriate for me to comment on the different criticisms raised after the two trials. 

Nevertheless, I wish to highlight that it is Government’s responsibility to ensure that 
necessary  measures  are  taken  to  enable  all  institutions,  including  the  Police  Force,  to 
discharge their duties in an effective and efficient manner. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, the Government Programme 2015-2019 contains 

several measures aiming at modernising and upgrading the Police Force. These include – 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

the  introduction  of  the  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Bill  which  will,  inter 
alia,  regulate  all  issues  pertaining  to  confessions  and  their  admissibility  in 
Court; 
the setting-up of an online central criminal database for offenders; 
the installation of CCTV cameras and  audio recording systems in  all Police 
stations, and 
the setting-up of an Independent Police Complaints Commission. 

(iv) 
Action has already been initiated for the implementation of all these measures. 

In  addition,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  in  March  2015,  a 
Strategic Policing Plan has been launched, and emphasis has been put therein on the use of 
analytical  techniques  to  support  investigations  and  the  importance  of  upgrading  skills  of 
Police Officers in detection and management of scene of crimes. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  in  view  of  the  extensive  reforms  in  which 
Government  has  already  embarked  in  regard  to  the  modernisation  of  the  Police  Force,  the 
need for the setting-up of a High Powered Commission presided by a former Judge to enquire 
into  criticisms  levelled  against  the  Police,  does  not  arise.  I  wish  to  highlight  that  in  the 

 

103 

context  of  the  forthcoming  introduction  of  the  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Bill,  the 
Attorney  General’s  Office  will  soon  carry  out  public  consultations  to  provide  ample 
opportunity to all stakeholders to set out their views in relation to the enhancement of the 
efficiency and credibility of the Mauritius Police Force. 

H.E. THE VICE-PRESIDENT – PREMISES – RENT 

(No.  B/429)  Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the premises rented to 
serve as official residence for H.E. the Vice-President of the Republic of Mauritius, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to if tender procedures have been followed 
for the renting thereof and, if so, indicate the – 

date the bid therefor was launched; 
name of the bidders therefor, indicating the name of the successful bidder; 
extent thereof, and 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d)  monthly rental thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

ALLEGED ARM TRAFFICKING – INQUIRY 

(No.  B/430)  Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent request made 
to the Government of Mauritius by Mrs K. L. A., Director of the Conflict Awareness Project, 
to re-open the inquiry concerning the alleged arm trafficking network in Mauritius, he will 
state if he will consider acceding thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION – SETTING UP 

(No. B/431) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed setting up of an 

 

104 

Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission,  as  mentioned  in  the  Presidential  Address,  he 
will state where matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MELROSE PRISON – CONSTRUCTION – CONTRACT 

(No.  B/432)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  construction  of  the 
Melrose  Prison,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Prisons/Police, information as to the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

 name of the contractor thereof; 
contract value thereof, and 
delay in the completion thereof, if any. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

SCHOOLS – SYNTHETIC DRUGS 

(No. B/456) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research 
whether, in regard to the resurgence of synthetic drugs, she will state if consideration will be 
given for the advisability of introducing a Drug Education and Intervention Programme at the 
level of all the secondary and tertiary institutions. 

Reply: The emergence of synthetic drugs is a major cause of concern and no stone is 

being left unturned to deal vigorously with this issue. 

At  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  bold  steps  have  been  initiated  to  contain  this 
problem/plague.  A  Sensitisation  Coordination  Team  for  Actions  against  Drugs  has  already 
been set up. Anti-drug sensitisation and other actions are being taken. 

The Ministry had issued a circular to instruct schools on sensitisation of students about 
the  risk  associated  with  drugs  in  particular  synthetic  drug  and  to  ensure  vigilance.  Such 
sensitisation is being done through various platforms, including - 

1.  Morning assembly 

 

2.  Talks on drugs 

105 

Students  are  also  made  aware  of  the  adverse  impact  of  drug  consumption  on  their 

health and well-being. 

Educators are encouraged to be alive to the issue 

Any case of suspicion is reported to the Rector, and suspected students are monitored 

and followed. A protocol has moreover been established to handle cases of drug at schools. 

As  part  of  preventive  measures,  Rectors  of  schools  and  educational  institutions  are 
called upon to inform students not only on the risk of using the drugs, but also on the fact that 
drug-trafficking is a criminal offence. Moreover, they have been informed that the penalty 
associated with the consumption and possession of drugs is very severe. It is to be noted that 
a  component  of  drug  education  is  already  included  in  the  secondary  school  science 
curriculum at “O” level. 

However, due to the emergence of these new types of drugs, namely synthetic ones, I 
have  instructed  that  the  programme  be  revisited  and  beefed  up  and  also  to  adopt  a  more 
structured approach for proper dissemination of information on drugs. 

In line with the national commitment to prevent illegal drug proliferation, my Ministry 
is also working in close collaboration with the Police Department which has adopted a series 
of proactive measures which includes - 

(a) Sensitisation of its personnel on the New Psychoactive Drugs and the negative effects; 
(b) Involvement  of  ADSU  personnel  to  create  awareness  among  the  vulnerable  groups 
including  youngsters,  students  and  aged  persons  about  the  advent  of  such  New 
Psychoactive drugs and the serious threat they may pose to health; 

(c) Enhanced focus by the ADSU on the new emerging drugs and their actual trend, as 

part of the intelligence network island wide, and 

(d) Conduct  of  regular  police  patrols  in  the  vicinity  of  the  University  campuses  and 

schools. 

The  Ministry  also  works  in  very  close  collaboration  with  the  Brigade  pour  la 
Protection  des  Mineurs,  the  Anti-Drug  and  Smuggling  Unit,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality  of  Life  as  well  as  NATReSA  in  so  far  as  sensitising  students  on  substance  abuse 
including synthetic drugs is concerned. 

 

106 

The  fight  against  proliferation  of  synthetic  drugs  is  the  concern  of  one  and  all.  Our 
Heads of schools are already exercising tight control, but it is the duty of all stakeholders and 
society as well to see to it that our youngsters do not fall prey of unscrupulous drug dealers. 

 

CEB - PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - PURCHASE 

(No. B/457) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to coal, heavy fuel oil, diesel and other petroleum products, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to – 

(a) the  actual  prices  at  which  the  Board  is  purchasing  same,  indicating  the 
percentage of decrease in these prices as compared to the highest levels at which 
these products have ever been purchased, and  

(b) if, following the fall in the prices of fossil fuels worldwide, the electricity tariffs 

on the local market will be revised downwards. 

Reply: I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that - 

(i) 

the CIF price for coal was USD 64.65 Metric ton for the latest consignment  

received in July 2015.  The highest level paid was USD 141.16 Metric ton on 
02 March 2011.  Based on this price, the percentage decrease is 54.2%. 

(ii) 

for 380 CST heavy fuel oil the price was USD 358.13 metric ton in July 2015.   

The highest price paid was USD 768.94 in March 2012. 

(iii) 

for 180 CST, the price was USD 363.50 metric ton in July 2015.  The highest  

price reached was USD 781.42 metric ton in March 2012.   

The percentage decrease is around 53%. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the electricity tariffs were last increased by an 
average of 10% in 2010 and have been maintained for the past five years at the same level, 
despite  the  relatively  higher  prices  of  heavy  fuel  oil  between  2010  and  2013,  significant 
investment in the extension and upgrading of the electricity infrastructure and debts of Rs2.6 
billion, as highlighted in the Director of Audit’s report. 

 

107 

Any  tariff  review  will  have  to  be  considered  in  a  holistic  manner,  based  on  sound 
financial principles taking into account, not only prices of fuel oil and coal, but also other 
factors  such  as  revenue  stability,  debt  servicing,  short  to  medium  term  capital  investment, 
integration  of  renewable  energy  in  the  generation  mix,  and  discouraging  wasteful  use  of 
electricity. 

 

VACOAS MULTIPURPOSE COOPERATIVE SOCIETY - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/458)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Co-operatives  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Vacoas  Multipurpose  Cooperative  Society,  he  will  state  the  measures  being  taken  by  his 
Ministry to help the Board thereof redress the situation thereat. 

Reply: Following an inquiry undertaken by my Ministry into the affairs of the Vacoas 
Popular Multi-purpose Co-operative Society  Ltd, serious malpractices and mismanagement 
issues were revealed. 

The existing Board of the society was removed and a new Board was appointed on 12 

January 2015.   

The following measures have been taken by my Ministry to help the Board redress the 

situation - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

In line with the provisions of the Cooperatives Act 2005 (as amended), the  
Society has been put under stricter control, that is, the payments effected by 
the Society are being vetted by two Senior Officers of my Ministry; 
As the top management of the Society has either resigned or been dismissed,  
the Board has, in consultation with my Ministry, appointed Ernst & Young, a 
professional accounting firm to manage the affairs of the Society; 
A special working group, comprising of a Lead Analyst from the Financial  
Services Commission (FSC) and Senior Officials of my Ministry, has been set 
up to closely monitor the situation; 
Directives have been issued to the Board to enlist the collaboration of   
institutions  such  as  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption  (ICAC), 
Financial Reporting Council (FRC), FSC, CCID and the Bank of Mauritius to 
assist  the  new  Board  in  addressing  alleged  cases  of  gross  financial 
irregularities; 
A help line desk has been set up at the level of my Ministry, as well as at the  

 

(vi) 

108 

seat of the Society to help the Board in handling queries and complaints; 
Following the Board’s submissions of Ernst & Young Report regarding the  
solvency of the Society, my Ministry directed the Board to convene a Special 
General meeting to consider the insolvency issue; 

(vii)  My Ministry also assisted the Board to hold the Society’s Annual General  

Meeting  to  apprise  members,  inter  alia,  of  the  financial  situation  of  the 
Society; 
The Board apprised the Ministry of several pertinent issues which emerged  
from  the  Special  General  Meeting  and  the  Annual  General  Meeting.    My 
Ministry  sought  legal  advice  from  the  State  Law  Office  and  informed  the 
Board accordingly, and  
I am informed that the Board has received as at to date three Rescue Plans  
from the members of the Vacoas Popular Multi-purpose Co-operative Society 
Ltd.  However, they have asked for an extension until 15 September 2015 in 
order to submit a revised Rescue Plan.  My Ministry has already acceded to 
their request. 

(viii) 

(ix) 

 

EID-UL-ADHA – LIVE CATTLE 

(No. B/459) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to the live cattle being made available on the local market for the Eid-ul-Adha festival, 
he will state if he is aware that, currently, there are uncertainties surrounding the age thereof 
and, if so, indicate the measures being taken by his Ministry to guarantee that the age thereof 
is as per the prescribed norms. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/434) 

 

EMPLOYEES – LAID OFF 

(No.  B/460)Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training whether, in regard to the 
employees laid off over the period 01 January 2015 to date, he will state the number thereof 
who were employed in the – 
(a) private sector  

 

109 

(b) parastatal/statutory  bodies,  partly  or  wholly  government  funded  companies  or 

local government authorities, and  

(c) British American Insurance or other related companies. 

Reply: The number of employees laid off for the period January 2015 to date in the 
Private Sector including the British American Insurance or other related companies is 1776.  
For the information of the House, this figure when compared to previous years, it is found 
that the trend of laid off workers is more or less the same specially in comparison to figures 
of 2013 which stands at around 2250. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  services  of  around  450  employees  of 
parastatal and statutory bodies, have been terminated following Government decision taken in 
March  2015  to  the  effect  that  all  recruitments/enlistments  made  after  01  July  2014  in 
parastatal bodies and Government-owned companies be terminated according to Law. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I would refer the hon. Member to reply made to 

the PNQ of 01 September 2015.  

 

CERTIFICATE OF CHARACTER ACT - AMENDMENTS 

(No.  B/461)Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Attorney  General  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Certificate  of  Character  Act,  he  will  state  if 
Government is considering bringing amendments thereto and, if so, indicate – 

(a) When, and  
(b) the nature thereof. 

Reply:  Paragraph  38  of  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019  is  specifically  in 

relation to Certificate of Character and it provides as follows - 

“38. In order to increase the employability of people convicted of minor crimes and 
misdemeanors,  such  records  will  cease  to  appear  on  their  ‘certificates  of  character’ 
after a period of one year.” 
With a view to implementing paragraph 38 of the Government Programme, my Office 
has  started  consultations  with  relevant  stakeholders  in  relation  to  the  amendments  to  be 
brought to the Certificate of Character Act. My Office is still awaiting inputs from various 
stakeholders. 

I have to inform the House that the consultation process is ongoing and as soon as it is 
over,  I  will  seek  Cabinet  approval  to  make  the  required  amendments  to  the  Certificate  of 
Character Act and will bring the Bill before the National Assembly. 

 

110 

At this stage, given that consultations are still ongoing and that Cabinet approval has 
yet to be sought or obtained in relation to the amendments to be brought to the Certificate of 
Character  Act,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  me  to  give  any  further  details  on  those 
amendments. 

 

PENSION SYSTEM - REFORMS 

(No.B/462) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in regard to 
the Pension System, she will state the actions, if any, that will be taken in relation thereto, 
following the recent recommendations for pension reforms proposed in the Working Paper of 
the International Monetary Fund. 

Reply: A Ministerial Committee has been set up to look into the mechanism of the 

pension system. 

The Committee will comprise the following - 

(a)  The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities 
(b)  The Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
(c)  The Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
(d)  The Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 
(e)  The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 

The Committee will be chaired by the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and 

Lands. 

D.Y. PATIL MEDICAL COLLEGE - COURSES 

 

(No.  B/463)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the courses 
run at the D.Y. Patil Medical College, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the - 
(a)  Medical Council of Mauritius, information as to where matters stand regarding 

the recognition and registration of the postgraduates thereof, and  

(b)  Tertiary Education Commission, information as to if it will be allowed to enroll 

under-graduate and post-graduate students in the future. 

Reply:  I am informed by  the Medical Council that no action has  yet been taken in 

respect of - 

(a)  the  recognition  of  the  University  of  Technology,  Mauritius  (UTM)  as  a 

medical institution as defined in the Medical Council Act, and  

 

111 

(b)  the registration of Post-graduate students of the D.Y Patil institute. 

I am further informed that a team from the Imperial College comprising eight medical 
Specialists will be in Mauritius in November, 2015 to reassess the clinical competency of the 
students of the D.Y Patil Institute.  The team from Imperial College will be assisted by a local 
team of Specialists who will be chosen on the basis that they have not been involved in the 
Postgraduate training of the D.Y. Patil students. 
 

INFANT MORTALITY 

(No.  B/464)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  infant 
mortality,  he  will  state  the  latest  figures  thereof,  indicating  if  there  has  been  an  increase 
thereof and, if so, indicate the - 

(a) identified causes thereof, and 
(b) measures that are being taken for the prevention thereof. 

Reply: Infant Mortality is defined as the death of a child less than one year of age.  
The Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) is the number of deaths of children under one year of age 
per 1000 live births. 

According  to  available  data,  the  Infant  Mortality  Rate  (IMR)  for  the  island  of 
Mauritius  from  1990  to  2015  has  shown  a  general  decline  from  19.9  to  13.2  (up  to  June 
2015).  The forecast for 2015 will be 12.6. As regards Rodrigues, the IMR from 1990 to 2015 
has shown a good decreasing trend from 34.9 to 17.0.  The forecast for 2015 is 14.3. 

Therefore, parts (a) and (b) of the question do not arise. 

 

NATIONAL AIDS COMMITTEE - COMPOSITION 

(No. B/465) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National  Aids 
Committee, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(a) the composition thereof;  
(b) when the Committee last met, and 
(c)  if  the  proposed  discontinuation  of  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy 
Programme  was  discussed  at  the  level  thereof  and,  if  so,  table  copy  of  the 
proceedings thereof in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

112 

NINE YEAR CONTINUOUS BASIC EDUCATION PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 
(No. B/466) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  implementation  of  the  Nine  Year  Continuous 
Basic Education Project, she will state how her Ministry is proposing to respond to the public 
concerns that - 

(a) it will lead to the introduction of an additional competitive high stake examination 

at the end of Year 9, and  

(b) the introduction of mixed schooling in existing single sex schools, to be renamed 

Academies, in Year 10, may result in serious management issues. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

SUPREME COURT - MEDIATION DIVISION - CASES 

(No. B/467) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Attorney  General  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mediation  Division  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Master  and 
Registrar, information as to - 

(a) the number of  cases  referred thereto, since the coming into operation thereof to 

date, indicating the number thereof that have been resolved and settled, and  

(b) if consideration will be given for the advisability of extending mediation services 
to the lower Courts with a view to allowing disputes to be expeditiously resolved 
and settled at the level thereof. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, the Deputy Master and Registrar has 
informed my Office since 2011 to-date, that the number of cases referred to mediation stands 
at 1949. 

The number of cases which have been resolved and settled for that period is 825. 
With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Deputy  Master  and 
Registrar that it is not proposed to extend mediation services to lower Courts having regard to 
the lack of Court personnel and proper infrastructure. 

I  personally  think  that  mediation  can  meaningfully  help  to  reduce  workload  in  our 
judicial system and help litigants resolve dispute. I intend to take this matter with the Chief 
Justice to see what can be done at District and Intermediate Court level. 

 

113 

You may wish to note that as at the year 2000, the District and Intermediate Courts 
(Civil Jurisdiction) Act in part  II  A, contains  a  provision for the prompt disposal of small 
claims not exceeding Rs25,000. 

Proceedings are commenced with the lodging of the claim with the District Clerk and 
not  later  than  one  month  from  the  date  on  which  the  reply  of  the  defendant  (if  any)  is 
received,  the  Magistrate  convenes  the  parties  in  Chambers  with  a  view  to  reaching  a 
settlement acceptable to all. 

If no settlement is possible, the matter is heard without delay. The hearing is informal 

and the Court determines the issues as soon as possible after the conclusion of the hearing. 

 

FREE TRANSPORT TO THE ELDERLY AND TO THE STUDENTS 

SCHEME - SUBSIDIES 

(No.  B/468)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
allocation of subsidies to the bus owners in relation to the Free Transport to the Elderly and 
to  the  Students  Scheme,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  is  considering  revising  its  policy  in 
relation thereto and, if so, give details thereof.  

Reply:  I  am  not  envisaging  any  fundamental  change  in  the  policy  of  the  Free 
Transport to the Elderly and to the Students Scheme.  However, there is need to revise the 
modalities thereof.  

The present system represents a number of flaws and there is need to make it more 

efficient, cost effective, transparent and accountable.   

The main problems relating to the present system are as follows - 

(a) 

complaints from parents and head of schools about unavailability of school bus 
services; 

(b) 

buses failing to pick up students and old-age pensioners; 

(c) 

excessive lateness of students at school; 

 

114 

(d) 

students can travel only on the itinerary  from their residence to their schools 
and back; 

(e)  misbehaviour of bus crew towards students and old-age pensioners, and 

(f) 

calculation of compensation is based on assumptions and projections and not on 
specific figures and therefore very difficult to be audited.  

I am further informed that over the years the amount disbursed under the scheme has 
increased considerably from Rs570 m. in 2005 to reach Rs1.233 billion in 2014 and Rs616.48 
m. for period January to June 2015. 

In view of the massive amount of public funds used, I consider that there is need to 
make an assessment of the impact of the free travel scheme and to determine as to whether 
the target population is getting value from the budgetary resources injected in the scheme. 

I  have  therefore  decided  that  a  study  be  carried  out  to  re-engineer  the  transport 
industry  which  would  include  an  assessment  of  the  free  bus  travel  scheme  and 
recommendations for a more transparent, efficient and cost effective management of the free 
transport payment mechanism effected by Government to bus operators. 

Expressions  of  Interest  will  be  issued  by  mid-September  2015,  and  the  assignment 

will have to be completed within a period of six months from the award of the contract. 

 

PORT AREA - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS - STORAGE FACILITIES 

(No.  B/469)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Port  area,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority, information as to if new storage facilities for Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas have been constructed and commissioned thereat, since 2011 to date and, if so, indicate –  

(a) the name/s of the promoter/s thereof, and  

(b)  if  same  have  been  constructed  on  freehold  land  or  on  land  belonging  to  the 

Authority and, if in the latter case, further indicate the -  

(i) extent and location thereof;  

 

115 

(ii) procedures followed and terms and conditions thereof, and  

(iii)  shareholding  of  the  company/ies  at  the  time  of  application  therefor  and 

subsequent thereto.  

(Withdrawn) 

FISHERMEN – OFF LAGOON FISHING 

 (No.  B/470)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the developments in the port, he will state the medium and long 
term policies Government proposes to adopt to support the fishers of the regions of Tombeau 
Bay, Roche Bois, Les Salines, Bain des Dames, Sables Noir, Grand River North West and 
Pointe  aux  Sables,  indicating  if  he  will  consider  the  possibility  of  giving  a  substantial 
compensation to those who would opt to quit the business. 

Reply:  It  is  the  policy  of  my  Ministry  to  encourage  and  empower  fishermen  to 
operate  off  lagoon.    In  this  context,  my  Ministry  has  embarked  on  a  programme  to  assist 
fishermen to take advantage of a scheme whereby 50% grant up to a maximum of Rs200,000  
is given to fishermen for the purchase of canotte (fishing boat) which would allow them to go 
fishing off lagoon. 

Furthermore,  my  Ministry  has  set  seven  Fish  Aggregating  Devices  (FADs)  in  the 

 
regions between Trou aux Biches and Albion to enable fishermen to increase their catch. 

Most of the Fishermen from Baie du Tombeau to Pointe aux Sables have been trained 

 
in new fishing techniques to enable them to engage in off lagoon fishing.  

With regard to compensation to those who would opt to quit the business, there is no 
scheme to compensate fishermen who opt to relinquish their fishermen cards, except for net 
fishers. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  since  2006  to  date,  some  510  fishermen  have 

surrendered their fishermen cards without any compensation. 

 

 

 

116 

CEB - ST. LOUIS PROJECT - TENDER EXERCISE 

(No.  B/471)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the last tender exercise for the St. Louis Project – CEB Tender CPB-22-2014 for the 
Redevelopment of St. Louis Power Station – Design, Supply, Installation and Commissioning 
of 4x15MW Diesel Generating Sets, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Central Electricity Board, information as to the - 

(a) name/s of the bidder/s thereof, and  

(b) reasons why the bid exercise was cancelled. 

 (Withdrawn) 

 

TRAFFIC LIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/472)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 
to the Traffic Light Control System, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information 
as to the - 

(a) terms and conditions of the maintenance contracts awarded in relation thereto, and  

(b) name/s of the contractor/s therefor.  

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

