  

1  

  

No. 39 of 2015  

  

  

  

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  

  

  

PARLIAMENTARY  

DEBATES  

  (HANSARD)  

 

  

   FIRST SESSION  

  

      TUESDAY 10 NOVEMBER 2015  

  

  

 

 

 

  

  
  

  

ANNOUNCEMENT  

PAPERS LAID  

QUESTIONS (Oral)  

MOTION  

ADJOURNMENT  

 QUESTIONS (Written) 

  

  

  

2  

CONTENTS  

  

 

  

 

3  

Members  

                                                                       Members  

THE CABINET  (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK,  
KCMG, QC   
Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval,  
GCSK   
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK  

GCSK, KCMG, QC)  
Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit  
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External  
Communications  
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands  

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK   Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public  

Utilities  

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK   Minister of Finance and Economic Development  
  
  
Minister of Youth and Sports  
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden  
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha  
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport  
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun   Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary  

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan  
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo   Minister of Local Government  
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun  

of   Social  

Education and Scientific Research  
Minister of Health and Quality of Life  

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain  
Sinatambou  
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo  
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun   
Hon. Santaram Baboo     
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah   
Hon.   Mrs   Marie-Aurore   Marie-Joyce  
Perraud  
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain  

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah  

and  

Economic  

Integration  

Minister  
Empowerment  
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and  
International Trade  
Attorney General  
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security  
Minister of Arts and Culture  
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and  
Family Welfare  
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional Reforms, Minister of Technology,  
Communication and Innovation  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives  

  

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo  

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo  

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM,  
QPM  
Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen  
Cheong, MSK  
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn  

4  

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform  
Institutions  
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries,  
Shipping and Outer Islands  
Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and  
Disaster and Beach Management   
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms  

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and  
Training  

 

  

Madam Speaker  

Deputy Speaker  

5  

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS  

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK  

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles  

Deputy Chairperson of Committees  

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma  

Clerk of the National Assembly  

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena  

Deputy Clerk   

Clerk Assistant  

Hansard Editor  

Serjeant-at-Arms  

  

  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi  

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to  
RRA)  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

6  

 

 

MAURITIUS  

  

Sixth National Assembly  

---------------  

  

FIRST SESSION  

------------  

Debate No. 39 of 2015  

  

Sitting of 10 November 2015  

  

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m.  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  The National Anthem was played  

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)   

 

 

 

 

  

7  

ANNOUNCEMENT  

OBITUARY  -  MR  MARIE  JOSEPH  EMMANUEL  GUY  OLLIVRY,  QC, 

GOSK  

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  with  deep  sadness  and  sorrow  that  we 
learned the demise recently of one of our distinguished former colleague who devoted his life 
and career to the service of the nation.  I am referring to Mr Marie Joseph Emmanuel Guy 
Ollivry, QC, GOSK, who passed away on 03 November last at the age of 82 after a prolonged 
illness.  

Mr  Ollivry  was  born  on  17  February  1933  at  Quatre  Bornes.  After  his  primary 
schooling at the Loreto Convent of Quatre Bornes, he attended the St Esprit College for his 
secondary education. He then proceeded to study law in London and at the Faculty of Law in  
Paris. He was called to the Bar at Gray’s Inn in 1957 and became an Associate of the London 
Institute of Taxation. Between 1962 and 1965, he worked as Legal Advisor to the President 
of the Republic of Cameroon. After his return in 1965, Mr Ollivry joined the then Crown Law 
Office.  

He left the Crown Law Office in 1967 for private practice and in parallel to embark on 
a political career. He stood as a candidate for the 1967 general election in Constituency No. 
21 - Rodrigues under the banner of the PMSD and was returned First Member for the said 
Constituency.  On 14 June 1968, he was elected Deputy Chairman of Committees and held 
that post until 25 November 1969. In December 1969, Mr Ollivry was appointed  
Minister  of  Economic  Planning  and  Development.    He,  however,  resigned  as  Minister  in 
November 1970 and founded his own party, the Union Démocratique Mauricienne, UDM.   
Consequently, he joined the Opposition bench in Parliament.  

Mr Ollivry also served as Mayor of the Municipality of Curepipe in 1970.   

He participated in the 1976 and 1982 general elections in Constituency No.1 – Grand 
River North West and in Constituency No. 17 – Curepipe and Midlands, respectively, under 
the banner of his party, but was not returned.   

Mr Ollivry who was a specialist in Human Rights, Constitutional and Administrative 
Law, was appointed in 1993 by the Commonwealth Secretariat to advise in the drawing up of 
a new draft Constitution for the Seychelles.  

  

8  

Mr Ollivry was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1987 and regularly appeared before the 

Court of Appeal of Seychelles and the Privy Council. He was elected Chairman of the Bar  
Council  twice.  In  May  2006,  Mr  Ollivry  was  appointed  Chairman  of  the  Law  Reform 
Commission and was re–appointed to that post in May 2011 and held that position until his 
last breath.  

In 1998, Mr Ollivry was elevated to the rank of Grand Officer of the Star and Key of 
the  Indian  Ocean,  GOSK,  for  his  outstanding  contribution  in  the  legal  profession  in 
Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, during his Parliamentary career, Mr Ollivry gained the appreciation 
of  all  the  Members  of  the  House  and  commanded  respect  through  his  deep  sense  of 
seriousness and his great intellectual ability. Mr Ollivry held strong views on many issues and 
was always motivated by lofty ideals and love for the country.  

Through his contributions as a respected barrister and renowned constitutional lawyer, 

he has left his indelible mark in the fields of criminal and constitutional law in Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, may I request you to direct the Clerk to convey the deep condolences 

of this Assembly to the bereaved family.  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.   
In fact, all of us who have known late Guy Ollivry here in Mauritius or in Rodrigues or in the 
Seychelles will miss him. We have lost a brilliant lawyer, a Minister, but above all, we have 
lost a good man. Late Guy Ollivry was really a good man and did a lot of good things during 
his time on this earth.  

Therefore, I join with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in requesting you, Madam Speaker, 

to convey our deep condolences to his family and his children.  

Madam  Speaker:  I  associate  myself  with  the  tribute  paid  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  to  the  memory  of  late  Mr  Marie  Joseph 
Emmanuel Guy Ollivry, QC, GOSK, and direct the Clerk to convey the deep condolences of 
the Assembly to the bereaved family.  

  

  

  

  

9  

PAPERS LAID  

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –   

  

A.  Ministry of Finance and Economic Development -  
(a)  The National Accounts of Mauritius 2014 (Vol. 32).  
(b)  The Digest of Demographic Statistics 2014 (Vol. 30).  
(c)  The Investment Promotion (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations  

2015.  (Government Notice No. 216 of 2015)  

(d)  The Public Procurement (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2015.   

(Government Notice No. 217 of 2015)     

  

B.  Ministry of  Local Government  –  

(a)  The  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015.  (Government Notice No. 219 of 2015)   
(b)  The Municipal Town Council of Quatre Bornes (Markets) (Amendment 

of Schedule) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No.220 of 2015)  

  

C.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International  

Trade -  

The  African  Reinsurance  Corporation 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 215 of 2015)  

(Privileges  and 

Immunities) 

D.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  –  

  

  

  

  

10  

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and            
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.28)  Regulations  2015.  (Government 
Notice No. 218 of 2015)  

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS  

INDIA-MAURITIUS DOUBLE TAXATION AVOIDANCE CONVENTION  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked  the  Rt.  

hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National 
Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  India-Mauritius  Double  Taxation  Avoidance 
Convention, he will state if -   

(a) 

Cabinet was made aware on 03 July 2015 of the -   

(i) 

details  of  the  Draft  Protocol  presented  on  16  June  2015  by  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  of  Mauritius  to  the 
hon. Minister of Finance of India, and   

(ii)  Minutes of the Joint Working Group Meeting signed on 01 July 2015 

by the Financial Secretary of Mauritius, and   

(b) 

the hon. Prime Minister of India has agreed that there will be no revision of 
the  main  provisions  of  the  said  Convention,  in  particular,  of  Article  4 
regarding Capital Gains.  

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 

Madam Speaker, I will reply to this PNQ put to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  

The Mauritius-India Double Taxation Avoidance Convention (DTAC) was signed in 

April 1983 and it came into force in June 1985.  

So far, the DTAC has served the interests of both Mauritius and India where it has 
played  an  important  role  in  foreign  investment  in  India,  Private  Equity  and  Portfolio 
investment. These investments have been crucial to India to overhaul infrastructure and boost 
growth.  It  has  helped  to  build  a  diversified  economy  in  Mauritius  that  is  more  resilient  to 
external forces and to attain middle income status. Increased reliance on the financial services 
sector  has  been  an  engine  of  growth  whilst  creating  employment  opportunities  for  young 
professionals.  

  

11  

However, the DTAC has been continuously subjected to attacks from various quarters 
in India with claims that its provisions were being misused, thus resulting in huge tax losses 
for India.  

In order to address concerns expressed by the Indian side on possible misuse of the 
DTAC,  a  Joint  Working  Group  (JWG)  comprising  senior  officials  from  the  concerned 
authorities of India and Mauritius was established in August 2006.  

The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the JWG was set as follows -  

(i) 

(ii) 

To put in place adequate safeguards to prevent possible misuse of the 
India-Mauritius DTAC without prejudice to the economic interests of 
either country, and  

to strengthen the mechanism for the “Exchange of Information” under 
the India-Mauritius DTAC.  

The Joint Working Group has held ten meetings between October 2006 and May 2014 

without any positive outcome.  

The  discussions  were  inconclusive  due  largely  to  strongly  conflicting  views  on  the 

mandate of the Joint Working Group amongst other things.  

Following the visit of the Prime Minister of India in March 2015, I led a ministerial 
delegation  from  15  to  19  June  to  discuss  various  bilateral  issues,  including  the  DTAC 
between our two countries.  

I then met with the hon. Arun Jaitley, Minister of Finance, hon. Mrs Sushma Swaraj, 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  Mr  Mishra,  Personal  Assistant  to  the  Prime  Minister  of 
India.    In  our  meeting,  we  reiterated  the  need  to  maintain  the  DTAC  between  our  two 
countries and emphasised its importance for the survival of the Global Business Sector.  We 
shared  the  qualms  of  India  in  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  DTAC  and  conveyed  our 
commitment in enforcing good governance in all sectors of our economy. We clarified our 
Government’s vision in developing substance in our financial services sector by moving from 
the traditional back office and treaty centric focus to more jurisdictional substance.  

During  the  visit,  the  Mauritian  delegation  submitted  a  draft  Protocol  amending  the 

DTAC for consideration by the Indian authorities.  

Subsequently, the Indian Authorities agreed on the 11th Meeting of the Joint Working 

Group to be held in India on 29 and 30 June 2015 to resume discussions.  

  

12  

Accordingly, Cabinet was informed on 26 June 2015 that a delegation would proceed 

to India to discuss the DTAC.  

As regards part (a) (i) of the question, there was no need for Cabinet to be informed 

on the details prior to the holding of discussions at the level of the Joint Working Group.  

Concerning part (a) (ii) of the question, Cabinet was informed  on 03 July 2015 that 
the Joint Working Group had discussions to resolve pending issues and that agreed Minutes 
of the discussions had been signed and a draft Protocol initialled by both parties.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House 
that,  during  the  last  visit  of  the  Prime  Minister  to  India  in  the  context  of  the  India  Africa 
Forum Summit, held in New Delhi on 29 October 2015, the issue of the Double Taxation 
Avoidance Convention was raised during a bilateral meeting with the Indian Prime Minister.  

 During the discussions, our Prime Minister recalled the statement made by his Excellency 
Mr Modi during his visit to Mauritius in the context of our National Day Celebrations.  Mr 
Modi, and I quote, stated -  

“We understand the importance of the offshore banking sector for your economy.  We 
are  conscious  of  its  dependence  on  India.    We  will  work  together  for  our  shared 
objective to avoid the abuse of our Double Taxation Avoidance Convention.  I thank 
you  for  your  support.    But,  I  also  assure  you  that  we  will  do  nothing  to  harm  this 
vibrant sector of one of our closest strategic partners”.  

Madam Speaker, during the same bilateral meeting, amongst other issues, our Prime 
Minister  reiterated  his  appeal  to  the  Indian  Prime  Minister  to  safeguard  the  interest  of 
Mauritius and to see to it that nothing is done to put at stake the benefits derived by Mauritius 
under Article 13 of the Double Taxation Avoidance Convention with regard to Capital Gains 
Tax. Our Prime Minister also assured India that Mauritius will put in all necessary efforts and 
walk the extra mile to ensure that our reputation as a clean, proven and trusted jurisdiction is 
upheld at all costs.  

In view of the bond of kinship between our two countries and the mutual respect that 
exists  between  the  two  Prime  Ministers,  Shri  Narendra  Modi  reassured  that  India  strongly 
values its relationship with Mauritius and that his Government will not do anything to harm 
the economic interest of Mauritius.  

  

13  

Madam  Speaker,  there  are,  however,  new  developments  concerning  this  sector  at 

international level, which we cannot ignore in Mauritius.  

(i) 

On 08 October 2015, the OECD announced that the G20 Finance Ministers, 
including the Minister of Finance of India, have endorsed the final package of 
measures  proposed  by  the  OECD/G20  Base  Erosion  Profit  Shifting  (BEPS) 
project,  including  the  development  of  a  multilateral  instrument  for  the 
harmonisation of tax treaties and the elimination of double non-taxation.  

(ii)  Moreover,  the  General  Anti  Avoidance  Rule  (GAAR)  under  the  amended 
India Income Tax Act will come into force in April 2017 and will address the 
issue of double non-taxation as well as treaty shopping.  

(iii) 

India has already started its own financial services centre, that is, the Gujrat 
International  Financial  Centre.  All  FDI  to  Mauritius  is  expected  to  be 
channelled to India through the GIFC.  

Mr  Bérenger:    Madam  Speaker,  my  question  was  addressed  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister of Mauritius who has just met the Prime Minister of India and subsequently made 
statements on Tuesday the 3rd of this month, and it was widely reported in the press in India. I 
am,  therefore,  not  putting  questions  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, with regard to questions addressed to the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  P.Q.  Nos.  B/816  and  B/822  have  been 
withdrawn. Hon. Ameer Meea!  

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION – COMPLAINTS  

(No. B/810) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Equal Opportunities 
Commission, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
number  of  complaints  registered  thereat,  since  the  coming  into  operation  thereof  to  date, 
indicating the outcome thereof in each case.  

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to 

Parliamentary Question Nos. B/810 and B/818 together as they relate to the same issue.  

  

14  

I am informed by the Equal Opportunities Commission, that since its inception in April 

2012, 1,433 complaints have been received in Mauritius and 67 in Rodrigues.  

I am further informed of the following outcomes on these cases -  

(i) 

(ii) 

95 cases have been conciliated and settled ;  

In 331 cases, there was no evidence of discrimination;  

(iii)  Additional information is being sought in respect of 360 cases;  

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

290 cases do not fall under the purview of the Commission;  

204 cases are under investigation;  

6 cases have been referred to the Equal Opportunities Tribunal;  

(vii) 

1 case has been referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions;  

(viii)  13 cases fall under the purview of other Departments and have been referred 

thereto;  

(ix) 

(x) 

(xi) 

85 cases have been withdrawn by the complainants;   

29 cases are pending examination by the Commission, and  

86 cases are time barred as per the Equal Opportunities Act.  

Regarding  the  name  of  the  complainants  and  the  nature  of  the  complaints,  I  am 
informed by the Commission that it cannot reveal this information without the consent of the 
former.  

However,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commission  that  when  an  investigation  is 
opened  by  the  Commission  of  its  own  motion  and  that  the  matter  involves  public  interest 
issues, it may, in a spirit of transparency, inform the public at large of same.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the Equal Opportunities Commission was set up to 
work toward the elimination of discrimination and the promotion of equal opportunities, and 
answering to a PQ in April 2015 from hon. Mrs Danielle  Selvon, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
stated to the House, I quote –  

“I am informed by the Attorney General’s Office that, in 2013 and 2014, the Chairman 
of the Equal Opportunities Commission has made proposals to the Attorney General for 
amendments  to  be  brought  to  the  legislation  for  the  Equal  Opportunities  Tribunal  to 
entertain cases involving the PSC.”  

  

15  

To cut short, the reply was that, from the Prime Minister’s Office at this time, it would not 
consider piecemeal approach, but rather a holistic approach to amend the legislation.  So, my 
question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is, whether the Government is considering favourably 
to amend the Equal Opportunities Commission to allow the Tribunal to enquire into matter 
regarding the PSC?  

The Prime Minister:  It is under study, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem!  

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  It  has  been  reported  that,  yesterday,  in  a 
sitting before the Equal Opportunities Tribunal, the lawyer for the hon. Minister Gayan raised 
a point as to the partiality of the Equal Opportunities Commission. So, may I know from the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this view is shared by the Members of his Government as 
well or is it an isolated opinion or it is just a joke from the hon. Minister?  

The Prime Minister:  I have not looked into it yet.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell us 
whether when a matter concerns an hon. Minister or any hon. Member of Government or any 
of the para-statal bodies, that it is a Government policy not to respond to the summons or 
invitations of the Equal Opportunities Commission and that is why it is still under study and 
will be under study for many years to come?  

The Prime Minister:  As long as it takes.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Rutnah!  

Mr Rutnah:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Given that the post of the Chairman of the 
Equal opportunities Commission is a post that is appointed by advice of the Prime Minister in 
consultation  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  it  is  supposed  to  be  an  independent 
position,  the  fact  that  the  Chairman  of  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  clearly  was 
touting to be a candidate…  

Mr Mohamed:  On a point of order! He cannot attack a member of the Commission 

like this!  

  

16  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker:  Please, sit down!  Hon. Rutnah, if you look at both questions, the 
questions relate to complaints registered, the complainants.  Please, reframe your question in 
relation to the two questions which have been asked.  

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam Speaker,  I am asking in the light that the Equal  Opportunities 
Commission deals with equal opportunities, whether the Chairman is still considered to be an 
independent person?  

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Rutnah,  we  cannot  in  the  National  Assembly  attack  any 

member who is not present and cannot defend himself.  

Next question! Hon. Ameer Meea!  

(Interruptions)  

PAY RESEARCH BUREAU REPORT – PUBLICATION   

(No. B/811) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the forthcoming Report 
of the Pay Research Bureau, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bureau, 
information as to the expected date of publication thereof.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the 2016 PRB Report was initially expected to 
be  released  in  October  2015.    However,  the  Director,  PRB  recently  explained  that  the 
exercise for the preparation of the 2016 Report has been delayed due to several factors which 
were beyond the control of the Bureau.  

The Report is now scheduled to be published in the first quarter of 2016. The Director, 
PRB has informed that the Bureau is striving to complete and publish the Report within the 
new time frame.  

I  would  like  to  underline  that  despite  the  delay  in  the  publication  of  the  Report,  its 

recommendations will still be made effective as from 01 January 2016.  

Madam Speaker:   Hon. Bhagwan!  

Mr  Bhagwan:    Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  his  Office  has  been 
aware that several Ministries and parastatal bodies have delayed considerably in giving their 
recommendations to the PRB and this is why there is a late, I would say, submission of the 

  

17  

report; whether his Office will direct all these Ministries to make diligence in submitting their 
submissions to the PRB?  

The Prime Minister:  I cannot answer for sure, but it may be one of the factors.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! No question! Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

NATIONAL DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT LEGISLATION 

- INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/812) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the weather conditions prevailing during the 
passage  of  a  cyclone,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  introduction  of 
relevant legislation with a view to making it an offence for a person to venture outside and 
putting at risk his life and that of his rescuers.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in the Government Programme 2015-2019, it 
is clearly stated that, with a view to enhancing the safety and security of our citizens against 
natural disasters, Government will review and update the national multi-hazard early warning 
system  and  embark  on  innovative  disaster  management  education,  training  and  public 
awareness initiatives.  

In  this  context,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management,  that  a  draft  National  Disaster  Risk 
Reduction and Management Bill is currently under preparation.  

I am further informed that the implications of the issue raised by the hon. Member are 

already being examined within the framework of this new piece of legislation.  

Dr.  Sorefan: Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister. The question was raised in 2008 
and recently - I call it recently - in 2011 by hon. Seeruttun and the answer was more or less 
on the same line as our Rt. hon. Prime Minister is saying. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
see to it that this time we come, within a short time delay, with this Bill?  

The  Prime  Minister: Well, I suppose those who are working on the legislation are 

doing their best.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

  

18  

FANFARON  HARBOUR,  ROCHE  BOIS  &  PLAINE  VERTE  –  POLICE 

OFFICERS  

(No.  B/813)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police  Stations 
located at the Fanfaron Harbour, at Roche Bois and in Plaine Verte respectively, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the 
number of Police Officers posted thereat, indicating if they are undermanned.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  number  of  Police  Officers  posted  to  the  three  Police  Stations,  namely  Fanfaron 
Harbour, Roche Bois and Plaine Verte is 69, 56 and 60 respectively.  I am further informed 
that those Police Stations are adequately staffed for policing purposes.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the 
deployment  of  human  resources  in  the  different  Police  Stations  is  based  on  the  size  of 
population, crime incidence, the volume of commercial and social activities, and important 
and vulnerable installations in the station areas.  

Mr Mohamed: Could I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, since he stated that they are 
‘adequately’ and the word that he has chosen is ‘adequate’, for each of the Police Stations 
what would be the Force that is normally stipulated as being proper? I am not talking about 
an  adequate  or  acceptable  figure.  What,  according  to  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  is  the 
figure  that  each  Police  Station  referred  to  in  the  question  has?  Normally,  there  is  a  figure 
officially for that.  

(Interruptions)  

The  Prime  Minister:  I  am  afraid  I  don’t  have  the  information.  The  hon.  Member 

should come with a specific question on that.  

Mr Mohamed: I have two more questions. One question is – I will try to simplify.  
Normally,  all  Commissioners  of  Police,  what  they  do  is  that  each  Station  –  because  my 
question  referred  as  to  whether  they  are  undermanned.  Normally,  what  is  the  figure, 
according to the Police that would - according to him - say that it is manned? What is the 
minimum that is required for each Police Station? Each Police Station has a minimum figure 
and what would that figure be?  

  

19  

The Prime Minister: I have just explained the criteria to come to the conclusion that 
the  number  is  adequate  and  the  Commissioner  of  Police  considers  that  the  number  is 
adequate. I am satisfied with that.  

Mr Ameer Meea: The Plaine Verte Police Station is classified as a Class A Station 
according to its region, to the size and number of population, that is, 52,000 people. Can I ask 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he is aware that there is no Chief Inspector at the Plaine Verte 
Station?  

(Interruptions)  

The Prime Minister: I am not aware.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  don’t  reply  to  the  Prime  Minister!  

Please!  

Please!  

(Interruptions)  

(Interruptions)  

Can I ask hon. Members to behave and not to make comments from a sitting position? 
I have said that I would not accept comments from a sitting position. If they have anything to 
say, then they should stand up and speak - for all Members.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, I am expecting a reply.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  please  repeat  your  question!  Can  you  please 

repeat?  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  there  is  no  Chief 

Inspector at the Police Station of Plaine Verte? I think I have been very clear.  

The Prime Minister: It happens sometimes that the post is empty, but if it is so, I am 

sure it will be filled in.  

Mr Baloomoody: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister answered that he is satisfied with the 
quantity, but it is not a question of quantity, it is the quality of the Police that we need. Is the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that in most of the Police Stations, especially when it comes to 

  

20  

the  second  shift,  there  is  no  Sergeant,  no  Inspector  and  no  Chief  Inspector?  This  is  where 
there is a lacking in the Police Station. The middle management staff, we don’t have in all the 
shifts.  

The  Prime  Minister:  Anyway,  the  question  was  about  three  Police  Stations.  The 
Commissioner is satisfied. They are being adequately served. If they are adequately served, I 
am satisfied.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, last question!  

Mr  Mohamed:  Since  the  Rt.  hon. Prime  Minister  is  totally  satisfied  with  what  the 
Commissioner of Police has done, is he satisfied that recently certain dancing Police Officers 
were transferred to that particular…  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

(Interruptions)  

Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  please  sit  down!  Please  sit  down!  The  question  relates  to  Roche 
Bois and Plaine Verte. Please restrict your…  

Mr Mohamed: It is with regard to the dancing Police Officers that were transferred to 
Roche Bois, Plaine Verte, Fanfaron and Harbour Police.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister also 
satisfied that this is a way of putting discipline, of transferring people who have done wrong 
to my Constituency? Is he satisfied with that?  

(Interruptions)  

The Prime Minister: I don’t think I should answer to that because it does not arise 

from the question that has been put.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur!  

No comments, please! No comments!  

(Interruptions)  

(Interruptions)  

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please refrain from making comments!  And on this side also!  

  

21  

(Interruptions)  

Hon. Jhugroo! Order, hon. Jhugroo! Please, don’t make provocative remarks! We are wasting 
the time of the House.  

Mr  Mohamed: On a point of order! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has made a very 
serious comment here. From a sitting position, he said: “Ale occupe Gorah Issac”. So, could 
he  try  to  refrain  from  making  such  comments  and  withdraw  what  he  said  because  this  is 
attacking my person in a very unparliamentary manner and that is a dangerous man?  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I did not hear. I will have to check.  

Mr Mohamed: Everyone heard it, you should!  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: I did not hear!  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, how come you did not hear…  

Madam Speaker: I did not hear!  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Mohamed: …what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said?  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: You can’t argue with me! Please, sit down! You can’t argue with 
me! If I did not hear, I did not hear, and I have the right to say that I did not hear! You can’t 
compel me to hear! I told you I’ll have to check!  

Please, sit down!  

And no argument with me, please!  

(Interruptions)  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Bérenger: Can I suggest you to go as usual to listen to the recording?  

Madam Speaker: But I said that I did not hear! Hon. Rughoobur, next question!  

  

22  

ELECTIONS – OPINION POLLS  

(No. B/814) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Opinion Polls in relation 
to the performance of candidates standing for elections and/or the elected members thereof, 
he will state if consideration will be given for the introduction of legislation to provide for the  
-  

(a) 

(b) 

compulsory disclosure of the methodology used for the conduct thereof prior 
to the publication of the results thereof;  

appointment of a Commission on Opinion Polls to ensure compliance with the 
legislation in relation thereto, and  

(c) 

obligation to be issued with a licence in order to be allowed to conduct same.  

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  current  practice  in  advanced 
democracies  that  during  the  run-up  of  elections,  opinion  polls  are  conducted  by  various 
organisations and specialised agencies to gauge the intentions and moods of voters.  Media 
coverage of such opinion polls is an integral part of the right to freedom of expression and 
information in a vibrant democracy.  

 The publication and reporting of the results of such opinion polls is a subject that arouses 
strong passions in the media, among political parties and the people.  Often, controversies 
arise challenging the integrity of the opinion polls as a result of allegations that the exercise 
may involve malpractices, such as juggling with statistics and partisan manipulation of the 
results.  

 In some countries, the publication and reporting of opinion polls are altogether banned and in 
others, restrictions are imposed on the time frames ranging from 24 hours to several days and 
weeks before the election day.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  question  of  regulating  opinion  polls  for  the  elections  is  a 

complex matter and needs serious reflections from all the stakeholders.  

 I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  it  has  been 
mentioned that the Electoral Supervisory Commission will be given wider powers to control 
and sanction, inter alia, conflict of interests during election time, including such aspect as the 
conduct of opinion polls in a fair manner.  

  
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur!  

23  

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has rightly 
been  speaking  about  the  controversies  on  opinion  polls  in  the  past.  Only  during  the  last 
general elections it has been the case where there has been huge disparity between what were 
the results of some polls…  

Madam Speaker: Yes, please ask your question!  

Mr  Rughoobur:  May  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  if  he  would  consider  the 
setting up of a Select Committee on this whole issue and come up with proposals to legislate 
this whole issue of opinion polls, whether it is for electoral purposes or for any purposes?  

The Prime Minister: We will have to study and find out whether a Select Committee 

is necessary at this stage.  

AFRICAN UNION OBSERVER MISSION & AFRICAN CHARTER ON 
DEMOCRACY, GOOD GOVERNANCE AND ELECTIONS – REPORTS  

(No. B/815) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the elections, he will state if 
he  has  taken  cognizance  of  the  Report  of  the  African  Union  Observer  Mission  dated  12 
December 2014 on the National Assembly Elections of 10 December 2014 and of the African 
Charter  on  Democracy,  Good  Governance  and  Elections  and  if  so,  indicate  where  matters 
stand as to the implementation of the recommendations contained therein in each case.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have taken cognizance of the Report of the 
African  Union  Observation  Mission  and  the  African  Charter  on  Democracy,  Elections  and 
Governance, referred to by the hon. Member.  The African Union Observation Mission has, 
in fact, noted with satisfaction that the General Elections of 10 December 2014 were held in 
satisfactory  conditions  of  freedom  and  transparency.    Furthermore,  the  Mission  has 
congratulated  the  people  of  Mauritius  and  all  political  stakeholders  for  the  maturity  they 
demonstrated during the electoral process.    

 The Observation Mission has, however, made the following recommendations, inter alia -   

(i) 

a  reform  of  our  legal  framework  to  ensure  gender  parity  in  the  National 
Assembly in accordance with Article 29 of the African Charter on Democracy, 
Elections and Governance and the SADC Protocol on Gender and  

  

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

24  

Development;  
amendment  to  be  brought  to  our  electoral  law  to  ensure  that  counting  takes 
place at the polling stations immediately after the closing of polls in order to 
conform with the international principles governing democratic elections;  

the reform of our legal framework to regulate the private funding of political 
parties and campaigns, and to consider the establishment of public financing 
of political parties;  

to  include  regulations  for  media  coverage  of  electoral  campaigns  in  the 
electoral legal framework to ensure equitable  access by political parties and 
candidates to the public media;  

to  improve  the  voter  control  system  by  introducing  indelible  ink  or  another 
system that may be consensual among political parties, and  

to undertake a review of the delimitation of constituencies in order to have a 
more balanced and fairer representation of the national territory.  

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, in the Government Programme 2015-2019, 
the Government already stands committed to reform our electoral system to introduce a dose 
of  proportional  representation  in  the  National  Assembly  and  guarantee  better  women 
representation. The Government Programme also provides for the enactment of a Financing 
of Political Parties Act.  

  
In  my  reply  to  the  Private  Notice  Question  on  20  October  last,  I  informed  that  a 
Ministerial  Committee  will  be  set  up  to  examine  and  make  recommendations  on  electoral 
reform, as proposed in our Government Programme 2015-2019.  The recommendations made 
by  the  African  Union  Observation  Mission  will  be  examined  in  the  wider  context  of  the 
proposed electoral reform.  

Madam Speaker, insofar as the recommendation of the Observation Mission regarding 
the review of the delimitation of the Constituencies is concerned, as I stated in my reply to 
PQ B/371 on 01 September 2015, the last report of the Electoral Boundaries Commission on 
a  Review  of  the  Boundaries  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  was  tabled  in  the  National 
Assembly on 10 November 2009.  

  

25  

However, the National Assembly was dissolved on 31 March 2010 and there was no 
  
resolution brought in the National Assembly before its dissolution to approve or  reject the 
recommendations of the 2009 report.  

  
In view of the above and due to the fact that a new Housing and Population Census has 
been  carried  out  in  2011,  the  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission  will  embark  on  a  fresh 
exercise  for  a  review  of  the  boundaries  of  the  Constituencies  and  present  a  new  report 
subsequently.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  the  African  Charter  on  Democracy,  Elections  and 
Governance,  most  of  its  provisions  relate  to  democratic  institutions,  specially  electoral 
management bodies and democratic elections are already enshrined either in our Constitution 
or in our electoral legislation.  The other issues contained in the Charter, such as funding of 
political  parties,  allocation  of  air-time,  etc.  will  be  addressed  in  the  wider  context  of  the 
electoral reform, as I have just stated.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur!  

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Prime Minister for the 
reply. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been talking about the long list of recommendations, 
but among all the recommendations there is one with regard to the African Charter. Will the 
hon.  Prime  Minister  enlighten  the  House  as  to  whether  Mauritius  has  ratified  the  African 
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, and, if not, when will this be done?  

The Prime Minister: I will have to find out.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur!  

Mr Rughoobur: I did not quite get the reply of the Prime Minister, Madam.  

(Interruptions)  

Okay! Well, thank you, Madam Speaker. May I emphasise on this issue of ratification of this 
African  Charter  and  may  I  propose  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  please  look  into  this 
possibility of ensuring - because this is the recommendation of the African Union - to include 
this African Charter in the school  curriculum.  In this whole process of  reform that we are 
undergoing - the nine-year schooling - may I ask the hon. Prime Minister to please look into 
this whole issue of ensuring that gradually we ratify and then we include this curriculum in 
the schools because this is the recommendation of the African Union and they have proposed 
that this be done in the African Union Member States schools?  

  
The Prime Minister: Well, we will look into it.  

26  

INVESTMENT PROJECTS FAST TRACK COMMITTEE  

  

(No.  B/816)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for  
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Investment Projects Fast 
Track Committee, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
the  number  of  major  projects  the  implementation  of  which  the  Committee  has  facilitated, 
indicating in each case the –  (a)  nature thereof;  

(b) 

(c) 

value thereof, and   

scheduled completion date thereof.  

(Withdrawn)  

MAURITIAN NATIONALITY - MR F.M. P. - GRANT  

(No.  B/817)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and  National  Development Unit  whether, in  regard to one Mr F. M. P., he will 
state if he has been granted –  

(a) the Mauritian nationality and, if so, indicate when;   

(i)  the application for the granting thereof was submitted, and   

(ii) it was granted, and   

(b) a licence to set up a shark fishing activity in Rodrigues and, if so, indicate when.  

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam Speaker, Mr F. M. P. a French National born on 12 
February 1940, came to Mauritius on 28 October 2009 on visit for 60 days. On 23 December 
2009, he was issued a residence permit as a Retired Non-citizen. The residence permit was 
cancelled on 29 August 2012.  On the same day, a Registration Certificate as Investor was 
issued to him by the Board of Investment and on 04 September 2012 he was issued with an 
Occupation Permit to stay in Mauritius as an investor.  

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  Mr  F.  M. P.  applied  for  a 
Certificate  of  Naturalisation  under  section  9  of  the  Mauritius  Citizenship  Act  on  21 
November 2013 and he was granted the Mauritian citizenship on 08 July 2014.   

  

27  

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Ocean 
Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands  and  the  Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly that no licence to carry out shark fishing activity in Rodrigues has been 
issued to Mr F. M. P.  He was one of the promoters of JS Fishing Ltd, a company which in 
June 2012, submitted a fishing project proposal to operate in the pelagic fishery targeting tuna 
and tuna like species.  

A Letter of Intent valid for six months was issued to the company on 23 August 2012, 
by the then Ministry of Fisheries.  However, the Letter of Intent lapsed as the company did 
not start its fishing operations within the approved period.  

Mr  Rutnah:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  to  the  House,  from  the 
information  that  he  has  gleaned,  whether  he  is  aware  that  at  the  time  the  application  was 
being processed for naturalisation, Mr F. M. P. was charged with a criminal offence and that 
criminal offence was not disposed of by then at the Black River District Court?  

The Prime Minister: Well, I cannot confirm what is being alleged.  We will have to 

find out.  If a specific question is put, we can get the information.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, one last question!  

Mr Rutnah:  Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see whether a copy of the application 
for naturalisation could be tabled to this House in order that we can ascertain the exact date of 
application  because  the  information  that  I  have  is  completely  different  to  what  has  been 
answered in the House?  

The Prime Minister:  Well, if it is still available, I will do so.  

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION - COMPLAINTS   

 (No.  B/818)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Equal  Opportunities 
Commission, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
name  of  the  complainants  and  the  nature  of  the  complaints  registered  thereat,  since  the 
coming into operation thereof to date, indicating the outcome thereof in each case.  

(Vide reply to PQ B/810)  

Madam Speaker:  Time is over!  Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ  

  

28  

B/826, in regard to the exodus of foreign investment at the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and 
addressed to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will now be replied by 
the hon. Minister of Financial Services.  PQ B/865 has been withdrawn.  Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

STATE LAND - LEASE  

(No. B/823) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to State land, he 
will state the number of applications which are  presently being processed by  his Ministry, 
district-wise, for the allocation of plots thereof to holders of building site leases for an amount 
of Rs2,000, indicating if consideration will be given for the expeditious processing thereof.  

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha):   
Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will answer this question.   

          Madam Speaker, I am informed that as at 31 October 2015, the Ministry of Housing 
and Lands has received 10,535 applications for the sale of State land under the provision of 
the  State  Land  Act,  which  was  amended  by  the  Economic  and  Financial  Measures 
(Miscellaneous)  Provision  Act  of  2013.  Under  this  provision,  Madam  Speaker,  a  person 
holding a building site lease over a portion of State land of an extent not exceeding 422.07 
m2, that is, 10 perches, who is willing to buy the portion of land may do so by private contract 
at  the  price  of  Rs2,000  with  the  approval  of  the  Minister.  Out  of  the  10,535  applications 
received, 6,801 cases have already been processed, out of which 1,928 cases have not been 
considered for various reasons including –  

(i) 

(ii) 

the plot is greater than 10 perches;  

the plot is situated within a distance of 81.21 metres from the high water mark, 
that is, State land on pas géométriques, or  

(iii) 

the site forms part of an ex-railway land or a defence land.  

4,873 cases out of 6,801 cases processed have been found out to be in order and the 
lessees concerned have either be or are being informed by way of letter to contact a notary of 
their choice for the drawing up of the deed of sale.   

The remaining 3,734 cases, Madam Speaker, out of the 10,535 applications received 

are presently being processed and are distributed district-wise as follows –  

•  Port Louis   
  
•  Pamplemousses   

-   
-   

479 cases;  
300 cases;  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

  
  
  
  

 Rivière du Rempart      
  
 Flacq   
 Grand Port   
  
  
 Savanne   
  
 Black River  
 Plaines Wilhems   
  
  
 Moka    

29  

-   
-  
-  
-  
-   
-   
-   

207 cases;  
299 cases;  
1,140 cases;  
 79 cases;  
262 cases;  
553 cases, and   
415 cases.  

  

  
Madam Speaker, I am informed that no time frame has been set for the processing of 
applications received at the Ministry.  However, examination of applications and conveying 
of approvals, where appropriate, are being effected diligently and all steps are being taken to 
avoid any delay in the process.  

Dr.  Sorefan:    Madam  Speaker,  being  given  that  there  are  several  cases  where  the 
applicants  are  badly  in  need  of  their  title  deed,  for  example,  for  renovation  works, 
construction works and given that they have to wait for their turn which takes long time, will 
the hon. Ag. Minister of Housing and Lands consider giving priority to those who are in need 
of their contracts in order not to jeopardise them whilst others who are not in need can wait 
for their turn?  

Mr  Bodha:   I think it is a valuable contribution, Madam Speaker.   I  will raise the 

matter with the substantive Minister.  

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  I  know  that  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the  substantive 
Minister.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether the Rs2,000 includes notary fees and 
whether there is a panel of notaries to whom people are required to go in order to process 
these applications, and if so, can he table the list of notaries?  

Mr Bodha:  I do not think that these Rs2,000 include the notary fees.  

Mr  Ganoo:  The  hon.  Minister  explained  that one  of  the  reasons  why  thousands  of 
cases are not being regularised is because the State land is on Pas Géométriques.  According 
to law, it is not possible to sell Pas Géométriques, but this also applies to Cité houses, EDC 
houses, CHA houses which are on Pas Géométriques when Government decided to sell those 
plots of land to the occupiers.  May I ask the hon. Minister - although he is not the substantive 
Minister - to liaise with his colleague so that, once for all, a solution is found in order to settle 
the  cases  of  thousands  and  thousands  of  families  who  are  occupying  State  land  on  Pas 

  

30  

Géométriques, and they can have their title deeds once for all.  It entails perhaps legislating or 
even amending the Constitution, but I am sure, there must be a solution to this problem.  

Mr Bodha: These are exceptional cases, Madam Speaker, and I will raise the matter 

with my colleague.  

Dr.  Sorefan:Will the hon. Ag. Minister of Housing consider setting up a dedicated 
unit at the Ministry of Housing to deal with these cases on a fast track basis?  Because certain 
people can’t get their contract to apply for a loan.  

Mr Bodha: Madame la présidente, c’est vraiment un parcours de combattant, quand 
j’ai etudié le dossier. I think that it is a very valuable contribution that we have a fast track 
system to address a number of cases where there is need for urgent action.  

CEMETERIES – SAFETY   

(No.  B/824)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
cemeteries, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal/District Councils, 
a list thereof, indicating the –  

(a) 

measures that are taken to ensure the safety, good environment and lighting 
thereat, and   

(b) 

amount of funds budgeted in respect of each cemetery.  

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  information  requested  has  been  compiled.  I  am 
arranging,  with  your  permission,  for  the  information  to  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the 
National Assembly.  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Minister  satisfied  with  the 

management of the cemeteries falling under his Ministry’s responsibility?  

Dr. Husnoo: We have about 49 cemeteries and lot of work has been done since one 
year that I have been there.  A lot of work has been done and a lot of work needs to be done 
as well. I am aware of that and the work is being done.  

Mr Mahomed: On this issue of management, there is a real problem. Recently, there 
have  been  constituents  of  mine,  in  the  region  of  Tranquebar,  especially  at  the  Christian 
cemeteries, the funeral goes there and then the digging starts taking place and this causes a lot 

  

31  

of embarrassment to the family. So, can the hon. Minister ensure that, henceforth, this is not 
the case?  

Dr.  Husnoo: Yes, Madam Speaker, I’ll look into that. I know there has been some 

problem, but I will look into it.   

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  is  aware  of  the  problem  at 
cimetière de Bois Marchand où l’herbe n’est pas taillée, il n’y a pas de gate, il n’y a pas de 
sécurité,  et  souvent  les  caveaux  sont  défoncés  et  les  morts  pillés.  Est-ce  que  l’honorable 
ministre est au courant de tous ces problèmes au cimetière de Bois Marchand et qu’est-ce 
qu’il fait pour y remédier ?  

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am aware of this problem, as I said. Bois Marchand, 
as you know, is the biggest cemetery in Mauritius with, I think, about 70 acres of land. I have 
been told that there were only six people looking after that cemetery, which is not enough. I 
have  been  looking  into  that  problem,  I  have  discussed  with  the  District  Council  of 
Pamplemousses and we are trying to sort out the problem. I know there are lots of problems 
there, but we are looking into it.  We are trying to find a solution.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon. Minister to ask the Chief Executive of the Municipal 
Council of Port Louis to take disciplinary actions against the officers who are not doing their 
work, as just mentioned by hon. Members?  

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, I will look into that.  

Madam Speaker: Last question!  

Mr Ameer  Meea: Madam Speaker, in my question, I asked for a list of cemeteries 
that fall under the Minister’s responsibility.  The hon. Minister just stated that there are 49. I 
don’t  know  why  he  said  that  the  information  is  being  compiled  and,  even  if  it  is  being 
compiled, I want to know what is the time frame for me to have an answer.  

Dr.  Husnoo:  I said that  I have the information  here.  I  am going to submit it. I am 

going to place it in the Library.  

Mr Ramano: Question No. B/825, please.   

Madam Speaker: The hon. Minister of Finance is not there.  So, can we pass on to 

question No. B/826?  

  

  

32  

STOCK EXCHANGE OF MAURITIUS - FOREIGN INVESTMENT  

(No.  B/826)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the exodus 
of  foreign  investment  at  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain information as to the quantum thereof over the past six months and the forecast 
for the next six months respectively, indicating the - (a) companies concerned therewith, and   

 

(b)   measures that will be taken to curb the tendency.  

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
and Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Mr S. Bhadain): Madam 
Speaker, with your permission, I’ll answer the question.  

Madam  Speaker,  according  to  the  recent  report  published  by  the  Institute  of 
International Finance (IIF), emerging markets and frontier markets are expected to experience 
net outflows of 540 billion dollars in 2015. In fact, Madam Speaker, I am informed by the 
Stock Exchange of Mauritius that emerging markets and most developing countries, including 
China  and  other  BRICS  countries,  have  experienced  similar  net  divestment  on  their 
respective exchanges and the recent economic trends indicate a major shift of international 
asset allocation away from emerging and frontier markets in favour of developed markets.  

I  am  also  informed  by  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  that  the  quantum  of  net 
trading outflows for the period from 01 May 2015 to 31 October 2015 amount to around Rs2 
billion.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  four  main  companies 

which have recorded a net outflow of foreign investment are as follows –  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

SBM Holdings Limited;  
MCB Group Limited;  
New Mauritius Hotels Limited;  
CIEL Limited, and  
the  remaining  is  spread  among  about  63  companies  which  are  listed  on  the 
Stock Exchange of Mauritius.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  my  Ministry  has  already 
taken bold measures as far back as March 2015 to pursue an internationalisation strategy of 
our capital market with a view to develop Mauritius into an attractive multi-currency capital 

  

33  

raising,  listing,  cross-listing  and  trading  platform  for  local  and  international  companies  on 
both equity, bonds, debt, derivatives, Sukuk, commodities and Africa Indices offering.  

To that effect, the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and my Ministry have already signed 
MoUs with the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India, which 
are being implemented. Going forward, stocks traded under the National Stock Exchange of 
India and the Johannesburg Stock Exchange may be listed and traded in US dollars on the 
Stock Exchange of Mauritius. This initiative will undoubtedly increase the level of activity 
and  trading  of  foreign  investors  on  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  as  well  as  attract 
international stockbrokers to operate in our jurisdiction.  

Madam  Speaker,  these  initiatives  taken  by  Government  will  no  doubt  provide  a 
sophisticated capital market offering that would also add to the substance of Mauritius as a 
financial services sector of international repute.  As is already the case, Mauritius has shown 
more resilience in the net divestment as compared to other emerging markets.  

Madam  Speaker,  cross-listing,  Exchange  Trade  Fund  listing  with  the  Johannesburg 
Stock Exchange are already a reality today and my Ministry will spare no efforts to continue 
on the internationalisation strategy of our capital market.  

Madam Speaker, I would also wish to inform the House that we have recently signed 
a MoU with Nasdaq Dubai with a view to setting up a new international stock exchange in 
Mauritius.  

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre s’il peut 
confirmer que, pour l’année 2014/2015, l’exode des foreign capitaux était de l’ordre de 4.6 
milliards?  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the word ‘exodus’ is not correct. This is trading on a 
Stock  Exchange;  people  buy  and  sell.    The  figure  I  have  from  the  Stock  Exchange  of 
Mauritius is that, from 01 May 2015 to 31 October 2015, the net trading outflows was Rs2 
billion.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, recently there was a confusion when dealing with 
shares  on  the  stock  market;  short-term  capital  gains  were  being  taxed.  Can  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister whether short-term capital gains are being taxed presently?  

Mr Bhadain: I am not aware that this is the case, Madam Speaker.  

  

34  

Madam Speaker: Since the hon. Minister of Finance is here, can we come back to his 

question? Hon. Ramano!  

Mr  Ramano:  Merci  à  l’honorable  ministre  d’être  de  retour.  Question  No.  B/825 

please!  

SALE BY LEVY – COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY - FINDINGS   

(No.  B/825)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the victims 
of the Sale by Levy, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner for  
Borrowers, information as to the -  

(a)  number of cases  referred thereto, indicating the outcome thereof in each case, 

and   

(b) measures that are being envisaged following the findings of the Commission of 

Inquiry on Sale by Levy.  

(Interruptions)  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  sorry,  I  had  to  attend  to  urgent 
matters.  With  your permission,  I shall reply to PQ Nos.  B/825  and  B/856 together as the 
issues raised therein are inter-related.   

It is because of plight of victims of sale by levy that in the Government Programme 
2015-2019  we  took  the  commitment  to  bring  relevant  changes  in  the  legislation  to  protect 
financially  distressed  people  and  review  the  overall  procedure  of  Sale  by  Levy  to  prevent 
collusion between financial institutions, legal advisors and their agents.   

It is in this perspective that in the Budget Speech this year and also as highlighted in 
the reply to PQ No. B/569 made by the then Acting Prime Minister on 29 September 2015, a 
Special  Committee  has  already  been  set  up  to  examine  the  Report  of  the  Commission  of 
Enquiry on Sale by Levy and expedite the implementation of its recommendations.   

Madam Speaker, in fact, the  Borrowers Protection Act (BPA) which  was passed in 
2007, inter alia, regulates credit agreements for a sum not exceeding Rs2 m. and provides for 
prudential  measures  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  these  borrowers.  The  Act  does  not  cover 
victims of Sale by Levy prior to 2007 and those borrowers above Rs2 m.   

In this respect, I wish to inform the House that in 2007 the National Solidarity Fund  

  

35  

Committee was set up to deal with Sale by Levy victims who could not be covered by the 
Borrowers Protection Act through a close end Fund with a maximum of Rs100 m.  The aim 
of  the  Fund  was  to  financially  assist  deserving  families  who  had  lost  their  only  residence 
through Sale by Levy.  

Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  does  not  compile  information  on  individuals 
  
facing difficulties to effect the repayment of their credits. Instead, the Bank of Mauritius, as 
part  of  its  monitoring  exercise,  requires  financial  institutions  to  submit  information  on  the 
total amount of credit facilities impaired.  

With regard to part (a) of Question No. B/825, I am also informed that the Office of 
the Commissioner for the Protection of Borrowers has so far received 2,350 requests from 
borrowers whose credit agreement does not exceed Rs2 m. All these requests were considered 
to the satisfaction of borrowers and their debts duly rescheduled, except for five cases where 
banks have lodged an appeal before the Judge in Chambers.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Special  Committee  set  up  to  examine  the  Report  of  the 

Commission of Inquiry on Sale by Levy has been requested to also –  

(i) 

(ii) 

legislative  amendment  for  providing  moratorium 

consider  any 
to 
individuals who are genuinely facing difficulties to effect the repayment of 
their loans/credits/mortgages, and  

consider  increasing  the  limit  of  Rs2  m.  under  the  Borrowers  Protection 
Act.  

In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  working  on  a  piece  of  legislation  wherein  an 
Asset Management Company will be set up to take over non-performing loans of financial 
institutions,  especially  where  individuals  have  provided  their  residence  as  guarantee.    This 
approach  will  prevent  properties  given  guarantee  from  undergoing  the  process  of  Sale  by 
levy.  

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du  ministre  si  le 
gouvernement  compte  rendre  public  le  rapport  de  la  commission  d’enquête  sur  le  Sale  by 
Levy?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I will look into the request, Madam Speaker.  

Mr Ameer Meea: In fact, I would have asked the hon. Minister the same question.  

The works of the Commission of Enquiry has ended more than one year, if I am not wrong.   

  

36  

Why is Government not tabling the Report? What is the reason why this Report is not made 
public?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, there should be no question of not tabling the Report, 
but my colleague, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional  
Reforms  now  has  set  up  a  Special  Committee  to  look  into  this  Report  and  report  back  to 
Cabinet. So, until then, the Report will not be circulated.  

Mr  Fowdar:  Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  Government  is  looking  into  the 
matter  of  Sale  by  Levy,  in  particular,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance and Institutional Reforms but, in the meantime, can I make a humble request to 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to ask the State-owned companies 
and banks to be more humble and have a human approach when dealing with the defaulting 
clients until the matter is sorted out?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, I agree with the hon. Member. In fact, Government is 
very  much  aware  that,  at  times,  undue  Sale  by  Levy  of  properties  has  caused  enormous 
prejudice to individuals.  In fact, the Committee set up by my colleague is working on ways 
and means of ensuring a better protection for those who have given their house as guarantee. 
Therefore, we are very conscious of the issue and we are taking it up.  And on a personal 
level, my colleague is also trying to ensure that when it comes to seizure and Sale by Levy, 
we try to intervene and help the process.  

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development, in view 
of  the  fact  that  the  question  was  answered  last  time  by  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon. 
Collendavelloo, who was replacing him with regard to the Sale by Levy Fund of Rs100 m. 
which was set up and wherein only Rs15 m. was disbursed, may I refer the case of one Mrs 
Padiachy, who became the symbol of the victims of ‘casseurs’ and merciless people, and this 
lady was stripped of all her wealth,  she was ousted from her house and had to live under a 
small hut and for years she has been knocking at all doors?    

May I ask the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development if he can ask the 
National Solidarity Fund Committee to look at this particular case with some sympathy so 
that a solution can be found to address the problem of this lady who has been suffering untold 
miseries in the hands of ‘casseurs’?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I thank the hon. Member for the question. We are all very 
much  aware  of  the  incredible  abuse  that  has  taken  place  before.  It  is  not  only  the  few 

  

37  

‘tapeurs’ that try to control the Sale by Levy office, also I must say, in the process, there has 
been involvement of lawyers, of attorneys and others. My colleague is looking into the whole 
matter and will report back, but the question put by the hon. Member is a good one. We have 
dozens of dramatic cases like the one he has just mentioned. We will look into it.   

As  to  the  Rs100  m.  which  has  been  provided  in  the  Budget,  it  concerns  especially 
those victims before 2007. In fact, after 2007, the Borrowers Protection Act has taken over. 
So, there are not so many cases. There are a few cases prior to 2007 which need to be taken 
care of. If this lady is in this case, it will be done.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! Next question!  

PARIS - MAURITIUS EMBASSY- MR L.O. - APPOINTMENT  

(No. B/827) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to Mr L. O., he will state the capacity in which the Embassy of Mauritius in Paris 
retained the services thereof, indicating the -  

(a)  period thereof;  

(b)  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  thereof,  including  the  salaries  and  other 

fringe benefits drawn, and   

(c)  official  missions  he  undertook  during  his  term  of  office,  including  the  total 
amount of money paid out thereto in terms of air tickets, per diem allowances and 
other facilities extended thereto.  

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  Mr  L.  O.  was  employed  as 

Senior Trade Adviser at the Mauritius Embassy in Paris.   

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  he  was  employed  on  a 
contract basis for an initial period of three years with effect from 01 March 2006. His contract 
was subsequently renewed on a two yearly basis to expire on 28 February 2015.  However, I 
am informed that he resigned on 16 January 2015.  

 As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  during  his  contract  of 
employment,  Mr  L.  O.  drew  a  total  salary  and  allowances  amounting  to  Rs28,130,592  the 
details of which are as follows -  

• 

Rs5,607,031 for the period 01 March 2006 to 30 June 2008;   

  

• 

• 

• 

38  

Rs16,115,470 for the period 01 July 2008 to 31 December 2012, in the wake 
of PRB Report 2008;  
Rs5,214,091 for the period 01 January 2013 to 15 January 2015 again in the 
wake of the PRB Report 2013;  

Rs1,194,000 as gratuity equivalent to two months’ salary on completion of 12 
months satisfactory service for the period 01 March 2007 to 28 February 2014.    

In addition, Madam Speaker, Mr  L.  O. also benefitted from 21 working days annual 

leave and 21 working days sick leave.    

With regard to part (c) of the question, according to records obtained from our Embassy 
in  Paris,  Mr  L.  O.  undertook  the  following  five  official  missions  during  his  term  of 
employment  
-   

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

February 2007:  Sommet France-Afrique, in Cannes, France;  

December 2009: Copenhagen Climate Change Conference in Denmark;  

October 2012: - 14th Francophonie Summit, Kinshasa, in Democratic Republic 
of Congo;  

January  2013  and  January  2014:  Davos  World  Economic  Forum  in 
Switzerland.  

According to the same records obtained from our Embassy in Paris, no payment in terms of 
air tickets or per diem allowances was effected to Mr L. O. for those five official missions, 
but the matter is still being looked into.  The reason is because surprisingly, we have been 
informed by the Passport and Immigration Office that Mr L. O. has travelled to Mauritius on 
no less than 40 occasions during that period.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo!  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House - with regard to the number of 
times Mr Obadia visited Mauritius, 40 times - what was the purpose of his visits and who 
incurred the costs for the travel?  

  

39  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Sinatambou:  Madam Speaker, from information obtained from the Commissioner 

of Police, 36 times were for holidays and four times for business purposes.  

(Interruptions)  

I am informed, however, that expenses for his air tickets were, in no less than 30 cases, met 
from public funds and such benefits are nowhere to be found in his contract.  But, as I said, 
Madam Speaker, the matter is still being looked into.  

Mr Jhugroo:  Is the hon. Minister in a position to inform the House where Mr Obadia 
stayed  during  his  trips  to  Mauritius,  who  funded  his  stays  and  whether  he  was  provided 
chauffeur-driven cars with VIPSU?  

Mr Sinatambou:  As I stated earlier, Madam Speaker, the matter is still being looked 
into. But the information which I have up to now is that 22 of Mr L. O’s stays were at the 
Trou aux Biches Hotel, at the expense or courtesy of the Government of Mauritius.  As to 
chauffeur-driven cars, I don’t have the information at this stage.  

Mr Jhugroo:  From the reply of the hon. Minister, it is noted that some Rs28 m. was 
paid to Mr Obadia for his assignment as Senior Trade Adviser.  Can the hon. Minister inform 
the  House  what  actions  have  been  undertaken  by  his  Ministry  following  recommendations 
made by Mr Obadia in his reports?   

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, Madam Speaker, no recommendation has been implemented 
by my Ministry for the simple reason that there are no recommendations at all in the eight 
annual reports filed by  Mr  L. O. The so-called  reports, Madam Speaker, are, in fact, mere 
descriptions of activities carried out by Mr L. O.   Each report consists of a maximum of three 
pages only. They are being compiled and I will be tabling them to the House.  

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Jhugroo!  

Mr  Jhugroo:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  what  is  the  academic 

qualification of Mr L. O?  

Mr  Sinatambou:    Madam  Speaker,  he  submitted  a  CV  in  2006  at  my  Ministry. 
However, the information appears to be contradictory because we are first told that in 1994 he 
obtained a Government Diploma in Sports Education majoring in table tennis.  

  

40  

(Interruptions)  

We are also told from his CV that from November 1991 to November 1994, he was the coach 
for youths and adults at the Levallois Sporting Club for table tennis.  We are further told from 
his CV that from June 1994 to September 1994, he was the coach for the Asian Games at the 
University of Sports of Tokyo.    

On the other hand, we are told, according to his CV, that he would have started reading 

law at the University of Paris X during the same year, in 1994.    

(Interruptions)  

So, we don’t know which is which. I can just table a copy of the CV for the House to take 
note.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, since the hon. Minister has 
made such a light-hearted note of the qualifications of Mr L. O.; is he aware or is he not that 
the same Mr L. O. has been elected in 2015 by a French journalist as the Best Director of 
Communication  of  le  CAC  40?    Is  he  also  aware,  in  the  same  breath  -  since  he  talked  at 
length about the CV of that gentleman - that between 2000 and 2005, he occupied the post of 
Directeur Conseil au sein du Groupe Euro RSCG, Havas?  Is he aware that between 2005 
and 2009, he has directed, at international level, institutions in the whole of Africa and the 
Gulf  and  India,  and  from  2009  onwards,  he  has  been  Adviser  to  the  President/Directeur 
Général of Veolia, that is dealing, at the moment, with the Government of Mauritius?    

Mr Sinatambou:  I am aware.      

Mr Mohamed:  He seems to have blurred all of that out.  

Mr Sinatambou:  I am not blurring out.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker:  Sit down! Allow the hon. Minister to reply!  

Mr Sinatambou:  With all due respect, first of all, I would like the hon. Member not to 

impute motives. I am not blurring out anything.  

I am not!  

(Interruptions)  

  

41  

Madam Speaker:  No comments, please!  
Mr  Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I would appreciate if in line with Standing Order 

39, rule 13, the hon. Member would stop interrupting unless he has the right to.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please proceed with your reply!  

Mr Sinatambou:  I cannot keep being interrupted, Madam Speaker!  Every time I start 

speaking, the same hon. Member keeps interrupting.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam  Speaker:    Whenever  I  see  that  there  are  interruptions,  I  will  take  action.  

Please proceed with your reply!  

Mr Sinatambou:  Thank you.  Now, first of all, Madam Speaker, I am not blurring out 
anything.  But let me just state:  Yes, I am aware that Mr L. O. was not only elected meilleur 
directeur de la communication du CAC 40 pour l’édition 2015, but he was also nominated for 
the same title for the year 2014.  This is what, to me, is shocking and even scandalous.  Mr L. 
O. was appointed as Senior Trade Adviser to promote the economic interests of Mauritius.  
The House will appreciate that this assignment, if carried out in a professional manner, is a 
demanding and challenging one, and also time-consuming.  Therefore, it is surprising to note 
that  at  the  same  time  he  is  employed  as  Senior  Trade  Adviser  for  the  Government  of 
Mauritius, earning a total amount of Rs28 m., he should be doing all those things that the hon. 
Member has just been mentioning.  Because it is quite clear that he must have been working 
for at least one of the companies listed on the French Stock Exchange and I am very happy 
that the hon. Member mentioned Veolia because it means that while he was working for the 
Government of Mauritius, he was earning elsewhere and doing other things.  

(Interruptions)  

One can appreciate why the eight reports filed over eight years have nothing to say in them.  

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  B/867  and  PQ  B/868  have 

been withdrawn. I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours.  

At 1.02 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  

On resuming at 2.34 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo!  

  

  

42  

CIVIL SERVICE - FLEXI TIME – IMPLEMENTATION  

  

(No. B/828) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
civil service, he will state if the introduction of flexi time thereat is being contemplated and, if 
so, indicate where matters stand as to the implementation thereof.  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, let me, at the very outset, inform the House 
that the flexible work arrangement system already existed in the Civil Service in line with 
PRB Report 2008 whereby officers can attend duty on flexible working hours between 8:30 
a.m.  and  9.15  a.m.  and  leave  the  office  between  3.45  p.m.  and  4  p.m.  with  a  view  to 
improving attendance at work, reduce absentees and/or lateness.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  when  I  thought  of  introducing  a  flexi  time  in  the  Civil 
Service, I was not aware of flexible time that was in the PRB.  The flexi time will contribute 
to bring a new dynamism to the Mauritian economy whereby activities will start earlier and 
continue till late.  It will also help to reduce traffic jam during peak hours and reduce fuel 
costs for the whole economy.  Gradually, it can also pave the way for a new lifestyle based on 
the 24/7 concept.   

It  is  in  this  context  that  my  Ministry,  after  consultation  with  federations  of  trade 
unions,  has  implemented  on  a  pilot  basis  a  new  flexi  time  work  arrangement  system  with 
effect from 01 October 2015 for one month.    

Under this new system, officers can choose and agree with management to attend duty 

on any one of the three time slots which is called staggered hours, which is –  

• 
• 
• 

7:45 a.m. to 3 p.m.;  
8.45 a.m. to 4 p.m.  
and 9.45 to 5 p.m.  

Madam Speaker, the main objectives of the new system are to enable public officers 
to attend duty on time, on the basis of a chosen time slot; secondly, it is to enhance the work 
life balance of officers, whereby they will spend less time in travelling and traffic jam and 
have more time for leisure, sports and other activities.  Thirdly, increase overall efficiency 
and effectiveness of the public service as officers will be operating at extended hours from 
7:45 a.m. to 5 p.m.   

  

43  

Madam Speaker, at present, an evaluation of the pilot project is being carried out in 
order and we are still gathering information on the feedback from civil servants.  First, we are 
assessing  its  impact  on  organisational  effectiveness  and  work  life  balance  of  officers; 
secondly make an adjustment of the time slot where required and thirdly enable the Ministry 
to decide whether the system can be replicated across the Civil Service.   

In the light of the evaluation exercise, a policy decision will be taken for the extension 
of the new system to other Ministries and departments after consultation with stakeholders 
concerned.  

Furthermore,  the  National  Transport  Authority  and  the  bus  companies  will  also  be 
consulted with a view to making necessary adjustments in the travel plan of buses so as to 
meet the requirement of the new flexible working arrangement system.  Thank you.  

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  all  Ministries, 
parastatal  bodies  and  other  governmental  departments  are  equipped  with  an  electronic 
attendance system?  

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  As  to  the  information  that  I  have  heard,  most  of  the 

Ministries and parastatal bodies are equipped with fingerprints attendance.  

Mr  Jhugroo:  With  the introduction  of  the  flexi  time  on  a  pilot  basis,  can  the  hon. 
Minister  inform  the  House  whether  there  has  been  a  skeleton  staff  working  during  lunch 
time?  

Mr Wong  Yen Cheong: Thank you, hon. Jhugroo. In fact, this is the case. For the 
working time, there is no pause, in fact, because people go on lunch on different times; so 
there are always people working at the Ministry.  

Mr  Uteem:  With  this  introduction  of  flexi  time,  is  the  Government  considering 
extending the opening hours of Ministries and various public bodies which offer services to 
the public?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you very much hon. Uteem. In fact, this is my idea, it 
is to spread it all across even in the private sectors, everywhere in Mauritius. This is how we 
will have a society where people do not leave  at the same time. This is why we find Port 
Louis like a ghost sign at night because people always work in the same slot. Thank you.  

Mr Jhugroo: I was coming with the same supplementary question. Will the hon.  

  

44  

Minister, after the pilot basis, give a priority to introduce the system to the Fitness Centre, the 
National Transport Authority, the Registrar of Companies, the Social Security Offices at the 
earliest possible?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you hon. Jhugroo.   

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Please don’t interrupt, hon. Ameer Meea!  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I have already partly answered to the question because my 
idea is to spread it all across the Civil Service and to private sectors. We have already had 
representations from different Ministries that came forward and asked the Ministry of Civil 
Service to make a plea to introduce it as fast as possible.  

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  hon.  Minister  is  talking  about  public  services.  May  I  know 
whether we will have this system in the Judiciary as well where there was a talk, at a certain 
time, of having a morning shift and an afternoon shift?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you hon. Baloomoody. I have not looked into that.  

(Interruptions)  

I will look what is the way to implement it in the Judiciary. Thank you.  

Mr Rughoobur: In its annual report, the Bank of Mauritius emphasised on the need 
to look into this whole issue of productivity. Will the hon. Minister, please, ensure that this 
proposal is taken on board and there is emphasis on this issue of productivity as well?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I will look into it. Thank you very much.  

MAURITIUS TELECOM – VEHICLES - SALES  

(No. B/829) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the Mauritius 
Telecom, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list of the vehicles thereof 
which were sold over the period July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each case the –   

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

names of the purchasers thereof;  

reasons for the sale thereof;  

procedures followed therefor, and   

45  

  
(d)     selling price thereof.  
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Telecom that it is the 
policy of the company to dispose of vehicles which are no longer suitable for the purposes of 
the company or vehicles which are unserviceable by tender to the highest bidders.   

Madam Speaker, the question asked also relates to transactions between a company 
governed by the Companies Act and other parties and it is the responsibility of the Board of 
Directors to ensure that the policy and processes set up in the company have been complied 
with.  

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  BAI  has  purchased 

vehicles from Mauritius Telecom?  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, the question is with regard to Mauritius Telecom. Is 

the hon. Member asking whether BAI has purchased from Mauritius Telecom?  

Mr  Jhugroo:  This  is  my  question.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  BAI  has 
purchased vehicles  from Mauritius Telecom? Can we know the number  of vehicles? What 
amount? And can the Minister confirm whether the said vehicles have been rented again to 
Mauritius Telecom and can we know the amount of money paid to BAI?  

Mr Bhadain: Well, from what the hon. Member has mentioned, it would seem to be a 
sale and leaseback transaction. It could well be the case, I don’t have the information, but I 
will certainly look into that.  

COMMISSION NATIONALE DU SPORT FEMININ - ADMINISTRATIVE 

SECRETARY   

(No. B/830) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  post  of  Administrative 
Secretary  at  the  Commission  Nationale  du  Sport  Féminin,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Commission, information as to –   

(a) the name of the incumbent thereof, indicating the –  

(i)  qualifications held, and   

(ii)  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  thereof,  including  the  salary  and 

other benefits drawn, and   

(b) if the post was advertised and, if so, indicate –  

  

46  

(i)  when, and   
(ii)  the number of applications received therefor and, if not, why not, and   

(iii) mode of recruitment thereof.  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commission Nationale du 
Sport  Féminin  (CNSF)  that  the  post  of  Administrative  Secretary  at  the  level  of  the 
Commission is held by one Mrs V. B.   

I am further informed that Mrs V. B. was employed on a contractual basis for a period 

of two years as from 01 June 2009 and drawing a salary of Rs12,000 per month.  

The contract was renewed for a further period of two years as from 01 June 2011 and 
she was drawing a salary of Rs12,500. It was then increased by the PRB to Rs15,000. No 
contract was issued for period 01 June 2013 to 31 May 2014, but she was drawing a salary of 
Rs15,590 plus compensation.  

The contract was further renewed for a further period of two years as from 01 June 
2014 and the salary was increased to Rs17,880 plus compensation. Then there was a Board 
decision to increase her salary by Rs2,000 as from August 2014. So, she ended up drawing a 
salary of Rs19,880 plus compensation.  

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the post was not advertised and 

decision to enlist her services was taken by the then Board of the Commission.  

As regards the modes of recruitment, as already stated, appointment has been made on 

a contractual basis.  

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister confirm whether the said lady is the sister of the 

former Minister of Youth and Sports?  

Mr Sawmynaden: I have heard of it, but I need to check the family tree!  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano, next question!  

LAND SURVEYORS COUNCIL – SETTING UP   

(No.  B/831)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the Land 
Surveyors Council, he will state if it has been set up and, if so, indicate –   

  
(a) when, and   
(b) the composition thereof.  

47  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Minister of Housing and Lands. Who is replying?  

(Interruptions)  

Who is replying to question No. B/831 for the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and 
Lands?  

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Well,  
I don’t have a precise answer because from what I have been given it is that the Council has 
not yet been set up and the Vice-Prime Minister is considering the possibility of contacting 
the surveyors and the professionals in order to come forward with the composition of the new 
Council.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano!  

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  ma  requête  au  ministre  est  de  considérer 
l’urgence de la situation parce que c’est un secteur où le braconnage est en train de tuer la 
profession.  Donc,  ma  requête  est  de  considérer  dans  l’urgence  la  constitution  de  ce  Land 
Surveyors Council.  

Mr Bodha: I will give it a certificate of urgency and request my colleague to take the 

matter as soon as possible.  

Mr Ramano: Suivant l’adoption du Cadastral Survey Act en 2011, c’était clair que le 
Land  Surveyors  Council  allait  suivre  parce  qu’il  y  a  pas  mal  de  recommandations  dans  le 
Cadastral Survey Act où il est question de discipline et de fees à être imposés mais sans un 
proper Land Surveyors Council ce sera impossible de procéder d’une façon professionnelle.   

Mr Bodha: I will do that, Madam Speaker.  

 

 

 

 

 

  

NINE-YEAR SCHOOLING - MIXED SCHOOLS - IMPLEMENTATION  

48  

(No. B/832) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  mixed  schools  component,  inherent  to  the 
NineYear Schooling that will be implemented as from 2015, she will state the measures, if 
any, being taken to address the problems faced in relation to the introduction thereof in the 
recent past, as was the case in respect of the former Junior Secondary Schools.  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I wish at the very outset to draw the 
attention of the House that the Nine-Year Schooling project is to be implemented as from 
2017 and the introduction of the mixed schooling component in the academies is due for 
2021.  

There were initially in the 70s junior technical schools with Forms I to III classes and 
then, these were converted to junior secondary schools having classes running up to Form III 
with subsequent extension to Form V. The junior secondary schools admitted students on a 
co-ed basis. I am advised that there is no record of any problem arising in these institutions as 
a  result  of  this  co-ed  set  up.  However,  later,  these  schools  were  converted  into  State 
Secondary Schools running classes up to Form VI and they were single sex schools.  

As  far  as  the  academies  are  concerned,  they  are  due  to  operate  as  from  2021  and 
necessary infrastructural adjustments will be carried out and adequate resources provided to 
ensure the pupils evolve in an environment adapted for and conducive to learning.   

It is to be noted that while academies would be co-ed institutions, other schools may 
continue  to  operate  on  a  single  sex  basis  as  they  do  today  with  no  imposition  upon  them. 
Parents wishing to admit their children in single sex schools would still be in a position to 
exercise this choice.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!  

Mr Mahomed: Thank you. Later on Sir Rampersad Neerunjun in Ebène which was 
also a mixed school ceased to operate. Would the hon. Minister be able to shed some light on 
that one as well?  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, things have changed since 1986. We are 
almost 30 years after and I think the society has evolved and students will be able to manage 
without any problem in a co-ed set up. In my answer to the last Parliamentary Question No. 
B/549  on  mixed  schooling,  I  had  informed  the  House  of  the  many  advantages  of  having 

  

49  

schools operating on a co-ed basis. There are actually many private secondary schools such as 
the  MGI  and  the  MGSS  operating  in  a  coeducational  setup  and  the  performance  of  the 
students is really good. We have no problems as far as academic performance or discipline is 
concerned in these schools.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!  
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Minister whether 
it will be compulsory for all the schools to have co-ed or there will be discretion to allow 
single sex schools and whether she has had consultations with religious organisations which 
run these schools and which have shown resistance to having mixed schooling?  

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  as  I  have  just  said,  Madam  Speaker,  schools 
operating as single sex schools will continue to operate as such. We are only talking about 
academies. I have not had any consultation with religious bodies on that particular issue, but I 
have had consultations with all the stakeholders involved in the education sector and they are 
all very much for the setup that is being proposed. And, as I have just stated, there are schools 
which will remain single sex schools and which will continue to operate as such.  

TRANQUEBAR – CREMATION STREET & CROWN LAND TOOREE - WATER 

SUPPLY  

(No. B/833) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  water,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water 
Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for water fountains to be placed in  
Tranquebar  for  the  benefit  of  the  squatters  thereat  who  are  not  currently  connected  to  the 
Central  Water  Authority  network  therefor  to  palliate  the  currently  irregular/insufficient 
supply thereof from the water trucks, as a temporary measure.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that 
currently  there  are  20  households  living  as  squatters  at  Cremation  Street  and  about  40  at 
Crown Land Tooree. I suppose it will mean State land Tooree.  

I  understand  that  following  strong  representations  made  by  hon.  Mrs  R.  Jadoo-
Jaunbocus, MP for the area, the Central Water Authority is now in the process of installing 
public  standpipes  at  Crown  Land  Tooree.    It  has  also  upgraded  the  service  main  pipe  to 
ensure adequate pressure in that area.  

  

50  

In addition, the CWA is providing water tanker service on the basis of two trips three 

times a week.  

Mr  Mahomed:  I  hope  I  have  not  missed  a  part  of  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister’s 
answer, but by when would this water supply be operational? Because the tracks do break 
down every now and then and the people are left without water supply for a long time.  May I 
know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister when this facility, that is, the fountain or the pipe 
that he is referring to will be installed?  

Mr Collendavelloo:  There are two trips water tankers thrice weekly, that is, two trips 
three  times  a  week.  Now,  they  are  in  the  process  of  installing  this.  This  will  involve  the 
extension of existing service main over a length of 100 metres for both sites. The laying of 
the pipes and installation of standpipes are scheduled to be completed by 15 November 2015.   
Add a couple of months to be sure.  

Mr Uteem:  The  hon. Vice-Prime  Minister  mentioned  Cremation  and Crown Land  
Tory.  In  fact,  there  is  another  place  in  Tranquebar  which  has  the  same  fate,  namely  Camp 
Mana - Crown Land Mana - where the Ring Road will pass.  Some of the households will be 
displaced, but not all of them.  So, may I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to also cover the 
area of Camp Mana when looking into the rescheduling of tankers?  

Mr Collendavelloo:  I will certainly convey that information to CWA.  

VEHICLES - SMOKE METERS - CONTRAVENTIONS  

(No. B/834) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the smoke meters procured in 2013 for the carrying 
out of the Survey on Vehicular Emissions and Capacity Building on Emission Testing by his  
Ministry, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Police de l’Environnement, 
information as to the –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

frequency at which same are being used;  

places where same are mostly used;  

number  of  contraventions  booked  following  the  use  thereof,  since  January 
2015 to date, and  

(d)  measures being undertaken to reduce the number of polluting vehicles.  

  

51  

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am advised that 
smoke meters were procured by my Ministry in 2011 and not in 2013. These smoke meters 
are being used on a weekly basis.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, the smoke meters are mostly used at –  

(i) 
(ii) 

Sorèze;  
Pamplemouses, near Droopnath Ramful SSS;  

(iii)  Bonne Mère, near Kalimaye;  

(iv)  Alma, Quartier Militaire;  

(v) 

St Jean, Quatre Bornes;  

(vi)  Bambous;  

(vii)  Forest Side;  

(viii)  LaPeyre  Hill,  Nouvelle  France,  and  any  other  area  from  where 

complaints are received.  

With regard to part (c) of the question, 65 contraventions had been established against 
vehicles emitting smoke above permissible limit during the period September 2015 to date. 
Here,  I  wish  to  inform  Members  of  the  House  that  there  is  evidence  emanating  from 
prosecution offices, spelling out that already 3,701 prosecutions have been undertaken and 
the District Courts have fined contraveners for having motorcycles with modified silencers 
causing excessive noise. These contraventions were established through hearing and checking 
of modification of silencers. I would like to inform the House of the following –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the  smoke  meters  could  not  be  used  for  the  period  January  2015  to  August 
2015, as the sole supplier of the equipment was not in a position to calibrate 
same since its certified engineer had left its company;  

with much difficulty, we have been able to find another company to calibrate 
the smoke meters, and  

even  though  the  smoke  meters  could  not  be  used  from  January  to  August 
2015, the Police de l’Environnement, by visual inspection, issued 1,006 Police 
Form  71  to  drivers,  to  cause  their  vehicles  emitting  black  smoke  to  be 
examined at the NTA.  

  
With  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  in  order  to  reduce  the  number  of  polluting 

52  

vehicles, the following measures are being undertaken by la Police de l’Environnement –  

(i) 

(ii) 

presently, we are importing diesel with sulphur  content less than 50 ppm.  My 
Ministry  is  having  consultation  with  all  stakeholders  to  look  into  the 
implications to import diesel with sulphur content of 10 to 15 ppm as from the 
next contract agreement;  

drivers and owners of diesel-driven vehicles are continuously being sensitised 
through  the  media  (radio  talks)  to  carry  out  regular  maintenance  on  their 
vehicles to avoid being contravened. Additionally, my Ministry is undertaking 
an aggressive awareness campaign on eco driving which, amongst others, will 
help  to  make  energy  efficient  use  of  vehicles,  thereby  reducing  vehicular 
emissions, and  

(iii) 

furthermore,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Road  Traffic  (Control  of 
Vehicle  Emissions)  Regulations  2002  was  amended  to  increase  the  penalty 
from Rs1,000 to Rs10,000.  

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, I cannot possibly comment on the visual inspections 

because …  

(Interruptions)  

And laser as well.  Hon. Baloomoody raised a very good legal point last week.  Vehicles 
emit for two reasons: either they are poorly serviced or they are overloaded.  One place to 
catch smoky vehicles is on slopes.  I can give an example.  At the roundabout of Réduit, 
vehicles are very smoky.  I am quite astonished by the hon. Minister’s…  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, ask your question!  

Mr  Mahomed:    Is  the  hon.  Minister  willing  to  put  smoke  meters  at  locations  up 

slopes, so that more vehicles can be caught?  Because all of them emit up slopes.  

Mr Dayal:  Madam Speaker, these factors are taken into consideration.  

Mr Ameer Meea:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just stated the measures that 
are being undertaken to reduce the number of polluting vehicles.  He stated something about 
importing diesel of less than 50 ppm.  So, is it his Ministry, which is importing this new 
diesel, type or is it the Ministry of Commerce which is doing it?  

  
Mr  Dayal:  It  goes  without  saying  that,  in  this  Government,  we  work  in  close 

53  

collaboration with all Ministries.  

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is 
any concerted action with the Ministry of Public Infrastructure?  It is a well-known fact that 
when  vehicles  go  to  the  fitness  centre  for  regular  check-up,  the  examination  is  not  well 
performed  and  they  come  out  with  smoke  instead  of  reducing  smoke.    So,  can  the  hon. 
Minister  state  whether  there  is  any  concerted  action  with  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure to see to it that the examination at the fitness centre is being carried out in a 
professional and well-balanced manner?  

Mr Dayal: Affirmative!  We do collaborate.  As a matter of fact, our Government is 

l’Alliance du peuple and, at the same time, as Ministers, we collaborate fully.  

Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  is  any  collaboration 
between his Ministry and the CNT?  Because it is a known fact that most of the buses of 
CNT are the ones which commit more pollution.  

Mr Dayal: As a matter of fact, la Police de l’Environnement operates in consultation 
with all parties, because at the end of the day, when we observe emission at a level which is 
not permissible and the frequency of contraventions, we do apprise all concerned and there is 
no exception.  

Mr  Mohamed: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister likes using the word ‘proactive’ 
very often in his interventions.  Could he just tell us, as far as the element of being proactive 
is concerned, whether he has asked the police or getting police officers to use their nose or 
their eyes to identify smoke quantity? He has talked about figures of how many people have 
been  contravened.    But,  out  of  all  those  contraventions  that  amount  to  thousands,  from 
January  2015  to  date,  how  many  of  those  contraventions  have  ended  up  in  court  where 
people have been found guilty, how many convictions have been established or has it simply 
been just a simple nasal exercise and nothing else?  

Mr Dayal: I am proactive. I knew somebody is going to ask this question and I will 
be tabling the information for successful prosecutions. Here, I have in mind the figures which 
are to the tune of 3701.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mahomed!  

  

Order please! No comments!  

54  

(Interruptions)  

STUDENTS & EDUCATORS -TABLET PC – DISTRIBUTION  

 (No.  B/835)  Mr.  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port 
Louis Central) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education 
and  Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  procurement  of  23,400  digital  tablets 
intended for distribution in 2014 to the then Form IV students who are now in Form V and to 
the Educators respectively, she will state where matters stand.  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, first of all, I wish to inform the House 
that  tablet  PCs  have  not  yet  been  delivered  by  the  contractor.  It  is  intended  to  distribute, 
ultimately, the tablet PCs to the 2014 cohort of Form IV students next year.  

Following a procurement exercise, which was started in September 2014 through the 
Central Procurement Board for the procurement of 23,400 tablets for Form IV students and 
Educators of 2014, the contract was awarded to Data Communications Ltd on 06 May 2015. 
As  per  the  terms  of  the  contract,  which  was  signed  on  the  12  June  2015,  delivery  of  the 
tablets was due to start on 07 September 2015 at latest.   

However,  DCL  made  a  first  delivery  of  24  tablets  in  unsealed  boxes  only  on  11 
September 2015. It is to be highlighted that on the 16 September the attention of the DCL was 
drawn to the fact that these tablets were not delivered in sealed boxes as per the contractual 
delivery schedule. On 01 October 2015, DCL provided a delivery schedule whereby it has 
proposed to deliver the tablets from 15 November 2015 to 30 November 2015.  

 The Ministry has reported the matter to the Procurement Policy Office and has sought 
the legal advice from the State Law Office on same. The latter has advised that as regards the 
first delivery which occurred on 01 September, the Ministry should notify DCL that it is in 
breach  of  the  contract  and  that  the  contract  may  be  terminated  if  DCL  fails  to  deliver  the 
tablets within the period specified in the contract. My Ministry has notified DCL accordingly.  

Mr Mohamed: Since this deals with the tablets, and here I am not in any way going 
to  play  party  politics  because  even  during  the  previous  Government  which  I  form  part  of, 
there was a serious issue of having internet coverage or internet service in schools. I have also 
been informed, recently, that this situation is simply the same, whereby, many schools still do 
not have Wi-Fi coverage of such an extent that allows the students to use the tablets. What 

  

55  

does  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  intend  to  do  in  order  to  try  to  correct  the  situation  that 
existed from before?  

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In fact, the Wi-Fi connection is being dealt with at the 
level of the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation.  I have been informed 
that the contract has been signed recently for 300 spot sites for Wi-Fi.  

Mr  Uteem: Thank  you, Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister mentioning that 
following  the  advice  from  the  State  Law  Office,  the  contractor  would  be  notified  that  the 
Government  can  terminate  the  agreement.  My  question  is  whether  the  Government  will 
terminate and if it does not terminate, will it, at least, ask for penalty fees, damages to be paid 
for late delivery?  

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  I’ve  just  mentioned  that  the 
Ministry is taking the steps, has already notified the company and will, in fact, terminate the 
contract if the tablet PCs are not provided within the time scheduled.   

(Interruptions)  

Obviously,  the  penalty  fees  as  well!  I  have  been  informed  that  the  company  was  asked  to 
provide the bank guarantee and the bank guarantee has expired, but the company has been 
asked to extend it further till December.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether it is the first time that 

Data Communications Ltd is providing services for tablets or it delivered in the past?  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I don’t have the information.  

ROADS - DECONGESTION PROGRAMME   

 (No. B/836) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 

the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the  
Decongestion Programme, he will state -  

(a) who designed the architectural concept therefor;   

(b) if bids have been launched therefor and, if so, when and, if not, why not;  

(c) the  quantum  of  the  payments  claimed  and  paid  out  therefor  in  relation  to  the 

projects implemented thereunder, and   

(d) if it is the policy of his Ministry to have recourse to architects in respect of road 

works.  

  

56  

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority that 
the Road Decongestion Programme, as a Public Private Partnership venture, was initiated in 
the year 2008.  In this regard, SPP Project Solutions Limited of South Africa, later renamed 
as J Maynard, was appointed in March 2009.  Following the decision of the then Government 
in June 2014, to reduce the scope of the RDP-PPP Project, J Maynard was appointed to work 
on the assignment. However, the Master Plan for decongestion was finally presented to this 
Government in April 2015 taking into consideration the new definition being proposed for the 
City of Port Louis (Port Louis vision 2030), smart cities and technopoles.  

Madam  Speaker,  no  architectural  concepts  have  been  designed  so  far.    Only  the 
artistic  impressions  of  the  different  components  of  the  project  were  shown  as  part  of  the 
presentation by the Transaction Advisor.  

Madam Speaker, as I mentioned to the House in my reply to PQ B/625 on 06 October 
2015, decongestion measures for the city of Port Louis comprise several other components, 
namely -  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Traffic Management Scheme;  
Relocation of hawkers;  
Relocation of the administrative centre;   
Delocalisation of public offices to the Highlands City, and  
Conversion of certain streets in the city centre into pedestrian zones.  

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the RDA that 
following an invitation to bid in 2010, PLAN consortium was selected as the Preferred Bidder 
and  Group  Five  Strabag  as  the  Reserve  Bidder  in  2012.    However,  the  contract  was  not 
awarded by the then Government since the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
raised concerns on the financial implications in view of the prevailing economic environment 
and Government’s commitment and priorities.  

Madam Speaker, concerning part (c) of the question, I am informed by the RDA that 
no payment has been effected in relation to works.  However, a total amount of USD5, 566, 
647 have been paid for transaction advisory services, so far.  

As far as part (d) is concerned, I am informed that it is not the policy of my Ministry 
to  have  recourse  to  architects  in  respect  of  road  works.    However,  for  major  and  complex 
structures such as bridges, flyovers and grade separators the consultant is requested to provide 

  

57  

the services of an architect/landscape architect to propose aesthetic structures, as part of the 
assignment.  

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has mentioned the art work which is, 
to me, small architectural concept, we saw a few weeks ago on TV, on internet. How much 
did that cost? Was that free to the Ministry? If it is so, is the Ministry allowed to take free art 
work from individuals or companies?  

Mr Bodha: No. It was the artistic design of the project.  That is all. It was the project 

for which consultancy fees have been paid.  

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  has  listed  several 
means by which his Ministry is proposing to reduce congestion in the country when the well-
known one is to reduce the number of cars on the roads, this is very basic, actually. What is 
the policy of Government on the importation of cars on a small island like Mauritius going 
forward?  

Mr Bodha: That is another big question, Madam Speaker. It is a policy question, but I 
think  one  of  the  best  ways  to  reduce  the  number  of  cars  is  to  have  a  better  land  transport 
system  which  is  sophisticated,  effective  and  cost-effective.  We  all  know  that  the  car  is  a 
symbol of status and at the same time, in many cases, it is the ambition of every family to 
have it. So, I don’t think that we can take some precise measures to reduce the car population. 
This has been done in Singapore, but we are not Singapore.  

But I think the best thing would be to provide for a better land transport system to 

encourage people to commute in buses rather than by cars.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo!  
Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just informed the House 
that USD 5 m. were paid for advisory works. Can we know to whom, to which company this 
amount has been paid?  

Mr Bodha: Well, this was paid to the company Maynard and it was not paid by this 

Government. We have not paid any cent so far.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  
Dr. Sorefan: On the same issue of the transaction adviser, USD 5.5 m. had been paid. 
Have we finished with this contractor and we are embarking with a new consultant? Is that a 
money loss for this Government?  

  

58  

Mr  Bodha: The money has been paid. Some of the work has been done. From the 
information that I have been given, there is an amount not paid so far. It was an amount of 
USD  113,855  for  option  analysis  and  Rs516,372  for  project  management,  but  we  have 
decided to ask for deliverables to be able to see whether we should pay this amount or not, 
because, in fact, the project as designed initially is not going ahead.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Gobin!  

LA FLORA JUNCTION - THIRD LANE - CONSTRUCTION  

  

(No. B/837) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
junction at La Flora, he will state if consideration will be given for the construction of a third 
lane and/or bypass to ease the flow of traffic at the traffic lights situated thereat.  

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road 
Safety Unit (TMRSU) that users of the road do face difficulties near the traffic lights at La 
Flora, in particular, those proceeding to Souillac along the route A3, Savanne Road.  

 I am further informed that the construction of a third lane is technically a solution.  
The third lane would start on the left just after the bridge towards the south and the design of 
the layout is being prepared by the TMRSU.  However, there are two major issues that will 
have to be addressed -   

land acquisition, and  
• 
•  availability of funds.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed!  

WORKERS (FOREIGN) - RECRUITMENT  

(No.  B/838)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked the Minister of  Labour,  Industrial Relations,  Employment  and Training 
whether, in regard to the recruitment of foreign workers, he will state if consideration will be 
given  for  the  introduction  of  proposed  amendments  to  the  existing  legislation  in  relation 
thereto to prohibit the agents thereof to charge the said workers for their services, in line with 
the decision/approval of Government therefor, in December 2014.  

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, I refer the hon. Member to the reply which I made 
to  PQ  B/30  on  10  February  2015,  where  I  had  proposed  the  setting  up  of  a  High-Level 
Committee  under  the  aegis  of  my  Ministry  to  look  into  issues  relating  to  employment  of 

  

59  

foreign workers in general, including the review of the existing regulations, the streamlining 
of procedures, as well as the proper operation of recruitment agencies in line with the new 
policy orientation of this Government.  

The  High-Level  Committee  has  already  been  set  up  in  April  2015  and  has  already 
submitted  its  recommendations,  inter  alia,  with  regard  to  the  fees  charged  by  private 
recruiting agencies. I am currently examining same.   

I reassure the House that I am well-intended to put in place a robust framework for 
curtailing  any  form  of  abuse  in  relation  to  the  charging  of  fees  from  workers.  It  is  to  be 
pointed out that it has been the practice in the past for recruiting agents to charge fees from 
workers and this has been ongoing for a very long time.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  adopting  a  realistic  and  cautious  approach.  We  can  only 
monitor and apply the provisions of the law to the extent that these transactions occur on the 
Mauritian  soil,  whereas,  in  practice,  most  of  the  dubious  dealings  occur  in  the  country  of 
origin of the workers. Therefore, any amendment to the legislation will require collaboration 
of source countries.   

Madam Speaker, following the ratification of the Maritime Labour Convention 2006, 
a draft Recruitment of Workers Regulations presiding, among others, abolition of payment of 
fees by workers have been submitted to the State Law Office for drafting.   

Therefore, as indicated,  consideration is  already  being  given for the introduction of 
proposed  amendments  to  the  existing  legislation  in  relation  thereto  to  prohibit  agents  to 
charge the aforementioned workers of their services.  

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his very 
straightforward answer. There is one issue which I would like to ask the hon. Minister.  It is 
ever since 28 November of last  year, the hon. Minister could see and any members of the 
public can see that Cabinet - according to the website of the Cabinet Office - had approved 
the decision of the former Government to amend the recruitment of workers’ regulations that 
already  provide  for  recruitment  agencies  to  charge  a  certain  percentage  of  the  salary  of 
workers. This is allowed by law, but it had approved a decision - I was then, I had taken a 
paper to Cabinet - to make it illegal for the recruiting agencies to charge anything whatsoever 
so that it be totally free in line with what is provided for called the IRIS methodology which 
is, in fact, the International Recruitment Integrity System as propounded by the International 
Organisation  for  Migration  based  in  Geneva.  Could  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  tell  us 
whether this paper that was prepared by the high-level committee, whether it also includes the 

  

60  

same vision, that is, that recruitment agencies should not charge anything from workers and 
to do that in collaboration with the International Organisation for Migration to address the 
concerns  that  the  hon.  Minister  rightly  pointed  out  about  the  problems  arising  in  other 
countries?  

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member has made his point.  
Mr  Callichurn:  Perhaps  the  hon.  Member  would  like  to  know  that  the  Private 
Employment  Agencies  Convention  1997  No.  181  has  not  yet  been  ratified  by  Mauritius. 
Article 7 provides that private employment agencies shall not charge directly or indirectly, in 
whole  or  in  part,  any  fees  or  costs  to  workers.  Therefore,  I  am  working  towards  it.  I  am 
working to be in line with the Convention.  

Mr  Mohamed:  Is the hon. Minister aware and  could he  consider the possibility of 
contacting  the  International  Organisation  for  Migration  that  had  ever  since  2013,  in  actual 
fact, organised the launch of the system which I just referred to which is called IRIS and IRIS 
stands for International Recruitment Integrity System and it was the Ministry of Labour and 
myself that launched it in Geneva whereby they can help internationally to address the issue 
which is raised by the hon. Minister - as I said again, rightly so, that it is not necessarily in 
Mauritius that the problem occurs, but outside of Mauritius? Could he consider, therefore, the 
possibility of working closely together with the IOM in order to ensure that this project that 
was launched can be spearheaded by the Government of Mauritius and by the hon. Minister 
himself?  

Mr Callichurn: I welcome the hon. Member’s suggestions. I will surely work with 

them.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed!  

PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ALGERIA - CHANCELLERIE 

DÉTACHÉE – SETTING UP  

(No. B/839) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade whether, in regard to the interest expressed by the People’s Democratic Republic of 
Algeria for the setting-up of a diplomatic mission in the Republic of Mauritius, he will state if 
any decision has been taken in relation thereto and, if so, indicate where matters stand.  

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Mauritius  and 
Algeria established diplomatic relations on 12 February 1976 and we have maintained cordial 
and friendly relations with that country since then. The current Ambassador of Algeria, His 

  

61  

Excellency Mr Mokaddem Bafdal, who is based in Madagascar, is accredited to Mauritius. 
He presented his credentials to the President of the Republic of Mauritius on 05 May 2015 as  
Ambassador  Extraordinary  and  Plenipotentiary  of  the  People’s  Democratic  Republic  of 
Algeria to the Republic of Mauritius.   

In September 2014, the  Algerian Government informed Mauritius of its  decision to 
open  a  “Chancellerie  Détachée”  in  Mauritius  with  the  objective  of  further  consolidating 
bilateral relations with Mauritius. The proposed “Chancellerie Détachée”, deemed to be at 
the level of a Vice-Consulate, was to operate under the jurisdiction of the Algerian Embassy 
in Antananarivo, Madagascar, and was to be headed by a full-fledged Algerian diplomat.   

However, on 04 June of this year, following the visit of the Algerian Ambassador to 
Mauritius for the presentation of his letters of credence, the Embassy of Algeria indicated that 
the  Algerian  authorities  had  decided  to  harmonise  the  official  designation  of  their  foreign 
missions in line with the provisions of the Vienna Convention on diplomatic relations and 
that the official appellation of its proposed “Chancellerie Détachée” would henceforth be  
“Diplomatic Mission of Algeria” and would be headed by a “Chargé d’Affaires ad interim”.    
I wish to inform the House that the request of the Algerian Government to establish a 

Resident Diplomatic Mission in Mauritius is being favourably considered.  

My Ministry is seeking all the necessary clearances and the Algerian Government has 

been informed through the diplomatic channel that its request is under consideration.  

Mr  Mohamed:  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his  very  straightforward  answer.  I, 
myself, met with His Excellency, the Ambassador of Algeria based in Madagascar some time 
last  year,  before  he  had  even  presented  ses  lettres  de  créance  to  the  Head  of  State  of 
Mauritius this year, and I had made him the request of moving away from the issue of having 
an  attached  level  of  consulate  situation  under  the  aegis  of  the  Embassy  of  Algeria  in 
Madagascar and to open a full-fledged Embassy in Mauritius.  I am informed, through my 
contacts, that there has been a request at the very beginning of the year and waiting for the 
response,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  would  recall,  that  there  was  this  request  that  they 
wanted  to  accelerate  matters  because,  in  the  meantime,  while  waiting  for  the  Mauritian 
counterpart answer, they have already opened 14 other Embassies worldwide.   

Madam Speaker:  Okay, so what is your question?  

Mr  Mohamed: So, could the hon. Minister look into the possibility of accelerating 

process which has consensus on all parts of the House?  

  

62  

Mr  Sinatambou:  Now,  the  information  which  the  hon.  Member  for  Port  Louis 
Maritime and Port Louis East has is totally inaccurate because, first of all, the request for the 
Chancellerie détachée is dated September 2014. At a time when you were all having your koz 
kozé and were not dealing with the affairs of this country. Now, the so-called request from the 
Algerian Ambassador was made, I repeat it, on the 04 of June of this year. So, from June to 
now, as I stated, the request of the Algerian Government is being favourably considered by 
Government.  My  Ministry  is  seeking  all  the  necessary  clearances  and  the  Algerian 
Government  has  been  informed  through  the  diplomatic  channel.  It  means  that  this 
Government has started processing the request as dated from 04 June of this year, and I think 
three months for the setting up of a diplomatic mission is not long in the field of diplomacy.  

Madam Speaker:  Okay, yes!  

Mr Mohamed: Because Algeria is a friendly State, I do not want to embarrass anyone 
on  this  particular  issue  following  the  information  that  I  have,  which  is  not  what  the  hon. 
Minister is stating. Now let us not play politics about that.  What can I ask the hon. Minister, 
whatever be the case and if he wants to win the day by his argument, let him win the day...  

Madam Speaker:  No. Please, ask your question! Don’t make comments!  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Mohamed: My point is: by when does the hon. Minister believe - which is a good 
work he is doing, maybe he is happy with that - that this excellent work of responding very 
rapidly to the Algerian authorities could be completed for him to, at least, be happy that he 
has done excellent work by opening this Embassy?  

Mr  Sinatambou:    Madam  Speaker,  it  is  not  a  question  of  winning  the  day.  It  is  a 
question of being accurate. We have had diplomatic relationships for nearly  40  years with 
Algeria, meaning from 1976 and the request of the Algerian Government is now dated June 
2015.  So, three months, I hope by any standard would be accepted as being good work. I 
don’t even need it to be excellent, but what I can assure the House is that this Government 
will act promptly and we will see the results in due course.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker:  No, next question!  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, next question!  

  

  
WORLD BANK GROUP - DOING BUSINESS REPORT - MAURITIUS  

63  

(No.  B/840)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the Report of the World Bank Group on Doing Business in Mauritius in relation to 
construction permits, he will state the measures that will be taken to streamline the processes 
therefor.  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    Madam  Speaker,  in  the  2016  Doing  Business  Report 
published by the World Bank Group on 28 October 2015, Mauritius is ranked 32nd among 
189  countries  in  the  world,  and  has  maintained  its  first  position in  Africa.  The  top  ranked 
countries in world are Singapore, followed by New Zealand and Denmark.  

Dealing with construction permits is one of the 10 indicators of the Doing Business 
Report. This indicator considers all procedures, time and cost to obtain a construction permit 
including connections to utilities. As from this year, a building quality control index has been 
added to the assessment of the indicator.  

Mauritius  is  currently  ranked  35th  out  of  189  countries  in  this  indicator  which 

represents a major leap from the 117th position in last year’s report.   

The  improvement  of  Mauritius  in  the  construction  permits  indicator  is  mainly 
attributed  to  the  ongoing  streamlining  of  processes  such  as  the  reduced  time  taken  to  get 
connections from Waste Water Management Authority and improved regulations relating to 
quality  control.  Previously  it  was  taking  six  to  nine  months  to  be  connected  to  the  Waste 
Water  Management  Authority  network.    This  timeframe  has  been  reduced  to  up  to  three 
months  by  increasing  the  number  of  registered  contractors  qualified  to  carry  out  the 
connection works.  

Furthermore, in the new Building Quality Control Index, Mauritius scored 13 out of a 
maximum  of  15  due  to  the  quality  control  and  safety  mechanism  put  in  place  in  the 
construction sector.  

To further improve our ranking on all indicators, a High Powered Committee has been 
set  up  under  my  Chairmanship  for  relevant  action.  The  Committee  focused  on  the 
construction permits in the first instance and the following measures are being implemented -  

First,  an  online  platform  to  submit  applications  for  all  Buildings  and  Land  Use 
Permits (BLP) has been developed  and is operational since July 2015.  This system 

64  

  
will  significantly  decrease  the  time  taken  to  process  a  BLP  while  allowing  the 
Ministry  of  Local  Government  to  monitor  the  whole  process  from  application  to 
approval.  

Second,  action  is  being  taken  to  integrate  the  plan  approval  or  clearance  by  other 
public bodies such as CEB, CWA, WMA with a Building and Land Use Permit (BLP) 
online  system.  Once  the  application  for  BLP  is  submitted  and  complies  with  all 
existing planning policy guidelines (PPG), the public utilities will have five working 
days to provide their stand through the online system, after which the silent agreement 
principle will apply.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

Mr Mohamed: The new measures which have been announced by the hon. Minister, 
could he, please, inform the House whether they are already in place or will there need to be 
any  changes  brought  about  to  our  legislation  in  order  to  implement  those  new  excellent 
measures and good news that he has just announced? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Those 

two  measures  announced  form  part  of 

the 
improvement  in  the  index  for  construction.  It  forms  part  of  a  global  index  on  which  we 
worked and whereby we have taken the commitment, quite an ambitious one, that in three to 
four  years,  Mauritius  will  be  in  the  top  15  countries  in  the  world  for  the  ease  of  doing 
business. That is huge!  It implies major reforms in the system itself.  It implies that the e-
Government system will be improved a lot more.  I hope that, within the next three to four 
years, whether it will be for building permit, whether it will be for EIA, whether it will be for 
morcellement  permit;  all  will  be  online  with  the  possibility  that,  in  the  case  where  civil 
servants do not act in time given, the silent agreement principle will be applied.  So, I think 
we are on the right track for this.   

Madam Speaker:  Yes.  

Mr Mohamed:  In fact, what I wanted to try to get, Madam Speaker, is the following, 
I mean, those ideas as enunciated and explained by the hon. Minister are quite marvellous 
ideas.  Undoubtedly!  What I would like to get at is the hon. Minister has stated that, within 
the next four years or so, we would start seeing the fruits of those excellent ideas.  So, do I 
gather,  therefore,  and  that  is  the  question,  that we  will  have  to  wait  another  four  years  on 
average for us to be able to see the implementation of those excellent ideas or are those ideas 
already working, and if at all, when do we expect any legislation to come and be brought to 

  

65  

this House to take into consideration the legality and the principle of applying online with the 
silent agreement, etc. What time frame are we talking about? I hope not four years!  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  am  speaking  of  an  ongoing  improvement  which 
means that the Committee which is working on it, is already taking measures. But, ultimately, 
within five years, Mauritius should be in a position to form part of the 15 best in terms of ease 
of doing business. Now, we don’t have to wait four years, naturally. It is an ongoing process. 
We are improving gradually and the online system, especially, is being improved quite fast.  

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister also, in his project of improving matters, to 
consider also the case when applications are rejected, for example, when the application for 
the BLU  permit  is rejected, the law provides that the applicant  can now appeal before the 
Tribunal. So, this is another étape in the whole process.  Can he see to it also that this process 
is shortened as much as possible so that the applicant is allowed to go as fast as possible to 
the Tribunal which gives its ruling as fast as possible?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I take note of the proposal.  

Mr  Mohamed:  May  I  humbly  suggest  or  could  the  hon.  Minister  consider  the 
possibility, in the working progress ideas that he has brought forward, to implement another 
issue which is when you have other organisations, for instance, the Waste Water Authority, 
the  Central  Water  Authority,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  and  other  organisations,  very 
often, if one of them happens not to be present, you have a situation where the Committee 
cannot, therefore, pronounce itself and give a decision with regard to the application. Could it 
be,  therefore,  considered  that  with  using  new  technology,  that  everything  turns  out  to  be 
paperless  in  the  sense  that  people  can  take  their  decision  and  not  have  to  come  to  this 
Committee,  but  can  take  a  decision  using  an  online  system,  give  their  views,  upload  their 
documents and comments so that things could go faster with a totally paperless system, as has 
been set up ever since last year at the Ministry of Labour?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The system should be understood in a very simple way. We 
are reducing the intervention of human beings in the decision of making process. When we 
speak about improving the ease of doing business, we are, in fact, speaking of corruption. We 
are speaking of ways and means by which things are differed, of people who have got the 
decision of taking power in their hands, use it to make money, and the only way to reduce this 
level  of  corruption,  is  to  ensure  that  the  decision  making  process  is  done  automatically,  is 
done  not  by  men,  but  by  machine  and,  ultimately,  reducing  the  intervention  of  officers, 

  

66  

human beings to the strict minimum. This is the approach we are following which will imply, 
therefore, that with this work, it means also that the level of corruption in the country will 
ease down considerably the next four years.  

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/861, B/863 and B/874 have 

been withdrawn. Hon. Bhagwan!  

BUILD MAURITIUS FUND – FUNDS ACCRUED  

(No.  B/841)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Build 
Mauritius Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, for the period January 
2014 to August 2015, information as to the total amount of funds which had accrued therein 
since the setting up thereof to date, indicating the –  

(a) 

amount  of  funds  disbursed  therefrom  for  the  implementation  of  projects 
earmarked thereunder, including to improve water supply, and  

(b) 

total outstanding amount of funds available therein as at to date  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I wish to inform the House that the Build Mauritius Fund 
was set up in December 2013 as a Special Fund under the Finance and Audit Act. From its 
setting up to 31 October 2015, a total amount of some Rs6.2 billion has been credited to the 
Fund.  

In  respect  of  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  a  total  amount  of  Rs1.9 
billion  has  been  disbursed  from  the  Fund  during  the  same  period  to  finance  the 
implementation of projects including Rs1 billion for the water sector.  

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  balance  available  in  the  fund  as  at  31 

October 2015 stood at some Rs4 billion.  

BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE – LOANS  

(No. B/842) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  British  American 
Insurance and conglomerates, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the special 
administrator appointed therefor, information as to the quantum of the loans which they had 
contracted with the banks having been written off, indicating the steps taken to recoup same, 
if any.  

  

67  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member will note that section 64 subsection 
(3) of the Banking Act prohibits the disclosure of such information and BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. 
and  its  related  entities  are  under  special  administration  by  virtue  of  section  110  of  the 
Insurance Act.  

There is also some confusion in the question, I believe, which basically is asking for 
information as to the quantum of loans which BAI had contracted with the banks having been 
written off, indicating the steps taken by the Special Administrators to recoup same, if any. If 
the banks have written off loans which BAI had undertaken, then there is nothing to recoup 
by the Special Administrators.  

Dr. Sorefan: Is the hon. Minister aware that an unsecured loan to the tune of Rs845  
m.  has  been  granted  advance  by  Mr  T.  R.  who  was  the  Chairman  and  Chairman  of  BAI 
International Holdings and by Mr S. who is the Chief Executive of a bank and who was the 
Chief Staff of ex-Bramer Bank and there was un complot to give Rs845 m. unsecured loan? Is 
the hon. Minister going to investigate in this because we know about Navin Rs40 m. saga 
where two officers are being taken to task? Will the hon. Minister investigate and take these 
two officers of that bank who granted Rs845 m. unsecured loan? I will live 10 times, born, 
die, born, die and born…  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

Dr. Sorefan:..I will never make Rs845 m.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, please, don’t make comments! You have asked 

your question, don’t make comments, please!  

(Interruptions)  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, that would not be a case of unexplained wealth, it will 
be an unexplained life. Madam Speaker, I take very seriously what the hon. Member has just 
mentioned, but the question itself is wrongly formulated, because the question he is asking as 
to  whether  the  Special  Administrators  will  recoup  the  amount  which  has  been  written  off 
from the banks, but the banks if they have written off that amount, then there is nothing for 
the Special Administrator of BAI to recoup. In fact, it is in the advantage of BAI that it has 
been written off and the Special Administrator. However, what has been mentioned by the 
hon. Member is a very serious issue and I will certainly look into that, Madam Speaker.  

  

68  

Mr  Uteem:  I  don’t  know  if  that  would  fall  under  the  aegis  of  the  Special 
Administrators  because  now  we  have  a  Receiver  appointed  for  Bramer  Bank.  But,  being 
given  that  this  question  is  about  BAI  and  its  conglomerates  which  would  include  Bramer 
Bank in receivership, may I know from the hon. Minister if he is prepared to table a list of all 
loans  that  have  been  written  off  by  Bramer  Bank  in  receivership  since  it  has  come  into 
receivership?  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is right. What has happened in effect 
is that the Central Bank has appointed a Receiver Manager for  Bramer Bank, but then the 
Special Administrator has been appointed under section 120 of the Insurance Act for BAI. 
Now, it so happens that because Bramer Bank does not have a banking licence anymore, then 
its status is reduced to a normal company and it becomes a related entity or company of the 
insurance company which is under special administratorship. So, I have raised the matter with 
the Governor of the Central Bank and I very much believe that it is the Special Administrator 
who has to look into that matter by law and once this issue is resolved, if there is a list which 
is made available to me, I will certainly make that available.  

Dr.  Sorefan:  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  of  the  Interim  Report  of  SBM  Holdings 
which is public, where mention is made that to the tune of R1.08 billion has been written off 
and what I have said Rs845 m. form part of that R1.08 billion that has been written off? Will 
the Minister look into it?  

Mr  Bhadain: Again, Madam Speaker, we have to look at the jurisdiction of issues 
here. The SBM will be regulated by the Central Bank of Mauritius and the banking sector 
does not fall under my portfolio. However, good governance does and if, indeed, there is such 
abuse, then this is certainly going to be looked into by the Ministry of Good Governance.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Gobin!  

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU HOSPITAL - MASTER V. J. – ALLEGED MEDICAL 

NEGLIGENCE  

(No. B/843) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  a  case  of  alleged 
medical negligence having purportedly occurred in the course of a surgery on master V. J., 
son of one Mr O. J., residing at Allée Jacques, in Grand Bois, on or about 31 December 2013 
at the Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital, in Rose Belle, he will state where matters stand as to the 
inquiry carried out thereinto.  

  

69  

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  minor  patient  V.  J.,  8  years  old, 
attended  the  Accident  and  Emergency  Department  of  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Hospital  on  30 
December 2013 at around 22.00 hours with a history of bad fall with injury to the left hand.  

An x-ray was performed immediately and showed supracondylar fracture on the left 
humerus. The patient was kept fasting and surgery was performed on 31 December 2013. The 
patient was followed up in ward from 30 December 2013 to 29 January 2014 by the treating 
doctors.  

The patient’s relative signed the Discharge against Medical Advice (DAMA) on 29 

January 2014 and took the patient from the hospital, apparently to a private clinic.  

Following a complaint made on 20 April 2014 by the father of the minor patient, an 
internal enquiry was initiated at the level of the hospital and a report was submitted to my 
Ministry on 02 June 2014. Subsequently, an in-depth enquiry was conducted on 28 November 
2014 to look into any alleged case of medical negligence.  

The  Enquiry  Committee  concluded  that  appropriate  treatment  was  provided  to  the 
patient, but also noted that there was no proper communication among the treating doctors 
after the operation.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  light  of  the  report,  my  Ministry  has  administered  a  written 

warning to the three treating doctors under Regulation 42 (3) of the PSC Regulations.  

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that the patient’s relatives were convened by the 
Acting Regional Health Director of the hospital on 27 October 2015 and they were informed 
that all necessary treatment was given to the patient at the time.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Gobin!  

Mr Gobin: With your permission, Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware that, 
following the surgery, this child has almost lost the use of his left hand? I have taken good 
note of the answer of the hon. Minister, but what is being proposed now as treatment for this 
child, whether here or abroad, so that remedial action can be taken? It is fine that warning 
was issued to the three treating doctors under Regulation 42 of the PSC Regulations, but what 
about the child, if I may say victim?  What is being contemplated for him?  

Mr Gayan: I understand, Madam Speaker, that it was a very bad fall and it happened 
on 30 December. But, according to the file that I have, all treatment was given to that young 
child. Unfortunately, it is true that he has lost the use of his left forearm, but I understand that 

  

70  

a further operation was carried out after some serious complication was found out on 02 or 03 
January.  

I am not aware whether there has been any request for further treatment to be funded 
either by the hospital here or by an institution overseas. But I must also maintain, Madam 
Speaker,  that  the  child  was  taken  away  from  the  hospital  against  medical  advice  by  the 
parents.  

Mr  Gobin:  One  more  question,  Madam  Speaker.    Fortunately,  if  I  may  say,  the 
DAMA was signed because we can see that the result of the enquiry has been that warning 
was  issued.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  at  least  give  an  indication  whether  there  would  be 
agreement  in  principle  to  offer  the  necessary  Government  funding  for  treatment  abroad  if 
such is a course of action which can be contemplated?  

Mr  Gayan: Madam Speaker, there is a protocol to be  followed  whenever overseas 
treatment is contemplated. But, if the protocol is complied with and there is justification to 
send this child, obviously, the needful will be done. But the protocol has to be followed.  

Mr Jhugroo: After the enquiry, it was found that there was no communication.  But is 

not ‘no communication’ in itself a medical negligence?  

Mr  Gayan: Well, what I understand, Madam Speaker, is that since it was the New 
Year’s festivity, there was lack of communication between the surgeon and the doctor and 
this is why warning was given. But, as far as the treatment was concerned, the treatment was 
the appropriate one.  

Mr Gobin: Can the hon. Minister give us the assurance that the parents of the child 
will, at the very least, be communicated with a report, including the treatment that was given 
to  the  child?    Because  the  parents  are  completely  in  the  dark  as  to  what  happened  at 
Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital in this case.  

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I understand that the Enquiry Panel was made up of the 
Acting Regional Health Director, a Consultant in Charge Orthopaedics, a second Consultant 
in  Charge  Orthopaedics,  the  Regional  Nursing  Director  and  also  an  Assistant  Permanent 
Secretary, and that Committee found that the treatment that was given was the appropriate 
one.  

With regard to the treatment (collateral matters), that was the reason why a warning 

was issued.  Well, at least, that is what I have.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Gobin!  

  

71  

TRADE FAIRS - ORGANISATION  

(No. B/844) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in regard to the 
holding and or organization of trade fairs in Mauritius, he will state if consideration will be 
given for a temporary suspension or a ban thereof with, as objective, to allow the stimulation 
of the business of the licensed local traders.  

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  has  received  numerous  representations 
from  local  traders,  namely  the  Front  commun  des  commerçants  and  the  Shop  Owners 
Association regarding the frequent holding of trade fairs across the island, which affects their 
business activities by creating unfair competition leading to an unequal level playing field. 
Same has also led to the closure of some local businesses while others have had to lay off 
employees. The foreign participants in these fairs tend to offer low quality products and do 
not provide after sales service to the detriment of the consumers.  

This state of affairs has been recurring since quite some time. The relevant regulations 
were reviewed in December 2013 to address the situation. Prior to January 2014, fees were 
payable according to the duration, the number of participants and the location of the trade fair 
and exhibition.  

With the Consumer Protection (Events) Regulations 2013, as from January 2014, fees 
payable were increased significantly and payable according to the type of event, the duration 
and  the  category  of  participants  in  such  events.  Moreover,  bodies  such  as  cooperative 
societies  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  were  exempted  from  payment  of  fees  in 
connection with the organisation of events.  

However,  this  did  not  produce  the  expected  results.  The  situation  has  deteriorated 
since most of the organisers of these fairs have registered themselves as SMEs so as to be 
exempted from the payment of the prescribed fees.  

Thus, with a view to protecting the duly licensed local traders, on 23 October 2015, 
the Government has decided to take a series of measures regarding the organisation of trade 
fairs.  

Firstly,  there  will  be  a  ban  on  the  organisation  of  trade  fairs  proposing  for  sale 
products which are readily available in shops such as textiles, garments, utensils, furniture, 
fancy jewellery, handicrafts, pharmaceuticals and food.  

  

72  

 Secondly, the provision for SMEs to be exempted from the payment of fees will be 

removed from the Regulations to avoid evasion from the payment of fees.  

Thirdly,  besides  the  standard  conditions  appearing  in  the  current  regulations,  new 

conditions will be introduced to ensure a proper control and monitoring.  

Madam Speaker, I am confident that these measures, especially the ban of the pêle-
mêle trade fairs will give a boost to the business of the duly licensed local traders and allow 
the public to be provided with good quality, safe and secure products at reasonable prices.  

Mr Gobin:  If I understand correctly, there are two types of measures – 

(i)        ban, and  

 

(ii)  

amendments to be brought to the regulations.  

Can I confirm from the hon. Minister whether the ban would be applicable immediately?  The 
second part of my question is with regard to the amendments of the regulations, for instance, 
for the non-payment of the fees of SMEs to be removed, when can we expect the regulations 
to be gazetted?  

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, as per existing regulations, no authorisation is given 
for the holding of events in the months of November and December, for example. So, these 
are applicable right now. As far as the regulations are concerned, they will be ready by the 
end of this month.  

MAURITIUS SPORTS COUNCIL - NATIONAL FEDERATIONS - FINANCIAL 

ASSISTANCE   

(No.  B/845)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Mauritius Sports Council, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to if it has changed its 
policy in respect of the financial assistance given to the national federations and, if so, give 
details thereof.   

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Sports Council 
that financial assistance  is provided to National Sports Federations to enable them to meet 
expenses incurred in relation to -  

(i) 

(ii) 

payment of affiliation fees to their respective International Federations;  

payment of salary/allowance to their Administrative Clerk;  

  
(iii) 

stationeries and petty stores, and  

73  

payment of coaching fees.  

(iv) 
I  am  further  informed  that  the  newly  set  up  Board  has,  after  consultation  with  my 
Ministry, decided to review the quantum of the financial assistance granted to the Federations 
with effect from 01 October 2015.  This decision has been taken to prevent duplication of 
refund  of  expenses  as  it  was  noted  that  financial  assistance  granted  in  respect  of  expenses 
incurred  for  the  payment  of  coaching  fees  and  office  incidentals  were  also  being  met  my 
Ministry.   

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre  peut-il  nous  dire  si    cette 
décision  qui  a  été  prise  est  en  raison  du  fait  que  le  MSC  a  trop  de  travail  et  trop  de 
responsabilités?  

Mr  Sawmynaden:    As  mentioned,  this  measure  has  been  taken  because  there  was 
duplication of fees.  Stationeries and payment of coaching fees were met by my Ministry and 
also met by the MSC.  So, to prevent this to happen, we have decided to have it under one 
roof.  

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre  peut-il  nous  donner  la 
garantie que ce changement dans le paiement des coaching fees principalement, n’est pas une 
démarche pour réduire les allocations des fédérations?  

Mr Sawmynaden:  As far as I am aware, there is no reduction.  It is just to prevent 

duplication of fees.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Quirin!  

FOOTBALL – CLUB M – COACHES   

(No.  B/846)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Mr A. H. and Mr J. T., coaches 
of  the  Club  M,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Football 
Association, in each case, information as to the terms and conditions of the contract thereof, 
including the –  

(a) duration thereof;   

(b) monthly salary and other benefits drawn, and   

(c) conditions of work and responsibilities thereof.  

  

74  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the MFA that Messrs A. H. and 
J. T. have been appointed as co-coaches of the  Men’s National Team after the  IOIG 2015. 
They have been working together since mid-August 2015.  

After the departure of D.S. at the end of May 2015, Mr. A. H. agreed to take over the 
responsibilities of the National Football Coach.  A two-year contract has been offered to him 
with a monthly salary of Rs200,000, including accommodation and transport expenses. He is 
also in charge of the Women’s National Football Team.  

Mr J. T. was called upon to act as co-National Coach of the Men’s Team along with 

Mr A. H. following the departure of the previous Coaches.  

Mr J. T. accepted this responsibility free of charge. I am informed that only travelling 

expenses are granted to him to attend training sessions and matches.  

The responsibilities of Messrs A. H. and J. T. are to work in close partnership for the 

benefit and the promotion of the Club M.  

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir – à part les responsabilités que le 
ministre  vient  de  citer  -  quels  sont  les  projets  et  objectifs  réels  des  deux  entraineurs  pour 
permettre  au  Club  M  de  remonter  dans  le  classement  de  FIFA?    Dois-je  rappeler  à  la 
Chambre que Maurice a perdu cinq places dans le dernier classement de la FIFA ?  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, as you know, football went down because toutes 
les  écoles  de  formation  étaient  fermées  pendant  bon  nombre  d’années.    Les  écoles  de 
formation sont maintenant ouvertes à nouveau et ces deux coaches, en collaboration avec les 
autres coaches qui sont en place, vont permettre  la formation des jeunes dès leur plus jeune 
âge afin de refaire l’équipe du Club M.  

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, le ministre est en train de confirmer que les deux 
entraineurs vont s’occuper aussi de la formation.  Est-ce qu’ils le font déjà ou bien ce sera 
dans un proche avenir?  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, c’est sûr que ces deux personnes ne peuvent pas 
être partout en même temps.  Ils vont prêter assistance aux entraineurs qui sont déjà existants.  
Ils sont là pour aider et on va tout mettre en place afin d’aider ces jeunes à vraiment monter 
en termes de technique.  

Madam  Speaker:  Time is over!  The Table has been advised that P,Q, B/852 has 

been withdrawn.  

  

75  

ADJOURNMENT  

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 17 November 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded.  

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

MATTERS RAISED  

(3.59 p.m.)  

(i) 

(ii) 

POUDRE D’OR FOOTBALL GROUND   

TROIS BRAS - YOUTH CENTRE - CONSTRUCTION   

 

(iii)   VALE - FOOTBALL GROUND - CLOAKROOM   

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Madam Speaker, for allowing me to take the time of the House.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur, can I just interrupt you to ask you to be brief?    

We have a list of those who want to intervene.  

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam Speaker, there have been several complaints - it is a request 
to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - received from members of my Constituency, No. 6.  There 
are three projects where works have remained unfinished since January –  

(i) 

(ii) 

Poudre d’Or Football Ground;   

Construction of a Youth Centre at Trois Bras, Petit Raffray, and   

(iii)  Construction of a cloak room at Vale Football Ground.  

May I please request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to liaise with the NDU and to look into this 
issue so that the projects are completed at the earliest?    

Thank you.  

The Prime Minister: Well, since the hon. Member is asking that we should look into 
the projects so that they are executed, in fact, they are already on and we will do our best to 
execute them as fast as possible.  

  

76  

COURTS - FORMER EMPLOYEES - COMPENSATION  

Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  
Madam Speaker, I would like to raise an issue which concerns the hon. Minister of Financial 
Services, Good Governance and it relates to the former employees of Courts.   

 Following a meeting on 23 September 2015 between the hon. Minister and the Trade 
Unionist, Mr Chuttoo, it was widely reported in the press that there has been an agreement 
that  the  former  employees  of  Courts  -  who  lost  their  jobs  -  will  be  getting  one  month 
compensation per year of service.    

I have been informed now that these people have received only 15 days per year of 
service.  So, I would make an appeal to the hon. Minister if he can take up the matter with the 
Special Administrators and the Financial Services Commission, so that these people be given 
the full one month as promised.  

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain):  We will certainly do that.  Madam Speaker.  I was not aware that 15 days 
only have been paid, but I will certainly look into that and we will hold on to our promise.  

SCHOOLS – CLEANERS - SALARY  

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East):    Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  I  would  raise  today  concerns  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research - if I can catch 
her attention.  It relates to the workers employed through sub-contractors or Parent Teachers 
Association.   

 A similar PQ was put by hon. Baloomoody in September 2015 and it has not yet been 
replied.  I have a similar case in my Constituency whereby people working as cleaners in the 
schools were being employed - the case I am referring to - by new Cleaning Company Ltd. 
and their salary was Rs5,000 per month.    

Now that there is a new company, Mauriclean Ltd., it is giving these people Rs2,000 
per month and they are supposed to start work at 7.30 a.m. for secondary schools and 8.00 
a.m.  for  primary  schools.    These  people  are  finding  it  very  hard  to  work  for  Rs2,000  per 
month on a daily basis.  Therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister to look into the matter and do 
the necessary so as to ease these people who are head of families?  

  

77  

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam  Speaker,  it  seems,  from 
what  I  have  gathered,  that  these  people  are  working  with  the  company.  I’ll  look  into  the 
matter and see how we can talk to the companies, but it is a contract between the workers and 
the company.  

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU HOSPITAL – CASUALTY & X-RAY DEPARTMENTS - 

COMPLAINTS  

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 
Speaker, I have two issues: one for the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and one for the 
Ministry of Local Government.   

As  regards  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  I  have  received  various 
complaints  from  the  constituents  of  my  Constituency  concerning  the  service  that  is  being 
provided  at  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Hospital,  in  particular,  the  waiting  time  and  the  Casualty 
Department as well as the X-ray Department. Can I request the hon. Minister to kindly look 
into the matter and effect a visit, if need be?  

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member said he had two issues; what is the second one?  

PLAINE MAGNIEN CEMETERY - INCINERATOR  

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 

Speaker, my second issue concerns the incinerator at Plaine Magnien Cemetery.   

The project has long been completed, but then the incinerator is still not operational. 

Can I request the hon. Minister to look into the matter?  Thank you.  

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, I will 
certainly look into the issues raised regarding the hospital at Rose Belle, but I must say that 
we have established an electronic ticketing system where the waiting time should normally be 
rationalised, but I will certainly look into that.  

The  Minister  of  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):  Madam  Speaker,  for  the 

problem at Plaine Magnien, I will look into it and inform the House.  

LE MORNE – FOOTBALL GROUND  

Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Madam Speaker, I 
had a question to the hon. Minister of Local Government at the last session concerning Le 

  

78  

Morne  football  ground,  as  it  is  actually  located  one  and  a  half  miles  outside  the  Village 
Council area.   

The hon. Minister, in his answer, stated that Government is contemplating the idea of 
constructing  another  football  ground  at  La  Prairie  which  is  also  outside  the  village, 
approximately  one  and  a  half  miles  away.  Could  the  hon.  Minister  consider  compulsory 
acquisition of land since at the back of the village there are private lands? Thank you.  

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Yes. That’s what I was told 
by the Chief Executive of Black River, but, obviously, I will have a look at it again and see 
whether we can get a plot of land nearer.  

MALAKOFF/CRIMEA STREETS, PORT LOUIS - DRAIN  

Mr  C.  Osman  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central): Madam Speaker, I have a request for the hon. Minister of Local Government with 
regard to a public health issue in my Constituency, more precisely regarding a drain located at 
Malakoff and Crimea Streets in Constituency No. 2, Port Louis.   

Since late, there have been lots of complaints forthcoming to me with regard to the 
drain being blocked for several reasons; accumulation of waste is one of them and this leads 
to a serious public health issue for the dwelling units located along this drain. So, my request 
is for the hon. Minister to kindly look into the ways and means to have the drain at Malakoff 
and Crimea Streets clean up for the sake of public health.  

The  Minister  of  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  I’ll 

definitely look into that problem.  

ALLÉE TAMARIN, ROCHE BOIS – CENTRE DE JEUNESSE - ACCESS  

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  have  got  two  particular  issues  and  the  coincidence  is  that  they  are 
addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  and  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport, both of them are seated next to one another.   

Now, the first one concerning the Minister of Youth and Sports, if I could obtain his 
assistance and help with regard to the Centre de Jeunesse that is in Allée Tamarin in Roche 
Bois.  Usually,  inhabitants  had  access  to  that  centre  in  order  to  organise  les  fêtes  de  fin 
d’année. But, unfortunately, inhabitants of Allée Tamarin have made an application recently 
and thinking that they would be allowed to organise les fêtes de fin d’année have been turned 

  

79  

down  by  des  préposés  of  that  Centre  de  Jeunesse  without  being  given  any  explanation 
whatsoever.   

So, I would request, therefore, the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports, if he could use 
his good offices to kindly allow people in the locality to have access to that facility for les 
fêtes de fin d’année, particularly for children of the kindergarden of the locality.   

QUARTIER SHELL, ROCHE BOIS – POLICE OFFICER  

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam  Speaker,  the  second  issue  would  be  with  regard  to  the  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport.   

On the highway, separating Quay D roundabout, there is a gas station next to Quartier 
Shell, Roche Bois and what separates the highway, Madam Speaker, is now - until recently, 
there  has  been  a  chain  that  has  been  put  there.  So,  people,  in  the  morning,  be  it  school 
children, whenever they are not on holidays, be it workers, whenever they need to go across 
the highway to take a bus or come back from work and go on the other side of the highway, 
they do not have the facility of a Police Officer there at peak hours or even in the afternoon 
after office hours.   

I humbly request, therefore, if the hon. Minister could use his good offices to try to 
ask the Police to remove the chain that is there because it is causing a lot of danger, and I am 
sure he would liaise with the hon. Prime Minister who would do the needful, and also try to 
get a Police Officer to be present there in order to direct traffic to help the people to go from 
Quartier Shell, from the bus stop that is on the other side of the highway, opposite the gas 
station, in order to avoid road traffic accidents, for children as well as for adults.  Thank you.  

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, I will 
definitely look into the matter with my Director of Youth Affairs. I don’t know what is the 
new policy and if there is anything, I will inform the hon. Member.  

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): I will 

also look into the matter, Madam Speaker.  

BELLE ÉTOILE ROAD, RIVER SIDE LANE, TEMPLE ROAD & SARAN VILLA 

LANE – ROAD TARRING  

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente,  ma  requête  cet  après-midi  s’adresse  au  ministre  des  Utilités  publiques  qui, 

  

80  

malheureusement, n’est pas dans la Chambre actuellement mais néanmoins, je vais élaborer 
sur mon point.   

Des travaux, Madame le présidente, ont été effectués par la CWA à Belle Étoile dans 
la circonscription No. 20 depuis plusieurs semaines déjà et le réasphaltage n’a toujours pas 
été effectué, causant donc, comme vous le devinez, de gros inconvénients aux habitants de la 
région.   

Les  rues  qui  sont  dans  un  état  exécrable  sont  Belle  Étoile  Road,  River  Side  Lane, 
Temple Road et Saran Villa Lane en particulier. Je considère que c’est la moindre des choses 
que la CWA s’assure que les routes sont réasphaltées aussitôt que les travaux sont terminés.   

De  ce  fait,  je  fais  un  appel  au  ministre  ou  -  même  s’il  n’est  pas  là  -  à  un  de  ses 
collègues, afin qu’il y ait un suivi par rapport à ce problème et, bien sûr, donner satisfaction 
aux habitants de la région.   

Je vous remercie.  

(Interruptions)  

Madam Speaker:  Allow the hon. Minister to reply!  

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): I will 

raise the matter with my colleague.  

BASSIN – FOOTBALL GROUND  

Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): My question 
will go to the hon. Minister of Local Government or to the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports.   

After  having  listened  to  my  hon.  friend  Jhuboo  with  regard  to  a  second  football 
ground at Le Morne with only 800 inhabitants, can I ask the hon. Minister concerned, if we 
can have a second playground for Bassin which has got a population of above 8000 people 
because their football ground is very far from where they live.  

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): I will definitely look into 

the matter and hope that the kids there will be able to play football as well.  

At 4.10 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 17 November 2015 

at 11.30 a.m.   

  

81  

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS  

SOCIAL MEDIA – COMPLAINTS OF ABUSE 

(No. B/819) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the social media, he will for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the 
number of –  

(a) 
(b) 

staff permanently dedicated to deal with offences in relation thereto, and  
complaints of abuse and antisocial behaviour originating therefrom dealt with 
since 2009 to date.  

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police, that the Cybercrime Unit of the 
Police Department is the Unit responsible to investigate into complaints of abuse on the social 
media, in breach of the Information and Communication Technologies Act 2001.  

The Unit is staffed with 16 Police Officers working under the direct supervision of an 
Assistant Commissioner of Police. In addition, there are seven Police Officers from the IT 
Unit of the Police Department who provide technical support to the Cybercrime Unit.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police, 
that since 2009 up to 04 November 2015, 548 complaints of abuse on social media have been 
reported to the Police and 86 persons have been arrested and released on bail. Out of the 548 
reported cases –  

• 
• 

in 2 cases two persons have been sentenced by Court to pay fines;  
in 2 other cases warning has been given to the accused by the Commissioner of 
Police upon the advice of the DPP;  
in 3 cases the advice of the DPP is being awaited;  
• 
•  311 cases are still under enquiry by the Police, and  
•  230  cases  have  been  classified  due  to  insufficient  evidence  or  the  accused  are 

unknown.  

As regards anti-social behaviour resulting from abuse on social media, no complaint 

has been recorded at the level of the Police Department.  

BRITISH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN & COMMONWEALTH 

AFFAIRS – DIEGO GARCIA – STATEMENT 

(No.  B/820)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

  

82  

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he is aware that the British Secretary of 
State  for  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Affairs,  Hon.  James  Duddridge,  stated  in  the  UK 
House  of  Commons,  on  04  September  2014,  that  there  is  no  lease  of  Diego  Garcia  to  the 
United States of America under which a rent is charged and that the use of the British Indian 
Ocean  Territory,  including  Diego  Garcia,  is  regulated  by  a  series  of  bilateral  agreements 
between the UK and the US covering a period of 50  years and, if so, indicate if he or the 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade  has  sought  any 
clarification from or expressed any reaction to the UK Government in relation thereto.  

Reply:  I  shall  reply  to  Parliamentary  Questions  B/820  and  B/821  together  as  they 

relate to the same subject.  

If  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  the  Chagos  Archipelago,  let  me  remind  her  that 

Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory”.  

Having said so, I wish to reassure the hon. Member that every opportunity is taken by 

my Government to assert the sovereign rights of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago.  

BRITISH  SECRETARY  OF  STATE  FOR  FOREIGN  AND 
COMMONWEALTH  AFFAIRS  –  UK  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS  – 
STATEMENT ON DIEGO GARCIA  

(No.  B/821)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the statement made by the 
British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Hon. James Duddridge, in 
the UK House of Commons to the effect that there is no lease of Diego Garcia to the United 
States of America under which a rent is charged and that the use of the British Indian Ocean 
Territory, including Diego Garcia, is regulated by a series of bilateral agreements between the  
UK and the US, he will state if he will seek from the UK Government information as to the –  

(a) 
(b) 

true nature of the said bilateral agreements, and  
sum of money being paid by the US to the UK, if any, in exchange of the use 
of Diego Garcia as a military and nuclear base.  

(Vide to PQ No. B/820)  

CRIMINAL CASES – SURETIES – REFUND  

(No. B/822) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  individuals  who  have 

  

83  

deposited  money  as  sureties  for  suspects  in  criminal  cases,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Master and Registrar, information as to the number thereof who have 
not been refunded same as at to date, in spite of the fact that the said criminal cases are over, 
indicating the reasons therefor in each case.  

(Withdrawn)  

MUNICIPAL  COUNCIL  OF  BEAU  BASSIN-ROSE  HILL  -  HOUSEHOLD 

BINS - DISTRIBUTION  

(No.  B/847)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the distribution of household 
bins, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin-  
Rose Hill, information as to -  

(a) the date of purchase thereof;   
(b) the total cost thereof, and   
(c) if the distribution exercise is now completed and, if not, why not.  
Reply: I am informed that a decision was taken on 04 March 2015 by the Municipal 
Council of Beau Bassin-Rose Hill to purchase a total of 30,000 plastic refuse bins with lid to 
be  provided  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town.  Subsequently  following  a  bidding  exercise,  a 
contract was signed on 05 May 2015 with the selected supplier and according to the terms of 
the  contract,  the  bins  were  delivered  within  a  delay  of  three  months  after  signature  of  the 
contract.  

As regards part  (b) of the question,  I am informed that the total cost  of the 30,000 

plastic refuse bins was Rs9,660,000 inclusive of VAT and other charges.  

With regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the distribution exercise 
could not be undertaken by the Council in view of the Municipal Elections held on 14 June 
2015  according  to  legal  advice  obtained.  However,  I  am  informed  that  the  distribution 
exercise  was  initiated  after  taking  office  by  the  present  Council  and  as  at  date  a  total  of 
10,093  refuse  bins  have  already  been  distributed  to  households  in  different  regions  of  the 
town.  

I am further informed that the distribution exercise is still ongoing and is expected to 

be completed by the end of December 2015.  

  

  

84  

BLUE ECONOMY - JOB CREATION  

(No.  B/848)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the Blue Economy, he will state if a Blue  Growth Study has 
been conducted to -  

(a) assess the impact thereof on growth and job creation potential and the dynamics 
improvements  and 

technology 

for  research  and  development 
innovations, and   

to  deliver 

(b) identify marine and maritime resources and the potential of each activity thereof.  
Reply: This Government is fully aware of the vast potential of our Maritime Zone of 
2.3 million square kilometres. In this connection, Government, in its Programme 2015-2019, 
commits itself to -   

“making the ocean economy an important industry to sustain economic  
diversification, job creation and wealth generation”.   

My  Ministry  was  set  up  only  in  December  2014.  However,  several  sectoral  studies 
and surveys have previously been carried out in the areas of ocean economy, inter-alia, by 
the Mauritius Research Council, the Board of Investment and the University of Mauritius.  

These studies show that our Maritime Zone abounds in marine resources and offers 

considerable opportunities for Mauritius to develop its ocean economy.   

Along this line, Government has pooled all ocean activities under one roof and further 
in  June  2015,  set  up  the  National  Ocean  Council,  which  is  the  main  driving  force  for 
identifying and realising ocean-related projects of this Ministry.   

Furthermore,  within  the  National  Ocean  Council,  seven  distinct  clusters  have  been 

created namely -  

(a) Business Facilitation;   
(b) Port & Shipping Development;   
(c) Regulatory Framework and Institution Building;   
(d) Fisheries & Aquaculture;   
(e) Seabed Exploration, DOWA, Minerals, Renewable Energy, Marine Research;   
(f) Capacity Building, Employment and Training Development, and   
(g) Environment Protection, Governance & Sustainable Development.   

  

85  

Within the next six months, each cluster will carry out a SWOT analysis ‘afin de faire 
un  constat  de  la  présente  situation’;  to  identify,  recommend  projects  and  action  plans  and 
oversee their implementation to promote national wealth and employment creation.  

 Side  by  side,  my  Ministry  is  exploring  possibilities  of  technical  assistance  and 

cooperation from friendly countries like India, UK, Germany, Australia and China.   

I am confident that with the current initiatives underway, considerable progress will 
be made in the next few years towards meeting the stated objectives of this Government as 
announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019 and the Economic Mission Statement.  

  

PROCUREMENT POLICY OFFICE - CONTRACTORS & CONSULTANTS  

- PAYMENT  

(No.  B/850)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
construction industry, he will state if Government will consider the introduction of a Building 
and  Construction  Industry  Security  of  Payment  Bill  with,  as  objective,  to  safeguard  the 
interests of the contractors, of the subcontractors and of the consultants thereof for the timely 
payment in respect of the goods and services provided.  

Reply: I am informed by the Procurement Policy Office that the Public Procurement 
Act 2006 already makes provision to safeguard the interests of contractors and consultants for 
the timely payment in respect of goods, works and services provided.     

I  am  also  informed  that  in  order  to  ensure  compliance  with  these  provisions,  the 
Standard  Bidding  Documents  for  goods,  works  and  services,  issued  by  the  Procurement 
Policy Office, incorporate payment terms in the respective General Conditions of Contract for 
each type of procurement.  

In  accordance  with  the  abovementioned  provisions,  procurement  entities  have  to 
effect  payment  for  the  supply  of  goods,  services  and  works  within  a  pre-determined 
timeframe, following fulfilment of the contractor’s obligations under the contract and subject 
to acceptance of the Public Body. In case payments are unduly delayed, the contractors and 
consultants  are  entitled  to  payment  of  interest  at  the  legal  rates  or  at  rates  defined  in  the 
contract.  

I  am  also  informed  that  some  contractors  have  indeed  made  representations  to  the 
Construction  Industry  Development  Board  to  the  effect  that  some  of  the  conditions  of 

  

86  

contract being imposed upon them for executing works or providing goods or services, appear 
to be onerous and unfair.  The CIDB is presently in the process of consultation with relevant 
stakeholders in order to  look into the possibility of reviewing these contractual provisions.  
Consequently, the issue will be taken up with the Procurement Policy Office and the State 
Law Office with a view to bringing appropriate amendments to the existing legislation and 
the Standard Bidding Documents, wherever required.  However, if the desirable amendments 
cannot  be  included  within  the  present  conditions  of  contract,  on  account  of  existing  legal 
constraints, then appropriate new legislation may be considered to regulate payment issues to 
safeguard the interests of contractors, subcontractors and consultants.  

GOODLANDS - FIRE STATION - CONSTRUCTION  

(No. B/851) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 
fire station at Goodlands, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Fire Rescue 
Services, information as to –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

if a plot of land has already been identified and vested with  
his Ministry therefor; 
if the design works thereof have been completed and, if  
not, why not, and   
the expected start and completion dates thereof.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  a  plot  of  land  of  the  extent  of  one  Arpent  near  the 
Goodlands football stadium with access onto Goodlands Mapou Road, had been vested in the 
Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service since year 2003 for the construction of a Fire Station.  

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Mauritius Fire and Rescue 
Service was projecting to construct three Fire Stations simultaneously namely at Rose Belle, 
Montagne  Blanche  and  Goodlands  and  the  Architect  Section  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  had  proposed  that  the  design  for  the  Rose  Belle  Fire 
Station be finalised and used as a typical one for the other two Fire Stations with a view to 
saving time in the preparation of preliminary design.  

I am informed that the design for Rose Belle Fire Station has been finalised and could 

be used for Goodlands and Montagne Blanche Fire Stations.  

The  construction  of  Goodlands  Fire  Station  is  scheduled  for  implementation  in 

financial year 2016/17 and is expected to be completed in financial year 2017/18.  

  

87  

A provision of Rs60 m. has been made for the project in the Public Sector Investment 

Programme.  

STATE LAND - LEASE  

(No. B/852)  Mr  R. Uteem (First  Member for  Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to State land, he will state the names of the beneficiaries of new leases therefor granted since 
January 2015 to date, indicating in each case, the - (a) terms and conditions of the lease, and  
(b) purpose of the lease.  

(Withdrawn)  

  

TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT OF DISABLED PERSONS BOARD - 

EMPLOYERS - NON-COMPLIANCE 

(No.  B/853)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
whether, in regard to the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board, she will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the number of -  

(a) disabled who are registered therewith, and   
(b) reported cases of employers for non-compliance with the statutory obligation for 
the employment of the disabled, since 2010 to date, indicating in each case, the 
actions taken in relation thereto, if any.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Training  and  Employment  of  the  Disabled  Persons 
Board  (TEDPB)  that  the  number  of  persons  with  disabilities  registered  with  the  Board  to 
date is 2,436.   

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to point out that prior to October 2012 the 
TEDPB did not keep records of employers having not less than 35 employees on an annual 
basis. Therefore, I am unfortunately not in a position to provide the House with the exact 
number  of  non-compliant  employers  for  the  period  2010  up  to  end  of  September  2012. 
However, out of 436 employers registered from October 2012 to date, 32 employers have 
been found to be fully compliant, 283 employers have been found to be fully non-compliant 
with the legal quota of the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Act 1996 while 
121 employers have been found to be partly compliant being given that they have recruited 
persons with disabilities, but without meeting the quota of 3%.   

  

88  

In an attempt to deal with the issue of non-compliance and following the amendment 
to the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Act in 2012, the Board has conducted 
several  sensitisation  campaigns  in  order  to  educate  and  sensitise  companies  and  parastatal 
bodies  on  the  significance  of  employing  disabled  persons  and  to  contribute  in  removing 
barriers or prejudices with regard to the employment of these persons.   

A sub-committee was set up in August 2013 to carry out the sensitisation meetings. It 
sensitizes  non-compliant  employers  twice  monthly.  A  moratorium  period  of  one  to  three 
months is usually given to them for compliance. To assess a list of disabled persons from the 
register  is  provided  to  them  in  their  recruitment  exercise.  158  companies  including  17 
parastatal  bodies  and  state-owned  companies  have  been  sensitised  as  at  date  by  this 
committee.    

Those  employers  who  persist  in  not  complying  with  the  legal  requirements  despite 
sensitization campaigns are referred to the Board which in turn refers the cases to a Hearing 
Committee which was set up in November 2012 following amendment of the Act in July 
2012.  Eighteen  private  companies  and  ten  parastatal  bodies  have  been  referred  to  the 
Hearing  Committee  as  at  date.  I  am  given  to  understand  that  during  the  hearing  process 
before  the  Hearing  Committee,  a  moratorium  is  given  to  encourage  the  non-compliant 
employers to comply with the law. The list of disabled persons from the register is again 
provided to them to help them in their recruitment exercise.    

During the period 2013 to date, 276 persons with disabilities have been recruited by 
private  companies  and  23  have  been  recruited  by  parastatal  bodies  and  state-owned 
companies.  In 2015 the TEDPB has also channelled four young graduates to be considered 
by the FSC under the young graduate scheme.    

The TEDPB in collaboration with the Ministry of Social Security will soon introduce 
a Skill Development Scheme for persons with disabilities seeking employment with a view 
to providing them with on-the-job training for a period of six months in private companies 
and parastatal bodies so as to enable them to gain work exposure and thereby facilitating 
their integration in the world of employment.  This is to encourage on one hand employers 
to learn how to promote an appropriate working environment for persons with disabilities 
and on the other hand to provide these employees with adequate experience.    

 SAHRAWI ARAB DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC - DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS 

(No.  B/854)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

  

89  

whether,  in  regard  to  the  Sahrawi  Arab  Democratic  Republic,  he  will  state  if  consideration 
will be given to re-establishing diplomatic relationships therewith and, if not, why not.  

Reply:  Mauritius  recognised  the  Sahrawi  Arab  Democratic  Republic  as  a  sovereign 
State on 01 July 1982 as one of the first decisions taken by the first Government of the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  Mauritius  established  diplomatic  relations  with 
the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic in 1983 and two Ambassadors from the Sahrawi Arab 
Democratic Republic have been accredited to Mauritius in October 2006 and January  2009 
respectively. 

On  08  January  2014,  a  Communiqué  was  issued  by  the  office  of  the  former  Prime 
Minister,  stating  that  Mauritius  has  decided  to  withdraw  recognition  of  the  Sahrawi  Arab 
Democratic  Republic  as  a  State.  Surprisingly  there  is  no  file  either  at  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office or at my Ministry  on the process of de-recognition of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic 
Republic. Nor is there any record to indicate that the matter may have been raised in Cabinet. 
It is only by way of a Press Communiqué that the alleged decision was recorded. I am tabling 
a photocopy of this press Communiqué. 

No  official  reason  was  given  for  the  decision  of  withdrawal  of  recognition  of  the 
Sahrawi  Arab  Democratic  Republic  in  the  said  communiqué.  However,  in  a  reply  given  to 
Parliamentary Question B/133 in April 2014, on the withdrawal of recognition of the Sahrawi 
Arab Democratic Republic, the former Minister of Foreign Affairs stated that the decision to 
withdraw recognition of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic as a State was motivated by 
the  belief  that  this  recognition  does  not  help  in  the  settlement  of  the  issue  of  the  self-
determination  of  the  Sahrawi  people.    The  former  Government  was  of  the  opinion  that  the 
decision of recognising a territory as a State ahead of the conclusion of a process under the 
aegis of the United Nations was not fully justified and therefore was deemed premature, and 
this,  surprisingly,  after  more  than  30  years  of  recognition  of  the  Sahrawi  Arab  Democratic 
Republic as a State by Mauritius. 

Since its coming into office, this Government has been studying the situation and the 
House may be pleased to note that Government has decided to consider anew the recognition 
of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. An informed decision will be taken with regard to 
our stand on this issue.  

  

  

90  

FIRE  AND  RESCUE  SERVICES  -  WATER  TANKERS/LORRIES  - 

PURCHASE  

(No.  B/855)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  purchase  of  water 
tankers/lorries by the Fire and Rescue Services, he will state if the inquiry to be initiated at 
his request has been carried out following allegations of malversation in the exercise therefor, 
and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof and the actions taken in relation thereto.   

Reply: I am informed that the bid for the five water tenders was carried out following 
a  procurement  exercise  carried  out  by  the  Central  Procurement  Board  in  2010  and  that  no 
inquiry was warranted.  

FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS – LOANS - MORATORIUM  

(No. B/856) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche &  GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the financial 
institutions,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  the 
number of individuals who are facing difficulties to effect the repayment of the loans/credits/ 
mortgages contracted therewith and who have requested a rescheduling thereof, since 2008 to 
date, indicating if, in the light thereof, he will consider introducing proposed amendments to 
the existing legislation in relation thereto to provide for the banks to allow a moratorium to 
those who are genuinely in need thereof.   

(Vide reply to P.Q. No. B/825) 

  

POINTE AUX SABLES – BUS SERVICE  

(No. B/858) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  Pointe  aux 
Sables and to the vicinity thereof, he will state if consideration is being given for a new bus 
route for the linking thereof with the main towns, including Rose Hill and Quatre Bornes.   

Reply: I am informed that at present a bus route, Number 51 exists between Pointe 
aux Sables and Port Louis and is served by the Triolet Bus Service Ltd. However, there is no 
direct bus service between Pointe aux Sables and the towns of Rose-Hill and Quatre-Bornes. 
The passengers from Pointe aux Sables commuting to Rose-Hill and Quatre-Bornes have to 

  

91  

travel in two legs from Pointe aux Sables to GRNW and from GRNW to Rose-Hill or Quatre-
Bornes.   

 I am further informed that on 22 July 2009, the Rose-Hill Transport Ltd (now RHT 
Bus Service Ltd) applied for a road service licence to operate buses along a new bus route 
from Rose-Hill (Place Cardinal Margéot) to Pointe aux Sables via Beau-Bassin, Coromondel, 
Camp Benoit, La Tour Koenig and Pointe aux Sables (Cité Débarcadère) and back.  

Moreover,  on  24  March  2010,  the  Triolet  Bus  Service  Ltd  also  applied  for  a  road 
service  licence  to  operate  buses  along  the  same  itinerary  applied  for  by  the  Rose-Hill 
Transport Ltd as mentioned above; and from Pointe aux Sables to Ebène Cybercity via Cité 
Débarcadère, La Tour Koenig, Camp Benoit, Coromondel, Rose-Hill (Place Margéot), Rose-
Hill Police Station, Sir Gaëtan Duval Ecole Hotelière, Ebène and back.  

However,  on  10  June  2011,  both  companies  withdrew  their  applications.  On  27 
February  2015,  the  RHT  Bus  Service  Ltd  applied  for  an  extension  of  route  174B 
(Coromandel  Industrial  Zone  -  Ebène  Cybercity  via  Ebène  Etoile,  Beau  Bassin,  Rose-Hill 
(Place Margéot and back) up to Pointe aux Sables.  

Moreover, on 10 April 2015, the Triolet Bus Service Ltd also applied for a road service 

licence to operate buses -  

From  Pointe  aux  Sables  Terminus  to  Rose-Hill    (Place  Margéot)  via  Cité 

(i) 
Débarcadère, La Tour Koenig, Camp Benoit, Coromandel, Beau Bassin and back, and  

(ii)  From Pointe aux Sables Terminus to Réduit University of Mauritius via Cité 
Débarcadère, La Tour Koenig, Camp Benoit, Coromandel, Beau Bassin, Rose-Hill 
(Place  Cardinal  Margéot),  Rose  Hill  Police  Station,  Sir  Gaëtan  Duval  (Ecole 
Hotelière), Ebène-Cybercity and back.  

The  creation  of  a  new  route  between  Pointe  aux  Sables  and  Rose  Hill  is  justified. 
However, NTA is looking into all implications, including related infrastructure and amenities 
before taking a decision to approve the applications for the new bus routes.  

As  regards  the  bus  service  between  Quatre  Bornes  and  Pointe  aux  Sables,  I  am 
informed  that  there  is  no  immediate  need  for  this  service  at  this  stage  as  the  bulk  of 
passengers for Pointe aux Sables commute mainly towards Rose Hill.  However, this service 
may be considered at a later stage after an assessment of the situation.  

  

92  

GRANDE RIVIÈRE – DECONGESTION & BUS SHELTER  

(No. B/859) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Decongestion Programme for the region of Grande Rivière, Port Louis, he will state –  

(a) where matters stand as to the proposed refurbishment of the Old Bridge at Grand 

River North West, and   

(b) if consideration will be given for the provision of an appropriate bus shelter for the 

Grande Rivière bus stop.  

 Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  my  Ministry  proposes  to  undertake  a  major  Road 
Decongestion Programme for the whole island for an estimated cost of Rs15.5 billion as from 
July 2016.  This programme includes phases 2 and 3 of the Ring Road as well as the A1-M1 
road which will link Coromandel to Sorèze.   The successful implementation of the A1-M1 
road and its impact on decongestion in the region of Pointe aux Sables and GRNW will surely 
help us in deciding on the need to refurbish the old Bridge at GRNW.  

In  fact,  the  RDA  has  already  conducted  a  preliminary  study  regarding  the 
refurbishment  project.    However,  the  project  is  not  included  in  the  current  budget  of  this 
financial year.  

 As regards the provision of a bus shelter for the bus stop, I have asked the RDA to 

do the needful.  

GRNW – PAILLES ROAD - FOOTPATH  

(No. B/860) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Pailles 
Road, in Grand River North West, he will state if consideration will be given for repair works 
to be carried out along same on the existing footpath and the provision of a new footpath after 
the Grand River North West Government School.  

Reply: I am informed by the RDA that a site visit was carried out along the Pailles 
Road (B 77) in GRNW on 06 October 2015.  Effectively, defects have been noted along the 
existing footpath of 150m in the vicinity of the GRNW Government School.  Moreover, the 
drains  under  the  footpath  would  need  to  be  cleaned  and  rehabilitated.    The  RDA  will 
undertake a detailed survey shortly to determine the scope of works to be carried out.  

  

93  

We are aware of the need to have a new footpath after the Grand River North West 
Government School for the safety of the inhabitants and especially the children attending the 
Government  School.    However,  I  am  informed  by  the  RDA  that,  at  several  locations,  no 
adequate road reserve is available for the provision of a continuous footpath due to build up 
areas and private land.  Further investigation would be required to determine the extent of 
land to be acquired.  

Accordingly, funding will be secured in the next Financial Year for the works and the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands will be requested to initiate action for acquisition procedures 
if necessary.  

SUBRAMANIEN BHARATI EYES HOSPITAL - AVASTIN TREATMENT  
(No.  B/861)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Avastin treatment, 
he  will  state  the  number  of  patients  who  have  permanently  lost  their  eyesight  following 
treatment therewith at the Subramanien Bharati Eyes Hospital in the recent past, indicating in 
each case, the name of the doctor who had administered same thereto.  

(Withdrawn)  

SOUTH-EAST HIGHWAY PROJECT - CONTRACT  

(No.  B/862)  Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
South-East Highway Project, he will state – (a) the name of the contractor therefor;   

(b) the initial and final costs thereof, and   
(c) if consideration will be given for the development of an alternate plan to connect 
the eastern part to the southern part of the island to ease out the traffic problems 
encountered by the road users therefor.  

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the RDA that, on 15 
January 2004, the Chinese firm Beijing Chang Cheng Construction Corporation was awarded 
the contract for the South Eastern Highway Project.    

As regards part (b) the contract was for an initial sum of Rs655,302,286.62.  The 
project was completed on 27 August 2007 at a reduced cost of Rs499,575,276.22.  I have to 
inform the House that there was a reduction in the cost due to the cancellation of part of the 
project following a Government decision in October 2005 for environmental reasons.  

94  

  
 In  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  alternative  plan 
available is the upgrading of the existing coastal road B28 from Mahebourg to Bel Air over a 
length of 31km at the cost of Rs1.3 billion.  The detailed engineering designs and the bidding 
documents  have  already  been  prepared  by  LuxConsult  Ltd.  which  was  appointed  as 
Consultant on 12 January 2010 following a Request for Proposal which was launched on 20 
July 2009.  

The project is not budgeted for the current year, but the RDA is ready to implement 

it once appropriate funds have been secured.  

MINISTRY OF YOUTH & SPORTS - NPS BUILDING - RENT  

(No.  B/863)  Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the office space rented by his 
Ministry at the NPS Building, at Rose Hill, he will state the –  

(a) monthly rental fee thereof;  
(b) purposes therefor, and   
(c) activities being carried out thereat.  

 
                                                                 (Withdrawn) 
 

EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM - BENCHMARKING 

(No.  B/864)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether, in regard to the educational system in Mauritius, she will state the – 

(a) benchmarking used to compare the attainment in the Mauritian schools with that in 

the schools of comparable countries;  

(b) steps taken to ensure that - 

(i) the standard thereof remains internationally competitive, and 
(ii) parenting and life skills are reflected in the national curriculum from primary to 

secondary school levels, and  

(c) assessment made of the lack of teachers and of other skills therefor. 
Reply: Mauritius has regularly been benchmarking itself against other middle-income 
countries so as to determine the efficacy of its educational system.  In this context, Mauritius 
has  participated,  over  the  years,  in  a  number  of  international  and  regional  surveys  in  the 
primary  and  secondary  sub-sectors  of  education,  namely  the  Programme  for  International 

  

95  

Student  Assessment  (PISA),  the  Southern  and  Eastern  Africa  Consortium  for  Monitoring 
Educational  Quality  (SACMEQ)  surveys  and  the  Programme  D’Analyse  de  Systèmes 
Educatifs de la CONFEMEN (PASEC).   

The  Programme  for  International  Student  Assessment  (PISA),  spearheaded  by  the 
OECD,  was  administered  among  our  secondary  schools  in  2009.    This  survey  aims  at 
presenting an overview of the performance on 15-year old students in Reading, Mathematics 
and Science  and it has revealed that Mauritius did not compare too favourably with OECD 
average in Reading, Mathematical and Scientific literacy.   

The mean score of Mauritius in Reading, which was the main domain of assessment, 
was 407 compared to OECD average of 493.  PISA found that there was a high proportion of 
poor readers with low proficiency in reading literacy.  

In the minor domain of mathematical literacy, the mean score point for Mauritius was 
420  which  was  below  the  OECD  average  of  496.    Students  have,  in  fact,  demonstrated 
weaknesses  in  reasoning  and  application  of  knowledge.    No  statistically  significant  gender 
difference was noted though.   

As far as scientific literacy is concerned, again the mean score of Mauritius was 417 
and below OECD average of 501.  Half of the sample surveyed demonstrated competencies 
that enable them to participate actively in real life situations related to science and technology.  
A  statistically  significant  difference  was  noted  in  favour  of  girls  in  this  minor  domain  of 
assessment.    

Mauritius  also  participates  in  the  surveys  conducted  by  SACMEQ,  which  aim  at 
gathering  information  on  the  general  conditions  of  schooling,  the  reading  and  mathematics 
achievement levels of Grade 6 learners and their teachers, and their knowledge of HIV and 
AIDS.   

The findings of the last published SACMEQ Report of 2007 has shown that Mauritius 
has scored well in the provision of basic teaching and learning materials.  However, the survey 
also showed that a percentage of pupils leave the primary cycle without having acquired basic 
literacy and numeracy.   

In addition, Mauritius has in the past been closely associated with PASEC which is an 
international  evaluation  methodology  based  on  the  comparison  of  education  system’s 
performance in Francophone countries. Our last participation in PASEC was in 2008 where it 

  

96  

was revealed that on the African level, Mauritius ranked among the best in terms of literacy 
and numeracy skills. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  outcome  of  the  benchmarking  exercises,  the  need  has 
been  felt  to  take  action  with  a  view  to  remaining  internationally  competitive  and  also 
addressing the under performance levels which require a multi-pronged approach in terms of 
provision  of  basic  education,  acquisition  of  skills,  teaching  and  learning  and  remedial 
pedagogies, capacity building programmes for teachers and development of high order skills.  
This  is  addressed  in  the  context  of  the  Educational  Reform  Agenda,  particularly  under  the 
Nine Year Schooling.   

As regards the life skills and parental skills, the new NCF deals with a whole set of 
skills  required  by  the  learner  especially  in  the  context  of  education  for  sustainable 
development in its Nine Year Curriculum.  The NCF 2015 thus recognizes and emphasizes the 
importance  of  imparting  life  skills  to  our  young  people,  that  is,  imparting  the  abilities  for 
adaptive and positive behaviour that enable individuals to deal effectively with the demand 
and  challenges  of  everyday  life.  These  skills  will  help  generate  and  reinforce  21st  century 
competencies and consolidate personal and social skills of all learners.   

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  highlight  that  an  annual  survey  is 
carried out with a view to planning for staffing requirements for the following year.  Shortages 
are  generally  met  through  redeployment  of  redundant  teachers  and  the  enlistment  of  the 
services of Supply Teachers or resource persons in specialised areas, such as Music, The Arts, 
Physical Education among others.  In new areas such as Tourism and Hospitality and Marine 
Science, which are new subjects, we have recourse to additional educators. 

It is worth highlighting that one of the thrust areas under the Nine Year Schooling is 
continuous professional development and capacity building for our staff.  In this connection, 
the  conduct  of  relevant  training  and  refresher  programmes  by  the  MIE  will  be  a  regular 
feature.  Partnerships between MIE and international institutions in Continuous Professional 
Programmes will be favoured. 

  

COMMISSION FOR CONCILIATION & MEDIATION – CHAIRPERSON - 

APPOINTMENT  

(No.  B/865)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 

  

97  

regard to the appointment of Mr I. S. as Chairperson of the Commission for Conciliation and 
Mediation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commission, information as 
to –  

(a) the date of appointment thereof;   
(b) the terms and conditions of contract thereof, and   
(c) who was acting as Chairperson prior to his appointment and since when.  

(Withdrawn)  

NTA - SEMI-LOW FLOOR BUSES - PROCUREMENT  

(No.  B/866)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
procurement of 100 semi-low floor buses, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the National Transport Corporation, information as to –  

(a) who prepared the specifications therefor;   
(b) the date the bid therefor was launched and the dates on which bids were received, 

and   

(c) if the contract has been awarded and, if so, indicate - 

the name of the successful bidder therefor;  

(i) 
(ii)  the contract value thereof, and   
(iii) if any representation has been received following the award of the bid and, 

if so, indicate by whom and where matters stand.  

Reply: I am informed by the National Transport Corporation as follows -  

(i)  the specifications for the purchase of one hundred (100) fully built semi 
low  floor  buses  were  prepared  by  a  technical  team  consisting  of  the 
Director, Mechanical Engineering  of the Ministry, and the Acting Chief 
Engineer, National Transport Corporation, and   

(ii)  The  bidding  document  was  duly  vetted  by  the  Central  Procurement 

Board prior to issue.  

As regards part (b) of the question, the National Transport Corporation invited bids 
on  03  July  2015  through  an  open  international  bidding  exercise  and  the  closing  date  for 
submission of bids was Thursday 20 August 2015.  

The tender notice for the acquisition of one hundred (100) fully built semi low floor 
buses was published in the local newspapers and also posted on the Government Procurement 
website on 03 July 2015. Nine (09) bids were received at the CPB.  

  

98  

As regards part (c) of the question, the bids have been evaluated by a technical team at 
the  Central  Procurement  Board  and  the  NTC  was  informed  on  06  October  2015  that  the 
lowest evaluated and substantially responsive bidder is ABC Coach Works Ltd.   

In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act  2006,  the 

notification of award was sent to both the successful and unsuccessful bidders.  

One challenge was received from Baoding Changan Bus Manufacturing Co. Ltd.  
within the prescribed delay of seven days. The challenge was examined and it was noted that 
it  was  not  submitted  on  the  prescribed  form  and  the  grounds  for  challenges  were  not 
specified. Moreover, the bidder failed to submit the Bid Security in the sum of Rs2.4 m. as 
required in the bidding document. The aggrieved bidder was informed accordingly.  

I am also informed that according to the Bid Document, Bidders were requested to 
quote  prices,  Delivery  Duty  paid,  inclusive  of  all  applicable  duties,  charges  and  VAT  in 
Mauritian  Rupees.  Baoding  Changan  Bus  Manufacturing  Co.  Ltd.  did  not  submit  his 
quotation in Mauritian Rupees. Instead it quoted only the CIF in US Dollars. Thus, at the very 
outset of the exercise, the Company was found to be non-compliant.  

Consequently,  a  Letter  of  Award  was  issued  to  the  successful  bidder,  ABC  Coach 
Works Ltd on Tuesday 20 October 2015, for the acquisition of 100 semi low-floor buses by 
the  NTC  for  the  sum  of  Rs406,266,240  inclusive  of  VAT,  maintenance  charges  and  a 
provisional sum of Rs25 m.   

  

PUBLIC  HOSPITALS,  DISPENSARIES  &  MEDICLINICS  –  NATIONAL 

IDENTITY CARD  

(No. B/867) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the public hospitals, 
dispensaries and mediclinics, he will state if consideration is being given for the mandatory 
requirement  for  the  patients  attending  thereto  to  present  their  respective  National  Identity 
Card  before  health  services  are  dispensed  thereto,  failing  which,  the  said  services  will  be 
denied thereto and, if so, indicate the –  

(a) rationale therefor, and   
(b) expected date of coming into effect thereof.   

(Withdrawn)  

 
 

  
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – MEDICAL HEALTH  

99  

OFFICERS - CONTRACT  

(No. B/868) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to employment of doctors 
on  a  contractual  basis  as  Medical  Health  Officers,  Senior  Medical  Health  Officers, 
Specialists, Senior Specialists and Advisers respectively, he will state the number thereof who 
are presently in post and are above 65 years of age in each category.  

(Withdrawn)  

CPE EXAMINATION 2015 - COMPLAINTS 

(No.  B/869)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Certificate of Primary Education Examinations 2015, she 
will  state  the  number  of  complaints  received  in  relation  thereto  concerning  ambiguous 
questions set in the papers, indicating the actions being taken to ensure that the students who 
sat therefor are not unfairly or unjustly penalised as a result thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate that, as at to date, seven 
complaints emanating from parents, one socio-cultural association and a group of educators 
have been received in respect of the English, Science, Arabic, Urdu and Tamil Papers for the 
Certificate of Primary Education Examinations 2015. 

However, according to the MES, the papers carried no error. The complaints received 
pertained firstly to the use of certain specific words in the English, Arabic, Tamil and Urdu 
Papers and secondly on the possibility of having an alternative answer to one Multiple Choice 
Question in the Science Paper.  

I  wish  also  to  highlight  that  as  part  of  the  process  of  marking  of  CPE  Examination 
scripts, the MES annually  conducts a rigorous and extensive sampling exercise prior to the 
marking  exercise  with  a  view  to  assessing  how  candidates  have  responded  to  the  different 
questions.  It is only after this sampling exercise has been completed that the marking scheme 
is finalised. Representations and comments received are also taken into  account during this 
exercise. 

Following  the  above  exercise,  I  am  informed  by  the  MES  that  for  the  English 
Examination  Paper,  the  composition  topic  has  been  understood  by  the  great  majority  of 
candidates.  Regarding  the  two  questions  in  the  Science  Paper,  correct  answer  has  been 

  

100  

obtained by the majority of candidates and no particular problem has been reported.  As for 
the Arabic Paper, the Question Paper was based on a prototype and the level of the paper was 
comparable to other Asian Languages. The same applies for the Tamil Paper where all words 
used were within the level of the 6th Standard students. The MES has confirmed that there was 
no error, no ambiguity and no question set out in the syllabus for any subject.  

I wish to highlight that the complainants have made requests to the MES to exercise 
some flexibility during  marking of these Papers owing to the problems raised such that the 
candidates are not penalised.  

MES will stick to the normal procedure with regard to sampling and marking for all 

subjects examined. 

NINE YEAR SCHOOLING REFORM PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/870)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Nine Year Schooling, she will state if prior consultations 
were  held  with  the  unions  in  the  private  and  public  school  sectors  in  relation  to  the 
implementation thereof, and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  The reply is in the affirmative.  

Further  to  the  endorsement  of  the  draft  Concept  Paper  on  the  Nine-Year  basic 
continuous schooling (NYS) by Cabinet in May 2015, my Ministry engaged in consultations 
with a wide cross-section of stakeholders of the Education sector on the policy orientations of 
the NYS Reform Project and its eventual implementation. This included Unions of Primary 
and Secondary sub-sectors (public and private), the Bureau Education Catholique (BEC), the 
PTAs, Educators (Std IV), the Federation of Managers, Rodrigues Regional Assembly (RRA) 
and its Education Commission, and even my colleagues Members of Parliament and the Press; 
so that information on the NYS Project could be diffused to the public at large. 

I must emphasise that I personally made it a point to chair the Consultative sessions with 
them  and  we  received  a  number  of  live  suggestions  and  comments  that  are  being  taken  on 
board.  

It has been gathered that stakeholders are generally agreeable on the policy guidelines of 

the NYS Project and that they really want it to see the light of the day.  

  

101  

In  fact,  I  would  like  to  add  that  a  striking  feature  of  the  outcome  of  the  consultative 
process is the encouragement which I have received to pursue this Reform Project which is 
above all in the interest of the child – it is a golden opportunity to seize in the wake of general 
acceptability on the policy guidelines.  

This major Reform Project has the blessings of this Government which will provide the 

necessary resources and support to ensure its successful implementation.  

The House may wish also to note that my Ministry is shortly coming up with a detailed 
Communication  Strategy  with  a  view  to  further  sensitising  the  public  in  general  on  the 
implementation modalities of the NYS Reform Project.  

 

VACOAS POPULAR MULTIPURPOSE COOPERATIVE SOCIETY – 

BOARD MEMBERS 

(No.  B/871)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether, in regard to the Vacoas 
Popular Multipurpose Cooperative Society, he will state where matters stand as to the holding 
of an Annual General Meeting or a Special General Meeting thereof to elect nine members to 
sit on the Board thereof to replace the caretaker Board which is holding office since January 
this year, following the press conference held jointly by representatives thereof and his good 
self.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  a  “Caretaker  Board”  was  appointed  by  the  Registrar  of 
Cooperative  Societies  on  12  January  2015.    The  Board  had  convened  an  AGM  (Annual 
General Meeting) and a SGM (Special General Meeting) on 11 July 2015 to decide on the 
liquidation of the society. The AGM did not agree to the proposal.   

During the same AGM, member proposed the election of 9 (nine) Directors though the 
item was not on the Agenda.  The advice of the SLO (State Law Office) was sought on the 
election of the 9 (nine) Directors, being given that a “Caretaker Board” was already appointed 
by the Registrar.  The SLO has advised that the election was illegal.   

Another SGM was held on 24 October 2015 wherein it was decided that the injunction 
entered in the Supreme Court by members of the society would be withdrawn.  However, as 
at today, seven (7) members have maintained their injunction in the Supreme Court.  

I  have  been  advised  by  the  SLO  that  the  Caretaker  Board  cannot  initiate  any  action 

regarding the assets of the society in view of the injunction in the Supreme Court.  

  

  

102  

INTERNATIONAL PARALYMPICS COMMITTEE GRAND PRIX 2015 – 

Ms N. A.  – GOLD MEDAL  

(No.  B/872)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Ms N. A. who won a gold medal 
in the 1500 m on Wheelchair Competition at the International Paralympics Committee Grand 
Prix, in Italy, in June 2015, he will state if his Ministry has offered/will offer thereto -  

(a) any  monetary  rewards  as a result thereof, as per established practice in respect of  
Mauritian gold medalists at similar high level competitions and, if not, why not and   
(b) a high level sport scholarship, in view of her high performance level and, if not, why 

not.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  High  Level  Sports  Unit  of  my  Ministry  that  it  is  the 
established practice for the National Sports Federations to submit a request along with the 
official technical result recorded by any medallist.  

As at date no request has been received at the level of the High Level Sports unit from 
the Physically Handicapped Persons Sports Federation in respect of the performance of Ms N. 
A. in spite of the Federation being requested to do so since 22 September 2015.  

Once all the relevant information is obtained she will be rewarded accordingly.    
As regards part (b) of the question, it is to be noted that handisport athletes started to 
benefit from high level scholarships as from January this year.  These athletes were listed on 
the  basis  on  their  performances.    The  High  Level  Sports  Unit  will  only  decide  on  the 
eligibility of Ms N. A. for a High Level Sports Scholarship once the minima of Handisports 
are finalised.   

In  fact,  the  unit  is  presently  working  in  collaboration  with  the  four  Handisports 
Federations to determine the minima which is indeed a very complex exercise in view of the 
specificities of Handisports.  

CHAMAREL ROAD – REPAIRS & CAR RALLIES  

(No.  B/873)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Chamarel Road, at the level of Case Noyale to that of Chamarel, he will state if his Ministry 
is in presence of any complaint regarding the –   

(a) bad state thereof and if so, indicate if a study will be carried out to assess the state 

thereof and take remedial actions in relation thereto, and  

103  

  
(b) holding of car rallies along same putting at risk the security of other users thereof 
and, if so, indicate the remedial measures that will be taken in relation thereto, if 
any.  

Reply: I am informed that, on 01 September 2015, the Road Development Authority 
received a complaint from the District Council of Black River regarding the bad state of the 
Baie du Cap – Chamarel – Case Noyale Road (B104) as follows -   

(i)  presence  of  cracks  at  the  dangerous  bends  and  in  the  vicinity  of  traffic  lights 

along the B104, and  

  

(ii)  collapse of the road edge of the B104 near Rhumerie de Chamarel.  

 Consequently, the RDA carried out a survey in mid-September 2015 and dangerous 
bends  between  the  traffic  signals  over  a  stretch  of  approximately  365m  were  identified  as 
being severely damaged due to a problem of edge failure resulting from poor drainage and the 
specific topography of the region as an immediate remedial measure, the road was converted 
into a single-lane traffic with the use of traffic lights for the safety of road users and to avoid 
further damages to the road structure.    

 I  am  further  informed  that  the  RDA  is  envisaging  to  restore  the  two  way  traffic 
along  the  section  of  the  road  and  the  works  would  involve  specialized  techniques  such  as 
micropiling, reinforced retaining wall and geonailing.  The RDA is proposing to invite bids 
on a “design and build” basis for the damaged road section in the next financial year. The 
estimated cost of the project is Rs50 m.  

 Concerning  the  collapse  of  the  road  edge  of  B104  Road  near  Rhumerie  de 
Chamarel, a survey was carried out by the RDA on 15 September 2015 which revealed that 
the damage to the road edge is being caused by upheaval of the road structure by tree roots.   
The RDA is proposing to carry out repair works shortly.   

 As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Traffic Management and 
Road Safety Unit that no complaint has been officially received recently in respect of rallies 
along the Chamarel Case Noyale Road.  However, I have to inform the House that the whole 
issue of car rallies will be looked into by my Ministry in consultation with all stakeholders, 
that is, the TMRSU, the Police Department and Organisers of Rallies.  The ideal solution will 
be to come up with a Racing Course.    

  

104  

YVES CANTIN COMMUNITY HOSPITAL - PROJECTS EARMARKED  
(No. B/874) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Yves  Cantin  Community 
Hospital, he will state –  

(a) if it is in fact a dispensary, a mediclinic or  a hospital, and  
(b) the projects earmarked for implementation thereat, if any.  

(Withdrawn)  

  
ALFRED GELLE STREET, CITÉ MARTIAL - SEWERAGE CONNECTION  
(No.  B/875)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities 
whether, in regard to the proposed sewerage connection of house numbers 20 to 26, at the 
Alfred Gellé Street, in Cité Martial, Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand, 
indicating the expected start and completion dates thereof.  

Reply: I wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply to PQ B/251.  According to the 
Wastewater  Management  Authority,  these  houses  form  part  of  the  rehabilitation  of  CHA 
estates Phase IV project which covers six CHA estates, including Cité Martial.  

The  feasibility  study  and  detailed  design  have  been  completed  and  funding  for  the 

works have been provided in the 2017/2018 budget.  

However, recurrent sanitation problems have been reported at the houses referred to in 
the Question.  The Wastewater Management Authority proposes to carry out urgent works 
within this financial year to rehabilitate the sewer network along that street.  

BASSIN BLANC RESERVOIR - TOURISTIC ATTRACTION  

(No. A/22) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the  
Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Bassin  Blanc 
Reservoir, he will state if consideration will be given for the –  

(a) transformation thereof into a touristic attraction;  
(b) creation of a hiking trail thereat, and  
(c) construction  of  food  outlets  to  cater  for  the  tourists/visitors  attending 
thereat and as a means of providing employment to the local inhabitants.  

  

105  

Reply:  In  March  2007,  Government  has  compulsorily  acquired  under  the  Land 
Acquisition Act a portion of land at Bassin Blanc of an extent of 149 Ha 600 m2 from Heirs 
of Abdool Rajack Goburdhun.  

 The main purpose of acquiring the land at Bassin Blanc was to incorporate this area 
to the Black River Gorges National Park and to protect its biodiversity as the area is one of 
the most important remaining area for native Mauritian birds. The land is a declared mountain 
reserve under the Forest and Reserves Act.  

  
 The  acquisition  was  made  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  following 
assessment made by the Director, Valuation and Real Estate Consultancy Services. An offer 
of  compensation  as  determined  by  the  Valuation  Department  was  accordingly  made  to  the 
Heirs  Abdool  Rajack  Goburdhun  who  subsequently  made  counter  claims  per  arpent  for 
biodiversity over and above their claim for the land acquired. The case is at present before the 
Board of Assessment.   
                      As the legal issue has not been settled  yet, the National Parks and Conservation 
Service has no project for Bassin Blanc at this stage.  

  

CHAMOUNY - RIVER RAFIA - FLOOD 

(No. A/23) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  River  Rafia  in  the 
region of Chamouny and to the damages caused to a certain number of houses and a poultry 
during the last floods in the vicinity thereof, he will state -  

(a) if a survey has been carried out in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the findings 

thereof, and  

(b) remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto, if any, indicating the – 

(i) cost implications thereof, and  
(ii) time frame set for the implementation thereof. 

Reply: The Forestry Service of my Ministry which is responsible for the management 
of rivers has not received any complaint with regard to damages due to flood caused by River 
Rafia in the region of Chamouny. Consequently, no survey has been carried out to assess the 
extent of damages. 

However, the Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute (FAREI) which 
operates under the aegis of my Ministry carried out an island wide survey on damages caused 

  

106  

by the torrential rainfall of 08 and 09 March 2015 to the crop and livestock sector.  No major 
damages were noted at Chamouny except for a poultry farm which was severely affected. It 
was established that flood water coming from the upper neighbourhood sugarcane fields had 
submerged the field premises and the water had reached a level of more than one meter high 
inside the two poultry sheds. All the openings and the poultry equipment were damaged. 9000 
broilers of about 40 days’ old were drowned. 

Following  the  flood,  the  farmer  has  taken  precautionary  measures  by  rehabilitating 
existing drains and digging new canals in order to divert flooding water towards the river. The 
farmer has also constructed a concrete wall on his farm as a barrier against flood. 

The  farmer  applied  to  my  Ministry  for  a  grant  of  Rs100,000  to  purchase  new  farm 
equipment. This grant has been approved by the Food Security  Fund and will be disbursed 
shortly. 

 
RIVIERE DES ANGUILLES – MARKET – STALLS ALLOCATION  

(No.  A/24)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the new market at Rivière des 
Anguilles, he will table the names and respective address of the individuals to whom the stalls 
found thereat have been allocated, indicating the respective stall number and the fees payable 
therefor in each case.  

Reply: The District Council of Savanne which has been consulted, has provided the 

information requested for.  

I  am  arranging  for  the  information  to  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National 

Assembly.  
  

  

