No. 25 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 05 MAY 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID  

ANNOUNCEMENTS  

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

E.S.E. (2013) OF 2015 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Clerk Assistant 

 

            Hansard Editor 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 
 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 25 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 05 May 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

                                                            PAPERS LAID  
 

          The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 
 

A.  Prime Minister’s Office  
 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Bill (No. X of 2015). In Original 

B.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 
 

(a)  The City Council of Port Louis (Abercrombie Market) (Amendment) 

Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 68 of 2015). 

(b)  The  Dr.  Oomar  Farook  Cassam  Uteem  Mini  Synthetic  Football 

 

 

(c) 

Ground Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 69 of 2015). 
The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Curepipe 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 70 of 2015). 
C.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection   

(Advertisement) 

 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 8) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice 
No. 67 of 2015). 

 

 

8 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE – CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that hon. Alan Ganoo 
submitted  his  resignation  as  Chairperson  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  on  24  April 
2015, and I have accepted his resignation.  Consequently, in accordance with Standing Order 
69(2)  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly,  I  have  appointed  hon. 
Vedasingam Baloomoody as Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee as from today. 

I also have to inform the House that Dr. the hon. Mohamud Raffick Sorefan submitted 
his resignation on 24 April 2015 as member of the Public Accounts Committee, and I have 
accepted  his  resignation.    Consequently,  the  Committee  of  Selection  met  under  my 
Chairpersonship earlier today and has nominated hon. Jean Claude Barbier to serve on the 
Public Accounts Committee. 

 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PROCEEDINGS –  
LIVE BROADCAST - SELECT COMMITTEE 

Furthermore, I wish to inform the House that, pursuant to the resolution adopted by 
the House on Tuesday last, 28 April 2015, to appoint a Select Committee of the House to 
consider the live broadcasting of the proceedings of the House and matters ancillary thereto, I 
have nominated the following hon. Members to serve on the said Committee – 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

The  hon.  Nandcoomar  Bodha,  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport; 

The hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, Minister of Health and Quality of Life; 

The  hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce  Perraud,  Minister  of  Gender 
Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare; 

The hon. Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, Opposition Whip; 

The hon. Jean Francisco François, Parliamentary Private Secretary; 

The hon. Jean-Noel Alain Aliphon, MP; 

The hon. Vedasingam Baloomoody, MP; 

The hon. Ahmad Bashir Jahangeer, MP; 

 
9. 

9 

The hon. Ezra Seewoosunkur Jhuboo, MP; 

10.   Dr. the hon. Mohamud Raffick Sorefan, MP, and 

11.  

The hon. Kalidass Teeluckdharry, MP. 

I have also fixed the first meeting of the Committee for Thursday 07 May 2015 at 

11.00 a.m. in Committee Room No. 1 of the National Assembly. 

Thank you. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No. X of 

2015) was read the first time. 

Second Reading 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2013) BILL 

(No. VII of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam Speaker, I move that the Supplementary Appropriation (2013) Bill (No VII of 2015) 
be read a second time. 

The Bill provides for the appropriation of an additional sum of Rs3,388,774,430 in 

respect of services of Government for financial year 2013.  

The  House  will  recall  that  the  previous  Government  initially  presented  an 
Appropriation Bill of Rs81.5 billion for financial year 2013.  During the course of that year, a 

 

10 

Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  of  Rs2.5  billion  was  introduced  to  cater  for  additional 
expenditure for - 

• 
• 

• 

The Land Drainage and Watershed Management Programme (Rs1.2 billion); 
Implementation of Errors, Omissions and Anomalies Committee Report 2013 
(Rs1 billion), and 
Construction of Roads and Bridges (Rs300 m.). 

The  total  sum  appropriated  for  financial  year  2013  thus  amounted  to  Rs84  billion 
while  actual  spending  totalled  Rs81.4  billion,  that  is,  Rs2.6  billion  below  the  total  sum 
appropriated.   

However,  there  has  been  over-spending  under  11  votes.  Funds  for  additional 
expenditures on these Votes have been made available by way of virements, essentially from 
votes  that  had  savings  and/or  unspent  balances  and  from  the  vote  “Contingencies  and 
Reserves”.  Thus, no new financing had to be raised to meet those additional expenditures. In 
addition, the Budget deficit for that year as well as the debt situation has not been affected.  

However, Section 105 (3) of the Constitution provides that when any vote requires 
additional funds in addition to what has already been appropriated, regardless of whether it is 
financed from savings, unspent balances or from the vote of contingencies and reserves, the 
additional funds must be appropriated by the National Assembly through a Supplementary 
Appropriation Bill.   

As the House is aware, following the recent amendments we brought to the Finance 
and Audit Act, funds are now appropriated by vote of expenditure instead of by programmes.  
At  the  same  time,  provision  was  also  made  in  that  amendment  for  Supplementary 
Appropriation Bills in respect of financial years 2013 and 2014 to be made on the basis of 
vote of expenditure.   

The eleven (11) votes of expenditure in respect of which supplementary appropriation 
is required are listed in the Schedule to the Bill, and the items of expenditure concerned are 
set out in the Estimates of Supplementary Expenditure (ESE).   
The main over-expenditures have been the following - 
(a) 

Rs2.2 billion under the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, 
for - 
• 

completing the Terre Rouge-Verdun link road and for land stabilisation 
works;  

 

(b) 

 
(c) 

 
(d) 

 
(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

11 

payment of consultancy fees for the LRT project;  
resurfacing of various roads, and 
the free travel scheme, following increase in bus tariffs in August 2013 

• 
• 
• 
 
Rs398.6 m. under the Ministry of Housing and Lands for - 
• 
• 
• 

payment of compensation in respect of compulsory land acquisition; 
the Military Road Housing Project, and 
the Casting of Roof Slab Scheme. 

 Rs257.9 m. under the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security for – 
• 

payment  of  the  last  tranche  of  the  accompanying  measures  for  the 
Sugar  Sector  Reform  (VRS)  on  the  closure  of  the  Deep  River  Beau 
Champ Sugar Factory, and  
additional  grants  to  the  Irrigation  Authority  and  the  Mauritius  Cane 
Industry Authority (MCIA) to cover their operating deficits. 

• 

 Rs232.2 m. under the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 
Education  and  Scientific  Research  as  additional  grants  to  PSSA,  MGI  and 
other parastatal bodies in the wake of the PRB and EOAC Reports 2013. 

 Rs170.1  m.  under  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and 
Reform Institutions, to cater for -  
• 

higher number of recipients of basic retirement pension and social aid, 
and 
increase  in  the  fees  payable  to  doctors  for  domiciliary  visits  in  line 
with the recommendation of the PRB Report 2013. 

• 

Rs65.4 m.  under the Ministry of Local Government as additional grants-in-aid 
to local authorities following the PRB and EOAC Reports 2013. 
Rs52 m. for the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) for its 
salary  review  implemented  as  from  January  2013  and  in  connection  with 
construction of its Headquarters at Réduit. 

 
(h) 

12 

Rs36.1 m. for the Office of the Electoral Commissioner in connection with the 
holding of the Village Council and Municipal Council elections in December 
2012. 

I  need  to  remind  the  House  that  the  actual  budget  deficit  for  financial  year  2013 
amounted to Rs12.8 billion and as a ratio to GDP; it was 3.5% against the revised estimates 
of 3.7%.  

As regards public sector net debt, for the purpose of debt ceiling, it turned out to be 
53.9%  of  GDP  compared  to  the  target  of  52.5%.    When  measured  using  IMF  definition, 
public sector debt was 60.1% of GDP instead of 57.7%. 

Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 
(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

ESTIMATES OF SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE (2013) OF 2015 
The following votes were called and agreed to - 
• 

Vote  1-4  Electoral  Supervisory  Commission  and  Electoral  Boundaries 
(Rs1,917,028). 
Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner (Rs36,125,751).  
Vote 1-10 National Audit Office (Rs4,365,578). 
Vote 1-13 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Rs52,000,000). 

• 
• 
• 

Vote 4-1 Vice-Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Housing and Lands was called.  
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ganoo! 
Mr Ganoo:  I wish to ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister one question pertaining to the 
item  on  page  11,  Acquisition  of  Non-Financial  Asset,  item  31410801  Acquisition  of  Land, 
Additional  provision  required  for  the  payment  of  compensation  related  to  compulsory 
acquisition  of  land  in  connection  with  the  implementation  of  various  major  Government 
projects. 

The Chairperson:  It is at the bottom of page 11. 

13 

 
Mr Ganoo:  Yes, bottom of page 11.  Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister with me? 
The Chairperson:  Page 11! At the bottom of page 11, item 31410801. It pertains to 

Acquisition of Land. 

Mr Ganoo:  May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister – the purpose of my question - if 
he can elaborate on the Supplementary Appropriation which has been budgeted Rs331m. The 
point is that, in his report, the Director of Audit has made the remark that very  often, the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands invests in the compulsory acquisition of land and, very often, 
this land is just around without being put to use. The purpose of my question today is to ask 
the hon. Minister to justify this significant amount of fund which has been budgeted and if he 
can give us a list of the projects concerned with this item. 

Mr Soodhun: Yes, Madam Chairperson, the additional provision is required for the 
payment  of  the  compensation  related  to  the  compulsory  acquisition  of  land  in  connection 
with the implementation of various major Government projects such as – 

Terre Rouge-Verdun; 
Verdun-Trianon Link Road; 
Triolet bypass; 
Port Louis Ring Road Phase I; 
Harbour Bridge; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Goodlands Bypass, and 
(vii)  Constrution of access to roads to Tianli Industrial Zone. 

Vote  4-1  Vice-Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands 

(Rs398,650,916) was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

Vote 9-1 Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam,  on  page  13,  item  22030  Rent,  may  we  know  whether  the 
Moorgate House is still being rented - as we know the LRT has been shelved -and what is it 
being used for now? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson,  concerning  item  22030  Rent,  it  is  additional 
provision  required  to  meet  increase  in  rent  following  the  occupation  of  the  third  floor  at 
Moorgate House by the newly set up Mass Transit Unit. There are also requests from socio 

 

14 

cultural organisations for erection of tents for religious activities and festivals as well as in 
cost of rental/erection of tents.  

As regards the Moorgate House, we are reconsidering this unit. So, we will see to it 

that we do not have this rent. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Chairperson,  at  page  20,  item  31113035,  that  is,  with 
respect to  Preparatory  Works for the  LRT. We know that Government is not going ahead 
with the LRT Project. May we know now what has been done with regard to consultancy, the 
amount of work that has been carried out with regard to the preparatory works concering the 
implemention of the LRT Project which is of the order of Rs169,040,109? 

Mr  Bodha:  The  project  has  been  shelved.  So,  we  are  going  to  wind  up  the  whole 
project. The consultancy fees have to be paid  – we are in the process of seeing what has to be 
paid, so that we put an end to the whole thing and we keep the consultancy material, that is, 
the survey. We are going to wind up the unit. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 17, last item 31113403 Upgrading of Roads, we are being 
asked to vote Rs275,942,586. Can the hon. Minister give us a breakdown constituency-wise 
of the amount we are being asked to vote? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, I do not have this information. I am going to table it 

in the National Assembly. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: On page 13, item 22030 Rent, with regard to the erection of tents, can 
we know whether there have been tender procedures and, if so, can we know who got the 
contract and for what cost? 

Mr Bodha: From what I have been told, there were rates and there were tenders at the 
beginning of the year, but every year, the budgeted provision was, in fact, only about 60%, 
two-third of what, in fact, we did spend at the end of the year. I am coming with a new policy 
with very rigid criteria. So, we are going to provide tents only for a number of national events 
and no other tents to socio cultural organisations on a discretionary basis. 

Vote  9-1  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Rs2,165,390,113) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

15 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research (Rs232,190,340) was called and agreed to. 

 

Vote 12-1 Ministry of Local Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  33,  Madam  Chairperson,  the  Unified  Local  Government 
Service Board, item 22050 Office Expenses. We are being asked to vote Rs56,397. Can the 
hon. Minister give us an idea of the composition of this Unified Local Government Service 
Board, whether this Board is found within the Ministry itself? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually,  I do not have the names of all the members here, but I can 

circulate it for you later on. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether this Board is found at 

the Ministry itself? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, it is found at the Ministry. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 35, item 22070 Cleaning Services. May we know from the hon. 
Minister whether renewal of contract is automatic or do we have a term for contract and we 
do re-tender? 

The Chairperson: Well, hon. Member, you have to ask questions pertaining to the 

increase specifically. This is an E.S.E. Please! 

Dr. Sorefan: Sorry, Madam Chairperson. There is an increase of Rs68 m. May we 
know from the hon. Minister why the contract has been renewed, why it has not been called 
for tender? 

Dr. Husnoo: Which item, please? 

Dr. Sorefan: Item 22070. 

The  Chairperson:  ESE!  Ask  questions  pertaining  to  the  increase,  to  the  expenses, 
please! This question is not relevant. Well, if the hon. Minister wants to reply, he can, but the 
question is not relevant to the ESE. I am sorry! Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

 

16 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  36,  Madam  Chairperson,  the  first  item  28222  Transfers  to 
Households,  Addittional  provision  required  to  meet  payment  of  compensation  for  the 
relocation of the inhabitants of Mare Chicose Village. Can the hon. Minister give us an idea 
whether all the inhabitants of Mare Chicose have, by now, been relocated and whether there 
are still cases pending with regard to litige? 

Dr. Husnoo: Again, I do not have all the information on whether all the inhabitants 

have been relocated, but I can let the hon. Member have the information later on. 

Vote 12-1 Ministry of Local Government (Rs65,420,897) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

 
Vote 16-1 Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Rs257,858,828) was called 

and agreed to. 

 
Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Rs170,152,472) was called and agreed to. 

 
Vote  25-1  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  (Rs4,702,507)  was 

called and agreed to. 

 
E.S.E. (2013) of 2015 was agreed to. 
On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 
 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Supplementary Appropriation (2013) Bill (No. VII of 2015) was considered and 

agreed to. 

 
On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

 

Second Reading 

THE ROAD TRAFFIC (AMENDMENT) BILL 

 

17 

(No. VI OF 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Second Reading of the Road Traffic 

(Amendment) Bill (No. VI of 2015). 

 Question again proposed. 

 

(12.04 p.m.) 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, well, you will 

allow me to start by congratulating the Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

At least, he listened to what the Leader of the Opposition proposed, especially in a 
technical Bill like that, he gave us time. Unlike others who rushed with Bills - first, second, 
third readings in one day - he was wise enough to give time to consider, to consult and that is 
why I congratulate him and I hope that other Ministers do the same. 

I see in the Explanatory Memorandum that the main twin purposes of the Bill is to do 
away with the penalty points system and to replace it by a new sanctioning mechanism for 
certain  specified  serious  driving  offences.  I  must  say  that  we  have  no  quarrel.  There  is 
consensus, we are in full agreement with those two priority targets. 

Having congratulated the Minister, I must, nevertheless, say that he should have told 
us because, in his speech, he told us that there were consultations with stakeholders. Well, it 
is  not  too  late  for  him  to  let  us  know  which  stakeholders  were  consulted  and  what  their 
reactions were. I also believe, Madam Speaker, that he should have provided us with some 
figures; the main causes for accidents and the changes with statistics for better or worse that 
took place under the old system so that we can compare with what is going to happen as from 
now. 

Having  said  that,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  quite  disappointed  by  the  weak  reaction 
outside. Granted that the speech is not much clearer than the Bill - the Bill was very technical 
- but the speech of the hon. Minister threw some light on the Bill itself, on the technicalities 
of  the  Bill  especially,  but  not  much.  Maybe  that  explains  the  very  weak  reaction  outside, 
which is disappointing. Although the Bill, not only we circulated it with quite a number of 
organisations and people, but is on Internet and yet, I have seen no expert in transport matters 
coming forward and commenting on that. I must say I am quite disappointed also that I have 
seen no reaction from the professional drivers: bus drivers, truck drivers, taxi drivers. Again, 
not  just  the  Bill,  but  the  speech  also  is  available  on  the  Internet.  That  is  why,  Madam 

 

18 

Speaker, I will not be long but, I would advise the Minister de garder l’esprit ouvert because 
this is non-polemical. I do not find anything to speak against but, as I say, the speech is not 
much clearer than the Bill. Therefore, I would advise the Minister to adopt an open mind, a 
trial and error attitude. When we put into practice what is provided for in the Bill - and that 
has been explained in his Second Reading speech - if something needs amending, adjusting, 
changing, we should keep, I suggest, an open mind on that. 

I will end, Madam Speaker, by reminding the hon. Minister that we rely on him to 
come forward with other measures apart from what we find in that Bill. That Bill aims, as I 
said,  at  replacing  the  penalty  points  system  by  a  new  system.  Fair  enough!  However,  to 
decrease  accidents,  to  protect  pedestrians,  passengers  and  drivers,  there  are  lots  of  other 
measures that need to be taken.  

For today, I will make reference to only one issue which I raised in this House half a 
dozen  times  under  the  previous  Government  and  nothing  changed!  I  am  talking  about  les 
vitres  teintées.  We  provide  in  the  Bill  for  an  offence  using  a  portable  telephone  whilst 
driving. I have checked, according to the figures I have seen worldwide but, especially, in the 
United  States,  more  than  50  per  cent  of  accidents  are  caused  by  what  in  the  technical 
language  in  traffic  affairs  is  called  ‘distraction’  and  the  first  distraction  is  interaction  with 
other passengers: talking, joking, playing; but the second most frequent cause of distraction 
leading  to  accidents  is  precisely  using  portable  phones.  Therefore,  this  is  indeed  a  serious 
offence and we have listed it in the Bill as a serious offence, but, for somebody to be brought 
before the authorities and eventually the Court for that serious offence, he must be caught at 
it. Police officers, Traffic officers must see him or her using that portable phone.  

I am sure the hon. Prime Minister, the Minister and everybody have seen how many - 
and it is supposed to be the law.  The two front windows are supposed to be lower than a 
given technical definition so that you can see the driver whether he’s using a portable phone. 
But there is a lot of cars which are still on the road and you can’t say anything. I am talking 
about  front  windows  not  back  windows.  Therefore,  what  is  the  use  of  providing  for  an 
offence when we can’t establish the offence. I raised that quite a number of times, but better 
late than never. I am just taking one example, but then, we rely on the Minister. Apart from 
the  penalty  point  system  that  is  being  replaced  by  this  new  system,  the  aim  is  to  protect 
drivers, passengers and pedestrians, we rely on him to find other measures that are not in that 
Bill like the one I have just mentioned, to improve the situation as far as road accidents are 
concerned.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(12.12 p.m.) 

19 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, let 
me start by saying that this Bill translates into legislative material, one  of the promises of 
l’Alliance Lepep. I must say that we, in Muvman Libérater, were the first ones to have raised 
this issue of speed limits as it was causing a lot of grievance to road users and road drivers. 
No Bill can be perfect and this is why I believe that any law that we pass in this House must 
have  the  stamp  of  proportionality  and  the  existing  law,  as  it  is,  does  not  have  that 
proportionality dimension which was the cause of grievance for all drivers. Let me just give 
an example, Madam Speaker, of what I am talking about. Somebody driving in excess of 1 
km was caught by the camera and it just happened that he was not wearing his seatbelt and he 
was  also  holding  his  handphone.  Therefore,  the  camera  had  caught  him  committing  three 
offences and it happened to a member of the Bar.  When that happens under the old law - I 
am  referring  to  the  former  section  191,  Fixed  Penalty  Notice,  subsection  (4)  which  the 
present Bill repeals by the way: 

 
“Where more than one offence are detected on a single occasion, the FPN - 
the  FPN  is  the  Fixed  Penalty  Notice  -  shall  make  reference  to  the  lowest 
number of penalty points in respect of the offence carrying the highest range 
of penalty points”. 
 

In fact, for one single occurrence, somebody runs the risk of losing six or eight points. I think 
that was unfair. We are not saying in this Bill that we do not need the speed limits. Of course, 
we need speed limits, but what was wrong with the old law was the double penalty.  One paid 
the  fine  and  also  one  was  penalised  in  the  loss  of  points.  This  is  what  caused  a  lot  of 
grievance  and  this  was  why  we,  in  l’Alliance  Lepep,  decided  that  we  need  to  address  this 
issue and we have addressed it and this is why section 191(4) is repealed. 

The  other  point  that  this  Bill  addresses  is  the  problem  of  foreigners  driving  with 
licences  issued  by  foreign  Governments.  Obviously,  they  are  not  covered  by  our  penalty 
point system, but this Bill cures that defect and it makes all those foreigners liable to the same 
penalty so that after a certain number of offences having been committed they will also have 
their driving licence cancelled locally. Therefore, I think this is also an anomaly which had to 
be addressed.  

 

 

20 

The third point I wish to raise is that, as the law stands, today, and until it is amended, 
the Judiciary has its hands tied and I think it is not right that any Judiciary must feel that it 
has no scope at all to inflict a penalty that is commensurate with the nature of the offence. I 
believe that it is good that we have given some discretion to the Courts to address the issue of 
penalty  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  offence,  the  nature  of  the  offender  and  how  many 
times he has been convicted and all these things. There are, of course, some people who think 
that the aim of punishment is to deter and that the more you impose on people, the better it is 
for people to obey the law. However, road traffic is quite a different thing. I think we all, at 
some stage, have been drivers and we have also committed maybe some minor offences, but 
the problem with speeding and cameras and all this was not that they are not needed, but it is 
the manner in which they  are being used and this is why we need to rationalise the speed 
limits.  You  cannot  have  on  the  motorway  different  speed  limits  so  that  the  driver  has  to 
concentrate  on  the  speedometer  and  not  on  the  other  dangers  that  may  arise  on  the  road. 
Therefore, the rationalising of the speed limits is also something which this Bill cures and I 
think that it is good that this aspect of the Bill has been greeted with consensus. 

I think the way it was in the past, Police officers used to hide in the sugar cane fields 
and then they jump on you with the mobile cameras.  I think punishment is right, road traffic 
needs rules, but there is no sense in treating everybody as a suspect. I believe the manner in 
which this Bill has been presented gives a certain flexibility in the way the speed cameras 
will  be  operational.  I  see  that  the  speed  cameras  are  being  painted  in  a  different  colour.  I 
think this is done in order to create the awareness for the drivers that they need to comply 
with the law, they need to observe the speed limits, but we should not have that mind-set that 
not every single driver is complying with the law. I think we need rules; of course, we need to 
comply with the rules, but the rules have to be fair.  I think what this Bill does is to bring 
fairness to the system of speed limits, fairness to the law and fairness to the penalty system.  

Another promise that we had made in the electoral campaign was that all the people 
who had points on their licences would have those points abolished.  This is also something 
that  is  being  done  in  this  Bill  and  I  think  this  is  one  more  electoral  promise  that  we  are 
implementing.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 
(12.18 p.m.) 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madam  Speaker, 
first of all, I congratulate the hon. Minister to come with this Bill so quickly after having put 

 

21 

the camera on the off mode. Madam Speaker, I will try to be brief with some new ideas and 
suggestions.  This  Amendment  Bill  is  most  welcomed  by  the  public  at  large  and  so  do  I 
especially when it comes to do away with the penalty points system. Here, Madam Speaker, I 
would  like  to  go  back  to  the  Amendment  Bill  proposed  by  the  former  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure on 17 July 2012. I could not participate in the debate because, as you know, 
Madam Speaker, of the word ‘bourrique’ pronounced towards the former Minister of Local 
Government,  hon.  Aimée,  by  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  who  was  asked  by  the  Deputy 
Speaker to leave the House for not withdrawing the word. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please come straight to the Bill! We have got a Bill, 

you have got the explanatory memorandum, come to the purpose of the Bill, please! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, I would like to say a few words on the introduction of 
this Amendment Bill to amend the previous Amendment Bill brought by hon. Bachoo, who, 
in his speech, was very hard towards drivers. He said: “We need to take bold decisions in 
order to protect our citizens from inappropriate and careless utilisation of motor vehicles and 
to put a halt to aberrant driving behaviour”.  Among many things he said and I quote – 

 
“Already  based  on  feedbacks  received  and  views  which  are  being  echoed 
around, this piece of legislation seems to have won the acceptance of almost 
everybody.” 
 

How many of us agree with what I quoted? Of course, many will undoubtedly disagree with 
the  ex-Minister.  Time  has  proved  him  wrong,  Madam  Speaker.  Within  two  years,  Madam 
Speaker, drivers were very wild with the penalty point, so are we. There are two penalties in 
the previous Bill. The first one, penalty point system and the second was the payment of fixed 
fines for the same offence.  

Madam  Speaker,  then  came  the  famous  tender  exercise  that  many  young  elected 
Members are not conversant with. If you will allow me, Madam Speaker, I will quote some 
of  my  PQs,  for  example,  B/101  addressed  to  the  ex-Prime  Minister,  B/33,  B/608,  B/789 
addressed to the ex-Minister of Public Infrastructure. Madam Speaker, those PQs were as if 
PNQs… 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

with  many  supplementaries  from  many  hon.  Members  like  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  hon. 
Bodha,  hon.  Jhugroo,  hon.  Baloomoody,  hon.  Ganoo,  hon.  Ramano,  hon.  Joe  Lesjongard, 
hon. Serruttun, myself and yourself, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Do not bring me in the debate, please! 
Dr. Sorefan: And many others.  It was about 10 pages of PQs answered previously.   

(Interruptions) 

Because the hon. Members showed so much interest in that tender exercise and they 
were  interested  and  disapproved  of  the  tender  exercise  at  that  time,  Madam  Speaker.  One 
issue of the tender, Madam Speaker, was the calibration of the speed camera which, up to 
now, we don’t have the answer. There was a supplementary question regarding the name of 
the independent laboratory as specified in the tender specification. The ex-Minister replied: 
“It  is  by  SANAS”.    SANAS  stands  for  South African  National  Accreditation  System.    As 
SANAS  is  an  accreditation  body,  it  can’t  be  an  independent  laboratory  to  calibrate  our 
camera. Therefore, I would like to know from the hon. Minister when he will sum up, to let 
us  know  which  is  the  independent  laboratory  which  calibrated  the  camera  and  the  amount 
paid to them.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  comment  on  the  speech  presentation  of  the 
Amendment Bill by the hon. Minister of MPI.  The hon. Minister, Madam Speaker, said that: 
“Severity  of  sanctions  for  road  traffic  offences  is  directly  proportional  to  the  level  of 
compliance”.  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has used mathematical formula where there 
should be a constant. Up to now, I am trying to find out what is this constant.  If ‘s’ stands for 
severity, it is directly proportional to compliance - I put it to ‘c’ – the ratio mathematically 
speaking ‘s’ over ‘c’ is equal a constant.  What is this constant, Madam Speaker?  I won’t 
dwell  in  this  mathematics.    What  I  think  the  hon.  Minister  wants  to  say  in  simple  term, 
Madam Speaker, is that the more a driver complies with, the less severity of sanctions. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that 120,000 road traffic offenders still 
have their cases pending in court.  What Government intends to do to these offenders? Will 
there be a written off or will prosecutions continue? If yes, Madam Speaker, there would be a 
dilemma for the judge to inflict penalty points and fines as per law before this amendment. 
Moreover,  will  they  be  fined  as  per  this  amendment?  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister 
mentioned that this Bill aims at changing the behaviour and attitude of road users through the 
introduction of five crucial measures, but going to his speech, I can see only four measures 
that have been mentioned.  I would like to know the fifth measure, Madam Speaker.   

23 

 
Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister said: “19 serious offences will be brought down to 
11 which will be easy to understand and easy to memorise by road users.” Madam Speaker, it 
is  a  fact  that  what  you  memorise  today,  you  forget  in  a  very  few  days.  Drivers,  Madam 
Speaker,  should  be  constantly  reminded  of  these  11  offences.    These  11  offences  be  it 
through press, TV or why not a brief fixed at the window of each vehicle.   

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  the  Cumulative  Road  Traffic  Conviction  Certificate,  do 
we take it, Madam Speaker, that it is not as the previous DLC rather a certificate that will be 
used upon application?  If this is so, Madam Speaker, offenders will lose track of their record. 
Drivers should have some kind of certificate at hand to remind them of their accumulated 
offences.  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister said: “Speed camera is an effective intervention 
in reducing fatal road accidents”.  However, he also said: “Speeding remains the number one 
road safety problem, not only in Mauritius, but in many countries around the world”. Is the 
hon. Minister aware that in many countries like UK, speed cameras are obsolete? 

Madam Speaker, one thing that is not clear to me is that regarding minimising fines.  I 
want to know where there is speed limit of, for example, 80km and the driver is exceeding by 
2 or 5 km; will the driver be fined? The hon. Minister said that: “At a speed where a driver 
exceeds more than 15km, the fine will be Rs1000 and so on.  For 25km it will be higher”.  I 
remember hon. Showkutally Soodhun on radio said he was fined when he exceeded by 2 kms 
in a zone of 60km; will that be the case?  The hon. Minister has already answered, but I was 
about  to  propose,  Madam  Speaker,  that  an  allowance  of  5%  to  10%  should  be  left  at  the 
discretion of police officers in charge not to penalise drivers who exceed. 

the 

Madam  Speaker,  regarding 

introduction  of  Intensive  Traffic  Offenders’ 
Rehabilitation  Programme,  here  I  must  say,  the  hon.  Minister  is  only  proposing  nothing 
concrete  so  far.    This  was  mentioned  by  the  ex-Minister,  but  up  to  now  zéro  plombage.  
Madam  Speaker,  I  sincerely  hope  the  hon.  Minister  will  take  this  on  board  seriously  and 
quickly.   

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  also  about  authorised  speed  limit 
which, if changed, should be gazetted.  This is alright for temporary change of speed limit, 
not for permanent. Why?  Well, Madam Speaker, when we design a road, the first criterion is 
that we must take speed into consideration first. The curvature of a road is dependent on the 
speed we want.  The M1, previously known as Chemin Bhurtun in the late 60s, was designed 
to accommodate a speed limit of 70 miles per hour.  Today, it is equivalent to 110 kilometres.  
We cannot go on changing speed because of accident.  This reminds me, Madam Speaker, the 

 

24 

‘S’ shape diversion at Sorèze when they were building the underpass bridge.  The ex-Minister 
first  came  with  60  kilometres  and  changed  it  to  40  kilometres  when  there  were  several 
accidents. When they designed the ‘S’ shape diversion, from the beginning they should have 
come to 40 kilometres.  Do not wait for accidents to change it! 

In  road  construction,  Madam  Speaker,  first,  we  should  know  what  speed  we  will 
allow and then design the road accordingly.  One should not geometrically design the road 
and then decide the speed to be allowed. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister,  in  his  speech,  mentioned  that  “transverse  road 
markings  at  a  distance  of  300,  200  and  100  metres  from  the  cameras”  should  actually  be 
wider.    I  think  500,  300  and  100  metres  from  the  cameras  would  be  more  acceptable  to 
reduce speed. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  proudly  announced  the  following  for 
motorcyclists.  First, an improved licensing scheme, and second, a moto-école, with the help 
of  authorities  from  Reunion  Island.    He  also  mentioned  that  41%  of  road  casualties  were 
motorcyclists, 38 of them fatal for the year 2013.  Is the hon. Minister aware that the then 
Minister of Finance, hon. X. L. Duval, reduced duty on motorcycles?  I said in my speech on 
the Budget that the hon. Minister of Health should enlarge casualty departments with more 
doctors to accommodate casualties from motorcyclists. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  should  have  set  up  the  licensing  scheme  and  the  moto-école 
before  reducing  duty.    The  then  Minister  of  Finance,  I  think,  was  wrong  to  please  the 
purchase of motorcyclists.  38 loved ones left their families. How sad, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that currently road safety education is 
being provided in all primary schools and secondary schools to impart necessary road safety 
skills  to  schoolchildren.    The  practical  part  is  carried  out  with  the  use  of  fully  equipped 
mobile  traffic  playground  where  traffic  environment  is  stimulated.    This,  Madam  Speaker, 
remains  to  be  proved  by  the  hon.  Minister  that  all  schools  have  practical  components. 
Anyway, if we achieve what the hon. Minister is saying, well, this is the best part of this Bill 
because education on road safety starts at young age, Madam, Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  this  Bill,  we  can  sum  up  by  saying  that  the  previous 
amendment  of  the  Road  Traffic  Act  was  the  introduction  of  the  penalty  points  system,  on 
which the ex-Minister of Public Infrastructure, Mr Bachoo, concluded, I quote – 

 

25 

 
“Already  based  on  feedback  received  and  views  which  are  being  echoed 
around,  the  piece  of  legislation  seems  to  have  won  acceptance  of  almost 
everybody.” 

Now, Madam Speaker, hon. Minister Bodha started his speech, I quote – 

“(…) the Bill before this House today is meant first and foremost to address a 
major injustice inflicted on our road users since the coming into force of the 
Penalty Point System.” 

In addition, the hon. Minister goes on saying, a few paragraphs later, I quote – 

“(…)  by  doing  away  with  the  Penalty  Points  System  as  promised  and  by 
replacing it by a new penalty system which is more humane (…)” 

As  you  can  see,  Madam  Speaker,  both  Ministers  talk  about  penalty.    The  aim  of 
penalties,  Madam  Speaker,  is  to  punish  offenders,  to  protect  society,  and  to  influence  the 
behaviour of offenders and all citizens, that is, prevention. 

Madam  Speaker,  many  studies  have  found  that  combination  of  enforcement  and 
penalties prevent violation of traffic regulations and increase road safety. However, the most 
common  type  of  penalty  at  present  time  is  a  fine.    A  fine  has  been  found  to  have  limited 
effect.  This Bill, Madam Speaker, is inflicting fine at reduced rate, which has limited effect, 
as I said. 

Madam Speaker, evidence shows that the size of fines has actual effect on violation 
behaviour.  Each percentage increase of fines has led to a decrease in violation, for example, 
in red light violation.  In case of speeding fine, when the rate is increased by 1%, the number 
of violation will decrease by 0.23%. Madam Speaker, fine imposed by a Judge; it has been 
shown that a fine for speeding, whether or not in combination with penalty points, has no 
effect on the likelihood of people being prosecuted again for a traffic offence. 

In  general,  Madam  Speaker,  fines  are  mild  penalties,  and  increasing  the  fine  has  a 
limited beneficial effect.   Madam Speaker, we can say that penalties in the long run do not 
have a lasting effect.  What can we consider?  Madam Speaker, it is known that behaviour 
can change more quickly  and be long lasting by rewarding; rewarding desirable behaviour 
than by penalising.  Penalising ends desirable behaviour.  Rewarding road safety behaviour 
can also be effective, as shown by research, for instance, the use of seatbelts and right speed.  
For  the  rewarding  programme  to  be  effective,  it  depends  on  the  design  of  the  rewarding 

 

26 

programme.    A  combination  of  rewarding  and  other  interventions  appears  to  be  more 
effective than each of these interventions taken separately. For example, rewarding may be 
applied most successfully in addition to traditional police enforcement rather than be used as 
a replacement. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  world  of  road  safety  generally  assumes  that  penalising  and 
rewarding  complement  each  other  and  that  a  combination  of  penalties  and  rewards  can  be 
more effective than they can separately. 

Madam Speaker, we must not forget that some people are more sensitive to rewarding 
than  penalising  or  the  other  way  round.    Madam  Speaker,  a  reward  programme  may  be 
material in nature, sum of money, reduction in the insurance plan, small gifts or some other 
means.    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister,  I  am  sure,  will  venture  in  the  rewarding 
programme on the road safety context in the very near future.  

Madam Speaker, my last point that I would like to spell out is the Intelligent Speed 
Assistance (ISA) as opposed to an Intelligent Transport System (ITS), as mentioned briefly in 
the hon. Minister’s speech. The ITS provides innovative services relating to different mode of 
transport  whereas  the  Intelligent  Speed  Assistance  (ISA)  technology  brings  speed  limit 
information  into  the  vehicle.  It  is  the  most  promising  type  of  advanced  driver  assistance 
system and, from a technical point of view, Madam Speaker, large-scale ISA implementation 
is  possible  in  the  short-term.  The  ISA  is,  Madam  Speaker,  the  future  technology  that  will 
replace speed cameras in Mauritius and in some countries in the world it has already replaced 
the speed cameras. It is a smart technology and, as we are talking about smart cities, why not 
the hon. Minister starts considering this piece of smart technology for the near future for a 
smart Mauritius?  

The  whole  country,  through  the  use  of  ISA  by  vehicles,  will,  undoubtedly,  start 
propulsing Mauritius as a smart island, Madam Speaker. In general, ISA system establishes 
the position of a vehicle, compares the speed of the vehicle with the posted speed limit at a 
given location and then gives the feedback about the speed limit to the driver in the vehicle or 
even restricts the vehicle speed according to the speed limit in force. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, speed cameras are becoming obsolete and need to be 
replaced  by  new  intelligent  technology.  Penalty  should  go  hand-in-hand  with  reward  and 
enforcement. The most important is road safety education at primary and secondary schools 
and, why not, refresher courses for all drivers, like we do in the medical field.  

27 

 
Madam Speaker, at the beginning of my speech I did not mention whether I will vote 
for this amendment but, the hon. Minister can rest assured that, we, on this side of the House, 
will vote for the Bill. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the House for my proposal and I 
hope the hon. Minister will take my suggestion on board. 

Thank you. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Fowdar! 

 
 
(12.43 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. I would first of all congratulate the hon. Minister for bringing this Bill to the 
House.  It  is  one  of  the  promises  we  made  during  the  electoral  campaign,  which  was  to 
address the issue of speed cameras and also road safety. 

Madam Speaker, speed cameras became a nightmare for drivers for some time and it 
is not only in Mauritius but worldwide. Although the concept of speed camera is relatively 
new - introduced in the early 1990s - yet it has become a nightmare for drivers and we, as 
legislators,  need  to  think  whether  speed  cameras  are  really  a  successful  deterrent  to  road 
accidents. A lot of money is usually spent in the installation and operation of speed cameras 
but  yet,  there  are  little  evidence,  not  only  in  Mauritius  but  worldwide,  that  speed  cameras 
have been successful and have really curbed down the number of road accidents and deaths 
on the road. Obviously, speed cameras have substantially contributed to the Treasury in terms 
of penalties and fines which drivers have been paying. 

Statistics  are  not  so  brilliant,  Madam  Speaker,  to  indicate  the  success  of  speed 
cameras. A recent survey in Mauritius - I think a couple of weeks back - stated that without 
speed cameras, the number of road accidents decreased instead of increased! Therefore, it is a 
sign that speed cameras are not so efficient in curbing down the number of road accidents. 
We don’t have enough statistics in Mauritius to say whether or not they have really curbed 
down the number of road accidents. I did some homework, Madam Speaker. I found a recent 
study in the UK, carried out by the RAC, which revealed that in 21 sites where speed cameras 
were installed in the UK, the number of road accidents appeared to have increased instead of 
decreased; and in other sites, it has been found that although the number of road accidents did 
not increase, it did not decrease either. So, again, the question is: are speed cameras efficient, 
are speed cameras reliable to curb down the number of road accidents and deaths on the road? 

28 

 
We ourselves are drivers, Madam Speaker, we know that when we come close to the 
speed camera zone we slow down and then, after crossing the zone, we speed up and we go 
even faster, endangering the life of other road users and ourselves as well. We can’t sleep on 
our laurels once we have installed speed cameras. We can’t say: okay, let us sleep now, there 
will  be  no  road  accident,  nobody  will  die  on  the  road!  We  are  very  uncertain  about  its 
efficiency. This is why I would appeal to the hon. Minister, just like the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition  did,  to  look  into  the  other  measures  that  we  have  to  take  to  implement  or  to 
reinforce so that the roads become safer for us. 

Speed cameras in the UK and elsewhere can be better used and I would urge the hon. 
Minister - I would humbly suggest him - to look into the possibility of introducing what is 
called the ‘average speed check system’. What is the average speed check system? Madam 
Speaker, the average speed check system is used in the UK and it really works. This is where 
two cameras are used in what we call the ‘black spot areas’ and the driver, once he crosses 
the first camera until he reaches the second camera, has to observe the speed limit set. If he 
comes earlier then he will be caught for speeding. It really works in the UK in black spot 
areas. Possibly, the hon. Minister can look into the possibility to introduce the average speed 
check system where we have a number of regular road accidents. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  why  I  think  besides  speed  cameras,  the  Government,  the 
Minister will have to come up with other measures to provide a safer road for motorists, their 
passengers and other road users so that they do not become  victims and arrive safely at their 
destination.  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  all  statistics  for  the  causes  of  road  accidents  in 
Mauritius but, I have made some research and I would like to quote some of them.  Madam 
Speaker, drink driving is a really serious offence and it accounts for nearly 13 per cent of 
road  accidents,  causing  death  and  serious  injuries  to  road  users.  We  all  know  that  many 
drivers here, continuously and persistently, drink and drive and they drive under the influence 
of alcohol. Madam Speaker, they are not scared. Why they are not scared? We know so many 
friends keep driving under the influence of alcohol! They are not scared because the penalties 
are not severe enough and they usually get away easily after driving while being under the 
influence of alcohol.  I  would appeal to  the Minister to review the penalties used for drink 
drivers.  

Let me quote, Madam Speaker. In the UK if somebody drives under the influence of 
alcohol,  although  he  does  not  meet  with  any  accident,  he  is  jailed  for  six  months!  No 
accident:  6  months  and  12  months  driving  ban.  Now,  if  this  person  kills  someone  while 
driving under the influence of alcohol, he goes to jail for 14 years and 2 years driving ban. 

 

29 

This  is  the  sort  of  penalties  we  need  to  introduce  here  to  discourage  people  from  drink 
driving. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, another cause of road accident rightly mentioned by 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition is using phone while driving. The Leader of the Opposition 
mentioned that 50% of accidents are caused by distraction and I have got figures here for the 
UK.  One out of four accidents in the UK is caused when the driver is on the phone, one out 
of four, which is 25% of road accidents while the driver is in communication with somebody 
else. I know this is very difficult, as rightly mentioned by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
very  difficult  to  catch  someone  on  the  phone  while  driving,  but  this  can  be  decreased  by 
having regular patrols, motorway patrol or Police patrol so that drivers are discouraged to use 
phone while driving.  

Another thing, Madam Speaker, is that 90% of road accidents are caused by human 
error, but 10% are not. The 10% accounts for other factors and we know that the two main 
other factors are bad road conditions and unfit vehicles. I know that the hon. Minister is also 
responsible for roads and we have got good roads in Mauritius, we can’t complain about this, 
but unfit vehicles need to be addressed.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  seen  this  terrible  accident  at  Soreze,  people  died, 
Mauritians were saddened by the accident. Yet, the day after the accident, it was business as 
usual and nothing new was made by the previous Government to curb or to prevent accidents 
caused  by  these  defective  vehicles.  Still  the  same  story!  How  can  we  run  unfit  vehicles, 
Madam Speaker? We all know fitness in Mauritius is a serious laugh! You can’t get a vehicle 
inspected  in  10  minutes  and  you  get  your  fitness  certificate!  This  is  going  on  for  ages  in 
Mauritius and this is why I am confident that the new Minister will revisit this, will review 
this  whole  system  of  vehicle  fitness.  We  all  know  the  stories;  you  need  to  put  something 
between the horsepower, then you get the fitness, and this is time bombs on the roads. The 
defective vehicles are time bombs on the roads; it is really  a serious matter for other road 
users. I am confident the new Minister will look into and revisit the whole issue of fitness in 
Mauritius. 

The other thing which I wanted to address which comforts me a little bit, when you 
talk to people these days, they will tell you getting a driving licence is becoming difficult. It 
is a tough test these days. I think the system in operation is working; it is fool proof, but we 
have to be on our guard. We need to do checks and balances; we don’t totally rely on it. Tests 

 

30 

need to be more rigorous and it has to cover all aspects of good driving. So, Madam Speaker, 
as  I said 90% of  accidents are caused by human error  and this can be  reduced if we train 
people how to drive and the driving tests are made rigorous and very difficult.  

The majority of people, Madam Speaker, are on the road as we are all of us every day 
and their safety is the responsibility of the Government, is our responsibility as legislators. 
People go on the road in the morning, they need to come back home every day. We need to 
ensure that they reach their destination safely every day. What we need, Madam Speaker, is 
safe  roads,  careful  drivers,  good  vehicles,  good  road  conditions,  all  this  what  we  need  to 
ensure that the people who go out for work come back safely home in the afternoon. I am 
really confident, Madam Speaker, the Minister is a really dynamic Minister, I am sure he is 
going to address all the other measures needed to make our roads safer.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 
 
(12.56 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  of  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  will  be  very  brief  in  my  remarks.  That  was  only  done  to  ensure  that 
everyone could be happy and listen. I was just sharing something with my colleagues on this 
side when talking about standards of driving tests. I am just realising that, obviously, each 
and  every  person  who  comes  up  and  as  our  hon.  Minister  has  come  up  with  this  Bill,  his 
intention is, of course, to make the road safer, to ensure that there are no fatal accidents, to 
reduce  the  number  of  non-fatal  accidents  and  to  ensure  that  when  we  leave  home,  we  get 
back home safely. Those are very laudable initiatives and his intentions are honourable. Let 
me have a say that there is this thing we were just sharing, it is that nowadays - en passant let 
me  share  it  with  you  -  when  someone  takes  a  driving  lesson  and  he  has  a  learner,  he  is 
accompanied by an instructor; he is still not allowed to drive on our highway even though he 
has the instructor with him. The first time that he will drive on the highway is when he gets 
his licence and he has never learnt how to do it.  

Now, fundamentally we have something seriously wrong with our system of testing. 
This was just one example. It is unacceptable that someone will be told: “You are not allowed 
as a learner to try and learn how to drive accompanied by your instructor on a highway, but 
the first time you shall be able to do so, will be when you have a licence even though you 
have  never  done  it”.  Now,  we  are  sending  someone  who  is  putting  his  life  in  danger  and 

 

31 

putting other people’s lives in danger on the highway and this is a road where people drive at 
high speed.  In other words, we increase the risks of fatal accidents, deaths and sorrows. 

I invite the hon. Minister to look at the system of testing because nowhere has any 
Government really questioned the following: “Are those testing us good enough? Where do 
those  testers  get  tested?  How  did  they  qualify  to  become  testers?  How?  When?”  Because 
when I compare the methodology of driving tests in the United Kingdom or in France with 
that in Mauritius, I hear the hon... 

(Interruptions) 

We have to compare because you have to be good, you cannot keep on going down 
and compare yourself with jurisdictions that do not have tests, but you have to be even better 
and  make  sure  that  the  drivers  that  you  churn  out  become  good  drivers.  So,  when  you 
compare - and I was listening to hon. Fowdar just now talking about the dangers out there and 
the  tests.    Yes,  in  Mauritius,  we  have  tests  that  are  very  simple  compared  to  other 
jurisdictions. That is a fact and still people complain and say it is a difficult test.  

There  is  one  issue  in  this  Bill  which  I  shall  not  comment  upon  because  basically 
whatever is going to happen here, we are going to see how it works - and we all hope that it 
will work - and that it will really achieve its objectives, but there is one issue that you will 
commit  me,  Madam  Speaker,  to  remark  upon.    It  is  the  issue  with  regard  to  international 
driving licences. That, this Bill comes forward with a novelty, that it is the first time - if I am 
not  mistaken  -  that  someone  with  an  international  driving  licence  will  have  his  licence 
suspended and taken away in Mauritius for an offence that he has committed in Mauritius. 
This is where I start with question marks.  

It is a laudable initiative and understand me, I am not in any way criticising though it 
is my habit to, but, today, I am not criticising, I am only humbly suggesting something. I do 
not  believe  that  this  is  possible  or  plausible.  The  reason  being  when  I  look  at  what  is  the 
practice in other jurisdictions, I have come across Conventions that myself, I did not know 
existed. The Geneva Convention on Road Traffic is a Convention of the United Nations of 
1949 and Mauritius is a signatory to that Convention. I have come across the International 
Driving Permit Convention, the 1968 Convention that was amended and updated in 2011. I 
have come across mutual recognition of licences in the European Union.  

I have come across mutual recognition of disqualifications within the European Union 
and the North American States; and between the European Union and the North American 
States.  What  I  am  getting  at  here  is  that  if  you  disqualify  someone  here  on  a  driving 
document that was not issued by the local authorities, does this country, throughout courts, 

 

32 

has a right to disqualify someone when this licence was not issued by this country? That’s the 
question! That is a moot point.  

The second issue is – which maybe we have forgotten – what happens when someone 
is  disqualified  in  the  United  Kingdom;  he  comes  to  Mauritius  and  he  is  driving  on  his 
licence? Do we have a way of verifying that this person is disqualified there, let’s say, for 
having killed someone drunk driving, that he should not drive here?  There is no agreement 
between the European States and Mauritius or Africa or Asia or any United Nations body that 
encompasses the element of driving offences and disqualifications. It only exists at the level 
of the European Union.  

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  we  find  ourselves  in  a  difficult  handicapped  situation 
whereby  we  have  no  way  of  enforcing  what  goes  on  abroad  and  ensuring  the  dangers  out 
there in Europe, in the States, in Africa, in Asia, in other countries, do not come and drive on 
our roads. We have no way of enforcing that. In addition, we also have no way of ensuring 
that those drivers, who are disqualified here, do not drive there. So, what I humbly require 
and what I humbly suggest is that the hon. Minister, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the hon. 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  try  to  explore  urgently  the  possibility  of  coming  up  with  an 
amendment  to  the  Convention  on  International  Driving  Permit  -  the  IDPs,  amended  to 
recently in 2011, but a new amendment to take into consideration the element of recognition 
of  offences  and  recognition  of  the  issue  of  disqualification  and  suspension.  It  is  only  then 
when  there  is  such  a  recognition  and  there  is  a  modality  and  mechanism  for  exchange  of 
information that this laudable initiative would make any sense at all. 

Now,  this  is  my  humble  suggestion.  It  is  true  that  I  also  have  clients  who  hold 
international  driving  licences,  but  forgive  me  if  I  am  addressing  this  right  now,  I  am  not 
declaring my interest as hon. Collendavelloo so ably said I should, but I am only here acting 
as a humble servant of this Republic and trying to say that this is an issue that seems to have 
been cast aside. It is not sufficient, Madam Speaker, to say: “We are going to stop people 
with  an  international  driving  licence  from  driving  because  they  have  committed  offence”. 
That does not make it right. Even if Parliament is sovereign, this is an issue which will, in my 
humble view, find a lot of challenges in our Courts and will fall.  

I  remember  the  time  when  there  was  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon. 
Beebeejaun, as he was then, brought after 2005 - hon. Soodhun will remember - a legislation 
which said, on the road traffic issue, that: “You could suspend someone’s licence pending the 
determination of the matter”. We all remember that. Hon. Bodha was here as well. I was one 
of  the  backbenchers  of  Government  who  stood  up  and  said:  “I  don’t  agree  with  that 

 

33 

legislation”.  Because  I thought that it was against the Constitution. I  was taken to task by 
Members of my party for not having stuck to Government and agreed that it was good even 
though it was not good. I was the only one in my party who said I did not agree with it and 
what happened, eventually, was the Court turned it down and said that: “it was indeed not in 
line with our Constitution.”  

What am I trying to get out here is: the intention is noble.  We all hope that there will 
be no accidents or less.  There will be no fatal accidents.  This is a heavy responsibility that 
the hon. Minister and any hon. Minister for road transport bears upon his shoulders and it is 
not an easy task.  I am sure that every day he looks at his newspaper and the statistics he 
receives at his Ministry and says: “I wish that there was no more accident”.  However, he 
finds them coming in and he finds himself in a situation where he says: “How can I control 
negligence?  How can I control those who do not think when driving?  I can come up with 
only legislation”. Then we all hope that it works.  We all wish the country success on this and 
we wish him well. 

Thank you very much. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bodha! 

 
(1.06 p.m.) 

The  Minister  for  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha):   
Madam Speaker, if  you allow me I will speed through the summing up.  There is a lot of 
consensus in the House.   I would like to thank  the hon.  Leader of the  Opposition and my 
colleagues  on  both  sides  of  the  House  to  have  participated  in  the  debates.    I  think  that 
everybody is keen to see to it that we have new measures and that we have measures which 
are  effective.    In  Mauritius,  today,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  465,000  vehicles.    We  have 
350,000  people  who  are  driving.    We  have  3,000  buses  and  we  have  about  175,000 
motorcycles.  That’s where the problem is.  We want to have safer roads.  We want to have 
less accidents.   

In fact, the World Health Organisation has said that, in about 10-15 years to come, 
road accidents will be the third killer as regards to the number of people; one of the causes of 
death. We  all know that cars are  going to be more sophisticated, faster. We all know that 
everybody wants to have a car.  We all know that life is going to be more hectic.  We are 
going to have better roads, more roads.  In fact, it is a very tall order for any Minister, for any 
Government to be able to see to it that the roads are safe and just to take the CNT; they have 

 

34 

about 500 buses and they  are carrying hundreds and thousands of people every  day.  You 
have 250,000 schoolchildren we are catering for every day.  

In Port Louis, you have 160,000 people, but you have 400,000 people coming every 
day for business, to work, to spend some time.  Therefore, it is a very tall order.  In fact, this 
is the beginning of a new system and I hope; I sincerely hope that everybody will help us to 
see to it that it is implemented because the former system was  a bit abusive. You had the 
double  jeopardy  and  people  had  the  impression  that  the  cameras  were  a  bit  des  cameras 
piégés.  Therefore, we are trying to put some order in all this to make it become simpler, 
more human.  In fact, there is going to be a tolerance.  It will not flash at 60, in fact.  You will 
have  a  leeway.  You  will  have  a  percentage  of  leeway.    We  have  made  the  speed  limits 
simpler, 60 and 80; 80 and 110.   

We  have  to  do  something  for  the  motorcycles.    Most  of  them  are  driving  with  a 
learner permit which, in fact, in many cases it is five years, ten years, fifteen years old.  You 
have no testing of motorcyclists and, out of 120,000 fatal accidents, about half of them are 
people on motorcycles.  In fact, Madam Speaker, this issue of road safety is one of the most 
important  issues  for  any  Government,  for  any  nation  because  it  is  millions  of  people 
travelling every day and we want to get home safely, we want to go to work safely.  This is a 
top  priority  and  this  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  journey  where  we  should  bring  all  the 
stakeholders. We have had consultations with the Police, with the bus drivers.  I met the taxi 
owners yesterday.  I met l’ACIM.  I met some of the people, of what we call la société civile, 
to understand and to listen to them. But, can you imagine that at any given point in time, in 
Mauritius, you may have 200,000 or 250,000 vehicles. And an accident, one second before 
and  one  second  after  does  not  happen.  It  happens  at  one  point  in  time,  for  a  number  of 
reasons. For this reason, Madam Speaker, il y a maintenant une science de l’accidentologie, 
its research, its surveys to understand the causes of accidents, that is, where, why and how. 
C’est devenu une science qui est étudiée et c’est devenu une prioritié nationale, because one 
person who loses his life in an accident, it is a loss for the country, it is a tragedy for the 
family. 

We  have  come  with  a  number  of  measures  and  I  hope  sincerely  that,  with  the 
collaboration  of  one  and  all,  we  will  make  our  roads  safer.  But,  it  is  the  beginning  of  a 
journey, it is a tall order. With regard to education in our schools, we will have to see to it 
that students travel more comfortably in the buses now. We have put 50 more buses. We have 

 

35 

to see that the elderly should be able to access the bus. We are thinking of semi-low floor 
buses. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, public transport has not developed in the same sophisticated 

manner as our society has. We had double deckers in Mauritius, like in London. 

(Interruptions) 

Before! Today, in the 21st century, buses are the same as the buses we had in the 1800s and in 
the 1900s. Therefore, we are coming with a series of measures and we are going also to see 
that  there  is  prevention,  there  is  deterrent.  We  are  working  with  the  Police  Squad  to  have 
more control on the roads. We are going to see to it that we have better roads and better new 
system. 

I think, Madam Speaker, that a lot has been said about the debates. Whatever I will 
say today, in this House, whatever be my wish and the wish of all the Members of the House, 
the proof of it will be on the road. We hope that, with this Bill - we will take some time to 
implement it, to make it become familiar – we will see to it that drivers are not reckless as 
regards to their own safety and the safety of the other road users. 

We have a huge problem with pedestrians. 40% of people who die on the roads are 
pedestrians. We have a huge problem because many roads are narrow, we have no pavements 
and we have a lot of reckless driving where we have the crossings. All this is a question of 
education and communication. We will see to it that we have a broad campaign, a national 
campaign. I am very happy that the Brahma Kumaris and some other NGOs are working on 
this road safety issue and everybody wants to see to it that we have fewer accidents and the 
roads are safe. 

I think, Madam Speaker, we will take on board many of the suggestions and proposals 
which have been mentioned in the House today. Many of them are very valuable. At the end 
of the day, there is a consensus that we want to have a country with a good reputation and 
less accidents. A good reputation, not only as a safe country for tourism, but a safe country on 
the roads, and I think that we will see to it that our children, ourselves, we are on the right 
track. 

We came with a Bill which we consider as being more acceptable, more humane and 
more user-friendly. I sincerely hope that we will be able to implement it. The proof of it will 
be in the implementation. 

36 

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. VI of 2015) was considered and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming,  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. VI of 2015) 

was read the third time and passed. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Wednesday 13 May 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

 

At 1.18 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 13 May 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

37 

 

