No. 31 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 22 SEPTEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 31 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 22 September 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - VIP GALLERY – FRENCH SENATORS 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that we have in our VIP 
Gallery today, two French Senators, Mr Alain Marsaud and Mr Christophe-André Frassa who 
are  on  official  visit  in  the  context  of  the  official  commemoration  of  the  300  years  of  the 
presence  of  French  people  in  Mauritius.    On  behalf  of  the  House  and  in  my  own  name,  I 
extend a warm welcome to them. 

                                                                       

PAPERS LAID 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –  
 

 A.  Prime Minister’s Office – 

  The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National  Human  Rights  Commission  for  the  year  ended  31  December 
2014. 

B. Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

.  

. 

 (a)   The  Land  (Duties  and  Taxes)  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.  2) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 175 of 2015).  

 (b)   The Annual Report of the Accountant General and the Accounts of the 
Government of the Republic of Mauritius for the fiscal year ended 31 
December 2014 (In Original). 

 

C. Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

  The  Dangerous  Drugs  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 

(Government Notice No. 179 of 2015).  

 

 

. 

. 

. 

 

 

. 

8 

D. Ministry of  Local Government  – 

  The  District  Council  of  Pamplemousses  (Market/Fair)  Regulations  2015  

(Government Notice No. 176 of 2015). 

 

E. Ministry of Arts and Culture – 

 The Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Tamil Speaking Union 
for the years 2010, 2011 and 2012.  

F.  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms, Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 

(a)   The  National  Identity  Card  (Civil  Identity  Register)  Regulation  2015 

(Government Notice No. 177 of 2015).  

(b)   The  National 

Identity  Card 

(Amendment)  Regulation  2015 

(Government Notice No. 178 of 2015). 

 

G.  Ministry  of 
Institutions – 

  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 

 The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
Chagossian Welfare Fund for fiscal year 2014. 

 

 

 

 

9 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CEB – ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to -  

regarding the emergency measures recommended by the World Bank to ensure 

(a) 
the security of supply thereof, where matters stand as to the – 

(i) 

appeals of CT Power and of Burmeister & Wain Scandinavian Contractor 
AS and the purchase of engines of 60 MW for the St. Louis Power Station;  

(ii)  optimisation of maintenance;  

(iii)  emergency voltage reduction;  

(iv)  37-year old Pielstick engines, and 

(v)  purchase of two 36 MW gas turbines, and  

if the price thereof will be lowered, following the windfall gains made by the 

(b) 
Central Electricity Board due to the fall in the price of coal and of oil. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, in answer to part (a), the World Bank in its report at page 
7 says – 

“The results of simulations of the energy supply to peak demand in the island 
of Mauritius carried out by the World Bank team revealed significant capacity 
gaps for the period 2015-2017.  In the short term - so goes on the World Bank 
- time constraints would very likely prevent any additions to the generation 
installed capacity in the island of Mauritius that are not already planned and 
under  development.  Therefore,  the  measures  recommended  by  the  World 
Bank team to eliminate the capacity gap in this horizon refer to enhancing the 
operation of the existing system, fast tracking generation projects already in 
the pipeline and extending the operation either  of existing  generation assets 

10 

 
that  are  scheduled  for  decommissioning  or  of  IPPS  whose  contract  is 
scheduled for termination.” 

At  page  53  of  the  report,  the  World  Bank  discusses  in  detail  its  recommendations  for  the 
short-term.  Nothing  in  what  they  say  can  authorise  any  well-intentioned  reader  to  find, 
emergency drama or panic, when there is none. 

It is, therefore, a theatrical exaggeration to suggest that we have to take measures in 

the nature of an emergency. 

On a correct reading of the report in conjunction with facts provided to me, I am of 
the firm opinion that, in assessing the capacity gap, the World Bank, in fact, underestimated 
the  capacity  available  for  supply,  especially  during  the  critical  months  of  November  and 
December. 

I shall take one instance which is at page 121 of the report. The World Bank assumes 
that CEL will continue to run on coal and bagasse but omits from consideration the fact that 
CEL has been running only on coal and this as from 2014. The World Bank figure is that 
CEL will churn out only 12 MW. In fact, CEL will continue with coal and will churn out 22 
MW of power. 

At page 41, I can only read what is written there: Little information is available on the 
Medine new bagasse-fired thermal plant in the documentation made available to the World 
Bank team. 

In the energy balance in 11, the projects output is considered from 2015 onwards. For 
this  reason,  the  World  Bank  team  assumes  that  the  Medine  new  plant  is  expected  to  be 
operational at the beginning of 2015. 

We see, therefore, that, far from being dramatic, the language of the World Bank is 
guarded and cautionary. For example, on Medine New, the World Bank provides the figure 
of 4 MW when the real figure is 11 MW. 

As for the Pielstick engines, they will continue to run until 2017 and not 2016. 

All  this  indicates  that,  on  real  figures,  we  are  not  in  any  situation  of  drama  and/or 

emergency. 

What we see, therefore, is that not only has there been an underestimation of available 
capacity, there has also been a misapprehension of the maintenance plan of CEB. CEB will 

 

11 

be able, with the assistance of the IPPs, to sail through 2016 and through 2017 without great 
difficulty. 

I come now to part (a)(i) of the question on CT Power and BWSC. The two cases are 
not appeals strictly speaking; they are applications for Judicial Review. CT Power has applied 
for judicial review.  The matter will be mentioned on 24 September 2015. 

BWSC has also applied for Judicial Review. They applied for an injunction. The case 

will be mentioned on 28 September 2015. 

In  my  statement  in  the  National  Assembly  on  01  September  2015,  I  informed  the 
House that, on 03 July 2015, the CEB has invited fresh tenders with revised specifications for 
60 MW capacity, as approved by the African Development Bank and recommended by the 
World Bank. The closing date is 01 October 2015.  It is expected that the contract will be 
awarded by the end of this year for commissioning of the engines within 18 months.  The 
engines should be operational by June/July 2017. 

Optimisation  of  Maintenance,  that  is  with  regard  to  part  (a)(ii)  of  the  question,  the 
CEB  is  in  consultation  with  the  Independent  Power  Producers  and  it  has  already  finalised 
scheduled maintenance of all generating units island wide with a view to optimise on capacity 
available and minimise outage on maintenance, that is, machines being immobilised because 
of maintenance. In terms of figures, the reserve margin - which is a capacity within which we 
can play if we are in trouble - ranges from 42 MW to a very comfortable 146 MW during the 
whole year taking into account what is called a spinning reserve of 10%. The reserve margin 
should, therefore, cater for any major breakdown of the biggest unit in operation. All these 
calculations have taken into account seasonal variation in demand and seasonal variation in 
supply. 

As regards part (a)(iii), emergency voltage reduction, that is a recommendation of the 
World  Bank.  CEB  has, in  the  light  of these  recommendations,  conducted  tests.  They  have 
given positive results, confirming the forecast of the World Bank, that is, that it is feasible to 
undergo emergency voltage reduction. What it means is that voltage would be reduced by a 
certain  percentage.  Already,  in  our  law  under  the  Electric  CT  Regulations,  CEB  or  any 
producer is allowed to reduce voltage by up to 6% - to reduce or to increase by up to 6%. 
This would mean, according to CEB’s estimates, that there would be a capacity reduction of 
5 to 8 MW, but I hasten to add that this has not been tested on the terrain, these are estimates. 

 
CEB  also  states  that  such  reduction  will  have  no  effect  on  domestic  and  industrial 

12 

appliances. 

CEB  does  not  envisage  resorting  to  this  measure  except  in  very,  very  extreme 

circumstances. 

As regards part (a)(iv), the Pielstick engines were commissioned in 1978 and 1979 
respectively. The initial rating was 12MW for each engine; they have been derated to 5 MW 
only and they are operating safely on this 5 MW output. It is expected that operating these 
engines for two more years should not be a problem.  Upon the commissioning of these new 
60 MW units at St Louis in 2017, those units will be phased out. 

As regards part (a) (v), the purchase of the two 36 MW Gas Turbines, in my statement 
of 01 September 2015, Madam Speaker, I mentioned how the World Bank had recommended 
that gas turbines of 2 x 36 MW should be procured.  Such technology should provide lower 
costs  of  production  of  electricity  in  the  medium-term  through  significant  improvement  of 
overall efficiency, which is twofold than the open cycle gas turbines presently in operation at 
Nicolay.  The environmental aspects associated with diesel engines operating on heavy fuel 
oil will also be considerably improved. 

The CEB is in the process of appointing a Consultant for the installation of the gas 
turbines and a first unit is expected to be in operation in January 2018. The CEB has launched 
an expression of interest for consultancy services on 25 August 2015. The closing date is 07 
October 2015. The scope of the consultancy is to carry out a summary feasibility study to 
validate  the  project  and  to  propose  technical  implementation  solutions,  carry  out 
environmental impact assessment and risk assessment and the basic design engineering of the 
power plant. 

The  CEB  expects  to  appoint  the  Consultant  by  mid-October  2015,  the  report  to  be 
submitted by June 2016. In parallel, the Consultant will carry out a pre-qualification of EPC 
contractors  by  May  2016  and  prepare  the  tender  documents  for  design,  supply  and 
commissioning  of  the  plant.  Tenders  are  expected  to  be  floated  in  August  2016  and  the 
contract award is expected by January 2017 which means that the first turbine could be in 
operation in January 2018 and a second one in January 2019 and completed with the steam 
turbine and full CCGT plant in January 2020.  

 
The  Combined  Cycle  Gas  Turbine  plant  will  operate  with  an  efficiency  of  around 

13 

60% as compared to 45% of diesel plant and 30% for coal/bagasse plant. 

In parallel, a committee comprising my Ministry, Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development,  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management, the Mauritius Ports Authority and the State Trading Corporation is working on 
the  aspects  regarding  the  implementation,  transport  and  storage  of  LNG.  This  will  be  the 
subject  of  debates  in  connection  with  the  MARENA  Bill.  The  possibility  of  bilateral 
cooperation with countries such as Mozambique and others regarding long-term Government 
to Government agreement is also being considered.  

As  regards  part  (b)  the  question,  I  am  not  aware  of  the  extent  of  these  alleged 

“windfall gains” as I do not hold the latest accounts of the CEB.  

(Interruptions) 

However, it is clear that with the drop in commodity prices –  I do not read certain 
newspapers - coupled with the fact that CEB steadfastly refused to be trapped by those who 
were pressing  for the adoption of hedging mechanisms, CEB can  easily  forecast a  year of 
profits. However, no reduction in tariffs is envisaged.  

Compared to other institutions in the country, the Central Electricity Board took the 
right  decision  not  to  resort  to  hedging  at  the  time  that  the  prices  of  HFO  and  coal  were 
increasing on the world market.  May I add that I take no credit for this because these were 
decisions which were taken before my time! This has enabled the Central Electricity Board to 
benefit from the current drop in oil and coal prices.  Such drops may be only temporary as the 
situation  may  quickly  evolve  on  the  commodities  market  particularly  if  oil  producing 
countries reduce their production.  Experience shows that oil prices are very volatile subject 
to geopolitical situations and demand and supply conditions. 

Furthermore,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  has  heavy 
investment programmes over the next five years to increase its production capacity through 
the installation of engines at St Louis Power Station and at Les Grandes Salines.  In addition, 
the  CEB  is  upgrading  its  grid  because  of  the  under-investment  in  that  sector  in  the  past.  
There  is  a  pressing  need  to  upgrade  the  physical  integrity  of  the  Transmission  and 
Distribution  network  to  cope  with  more  adverse  climatic  conditions  as  well  as  to 
accommodate more renewable energy to meet the target of 35% by 2025.  The current figures 

 

14 

of Central Electricity Board show that it will need investments in the order of Rs22 billion in 
the next five years. 

Such investments would increase the debt servicing requirements of the Board and the 
current positive financial position can only allow the Board to minimise any impact on future 
electricity tariffs. 

Furthermore,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  tariff  is  not  indexed  to  inflation  and 
foreign  currencies  for  the  payment  of  its  loans.    These  factors  may  obviously  erode  the 
current surplus. 

In  addition,  according  to  Central  Electricity  Board’s  forecast  the  price  of  coal  is 
expected to increase by 3% to 4% annually over the next four years, while the price of oil is 
forecast to annually increase in the range of 6.7% to 7.5% based on the latest World Bank’s 
Commodity Price Forecast Update.  A new salary structure and related conditions of service 
of Central Electricity Board employees is due as from July 2017.  This will further add to the 
operational costs of the Central Electricity Board. 

In light of the above, I repeat that the Central Electricity Board is not envisaging any 

reduction in tariff and I support fully the stand of the CEB. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has been very slow 
in  delivery,  I  will,  therefore,  expect  that  we  have  some  more  time  for  supplementary 
questions. Any clear-minded reading of the report picks out emergency measures throughout, 
the term ‘emergency measures’ appears time and again.  It is clear that for the World Bank 
we are in an emergency situation. Can I quote, for example, page 57, paragraph 5 where the 
World Bank report says –  

 “In  fact,  even  if  all  the  recommendations  are  implemented,  the  quantitative 
simulations indicate that there would still be a relevant capacity gap in 2016 and the 
first semester of 2017.” 

So, it is clear that it is emergency measures that are put forward. Now, it is clear also that the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister, advised by the CEB, is saying that the World Bank is wrong, has 
underestimated this and that. Now, can I ask whether a representation has been made to the 
World Bank by Mauritius, if yes, can we have a copy of that representation, and, if yes, what 
has been the reaction of the World Bank? 

15 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: Let me take one thing first. Nothing in page 57 warrants creating 
a  panic!  Nothing  in  page  57  warrants  that  we  declare  an  emergency!  On  the  contrary,  of 
course, we can always extract parts of a report.  

The  whole  of  that  report  shows  that  we  are  not  in  an  emergency.  Secondly,  with 
regard to what the World Bank figures have given, they, themselves said like I read at page 
41 that they have made assumptions - which is perfectly normal for an expert to do on - when 
they deal with Medine New the new bagasse fired thermal plant, it is clear that the experts 
were  basing  themselves  on  the  information  which  they  had,  but  the  real  information  is 
otherwise, this is all I am saying. We have taken the report, I don’t think there is any need for 
representations; I will take the decision when the decision has to be taken, but for now I’ve 
read that 10 times over, I am satisfied that we are not in a panic situation, but we are border 
line as I have said. We need to take our precautions, although it does not arise directly from 
the question, but it comes to my mind, we are embarked on an Energy Efficiency STARTER 
Programme which started with the Energy Efficiency Act, right now, I have asked PNKE to 
start  the  programme  with  CWA.  Already,  just  on  CWA,  we  will  be  able  to  save  15%  of 
energy bills. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, we will have to agree to disagree. My reading of the 
report is totally different and it is clear that the Minister himself disagrees when he says that 
the World Bank has underestimated this and that and so on. But I’ll move on, since we have 
to agree to disagree. As far as the purchase of those vital 60 megawatts engines at St Louis 
are concerned, the hon. Minister has informed us that two cases: one from City Power and the 
other  one  from  BWSC  are  before  the  Supreme  Court,  will  be  mentioned  in  both  cases  in 
September. Now, we know that time is of the essence, that we are very tight, it will take - I 
don’t think 18 months like the CEB is saying – I think two years for the order to be placed, 
the  engines  to  be  constructed,  shipped  to  Mauritius,  commissioned  and  installed, 
commissioned and so on. But even on 18 months, will the hon. Minister agree with me, this is 
very tight? Is he sure that those cases will be over by the end of the year or is he envisaging 
to  go  ahead  and  place  the  order  for  purchase  even  if  there  are  cases  before  the  Supreme 
Court? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I will see when the orders are open. I must say that I agree with 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that this is one of the way forward. It is true that we cannot 
be held to ransom by  a Supreme Court case, but at the same time, we need to respect the 

 

16 

Judiciary. We have to balance these two matters. The Public Procurement Act allows me to 
use certain powers, up to now I have been very careful not to make use of it, although I have 
been very tempted to do this. The BWSC (Burmeister & Wain Scandinavian Contractor) - I 
am sorry I can’t pronounce the real name - in fact, is very keen with the second tender. It has 
made about 50 demands of clarifications. So, in the same time, they are saying to cancel the 
tender the first month and at the same breath they are saying they want to be interested in the 
second tender. I don’t want to pass comment because the case is in Court. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move to the other points which I have raised 
because we see the risk, we are going to be sur la corde raide and I hope la corde ne cède pas 
between  now  and  the  first  six  months  of  2017.  Now,  if  I  can  ask  the  next  question  - 
optimisation of maintenance. We’ve been in this Assembly for the last year, then every year, 
every time I put a question, hon. Beebeejaun then Minister responsible would say: “we are 
improving,  we  are  fine-  tuning  and  so  on”.  What  is  left  to  be  fine-tuned?  Can  I  have  an 
estimate of what the fine-tuning by CEB at this late hour is going to bring us of more marge 
de manoeuvre?  

Mr  Collendavelloo:  It  is  not  annual  fine-tuning.  I  have  looked  at  the  maintenance 
plan although I don’t understand much about it, but I mean it is not too difficult either. There 
is a plan where you have lots of colours telling you month by month which machine is going 
to go on maintenance and then I have read that for November and December there are 40.7 
megawatts  of  power  which  will  be  available  for  maintenance  because  there  will  be  no 
maintenance at that time. This is what they tell me, their plan seems attractive and they tell 
me with this maintenance plan they can cater for breakdowns etcetera. L’avenir nous le dira. 

Mr Bérenger: I have looked at the figures which the hon. Minister has just provided 
us  for  that  is  described  as  an  emergency  measure,  this  so-called  ‘Emergency  Voltage 
Reduction’. Now, I’ve listened to the Minister and the figures that he has provided us, that we 
are  going  to  be  able  to  bring  down  peak  demand  by  5  to  8  megawatt  which  is  legally 
admissible. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that this should be the very last resort, that 
this is going to disturb the whole set up? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I do. I mean by that, I agree.  

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on the Pielstick engines. Really, I find that the Minister 
takes it très à la légère. These are 37 year-old engines that can explode at any time - I am not 

 

17 

being alarmist - there have been accidents in the recent past. It is polluting the environment 
there, you have protest and the World Bank points out that we will no longer have spare parts 
for these 37 year-old engines and therefore is the hon. Minister telling me that he can live, he 
is  happy,  with  that  really  emergency  situation?  It  is  described  by  the  World  Bank  that  if 
nothing else can be done, then these 37 year-old engines will be used with all the risks that it 
entails. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I have not started living in a dream world. The reality is there. 
For 35 years, there have been these two Pielstick engines, it is not my habit to dig in the past, 
but no one has been very worried about it until now. I am getting worried. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, of course! I am not saying anything against you! I am talking of... 

(Interruptions) 

You want me to dig in the past, that is your problem! 

(Interruptions) 

In the past I would be – this is why I say I don’t want to dig in the past, but we raised 
the alarm when we were together, we know this. But there was some complacency on the 
other side. I don’t know why this - I saw that mini minor on the paper Le Mauricien with 
Lady Jugnauth saying that was the first car she drove. This is the attachment we have with 
old  engines.  We’ve  got  to  understand  what  we  are  talking  about.    When  we  talk  of  the 
Pielstick engines running, we are talking only about three hours daily during peak hours. We 
are not talking of Pielstick engines running all the time. We are not that dependent on them, 
but at night, for instance, it is 200 megawatts. We don’t need them, but when it comes to 492 
on peak demand then, of course,  you put in the additional power.  I  hope that  clarifies the 
matter. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  on  because  the  hon.  Minister  is  taking  a  lot  of  time 
instead  of  replying  to  questions.  On  the  issue  of  the  two  new  turbines,  gas  turbine,  to  be 
operated for a few years on light diesel oil and then to move on LNG, if we do import LNG.  
Figures  have  been  quoted  by  the  Head  of  the  CEB  that  it  will  cost  us  Rs5.50  ou  Rs5.70, 
without telling us if that is long-term with LNG or only with light diesel oil. Can we have 
precision on that? 

 

18 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  I  hope  I  will  start  replying  to  your  questions  since  you 

seem to be unhappy with my attitude. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please! Address the Chair! 

Mr Collendavelloo: The combined cycle gas turbines will run on diesel oil. I have the 
figures; they have just been given to me.  In combined cycle, the cost of production will be 
less than Rs6 per kilowatt hour. 

That’s on combined.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, with the light diesel oil. Wait a minute, don’t be impatient. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Madam Speaker, will give you time. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I know it is combined cycle gas.  Your question is: what will happen when LNG steps 
in? 

Mr Bérenger: No, my question is: with light diesel oil, what will it cost? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Rs6 ! Light diesel oil… 

Mr Bérenger: This is with combined cycle! 

Mr Collendavelloo: No, no! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply. Do you have 

the reply, hon. Vice-Prime Minister? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Combined cycle will run on diesel. Combined cycle will not run 

with gas, will not run with kerosene. 

 

19 

Mr Bérenger: Can I remind the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, therefore, that we have set 
up, we are going to have a feasibility study if it is possible to have the combined cycle. Now, 
we are setting up a feasibility study to look whether it will be feasible to import LNG. Isn’t 
that putting la charrette loin devant les bœufs? We are going for LNG, we are going for the 
combined cycle and, at the same time, going with feasibility studies! 

Mr Collendavelloo: We are not at LNG. We are not at LNG yet. We need to know, to 
do  all  the  feasibility  studies  before  we  can  reach  there.  For  the  moment,  we  have  already 
launched ourselves on the combined cycle which will run on diesel,  and  you may be of a 
different opinion, but, for the moment, I am taking the decision on advice which I received, 
and on the advice that  I have  received, not only from CEB, and on that it is erroneous to 
assume  that  my  advice  is  from  CEB.  I  have  independent  Advisers  and  sometimes  they 
coincide and sometimes they do not coincide, and from what they tell me, the combined cycle 
will start working with diesel oil and then we will see what happens with LNG; because, it 
can be hoped. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  still  have  not  been  provided  with  the  figure.  With  light  diesel  oil, 

without the combined cycle, what will it cost us? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  We  don’t  know.  Because  we  need  to  do  the  feasibility  study 

before I adventure myself in figures. 

Mr  Bérenger:  This  morning,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Head  of  the  CEB  made  a 
statement. I wanted to ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he confirms that, that we are 
bound  by  international  conventions  not  to  import  -  what  was  stated  this  morning,  a 
convention internationale signée par le gouvernement - more than the 750,000 tonnes that we 
import as at present. Now, I want to know, has Mauritius signed, ratified any international 
convention that says that? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not aware of that statement, but the true position is that in 
the forthcoming COP21 there will be attempts to impose upon us, but there is no convention 
which limits the imports of coal for the moment. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: A good thing, because it seems that the CEB has forgotten – I don’t 
know if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is still standing – that CEB had given its green light to 

 

20 

CT Power, and that would have meant 500,000 additional coal to be imported, and now the 
Head  of  the  CEB  makes  such  statement  à  la  place  du  ministre,  je  dois  dire.  But,  I  am 
satisfied that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, at least, is not aware of any convention that we 
have signed. 

Mr Collendavelloo: No, I am not saying I am not aware. There is none. There is no 

such convention. Unless otherwise advised. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Bérenger: A last part of my question and then … 

Madam Speaker: Okay! 

Mr Bérenger: On the cost. I am surprised that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is saying 
that he is not aware; he has not had the final accounts of the CEB and so on. I am sure he is 
aware of the Central Electricity Board official report for the first five months of the year, and 
if I can quote - 

“The CEB budgeted a profit of Rs264 m. for the first five months, ending 31 May, but 
the actual profit for the first five months are now to be Rs1,594,000,000.” 

This  represents  a  favourable  variance  of  Rs1,330,000,000,  the  windfall  gains  of  the  five 
months. 

Now,  if  you  project  that  over  the  12  months,  and  is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
aware that only last week the latest order placed for purchase of coal was at 50 Dollars? The 
former purchase was 60 Dollars. Last week, the order for purchase has been put at 50 Dollars. 
Therefore, the windfall gains have already been made and the accounts are in front of the - or 
it  should  be  -  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  and  it  is  easy  to  calculate  that  the  windfall  gains 
would be more than Rs3 billion for the whole year. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is only one of the reasons why I am a happy man. 

(Interruptions) 

 

21 

But, on the report, I do not have it. I have asked the Chairman of the Board. 

(Interruptions) 

 I will! The first thing I do when I buy ‘Weekend’ is to read the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
for his press conference. 

Madam Speaker: Please, come back to the question! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Let me say, I am explaining how I came to know of the existence 
of this management account. I have asked the Chairman, it has not yet come up to the Board, 
and when it comes, I will look at it and then I will see. The Chairman is the person, because 
he chairs the Finance Committee, he should be the one to be available. So, I am… 

I am not going into this. I follow sound principles of good governance. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In reply to my Parliamentary Question 
No. B/457 of two weeks ago, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister replied that the highest price at 
which  we  ever  purchased  coal  was  141  Dollars,  and  now  we  hear  it  is  50  Dollars,  latest 
consignment. And we hear also this morning that the forecast increase in price of coal by the 
CEB is 4% to 5%.  That will take at least 20 to 25 years for the price of coal to become its 
original highest. Does that not provide enough leeway to the CEB and to the Government to 
be  more  compassionate  to  the  people  who  are  at  the  lower  rungs  of  the  ladder  and  to  our 
manufacturing sector which is having difficult times competing with countries like China and 
Bangladesh and so on and so forth? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, that’s a good one - at last! - because I was expecting that 
for a long time. Why, because hon. Ganoo was the first one to suggest this in one of his press 
conferences! Yes! What can be done is for the lower rungs of the ladder to benefit from a 
restructuring of the tariffs so that they don’t pay that much and they benefit from the gains to 
be obtained.  The suggestion from hon. Mahomed is extremely valid and it follows from what 
hon. Ganoo has suggested.  Let us look at the lower rungs, see whether the other consumers 

 

22 

can pay for those who are downtrodden.  Now, for manufacturing sectors, I don’t think we 
can do this.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In relation to part (b) of the PNQ, can I ask 
whether the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is aware that during the course of the press conference 
of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  on  Saturday,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  was 
quite enthusiastically referring to the final accounts and actually distributed the final accounts 
during the press conference… 

(Interruptions) 

The management account!  I am sorry, if I got it wrong. The management account and that if 
in the light of the answer given by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that he is not aware of the 
content of the report, whether there has been a breach of confidentiality and whether… 

(Interruptions) 

…and whether the hon. Vice-Prime Minister will initiate…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Allow  the  hon.  Member  to  finish!    Allow  the  hon.  Member  to 

finish! 

Order, please!  Order, Please! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, I said!  I have given already additional time for this PNQ.  I don’t want us to lose the 
time of the House, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

23 

Mr Rutnah:  Perhaps the hon. Members on the Opposition side can extend the courtesy 

of listening! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t make remarks! Please, ask your question! 

Mr Rutnah:  Will the Vice-Prime Minister order an inquiry - and I anticipate…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Rutnah,  don’t  anticipate  anything!    Ask  your  question,  the 

hon. Vice-Prime Minister will reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah:  The question is whether there has been a leakage and whether there will 
be inquiry and whether during the course of the inquiry the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
will assist as to how he received the copy of the report. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah!  Hon. Rutnah, please!   

Hon. Rutnah, please behave! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

And then the last question will be for the hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:   If hon. Baloomoody will let me…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Member, don’t use this kind of words in the Parliament! 

 

You have finished! 

24 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I have not even seen the document which was distributed to the 

press, for one.  I am not even aware of the origin and provenance of that obscure document. 

This document has not even reached the Finance Committee of the Board.  

(Interruptions) 

Now, whether… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please! I have asked you to behave! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  On a point of order… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  On a point of order, yes! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  The hon.  Member has just made  a very serious allegation that the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition has been involved in a serious crime of bribery.  He said that he 
paid bribery …. 

(Interruptions) 

May I ask him to come and withdraw immediately…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, did you say this? 

(Interruptions) 

Did you say this?  If you did, please say ‘yes’ and withdraw! 

 

25 

Mr Rutnah:  I never from a standing position made any allegation. 

(Interruptions) 

And I have not said it and I refuse to withdraw. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No.  Hon. Rutnah!  Hon. Rutnah, please! 

Please, sit down! 

Order, please! Order!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please!  Can I have some order, otherwise I will suspend the session?  

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister, please, sit down!  The floor is for the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

Let me - don’t spoil my day! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

For unparliamentary language, the Standing Orders say: it is only when the Speaker has heard 
the word. 

Read your Standing Orders!  Go and read your Standing Orders, then come back! 

(Interruptions) 

 

26 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister … 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  If you haven’t heard… 

Madam Speaker:  Please, sit down!  I will listen, if there is need, to the recording, 
whether in the recording there are such words which have been used.  I have asked the hon. 
Member to say whether he has used these words and I haven’t as yet received his reply. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  May I reply to the question, Madam Speaker.  I am not aware of 
the origin, provenance of that document.  I cannot, therefore, even say if there has been a 
leakage.  The leakage is a leakage of an authentic document.  For all I know, it could have 
been  written  by  anyone  in  the  world.    Now,  come  and  satisfy  me  that  this  is  the  original 
document and I will answer readily!  

Madam Speaker:  Last question is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Before  I  ask  the  question,  can  I  table  a  copy  of  the  report  dated  30 

July…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Please!    Hon.  Bhagwan,  please,  allow  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition to ask his last question!  We are ahead of time!  

Mr  Bérenger:    And  the  title  is  ‘Management  Accounts  for  the  period  January-May 
2015 and Revised Forecast for the year 2015’.  I table a copy.  You give me back my copy, 
please!   

My last question is - I hope the CEB is right.  We all hope, but can I remind the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister, il prend de lourdes responsabilités.  We have had precedence. The CEB 
has  been  badly  wrong  in  the  past.    In  1976-1977,  we  had  rolling  blackouts.    We  had  to 
purchase  a  very  expensive  gas  turbine  in  emergency  situations  that  we  all  remember.  
Therefore, is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister giving the guarantee to the country that there will 
not be a repeat of these periods? 

 

27 

Mr Collendavelloo:  The country will not wake up with any blackout if I am in charge 
and I am going to be in charge.  If I can see the report, please! I would like to see that.  I have 
never seen that report.  I don’t know where it comes from.  Of course, it will be unsigned.  
You can’t expect it to bear a signature.  

So, until such time … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

…when I obtain the correct copy, then I will…  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, you have got a question!  No, not from a 

sitting position, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo:  So, when I obtain what I have said… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please, sit down! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  …then I will be able to comment.  For the moment, this has no 

value for me.  

Madam Speaker:   Time is over!   Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that 
P.Q. No. B/523 has been withdrawn. P.Q. No.  B/521 in regard to the proposed setting-up of 
a Land Tribunal and addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will now be replied by the hon. 
Attorney-General.  P.Q. Nos. B/527 and B/528 have also been withdrawn.  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SMF QUARTERS – RELOCATION 

(No. B/519) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Special  Mobile  Force  quarters  in 
Vacoas/Phoenix,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Police,  information  as  to  if  the  relocation  thereof  is  being  envisaged  to  allow  for  the 
development of the prime land on which the said quarters stand. 

28 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that it is not presently envisaged to relocate any of the Special Mobile Force (SMF) 
quarters situated in the region of Vacoas/Phoenix, to allow for other development of the land 
on which stand these quarters. 

However, out of the 180 SMF quarters, 39 which are situated at Abercromby, Vacoas, 
are vacant and in a very bad state. The Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
has recommended that these quarters be pulled down. 

The land, on which these 39 quarters stand, has been earmarked for the construction 
of a swimming pool, a modern gymnasium and allied facilities for the Mauritius Police Force.  
As a matter of fact, provision for these projects has already been made in the Public Sector 
Investment Programme 2015/2016. 

SLAVES & INDENTURED LABOURERS – LAND RESTITUTION RIGHTS BILL  

(No.  B/520)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the descendants of slaves 
and of indentured labourers in Mauritius, he will state if Government proposes to introduce a 
Land Restitution Rights Bill in order to bring justice thereto. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  I’ll  be  replying,  with  your 

permission, to both P.Q. Nos. B/520 and B/521 as they relate to the same subject matter.  

Madam Speaker, the Truth and Justice Commission has, in its report, recommended 
the setting up of a Land Research and Monitoring Unit to carry out research into cases of 
dispossession of land and cater for the obstacles to recovering same.   

Madam  Speaker,  Cabinet  has,  at  its  meeting  of  06  February  2015,  agreed  to  the 
the 

setting-up  of  a  Ministerial  Committee  under  my  Chairmanship 
recommendations contained in the Report of the Truth and Justice Commission. 
 
The Ministerial Committee had, at its meeting on 06 August 2015, taken cognizance 
of the Interim Report of the Land Research and Mediation Commission submitted, in April 
2015, by Mr Mandary on the 224 cases of dispossession of land as highlighted in the Truth 
and Justice Commission Report. 

to  reconsider 

The Interim Report mentioned that there are 42 cases, that is, 27 in Mauritius and 15 
in Rodrigues, where there are sufficient evidence of land dispossession.  In 91 cases, there is 

 

29 

no evidence of dispossession. The remaining cases require further investigation by the Land 
Research and Mediation Commission. 

 
There is, also, an additional 131 cases, that is, 121 in Mauritius and 10 in Rodrigues, 
which have not been investigated by the defunct Truth and Justice Commission on account of 
late  submission  of  requests,  and  which  should  be  looked  into  by  the  Land  Research  and 
Mediation Unit.  

I  am  informed  that,  upon  receipt  of  the  Report  on  07  August  2015,  the  Solicitor-

The  Ministerial  Committee  has  also  recommended  that  the  42  cases  of  alleged 
 
dispossession identified in the Mandary Report be submitted to the Attorney-General’s Office 
for advice on the way forward. 
 
General has designated two law officers to study same and tender legal advice. 
 
Madam  Speaker,  it  is  important  to  note  that  many  of  the  cases  of  alleged 
dispossession of land date back to more than 100 years and, in many cases, legal challenge to 
the title of the current owners, whether acquired by prescription or by other means may  be 
difficult.  Legal  advice  on  these  and  other  issues  will  be  sought  prior  to  a  policy  decision 
being taken on the way forward. Moreover, it could be a lengthy and complicated process to 
trace out all the heirs. 

The House will note that the Ministerial Committee has recommended the setting up 
of  a  Land  Research  and  Mediation  Unit  as  opposed  to  the  Land  Research  and  Monitoring 
Unit recommended by the Truth and Justice Commission. This Unit will be headed by Mr 
Mandary and will comprise of a land surveyor from the Ministry of Housing and Lands, a 
retired officer of the Registrar-General and an Attorney, under contract.  This Unit would be 
called upon to carry out in-depth investigations into complaints to advise the applicants after 
investigation.   

The  Committee  considers  that  it  would  be  advisable  that  the  Land  Research  and 

Mediation Unit, in the first instance, attempts to resolve the dispute through mediation. 

A  Land  Restitution  Bill  would,  in  the  circumstances,  entail  various  legal  and 
constitutional implications which have to be carefully looked into. It could, also, entail major 
financial implications for the State if the approach to be taken in matters of responsibility for 
restitution follows, for instance, the South African model. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to the setting-up of a Land Division at the Supreme Court, 
consultations were held with the former Chief Justice who expressed the view that he was not 
in favour of creating such a Division. On 17 September 2015, the Master and Registrar has 

 

30 

been consulted anew on the setting-up of a Land Division of the Supreme Court. Whilst the 
Judiciary is currently not contemplating the setting up of a Land Division, it would welcome 
the setting-up of a dedicated Land Tribunal dealing with land disputes and which would also 
deal  with  cases  of  compulsory  acquisition  of  land  by  Government  in  order  to  avoid  the 
clogging of courts. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ag. Prime Minister, in his reply, 
stated  that  the  Ministerial  Committee  had  recommended  the  reconstitution  of  a  Land 
Research  and  Mediation  Commission,  but,  in  a  reply  in  this  House  last  week,  the  Prime 
Minister  stated  that  the  Ministerial  Committee  has  recommended  the  reconstitution  of  the 
Land Research and Monitoring Unit and later, in that same reply, it is stated that there are 87 
cases which should be followed by the Land Research and Mediation Unit. May we know 
what is the exact decision that has been taken by the Ministerial Committee? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Yes. The exact title of the Unit, Madam Speaker, is Land, 
Research and Mediation Unit. The report of the Truth and Justice Commission mentions a 
Land, Research and Monitoring Unit, but it is just a question of change of name, because 
there is obviously the possibility, especially with these 42 cases of what has been identified as 
dispossession of taking this to Court, but, in all likelihood, this could be a difficult venture 
given the time that has occurred, given the issue of tracing back all the heirs on both sides of 
the court case and given also that prescription has occurred, etc. and the 30 years have gone 
by. So, in fact, in a first instance, the Committee feels that let us try and do some mediation, 
let us try and get people to voluntarily compensate or restitute/restore the land and if that is 
not  possible  also  at  the  same  time,  as  I  mentioned,  the  report  has  gone  to  the  Solicitor-
General to advise on legal action. So, the two paths are being followed. 

Mr  Ganoo:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister,  Madam  Speaker,  whether  the 
whole problem about this question of dispossession and restitution of land finally boils down 
to  a  question  of  finance  and  money,  the  monetary  resources  available  to  the  claimants, 
especially in view of the executive summary of the Truth and Justice Commission said, and I 
quote – 

“There  is  no  justice  in  Mauritius  for  those  who  cannot  afford  lawyers, 
notaries,  land  surveyors  and  attorneys.  The  Commission’s  request  for  funds 
already earmarked since 2009 to help a few deponents survey their land was 
turned down by the authorities.” 

 

31 

So,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  to  see  to  it,  whatever  new  set-up  is  now  being 
envisaged, the Mediation Unit replacing the other Unit which was decided upon in the past 
that the authorities/Government see to it that all the resources should be made available to the 
claimants? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam, I think all of us who deal with the public know 
how  complex  these  cases  are,  because  they  date  from  a  long  time,  it  is  a  lot  of  complex 
issues. So, Government, in fact, is going the extra mile. We are appointing and paying a full-
time retired Chief Surveyor now to come and work on this issue. There will be also a retired 
person from the Registrar General’s Department, an Attorney on contract. So, money is being 
put to provide legal and other expertise in all these cases. Obviously, this is all free-of-charge 
to the persons and, in addition, Madam Speaker, the Solicitor-General has put these two law 
officers  at  the  disposal  of  the  Unit.  So,  it  is  a  question  of  money,  it  is  a  question  of 
complexity,  but  it  is  also  a  legal  issue,  because  of  the  time  that  these  dispossessions  have 
occurred  so  long  ago.  So,  we  are  putting  the  resources,  financial  and  humane  behind  this 
structure and this is the first time that this is being done on that scale. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  understand  from  the  Ag.  Prime 
Minister  that  there  are  42  cases  where  there  is  sufficient  evidence  of  land  dispossession. 
Madam Speaker, we have wasted a lot of time. We have raised expectation. The Ag. Prime 
Minister himself chaired a committee to look into these issues. Today, those families are in a 
very desperate situation. 

Madam Speaker: Please ask your question, hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the Ag. Prime Minister what guarantee do we have now 
that  these  42  cases  will  be  looked  into  immediately  because  those  families  are  waiting, 
Madam Speaker? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, there are lawyers also on the other side; 

they can put their time at the disposal of these people also to take this to Court! 

(Interruptions) 

On the other side, Madam Speaker, we have not wasted any time at all because we have to 
realise, Madam Speaker, that the Committee, headed by Mr Mandaree, had to look into 224 

 

32 

cases  and  another  131  cases  that  have  come  up  after.  There  are  lots  of  cases  and  he  only 
submitted his report in April and in August the report was dealt with and sent to the Solicitor-
General for advice and we are now reconstituting the whole committee. So, no time has been 
wasted. If the hon. Member has any time, he can, please, put himself at the disposition of 
these people and help them! 

LAND TRIBUNAL - SETTING UP  

(No.  B/521)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed setting up of a 
land tribunal to expedite matters of land disputes, he will state where matters stand, especially 
having regard to the alleged numerous cases of misappropriation of land by the sugar estates. 

(Vide reply to P.Q. No. B/520) 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

(Interruptions) 

But you have got another question on the same issue, hon. Lesjongard. It is P.Q. No. B/522, 
please! 

TRUTH AND JUSTICE COMMISSION – RECOMMENDATIONS  

(No.  B/522)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard    (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he will state if he is aware of the request 
made  by  the  Association  Justice  et  Vérité  to  delegate  the  responsibility  of  the  dossier 
concerning the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and Justice Commission 
to  another  Minister  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  actions  he  proposes  to  take,  if  any,  in  relation 
thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, a request has, in fact, been received from 

the Association Justice et Vérité. The request will not be acceded to. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Lesjongard! 

(Interruptions) 

33 

 
Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the Ag. Prime Minister whether he has taken cognizance 
of the letter that was addressed to the hon. Prime Minister and referred to him whereby it is 
stated and I quote, if I may be allowed Madam Speaker, -  

“Vu que M. Duval est très occupé, nous vous supplions de confier la responsabilité de 
cette tâche à quelqu’un de la trempe de M. Soodhun… 

 …qui nous a impressionné par son courage, sa détermination et sa vitesse d’exécution… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Lesjongard: … à aller jusqu’au bout.” 

Mais oui ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please, hon. Henry! 

Mr Lesjongard: Eta ale guetter ki famille ki pe roder do couillon, amerde dimoune! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, please withdraw this! Because you have used an 

unparliamentary word, please withdraw! 

Mr Lesjongard: I withdraw, but the hon. Member should not make comment from a 

sitting position, Madam Speaker.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the question is very specific and I have 

responded to it. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Lesjongard! 

 
Mr Lesjongard: The Ag. Prime Minister says he has responded. May I know whether 

34 

he has written to those people who have written the letter to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I have responded to the question, Madam. 

(Interruptions) 

INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION – SETTING UP 

(No. B/523) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed setting up of an 
Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission,  as  mentioned  in  the  Presidential  Address,  he 
will state where matters stand.  

(Withdrawn) 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION – LEGISLATION - AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/524)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Human  Rights 
Commission, he will state if consideration will be given for the law in relation thereto to be 
amended  to  increase  the  powers  thereof  to  investigate  into  alleged  cases  of  miscarriage  of 
justice. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

POLICE– BARRISTERS - SERVICES 

(No.  B/525)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the barristers of 
the  private  practice  whose  services  have  been  retained  by  the  Police  Department,  since 
January 2015 to date, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 
Police, information as to the names thereof, indicating in each case the  - 

(a) mode of selection thereof and the criteria used therefor; 

 
(b) terms and conditions of retention of services thereof, and  

35 

(c) cases in respect of which the services thereof have been retained. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  barristers  of  the  private 
practice whose services have been retained by the Police Department, since January 2015, I 
am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  Police  have  solicited  the  services  of 
private barristers on only one occasion, namely in the second leg in the matter S.B., against 
the  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  and  the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

I am further informed that the Police usually enlist the services of State Counsels for 
 
legal advice and to represent the Commissioner of Police in matters before Courts.  In the 
first  leg  of  the  matter  mentioned  earlier,  the  Assistant  Solicitor  General  and  the  Assistant 
Parliamentary Counsel from the Attorney General’s Office represented the Commissioner of 
Police before the Supreme Court. 

However,  in  the  second  leg  of  the  matter  regarding  the  application  made  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  for  an  Order  to  review  the  injunction  granted  by  Justice  Mrs  Ah 
Foon  Chui  Yew  Cheong  in  the  same  matter,  subsequent  to  a  meeting  with  the  Solicitor 
General  and  officers  of  the  State  Law  Office,  the  Police  exceptionally  decided  that  they 
would retain Counsel from private practice.  Accordingly, when the matter was called before 
the  Judge  on  17  July  2015,  Counsel  Mr  S.K.T.  instructed  by  Attorney  Mr  P.C.,  after  the 
motion for withdrawal by the State Law Office was granted, appeared for the Police. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed by the 
Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  services  of  Messrs  S.K.T.  and  P.C.  were  enlisted  on  the 
grounds  of  their  track  record  and  experience.    They  have  offered  their  services  on  similar 
terms and conditions as for their other private clients. 

 

No fees have been paid as at date.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Ag. Prime Minister what criteria has been used 

by the Commissioner of Police to retain the services of Counsel and Attorney in this case? 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: As I mentioned, Madam Speaker, it is stated here that it 

36 

was on the grounds of their track record and excellent experience. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the Ag. Prime Minister to enquire from the Commissioner of 
Police or the relevant authorities whether these barristers or attorneys, who have been chosen 
by the Police, have themselves very bad Police records and let the House know accordingly? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not at all aware of that, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Maybe the hon. Ag. Prime Minister may ask the Commissioner of Police 
whether for this attorney P.C. in particular there was not a Police case which was withdrawn 
only after this Government took office? There was a Police case before the Court and that 
was withdrawn.  

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  am  not  aware,  but  I  am  sure,  Madam  Speaker,  if  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  was  aware  of  anything  adverse  he  would  not  have  chosen  those 
persons. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: The Ag. Prime Minister just said because of the track record.  Can I 
ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether the services of a Senior Counsel was sought in this 
particular case especially to assist our Police Force? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether he could enquire and 
inform the House as to whether the services of these Barristers were directives coming from 
the Prime Minister’s Office, through the Secretary for Home Affairs? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware at all about that, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

37 

 
Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  practice  of  seeking  legal  advice 
from outside the State Law Office; does the hon. Ag. Prime Minister not feel that this will 
undermine legal officers that we have at the State Law Office? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, it is for the exceptional 
situation in a case which involved two divisions of the Attorney General’s Office. Therefore, 
this is why this exceptional step was taken. So, it is exceptional and that is why it was taken. 

Madam  Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN – PROJECTS EARMARKED 

(No. B/526) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Constituency  No.  12, 
Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien,  he  will  state  the  future  projects  earmarked  for 
implementation thereat. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am tabling a list of future projects for 
Constituency  No  12,  Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien,  which  has  been  approved  for 
implementation by the National Development Unit during Financial Year 2015-2016. 

In  addition  to  these,  new  projects  will  also  be  considered  under  the  forthcoming 

Framework Agreement for the construction and upgrading of roads and associated works. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: May I request the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to consider the possibility of 
making  provision  for  the  dredging  of  the  river  which  flows  in  the  village  of  Mare  Tabac 
because this has been the serious cause of flooding recently? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I will pass it on to the NDU. 

POLICE STATIONS, DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS & DETENTION CENTRES – 

CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/527) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed construction of 

 

38 

Police Stations, Divisional Headquarters and Detention Centres, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, a list thereof, indicating where matters stand 
in each case, including – 

(a) the cost of the project, indicating the amount of money budgeted therefor and the 

amount thereof already spent in relation thereto, and  

(b) when construction works are expected to start. 

(Withdrawn) 

NDU & CITIZENS ADVICE BUREAUX - VACANCIES 

(No. B/528) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  vacancies  which 
presently exist at the National Development Unit, including the Citizens Advice Bureaux, he 
will give a list thereof, indicating in each case -  

 (a) the grade thereof; 

(b) since when, and  

(c) when they will be filled. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary 

Question Nos. B/532, B/541, B/564, B/565 and B/546 have been withdrawn. 

Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/533  in  regard  to  the  Fishing  Port/Fish  Processing 
Project  at  Bain  des  Dames  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development will now be replied by the Ag. Prime Minister and Minister of Tourism and 
External Communications. 

With regard to the Fishing Port, Fish Processing Project at Bain des Dames addressed 
to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will now be replied by the Ag. 
Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications.  PQ  No.  B/539  in 
regard to the number of patients suffering from autism will be replied by the hon. Minister of 
Social Security and National Solidarity. 

 

39 

SPORTS ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL - SETTING UP 

(No.  B/529)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière)  
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether he will state if a Sports Arbitration Tribunal 
has been set up and, if so, when and if not, why not. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Sports 
Arbitration Tribunal has been set up since November 2014.  I am circulating the composition 
of the Tribunal which was constituted as required under Section 41 of the Sports Act 2013. 

I am also circulating a copy of a “Press Communiqué” which was issued following 
 
the  setting  up  of  the  Tribunal  inviting  stakeholders  and  members  of  the  public  who  feel 
aggrieved by the decision of any sports organisation to make representations to the Tribunal. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, malgré le fait que le ministre vient de nous dire 
 
qu’il  va  circuler  la  composition  du  tribunal,  peut-il  informer  la  Chambre  qui  est  le 
Chairperson et qui sont les assesseurs ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  As  I  have  said  the  Tribunal  was  set  up  in  November  2014,  the 
Chairperson  is  Mr  Raj  Seebaluck,  Magistrate  at  the  Intermediate  Court,  designated  by  the 
Chief Justice, Mr Mahendur Purbhoo a retired Senior Sports Officer and Mr Louis Clency 
Lee Khun Sing Sam-Soon, Barrister at Law. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  depuis  la  mise  sur  pied  de  ce 

tribunal, combien de cas ont été référés et peut-on savoir lesquels? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, no case has been referred to and, as I have said, there 

was a press communiqué and no one did come with any case. 

10TH EDITION OF THE INDIAN OCEAN ISLANDS GAMES  

 (No.  B/530)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Jeux des Iles de l’Océan 
Indien,  he  will  state  if  Mauritius  still  stands  as  candidate  for  the  organisation  of  the  2019 
edition thereof and, if not, why not.  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker,  I have to inform the House that according to the 
Charter of the Indian Ocean Island Games, the country to host the following edition of the 

 

40 

games is designated six years prior to the holding of the games so that the flag of the games is 
handed over to the next organising country at the closing ceremony of the current edition.   

The decision to entrust the organisation of the 2019 games was, therefore, taken in a 
meeting of the “Conseil International des Jeux” (CIJ) held in Seychelles in February 2012.  
However, at the CIJ meeting held in April 2015 in Reunion Island, Comoros did not submit 
the required documents regarding its capacity to organise the 2019 games.  CIJ expressed its 
concern  to  that  situation  at  the  meeting  and  invited  another  member  country  to  consider 
hosting the games.  Consequently, Mauritius bid to host the 10th Edition of the Indian Ocean 
Islands  Games  in  2019.    Mauritius  officially  submitted  its  bids  documents  to  the  CIJ 
Secretariat within the prescribed delay. 

During meetings held in August 2015 in Reunion Island, CIJ finally decided to entrust 
 
the hosting of the 2019 Games to Comoros Islands despite the issues raised by my officers 
regarding  les  Village  des  Jeux,  the  medical  facilities  available  and  availability  of  sports 
infrastructures.  At  the  closing  ceremony  of  the  Games  in  Reunion  Island,  the  flag  of  the 
Games  was  officially  handed  over  to  Comoros  Island.    Therefore,  the  candidature  of 
Mauritius no longer holds good and is automatically lapsed. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  malgré  la  réponse  du  ministre,  j’aimerai  qu’il 
nous dise si le représentant de Maurice, au sein du CIJ, a retiré la candidature  mauricienne 
lors de la réunion du 08 Aout de cette année à l’île de la Réunion? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  when  the  CIJ  Committee,  the  majority  of  the 
votes voted for Comoros Island, that means that the candidature of Mauritius is out. So, it is 
clear. 

Mr  Quirin:  Permettez-moi,  Madame  la  présidente,  d’être  en  désaccord  avec  le 
ministre car nous pouvons revenir en arrière. Après les jeux de 1998 à la Réunion, on avait 
confié l’organisation aux Comores, mais vu l’impossibilité des Comores d’aller de l’avant, on 
avait confié l’organisation à Maurice. Donc, le fait de maintenir la candidature - parce que 
nous savons très bien comment cela se passe - j’ai avec moi Madame la présidente… 

Madam Speaker: Yes, ask your question please!  

Mr Quirin: C’est important, il faut que je dise ce que j’ai à dire. J’ai une copie de … 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member should ask his question, he should be brief. 

41 

 
Mr  Quirin:  J’ai  un  article  dans  un  journal  en  ligne,  Madame  la  présidente,  où  le 
responsable du comité olympique des Comores, lui-même, est dans l’attente d’une réponse de 
son gouvernement pour débloquer les fonds de façon à procéder à construire les nouvelles 
installations  sportives.  Ce  qui  fait  qu’il  y  aura  une  réunion  du  CIJ,  donc  je  demande  au 
ministre  le  fait  d’avoir  retiré  la  candidature  de  Maurice,  est-ce  que  cela  ne  va  pas  nous 
empêcher  d’être  candidat  au  cas  où  les  Comores  n’arrivent  pas  à  aller  de  l’avant  avec 
l’organisation pour les Jeux 2019 ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, it is clear, the CIJ is the one who decides, who 
organises the game. The majority of the members of the CIJ have decided to give the games 
to Comoros despite they know that they don’t have the infrastructure. They are the ones who 
take the decision, let them assume their responsibility. We are not the spare wheel. So, we 
have bid to organise the game, we have the structure, if they don’t want to give it to us what 
can we do! 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, Maurice a retiré sa candidature. La candidature 
n’est pas tombée par elle-même. Si on consulte le procès-verbal de la réunion du CIJ en date 
du 08 août … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin, please! The hon. Minister has already replied to this 

question, you can’t insist on this.  Please, proceed with the next question! 

TABLE TENNIS - ADVISER/COACH - CONTRACT  

(No.  B/531)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Mr G. D., Adviser Coach of 
table tennis, he will state the reasons why his contract of employment has not been renewed. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker,  Mr  G.  D.  was  employed  as  Adviser/Coach 
(Table  Tennis)  by  the  Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports  on  a  yearly  renewable  contract  with 
effect as from August 2003. 

At the expiry of the contract of employment of Mr Denis on 31 December 2014, the 
 
Ministry decided to retain his services on a month to month basis, as it was the case for the 
other Advisers/Coaches in order to assess their performance during the tenure of office. 

I have to inform the House that I was surprised to learn that Mr Denis, despite being 
employed as Adviser/Coach in Table Tennis, was working at Harry Latour Stadium and Pte 

 

42 

Jérome Residential Youth Centre where he had not been performing the duties for which his 
services had been hired. 

Consequently, a decision was taken to terminate his employment with effect from 28 
February  2015.    Mr  Denis  was  given  one  month’s  notice  prior  to  the  termination  of  his 
contract as per the terms and conditions of the contract. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre  peut-il  nous  dire  pendant 
combien de temps Monsieur Denis a été au service du ministère de la Jeunesse et des Sports? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, actually it is in my reply, since August 2003 and 

until February. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, Monsieur Denis a été quelqu’un qui a été assidu à 
son travail. Il s’est occupé du centre d’entrainement à Rose Belle, du centre d’entrainement à 
Pte Jérôme, il s’est aussi occupé à promouvoir le tennis de table dans les écoles. Ceci dit, 
Madame la présidente, je demanderai au ministre si ce n’est pas surprenant que quelqu’un qui 
a été régulièrement à son travail pendant 12 années, faisant la promotion du tennis de table et 
que, subitement, dès que le ministre entre en fonction, un mois après on ne renouvelle pas le 
contrat de Monsieur Denis, on le licencie. J’aimerai que le ministre nous dise quelle est la 
vraie raison derrière le non-renouvellement du contrat de Monsieur Denis? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, he was under contract and it was on a month to 
month basis. Furthermore, he was employed as  an adviser/coach  for table tennis and what 
was he doing at Pointe Jérôme Residential Youth Centre where we don’t even have a tennis 
table! 

CASINOS DE MAURICE - FINANCE, STAFF & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  

(No.  B/532)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the casinos, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Casinos de Maurice, information as to 
the financial, staffing and industrial relations situations thereof, indicating if –  

(a) losses are being incurred thereat;  

(b) they are overstaffed;  

 
 (c)  a  mutually  agreed  retirement  scheme  and  a  14th  Month  Bonus  Scheme  for  the 

43 

employees thereof are implemented thereat;  

(d) there are arrears disputes thereat, and  

(e) where matters stand concerning the Grand’ Baie and Flic-en-Flac casinos and an 

eventual strategic partner therefor.  

(Withdrawn) 

BAIN DES DAMES - FISHING PORT/FISH PROCESSING PROJECT 

 (No. B/533) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Fishing 
Port/Fish Processing Project at Bain des Dames, he will give the details of the - 

(a) Chinese investment, and  

(b) project thereof, indicating -  

(i) who will finance the quays and other infrastructure in relation thereto;  

(ii) the fish species concerned therewith;  

(iii) if all permits required therefor have been sought and obtained, and  

(iv) the start and completion dates thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this 
question. During my official mission to China, in June 2013, I met the Chairperson of the 
LHF Group of Companies and invited them to invest in the port sector in Mauritius. The LHF 
Group of Companies which are based in China are internationally renowned in the fishing 
and seafood sectors. The development of the ocean economy will need the emergence of a 
dynamic port to attract investment.  

In regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed by the Director-General of 
the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  that  on  17  August  2015,  the  company  LHF  Marine 
Development Ltd, a subsidiary of LHF Group of Companies, has submitted an application for 
land in the port for the setting up of a fishing port and other ancillary facilities. The proposed 
development will be implemented in two phases. The first phase includes the construction of 

 

44 

quays and cold storage facilities at an estimated cost of USD 100 million. The second phase 
comprises the construction of a trade centre, a seafood market and a floating restaurant.  The 
estimated cost is USD 400 million. 

 The  Quay  proposed  under  LHF  Marine  Project  will  include  a  total  length  of  650 

metres together with an access of 350 metres.  

The promoter will meet the cost for the proposed development. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  fish  species  concerned  are  tuna  (skipjack,  yellow  fin,  big  eye 

tuna) and allied species (dorado and wahoo). 

 However, the project being at the initial stage, the promoter is now carrying out the 
full  feasibility  study  and  detailed  project  plan  to  be  in  a  position  to  apply  for  all  relevant 
permits, namely:  

•  EIA licence, 
•  Building and land use permit 
•  Port licence 
•  Health, sanitary licence 
•  Safety and security clearances 

The Mauritius Ports Authority has issued a letter of intent to the Company for a plot 
of land of 4.5 hectares to enable them to work on the feasibility study, detailed project plans 
and seek the necessary clearances. Depending on the receipt of all necessary permits, the first 
phase of the project is expected to start in the second quarter of 2016. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  whether  during  the 
course of the discussion, a social component with regard to the inhabitants of the region has 
been discussed? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  know,  Madam  Speaker,  that  a  social  component, 

including particularly the fishermen of the region is being discussed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: May I ask the Ag. Prime Minister - I missed it, if he answered - who 

will finance the quays and other infrastructure? 

 

45 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  The  whole  cost  of  the  project  is  being  financed  by  the 

promoter. 

Mr Baloomoody: The Ag. Prime Minister just mentioned that there is consultation 
with the fishermen in the region.  May I know the last time they met and what have been 
proposed to those fishermen? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I did not say there were consultations. I said that during the 
discussions  with  the  promoters  there  is  a  social  plan  which  is  being  considered  for  the 
fishermen of the region. Now, we are not yet at a stage where, in fact, development is about 
to start. We are still at the initial stage and it will be premature to start negotiations before the 
whole project is firmed up. 

Mr Baloomoody: Exactly, this is why!  Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that, 
whilst talking about compensation to the fishermen, we have given them the false hope that 
they will be employed soon by these Chinese promoters? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware of this, Madam Speaker. I know that there 
was compensation relating to the current work and previous work being done at the quay at 
the Mauritius Container Terminal, but I am not aware of this. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the Ag. Prime Minister inform the House whether he can enquire 
whether his colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, met with 
the  Legal  Adviser  of  the  fishermen,  Mr  Valayden,  and  they  nearly  came  to  a  sort  of 
agreement which was made public? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am sorry, I am not aware of that, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours! 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

SMALL PLANTERS - SUGAR - PRICE 

(No.  B/534)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the 2015 sugar 

 

46 

crop, he will state if the likely price of sugar for the small planters has been estimated so as to 
relieve the economic difficulties thereof, indicating if the bagasse transfer price of these small 
planters will be increased, as recommended in one report submitted to him, the more so, as 
the Central Electricity Board has made massive windfall gains recently. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the price of sugar for the Crop 
2015  has  been  estimated  as  at  to  date  by  the  Mauritius  Sugar  Syndicate  at  Rs13,000  per 
tonne, as compared to Rs12,693 for Crop 2014. 

For the Crop 2014, Government had, through the Sugar Insurance Fund, come to the 
rescue  of  the  sugar  industry  by  waiving  the  insurance  premium  for  the  Crop  2014  and  a 
special assistance of Rs2,000 per tonne of sugar accrued to the planters as recommended in 
the actuarial report commissioned by the Sugar Insurance Fund.  This Government, conscious 
of the vulnerability of the small planters, made provision for an additional compensation of 
Rs1,400 per tonne of sugar accruing to them. Thus, the small planters producing up to 60 
tonnes of sugar were eligible for a cash compensation of Rs3,400 per tonne as compared to 
Rs2,000 to other planters.  

The actuarial report commissioned by the Sugar Insurance Fund also recommended 
that  should  the  year  2015  be  a  non-event  year  and  the  price  of  sugar  remains  inferior  to 
Rs15,800, then Government may have resort to a similar approach as for Crop 2014.   

It  is  understood  that  the  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  (SIF)  will  need  to  proceed  with  the 
new  actuarial  exercise  within  the  shortest  delay  given  the  exceptional  circumstances  still 
prevailing.  The new actuarial exercise will define the new contours of the SIF system for the 
period post-2015. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the price of bagasse, it has remained unchanged since it 
was first formulated back in the early 80s.  As you are aware, Madam Speaker, I have set up a 
High  Level  Implementation  Committee  to  review  the  recommendations  proposed  in  the 
Landell Mills Commodities Report which include, among others, the review of the bagasse 
transfer price.  This Committee which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary of my Ministry 
has  had  several  working  sessions  with  all  the  stakeholders  of  the  Sugar  Industry  and  will 
come  up  shortly  with  measures  to  address  the  problems  facing  the  Industry,  including  the 
review  of  the  bagasse  transfer  price.    I  can  reassure  the  House  that  the  price  of  bagasse 
accruing to the growers would need to be fair and reasonable.  

 

47 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  relevant  to  point  out  that  the  previous  Government  had 
commissioned  a  study  by  Hunton  and  Williams  to,  inter  alia,  review  payment  of  bagasse 
price to planters.  I understand that the Report was submitted to the Prime Minister’s Office 
and, once again, we hear the same old story – the report is untraceable.   

Contrary to the previous Government, this Government is giving serious consideration 
to review the bagasse price to ensure that growers are adequately compensated to increase 
their revenue stream and keep the sugar industry viable.  

Mr  Bhagwan:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  informed  us  that  he  has  set  up  a 
committee  to  review  all  this,  but  while  going  through  the  report,  it  recommends  that 
negotiations with the IPPs could result in the IPP re-increasing their part of bagasse transfer 
price  to  the  benefit  of  small  planters.    Being  given  the  urgency  of  the  situation  and  the 
problems planters are facing, especially these days and the price of bagasse has remained the 
same, as rightly pointed out by the hon. Minister, can the hon. Minister inform the House, in 
the interest of planters themselves, whether he could initiate urgent action to see to it that this 
issue of the increase of the price of bagasse for the small planters be treated urgently? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  since  I  have  received  that  report  which  is  Landell 
Mills Commodities Report, I have set up this Committee to look into all the measures, all the 
recommendations made in that report and one of the measures recommended with regard to 
the price of bagasse, as rightly pointed out by the hon. Member, is with regard to reviewing 
that price.  But we are looking at all the other issues as well and since we had to talk to all the 
stakeholders  of  the  sugar  industry,  the  Committee  has,  like  I  said,  been  meeting  all  those 
people and we feel that in the probably coming weeks, we will be in a position to come up 
with the final recommendations as to be proposed by that Committee which will have to go to 
Cabinet and then probably make it public for the whole industry to be aware of the measures 
that we are going to propose.  But rest assured that I will make whatever necessary to ensure 
that the price that is being paid to planters at the moment with regard to bagasse which is only 
Rs100 will have to be reviewed and it has to be fair and reasonable. I can assure the House of 
that. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Do  I  understand  from  the  hon.  Minister  when  he  said  “fair  and 
reasonable” that there is a substantial increase which is coming in the pipeline from what he 
is doing with regard to the planters? 

 

48 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I just mentioned that this Committee is looking at it, 
it won’t be elegant for me now to comment on the substantiality of that amount, but I am sure 
it is going to reflect the real value that the bagasse is bringing to that sector. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, one last question.  Can I ask the hon. Minister apart 
from what he has said about financial assistance to the planters and I hope it is forthcoming 
with the increase in the bagasse of the planters, can the hon. Minister inform the House and 
the  planters  in  general,  what  other  incentives,  apart  from  financial  incentives,  that 
Government, his Ministry is trying to find out to give to the planters in these difficult days? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Apart from bagasse, Madam Speaker, we also, like I said, waived the 
insurance  premium  that  is  claimed  to  all  growers  and  that  insurance  premium  has  been 
waived for the Crop 2014 and as mentioned in that actuarial report, it is recommended that 
for the Year 2015 as well that premium be waived, should the Crop Year be a non-event Crop 
Year.  Apart from that, Government, in the last Budget that was presented in this House, has 
also made provision to provide assistance to small planters to make them go more towards 
Fairtrade label for the sugar that they produce which brings an additional USD60 per tonne of 
sugar  that  they  produce  under  that  Fairtrade  label.    And  also  with  regard  to  the  FORIP 
Scheme, an additional sum of Rs500 m. has been provided in the Budget 2015-2016, such 
that planters who need their land to be upgraded are provided with the necessary facilities to 
have their land upgraded. 

Madam Speaker:  One last question! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, thank you. We all know the situation d’angoisse que 
sont en train de vivre les planteurs.  L’honorable ministre doit le savoir.  From what we are 
hearing from the hon. Minister about the different incentives that are forthcoming, can the 
hon. Minister at least inform the House whether all that is being done and will be done for the 
planters,  whether  these  are  being  transmitted  to  the  planters?   According  to  me,  there  is  a 
problem of communication.  The planters feel that they are left aside despite what is being 
done.  So, can the hon. Minister at least inform the House whether he contemplates to meet 
the planters at least to inform them what is being done, what is forthcoming? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I have been meeting all the stakeholders ever since I 
have been appointed Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security and like I said also, we 
have that committee which will be set up to really talk to all the stakeholders, including the 

 

49 

planters,  small  planters  especially,  and  to  have  their  views  being  taken  on  board  and 
tomorrow itself we have the General Assembly of the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate and I am 
going to address all the stakeholders tomorrow.  So, that is going to be another forum for me 
to  talk  to  them  and  to  inform  them  of  all  the  things  that  we  are  doing  at  the  level  of  the 
Ministry with regard to that Industry. 

PARASTATAL BODIES & GOVERNMENT-OWNED COMPANIES - CODE OF 

CONDUCT 

(No.  B/535)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the parastatal 
bodies and Government owned companies, he will state if - 

(a)  his Ministry has prepared a code of conduct therefor, and  

(b) he has received representations to the effect that several chairpersons intervene 
daily  in  the  day  to  day  administration  of  the  respective  organisation,  for 
example, the Chairperson of the Mauritius Film Development Corporation and, 
if so, indicate the actions, if any, initiated in relation thereto, in each case. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I refer the hon. 
Member to the reply to PQ No. B/285 of 07 April 2015 when I informed the House that my 
Ministry had issued a Circular letter on 13 February 2015 to all Ministries and Departments 
to provide guidance and clarifications on the roles of Chairpersons and Chief Executives in 
public sector organisations.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of this circular has been prompted by the numerous failures 
in  the  management  and  oversight  of  public  sector  organisations  which  have  been 
compounded by  unclear segregation of roles and responsibilities of the  Chairperson of the 
Boards and their Chief Executive Officers.  This situation has, in many cases, led to abuse of 
office, other malpractices and also the weakening of our institutions and the erosion of trust 
in public sector organisations. 

Accordingly, with a view to ensuring and enhancing oversight and good governance, it 
was decided that the roles and responsibilities of Chairpersons and Chief Executives must be 
kept  separate.  Consequently,  the  functions  of  Chairperson  and  Chief  Executive  Officer 

 

50 

should  not  be  exercised  by  the  same  individual  and  the  Chairperson  should  not  have  any 
executive role.  

As regards the Chairperson he or she is primarily responsible for the conduct of the 
affairs  of  the  Board  and  is  not  allowed  to  interfere  in  the  day  to  day  management  of  the 
organisation.  His or her main role is to put in place structures and procedures to achieve the 
Board’s independence, to ascertain that all the relevant information is provided to the Board, 
to preside meetings and to provide overall leadership to the Board, while encouraging active 
participation of all Board members.  

With respect to part (b) of the question, I have not received any representation at my 

Ministry, regarding non-compliance with the said Circular. 

With regard to the MFDC, my Ministry is informed by the MFDC of the following – 

Firstly, the day to day administration of the MFDC is under the responsibility of Mr 
Sachin Jootun, Director; 

Secondly,  the  Chairperson  of  the  MFDC  is  not  involved  in  the  day  to  day 
administration of the Corporation; 

Thirdly, he has had a meeting with staff members of the Corporation when he was 
newly nominated; 

Fourthly, he had a few site visits with officers of the MFDC regarding the relocation 
of MFDC offices and studio. 

Mr Bhagwan: I will take a few supplementary questions, Madam Speaker, with your 
permission. I will start with the MFDC. This Government is talking of good governance and 
issuing circulars. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the present Chairperson of 
the MFDC – I will call him the ‘local Danny Denzongpa’ - was arrested on 30 November… 

(Interruptions) 

He is our ‘local Danny Denzongpa’! He was arrested on 30 November 2010 under…. 

(Interruptions) 

Let  me  ask  the  question.  He  is  a  member  of  the  PMSD,  no?  He  is  not  a  member  of  the 
PMSD, the one I am talking… 

Was he arrested on 30 November under PoCA? He was released on bail and is still on 

bail pour trafic d’influence at the Trust Fund for Specialised Care. 

 
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of any Danny Denzongpa having been 

51 

arrested in Mauritius. I think Danny Denzongpa is an actor in India. 

Mr Bhagwan:  He was arrested, I am saying it officially here – what’s his name? 

I know. He is on bail. Ag. Prime Minister, he is on bail. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bhagwan:  He is on bail. 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Does the hon. Minister of Good Governance find it normal - he is 
somebody who is supposed to ensure that there is good governance - that the Chairperson of 
the Mauritius Film Development Corporation is on bail for trafic d’influence? Is this normal? 
Does the hon. Minister find it normal? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate that I have a lot of responsibilities as 
Minister of Good Governance and I am assuming those responsibilities, but, unfortunately, I 
am not a Judge of the Supreme Court, I cannot prejudge a case of the court. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House, the population that he will 
ensure his colleague responsible for that parastatal body, that pending whatever happens in 
court, will have this person replaced? 

We are talking about good governance, moralité. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker, as I have stated, if there is any case in court, 
then, of course, the Court of Justice of our country will deal with that accordingly and, with 
regard to the procedures that are being put in place regarding the roles of Chairpersons and 
CEOs, this is being adhered to and I can also reassure the hon. Member that there is a team 
within my Ministry who is actively looking at conducting the performance appraisal of those 
Boards and the roles of these Chairpersons and CEOs. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  will  come  to  the  first  part  of  the  question.  The  Minister  has  been 
provided with information, but that person goes there only for a few minor activities. Is the 
hon. Minister aware that this Chairperson who is convicted – convicted Chairperson.  He is… 

 

52 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Who has been accused… 

(Interruptions) 

accused… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! Please, withdraw this word ‘convicted’. 

Mr Bhagwan: Yes. Who is accused  – Chairperson.  He not only  goes  there a few 
times, he is always there pe tire photo ek acteur, actrice, he has been travelling abroad. So, 
can the hon. Minister give assurance that he will conduct an enquiry for what I am saying and 
see to it that good governance prevails there and the Chairperson is not the MD – and the MD 
himself is complaining? 

Mr Bhadain: To reassure the hon. Member, I can certainly look into that. If there are 
any procedures, malpractices as to how the Chairperson and the CEO are acting right now, 
this will be looked into by my Ministry, but with regard to the court case, this is unfortunately 
not under my purview. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister mentions good governance and code of conduct. Being 
given  that  for  anyone  who  seeks  employment  in  the  private  sector,  he  needs  to  provide  a 
Certificate of Morality, so may I ask the hon. Minister whether, in his code of conduct and 
criteria  to  be  appointed,  to  represent  Government  on  Board,  that  he  would  insist  that 
henceforth  all  these  nominees  produce  their  clean  Certificate  of  Morality  and  disclose 
whether there is any Police case against them ongoing? 

Mr Bhadain: I am sure my hon. friend Uteem would know that when you ask for a 
Certificate  of  Morality,  if  there  is  a  case  which  is  being  investigated  or  tried  against 
somebody, it would not appear on the Certificate of Morality. What would appear is when 
somebody is convicted, and, at this moment in time, I understand, there is no conviction. 

But I do appreciate that this is a very good initiative and I am going to look into it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

 

53 

BELLE MARE WATER PARK AND LEISURE VILLAGE – STRATEGIC 

PARTNER  

(No.  B/536)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard 
to  the  Belle  Mare  Water  Park  and  Leisure  Village,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Sugar Investment Trust, information as to if a new strategic partner for the 
renovation and management thereof has been secured and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

name of the strategic partner therefor, and 

terms  and  conditions  of  the  partnership  agreement  therefor  and,  if  not,  why 
not. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Sugar Investment Trust that 
the Belle Mare Water Park and Leisure Village has ceased its operations since October 2013 
following the publication of the report of the Commission of Enquiry on the death of two 
children which occurred at the Waterpark. 

 
Since that time, the Sugar Investment Trust has been in search of a strategic partner to 
upgrade and modernise the infrastructure and propose new activities to attract more people to 
the Waterpark whilst maintaining the highest standards in terms of security and safety. 

The Sugar Investment Trust has, in July 2015, received a proposal from a potential 
 
strategic partner to revive the Waterpark.  Negotiations are still going on and will be finalised 
in due course. 

 
As no agreement has been reached yet and no Memorandum of Understanding signed, 
it  would  not  be  appropriate  and  proper,  at  this  stage,  to  disclose  the  name  of  the  strategic 
partner and the details of the negotiations. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  why  there  has  not  been  any  open 

tender for the management of Belle Mare Waterpark? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as you are probably aware, at the Sugar Investment 
Trust, we have not had a Chief Executive Officer for some time. We have advertised for the 
post and I think yesterday was the closing date for that post. Hopefully, we are going to have 
someone new at the head of that Institution with also new Board members to be appointed 
following election which is due shortly. So, probably, we will go for that, but I must say that, 
in the meantime, we have been receiving offers. I have been told also that last year we have 

 

54 

had three firms that were interested in that particular project, but none of those three suited 
the conditions laid out by the SIT and were not considered. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Minister if he could repeat for how long, how many 
months, this Belle Mare Water Park has not been functioning and what happens monthly? I 
take  it  that  no  one  has  been  thrown  out  of  work  and,  therefore,  what  is  happening,  what 
monthly losses are accumulating? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, like I mentioned in my reply earlier on, it has ceased 
its operation since October 2013, and the cost of maintaining and operating that Water Park 
which  is  now  closed  cost  around  Rs1.3  m.  per  month.  There  used  to  be  36  permanent 
employees posted there. Of those 36, 20 have been redeployed elsewhere within the group. 
Like I said, we are looking for new partners to join in to be able to put it back into operation 
hopefully very soon. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  With  the  coming  up  of  a  new  strategic  partner,  would  the  SIT 
invest additional sum of money, and, if yes, does the hon. Minister have any amount that will 
be invested in this project? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  the  SIT  itself  is  in  big  financial 
trouble with some dodgy projects that were undertaken in the last few years and that have not 
brought  any  money  in  those  projects.  So,  I  must  say  that  as  it  is  now,  they  have  not  got 
enough  financial  resources  to  put  into  that  Water  Park  to  make  it  up  and  running, 
unfortunately. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

SQUATTERS – REGULARISATION  

(No.  B/537)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in 
regard to the squatters, he will state the number thereof, district-wise, indicating the measures 
that will be taken in relation thereto, indicating where matters stand in relation to those who 
are eligible for the regularisation of their situation. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  the  House  certainly  knows  that  the  problem  of  squatting  State  land  is  a 
long-standing one and it has existed for many decades now.    

55 

 
I believe that the inaction and lack of interest on the part of the previous Government 
to deal with the problem at hand has worsened the situation. Consequently, this Government 
has inherited a situation where families with babies, old people and in a case, an old lady of 
102  years  old  as  well  as  children  are  living  in  poor  and  bad  conditions,  with  no  basic 
necessities such as water and electricity. 

However,  the  present  Government  is  committed  to  addressing  very  rigorously  the 
issue in a meaningful way. For the purpose, a plan has been developed so that the approach is 
very humane while taking into consideration the socio-economic implications, on a strictly 
merit basis. 

 
To gauge the extent of the problem, my Ministry recently carried out an exercise and 
it  has  been  found  that,  as  at  July  2015,  there  were  1054  cases  of  squatting  on  State  land 
throughout the island. 

 

The situation, district-wise, is as follows - 

District 

Rivière du Rempart 

Flacq 

Grand Port 

Savanne 

Black River 

Port Louis 

Pamplemousses 

Moka 

Plaines Wilhems 

 

 

Making a total of 1,054 squatters. 

No. of cases 

99 

114 

81 

78 

232 

347 

50 

34 

19 

56 

 
Madam Speaker, Government acknowledges that it is a tough  exercise to eliminate 
squatting. However, in an endeavour to assist these people in securing a decent dwelling, my 
Ministry  is  attending  to  eligible  cases  either  by  way  of  relocation  of  these  squatters  or  by 
regularisation in situ of their occupation of the State land.  A cut-off date of 01 July 2015 has 
been adopted so that the situation can be controlled. 

 
The  plan  that  has  been  developed  provides  for  422  cases  to  be  considered  for 
regularisation  in  situ,  subject  to  the  families  concerned  being  found  eligible.  472  other 
families  will  be  relocated  as  the  sites  squatted  upon  are  either  not  suitable  for  residential 
purpose or are required for Government projects, such as the Phases 2 and 3 of the Ring Road 
Project. Regarding the remaining 160 cases, investigation is being carried out by my Ministry 
to determine the suitability of the sites in terms of accommodating residential units, and if 
otherwise, relocation would be envisaged. 

As regards the 422 cases which have been considered for regularisation, survey works 
have already started on site and the squatters have been requested to fill in a form giving their 
particulars. In the same breath, a social inquiry is being carried out by the Ministry of Social 
Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  to  establish  the  profile  of  these 
households.  

I am circulating the details regarding the sites for both relocation and regularisation 

cases. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  persons  who  are  drawing  high 
incomes or who are owners of any immovable property would not be eligible for the grant of 
a building site lease and necessary legal action would be taken to have them evicted from the 
site squatted upon. 

To ensure that squatting State land does not become a never-ending problem, I have 
arranged  for  a  mobilisation  of  teams  made  up  of  officers  of  my  Ministry,  “Police  des 
Terres”, and the regular Police Force to deal with any new reported case of squatting. The 
teams  will  cover  not  only  the  sites  where  presently  there  is  squatting  but  also  other  areas 
which  are  considered  to  be  squatting  prone.  The  provisions  of  the  law  will  be  rigorously 
applied. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  confident  that  with  the  structured  approach  which  is  being 
adopted, the problem of squatting State land will be effectively dealt with and the cooperation 

 

57 

of  all  stakeholders  is  essential  for  that  matter,  as  squatting  is  a  problem  which  goes  well 
beyond party politics and other such considerations. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister just stated that there have been 422 
squatters who have been found eligible for regularisation. Can I ask him what has been the 
criteria for eligibility for these squatters? 

Mr Soodhun: As I have just informed in my statement, there is a criteria, that is, they 

do not have any property or the salaries are above Rs10,000. 

Mr  Bérenger:  From  what  I  have  heard,  we  have  1,054  registered  squatters  and 
enquiries are being carried out to see how many of them do qualify. We have been given a 
cut-off date, 01 July 2015, and those enquiries are going on. Can I know from the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister within what time frame, roughly, is it a question of weeks or months, before 
these enquiries are completed and, the squatters that do not qualify - and those who qualify - 
are informed that they do not qualify? 

Mr Soodhun: Nearly in three months’ time. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank  you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioned 
the number of squatters  on State land. But would he agree that the Ministry also needs to 
carry out a survey to find out the number of people, especially poor people, who are staying 
on  abandoned  land  or  private  land  as  he  would  have  a  complete  picture  of  the  number  of 
homeless in Mauritius? 

Mr Soodhun: I thank the hon. Member. We have taken into consideration that there 
are people who are squatters on private land. I would also like to inform the hon. Member 
that we are going to deal with those squatters. For example, in Tranquebar, we have nearly 82 
and  due  to  the  Phase  I  and  Phase  2  of  the  Ring  Road  which  is  coming,  we  are  going  to 
relocate  them  to  Pointe-aux-Sables  and  then  we  are  going  to  hand  over  to  the  Ministry  of 
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport which will then be responsible for this State land. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

58 

 
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell 
us  -  when  he  says  that  legal  action  would  be  taken  -  what  sort  of  legal  action  does  he 
contemplate  and  when  such  legal  action  has  been  taken  and  those  people  find  themselves 
without a home, is there any other scheme which he proposes whereby people will not end up 
being homeless? 

Mr  Soodhun:  First,  as  I  have  explained,  we  have  nine  districts.  I  have  put  nine 
officers and a team of five Police Officers. So, they are in charge of the whole district so that 
we do not have the new as I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that we have to take 
precaution  that  the  new  squatters  cannot  come  in.  So,  they  don’t  come  directly,  they  just 
come there and you know, put the Police... 

(Interruptions) 

Let me explain. Why are you in a hurry? Cool! 

(Interruptions) 

What  I  am  just  explaining  is  that  action  will  be  taken  against  the  new  squatters  as 
from now. Because what we have done is that we have already enquired about the number I 
have given, 1,055 plus one will be illegal, we are going to warn them first and we are going 
to go strictly by the law according to the Land Acquisition Act. 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister has indicated to the House that the first 
phase of the regularisation process is to decide upon the eligibility of the squatters. May I ask 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister - once this eligibility exercise has been carried out, since we 
know  there  is  a  time  frame  until  the  occupiers  formally  get  their  formal  lease  once  the 
eligibility criteria has been agreed upon - whether the Ministry could issue a letter of intent so 
that these occupiers, on the basis of the letter of intent, can be provided with electricity, water 
supply and the utility services? 

Mr Soodhun: Thank you. I think it is a very good question, 422 will be immediately 
offered the letter of intent so that they can help all these people to get water and electricity 
supply. So, we are going to do it in a couple of weeks. 

Mr Ameer Meea: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister just said that the eligibility criteria 
should be one who should not possess any land and should not have a high salary. Can I ask 
the hon. Minister what does he mean by high salary, what should be the amount? 

 
Mr Soodhun:  In the past, it was Rs8,500, now  we have reached up to the sum of 

59 

Rs10,000. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, we have been talking all this time about squatters 
and the issue of eligibility criteria, the salary that they are drawing. There are also, according 
to my information, some sugar estates, some sugar companies that are also squatters on many 
areas  of  State  land  and,  in  particular,  the  old  rail  tracks  whereby  they  have  squatted  upon 
those lands and I remember Constituency No. 13 in Rivière des Anguilles where there is a 
huge area that has been squatted upon by the Sugar Estate. Now, I am sure and I hope that the 
eligibility criteria would be applied very strictly here, that they don’t have any other home or 
that  they  do  not  earn  more  or  less  than  Rs10,000  and  what  would  be  done,  therefore,  to 
ensure that all sugar estates move off the State land? 

Mr Soodhun: Concerning the Sugar Estate, my colleague, the hon. Minister of Agro 

Industry is looking into it, what we call the camp and this will not fall under my purview. 

DIABETES - CHILDREN - SENSITISATION 

 (No. B/538) Mr  K. Ramano (Third Member  for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to diabetes, he will state 
the number of children suffering therefrom as at to date, indicating the measures and policies 
applicable in relation thereto at schools and in hospitals, respectively. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, in reply to the first part of the question I wish to refer 
the hon. Member to the reply I made to PQ No. B/141 on 03 March 2015 where I provided 
the House with statistics on the number of children suffering from diabetes and where I also 
elaborated  on  the  services  provided  to  diabetic  patients.  Madam  Speaker,  as  at  31  August 
2015, the number of children below 18 years suffering from Type I diabetes is 181 and the 
number for Type II is 34.  

With regard to the second part of the question, my Ministry has adopted a series of 
measures to sensitise school children and the public at large and the preventive measures to 
be taken in respect of lifestyle and consumption patterns. 

In this context, the following activities are regularly carried out by my Ministry – 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

60 

Ongoing primary school health programme whereby pupils of Standard I and 
Standard  V  are  examined  by  community  physicians.  Overweight  and  obese 
children are referred to health centres for further investigation and follow-up. 
They are also referred to the nutritionist for dietary counselling. 

The screening of students of Form III between 13 to 14 years and Lower Six 
between  17  to  18  years  for  risk  factors  related  to  diabetes  and  other  non-
communicable  diseases.  Those  children  with  risk  factors  are  referred  to  the 
regional hospitals for follow-up and counselling. Support for Type I diabetic 
children  by  diabetes  specialised  nurses  in  all  regional  hospitals  is  also 
provided. There is also provision of free glucose meters, testing strips, sharp 
disposal containers as well as latest insulin analogs to all children with Type I 
diabetes aiming at achieving an optimal control of blood sugar. We also have 
yearly conduct of open day activities in all the five regional hospitals under 
diabetes and vascular health centre where such patients are screened for eye, 
kidney, cardiac complications as well as other diabetes associated disorders. 

Oral healthcare treatment and appropriate counselling for Type I diabetic children are 
also provided. There is also conduct of health education programme on healthy lifestyle in 
hospitals and health centres for diabetic patients and there is finally a mass sensitisation on 
non-communicable diseases targeting the public at large, including children. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre s’il existe 
un personnel formé au niveau des écoles ou un protocole de collaboration avec son ministère 
en d’urgence concernant ces élèves? 

Mr  Gayan :  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  there  have  been  programmes  in 
schools where these patients can be present and participate and there are also programmes to 
give training and assistance to the parents, but there are also health nurses and community 
centres in the area and in case there is an emergency, they can be contacted. 

Dr. Joomaye: I would like to know from the hon. Minister the number of dieticians 

specialised in paediatric nutrition in post at your Ministry.  

Mr Gayan: Do I understand diabetics’ nutritionist? 

Dr. Joomaye: Dieticians specialised in paediatric nutrition. 

 
Mr  Gayan:  Well,  I  only  have  the  information  about  the  nutritionists,  but  I  take  it 

61 

nutritionists cater from babies to old age. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Since  the  Minister  said  that  there  exist  programs  to  advise  on 
situations where children are suffering from diabetes, could he tell us whether there are any 
leaflets that he could provide us with or table in this Assembly to show us what exactly is an 
advice or pamphlets or leaflets informative that are shared not only to students, but also to 
parents in such situations? Has this been provided for and does it exist? 

Mr Gayan: I do not have the pamphlets with me, but I will certainly look into the 

matter and communicate it to the House. 

Mr Leopold: I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he is working with NGOs 

specialised in the follow-up of small diabetic children together with his Ministry. 

Mr  Gayan:  Yes,  I  am  given  to  understand  that  there  is  an  NGO,  the  ‘Ti  Diams’ 

actively involved in this. 

AUTISM - AGE GROUPS 

(No. B/539)  Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to autism, he will state 
the number of patients suffering therefrom, indicating the - 

(a) age group thereof, and  

(b) measures provided by Government to help such patients. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): I wish to inform the House that according to the information 
received from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, 51 patients of the following age 
groups have been diagnosed with autism as at 15 September 2015. Age –  

0 up to 10  

- 37 

10 up to 20  

- 13 

20 up to 30 

- 1  

62 

 
I  would  like  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  House  to  the  fact  that  no  comprehensive 
survey  has  been  carried  out  until  now  to  determine  the  exact  number  of  persons  suffering 
from autism in Mauritius. However, according to the figures available at my Ministry, there 
are  around  200  autistic  children  aged  between  3  to  18  years  old.  We  are  currently  in  the 
process of setting up a new database whereby beneficiaries of basic invalidity pension, carers 
and other social aid allowances will be classified in terms of the diseases they are suffering 
from.  It  will  then  be  possible  to  obtain  an  exact  figure  of  those  patients  who  suffer  from 
autism.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, my Ministry is taking the following measures 

to help autistic persons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

provision of a Basic Invalidity Pension of Rs5,000 to patients above 15; 

provision of a monthly carer’s allowance of Rs2,500 to patients who require 
constant care and attention as certified by an approved Medical Practitioner; 

provision  of  Social  Aid  in  the  amount  of  Rs2,460  to  patients  below  15  and 
whose parents’ annual income does not exceed Rs250,000. 

provision of an additional special allowance of Rs1,350 for patients who are 
severely disabled. The special allowance is made up as follows - 

(a)   Rs450 for those who are bedridden 

(b)  Rs450 for those who suffer from incontinence 

(c)   Rs450 based on severity of disability 

(v) 

free transport for both autistic children and adults; 

(vi) 

refund of bus fare by the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and 
Reform  Institutions  to  parents  who  accompany  their  autistic  children  to 
schools/ day-care centres; 

(vii) 

provision of wheelchairs, spectacles and hearing aids in some cases;  

(viii)  an annual allowance of Rs595 to children attending school to enable them to 

cover their school expenses; 

 

 (ix) 

(x) 

63 

the  organisation  of  Respite  Care  programmes  and  leisure  activities  by  our 
Ministry for disabled children, including those suffering from autism; 

provision of ad hoc financial assistance from the NGO Trust Fund to “Autisme 
Maurice”, and 

(xi) 

 with  a  view  to  enhancing  capacity-building  of  NGOs  catering  for  autistic 
children,  assistance  from  ALEFPA,  Association  laique  pour  l'Education,  la 
Formation, la Prévention et l'Autonomie from Reunion Island has been sought.  
A Memorandum of Understanding will be signed shortly. 

 Furthermore, I wish to add that my Ministry is presently working on a Disability Bill 
which will better protect the rights of persons with disabilities, including those suffering from 
autism.  The  Bill  will  also  make  provisions  for  the  setting  up  of  One-stop  shop  to  provide 
better services to them. 

 It  is  also  good  to  be  highlighted  that  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare do intervene and provide support services to all cases of 
children at risk, including reported cases of children suffering from autism. 

I am informed by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life that in public hospitals 
all patients suffering from autism are being followed by a multidisciplinary team comprising 
Paediatricians,  Psychiatrists,  Psychologists,  Social  Workers,  Occupational  Therapists  and 
Speech Therapists.  

In critical cases where patients cannot be cared for at home, they are admitted in the 
adolescent  wards  of  Brown  Sequard  Mental  Health  Care  Centre  for  daily  follow-up  by 
Psychiatrists  and  Psychologists.  In  addition,  parental  counselling,  family  therapy  are  being 
provided by Psychologists and Social Workers. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du  ministre  quel 
moyen de détection existe au niveau du ministère de la Santé et  de la Qualité de la Vie, et s’il 
existe  un  protocole  d’aide  dans  les  écoles  pré-primaires  ou  même  dans  les  garderies  en 
matière de détection? 

 

64 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I think this question should be put to the Ministry of 

Health and Quality of Life.  

Mr Ramano: La question était adressée directement au ministre de la Santé et de la 

Qualité de la Vie. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano, if you have got a question for the Minister of Health 
and Quality of Life, then next time you put the question to the Minister of Health and Quality 
of Life. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  The  hon.  Member  will  understand  that  it  is my  Ministry 

which is offering all the measures to cater for the care of persons with autism. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has mentioned that certain patients 
suffering from autism go to the Brown Sequard Hospital - if I heard her correctly.  But, why 
there? Because, if you suffer from hearing, you are admitted in a place which has a different 
connotation. So, why not take these children somewhere else? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  I  have  not  said  that  all  the  children  are  sent  to  Brown 
Sequard Hospital. If some of them need help from that hospital, then they are sent there and 
they are admitted to the adolescent wards and special care are being given to those children. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

PRIVATE & PUBLIC SCHOOLS – CHILDREN WITH AUTISM 

(No.  B/540)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the students suffering from autism, she will state the - 

(a) number thereof presently admitted in private and public schools, and  

(b) existing specific measures provided thereto.    

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a), I am informed that 
as at date there are 168 children with autism admitted in both public and private schools as 
follows – 

Sn  Schools 

Number  

65 

Pre-primary schools 

Integrated Units in Primary schools 

SEN schools run by NGOs 

 

1 

2 

3 

 

16 

20 

132 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House 
that the education of children with special needs, including autism is high on the agenda of 
my Ministry.  In this context, various measures have been taken to cater for the specific needs 
of children with autism as follows - 

Two  Integrated  Units  dedicated  for  children  with  autism  are  operational  at  the 
the  J.T.  Ramsoondur 
Gopeechand Chuttur  Government  School,  Ecroignard  and  at 
Government  School  at  Solferino.  The  one  at  Solferino  also  caters  for  children  with  other 
impairments.  

Three Special Education Needs Resource and Development Centres are operational at 

Ferney, Colonel Maingard, Beau Bassin and Plaine des Papayes.  

These  Centres  provide  a  range  of  services,  including  assessment,  diagnosis, 
therapeutic services, sessions with the students and their families, capacity-building including 
workshops,  parenting  as  well  as  counselling  programmes  to  the  children  with  special 
education needs, including those with autism. They are staffed by a multi-disciplinary team, 
including  professionals  such  as  Occupational  Therapists,  Educational  Psychologists  and 
Educational Social Workers.  

Four  new  Resource  Centres  are  being  constructed  at  the  Rajcoomar  Gujadhur 
Government  School  in  Flacq,  Allée  Brillant  Government  School,  Rivière  des  Anguilles 
Government School and Moka Government School, and they will all be operational in 2016. 

My  Ministry  has  been  conducting  regular  special  admission  exercises  to  register 
children with special needs. Out of 15 applications received this year from parents of children 
with special education needs, three of them are on the autism spectrum and will be admitted 
in schools that best caters for their specific needs.  

 

66 

Adapted curricula have been developed by the MIE in respect of children suffering 
from  autism.  These  curricula  have  been  piloted  in  special  education  needs  schools  run  by 
NGOs as well as in the Government Integrated Units.  

The  curriculum  materials  will  be  enhanced  and  finalised  taking  on  board  feedback 

received.  

The Mauritius Institute of Education has been running a Teacher-Training Programme 
whereby teachers working in specialised schools learn to adapt the curriculum to respond to 
the needs of learners with autism and to develop strategies required to optimise their learning 
opportunities. Teachers are also trained to develop an individual education plan and to make 
use of appropriate assistive devices to respond to unique needs of the learners with autism.  

As  from  January  2015,  the  MIE  is  running  a  Diploma  in  Special  Education  Needs 
comprising  a  component  in  which  teachers  are  specialised  in  the  education,  pedagogy  and 
assessment and intervention strategies for the rehabilitation of children with autism. 

Furthermore, in terms of our collaborative venture with NGOs, teachers working in 
the  integrated  units  catering  for  autism  have  received  a  training  course  on  “Applied 
Behavioural  Analysis  (ABA)”  which  was  run  by  Autisme  Maurice,  an  NGO  catering  for 
children with autism, in collaboration with a French association Autisme Bel Avenir.  

The  Grant-in-aid  is  provided  as  a  financial  support  to  the  NGOs  running  special 
education needs schools. Provision is also being made for the enlistment of Carers, whose 
ratio is normally one carer for 15 children. However, in the case of autism, a customised ratio 
of one Carer to two pupils is adopted as an enhanced support is being provided to better take 
on board children with  autism. Parenting Programmes, including meetings, workshops and 
working sessions are organised by the Ministry and the ECCEA to get the involvement of 
parents in facilitating the education of children with autism.  The involvement of parents as 
partners  enables  them  to  play  an  effective  role  in  the  education  process  of  the  child  with 
autism. 

Furthermore, the Special Education Needs Unit of my Ministry, the Early Childhood 
Care  and  Education  Authority  are  maintaining  regular  contact  with  individual  parents  and 
providing dedicated support and guidance as appropriate.  

Madam Speaker: Do you have a long reply, hon. Minister? 

 

67 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  No, not much, just two or more points. 

Madam Speaker:  Otherwise, you may circulate your reply. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: No, only two points.   

The  collaboration  with  development  partners  are  also  on  board.    With  a  view  to 
securing expertise in the field of special education needs and to enhance the local capacity, 
my  Ministry  is  working  with  non-state  organisations,  development  partners  and  friendly 
countries on a bilateral cooperation basis and we have been dealing with the European Union 
which  has  come  up  with  training  programmes;  training  for  trainers  as  well  as  providing 
technical support for the development of the Special Education Needs Framework for pre-
primary sector which includes, among others, children with autism. A committee comprising 
of  representatives  of  the  MIE,  the  ECCEA  and  my  Ministry  is  working  at  present  on  the 
implementation programme.  

During my last visit to the Reunion Island, other collaborations have been engaged with 
their  education  institute  to  come  up  with  further  training  programmes  for  children  and 
teachers working with children with special education needs.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  en  2012,  le  ministre  d’alors  avait  annoncé  un 
comprehensive  survey  avec  la  collaboration  des  stakeholders  pour  la  formulation  d’une 
politique d’ensemble. Peut-on savoir si ce survey a été fait et est-ce que l’honorable ministre 
est disposée à rendre ce survey public? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Le survey a été fait dans le domaine de l’éducation et hier 
on a publié le nombre dans le  ‘Educational Statistics’.  Au fait, valeur du jour, il  y a 168 
élèves dans nos institutions que ce soit privées ou publiques.  Mais, bien sûr, le survey va 
continuer et on va continuer à suivre de près nos enfants ayant besoin de special needs. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have, myself, come across a situation 
of a child suffering from autism and the issue is of being able to identify in a normal school 
whether a child through various symptoms is, in fact, potentially suffering from autism.   I 
now  come  to  my  question.  In  England,  I  have  come  across  recommendations  whereby  all 

 

68 

teachers should be provided in teacher training with a special curriculum in order to be able 
to identify a child that is suffering from autism and not to make that child feel excluded or 
dumb  or  stupid  as  is  the  case  sometimes  in  Mauritius,  during  the  time  that  we  were  in 
Government.    I  am  not  saying  anything  wrong.  So,  could  the  hon.  Minister  instead  of,  I 
appreciated, having talked about existing training measures for children and for teachers in 
special needs’ environment, how about extending this to every single teacher to enable them 
to  identify  those  learning  difficulties  of  an  autistic  child  and  to  be  able  to  advise  children 
accordingly? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  In fact, Madam Speaker, this is being taken on board.  The 
whole Teacher Education Programme is being revisited and especially for children requiring 
special education needs and, in fact, not only this is being done at the level of the Mauritius 
Institute of Education, but the Early Childhood Care and Education Authority has also trained 
a number of its teachers to be able to find out, to assess and to diagnose cases of children 
showing autistic behaviours. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Can I know from the hon. Minister what is 

the policy of screening at school level by doctors? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The screening is being done by the teachers themselves 
right now because in the case of autism, it is more of a case of developmental disorder rather 
than a disease as such.  So, the teachers are being trained and, obviously, if there is a need for 
special attention by Medical Practitioners, the schools would obviously ask them to come for 
that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  dans  les  différentes  Integrated  Units,  les 
Government Schools, par exemple, Henry Buswell Government School, le nombre d’élèves a 
sensiblement diminué parce que selon les parents les élèves sont carrément enfermés, n’ont 
même  pas  le  droit  de  participer  aux  différentes  assemblées  ni  aux  différentes  activités  de 
l’école.  Est-ce que l’honorable ministre peut revoir la situation? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Au fait, ce que nous sommes en train de faire c’est d’avoir, 
dans les écoles, des unités spécialisées pour les enfants ayant quelques troubles que ce soit 

 

69 

des handicaps physiques ou des cas d’autisme ou des deaf problems.  Mais notre politique est 
de s’assurer que les enfants intègrent vraiment l’espace scolaire et, bien sûr, nous allons voir 
et nous allons nous assurer que cela se fait ainsi. 

Madam Speaker:  One last question on this, hon. Mohamed!  

Mr Mohamed:  I have seen that on the Internet, so there is a list whereby there are 47 - 
in England - criteria which help teachers to identify who is an autistic child.  Could the hon. 
Minister  consider  asking  her  officers  to  surf  the  net  -  instead  of  going  to  take  advice 
otherwise - at least; the check list is already there in the British Education System. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Obviously, the officers of my Ministry are doing the same 
and, in fact, we don’t talk about autism as such.  We talk about the spectrum of autism and 
you have a whole spectrum starting with people showing slight or mild cases of autism up to 
cases  of  severe  autism  when  the  person  does  not  want  to  interact  at  all.  Obviously,  the 
officers of my Ministry have done their job. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

CEB - ST. LOUIS POWER STATION - TENDER 

(No. B/541) Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  last  tender  exercise  for  the  St.  Louis  Project  –  CEB  Tender  CPB-22-2014  for  the 
Redevelopment of St. Louis Power Station – Design, Supply, Installation and Commissioning 
of 4x15MW Diesel Generating Sets, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Central Electricity Board, information as to the – 

(a)  name/s of the bidder/s thereof, and  

(b) reasons why the bid exercise was cancelled. 

(Withdrawn) 

TRAFFIC LIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM – MAINTENANCE CONTRACTS 

(No.  B/542)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  and 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 

 

70 

to the Traffic Light Control System, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information 
as to the – 

(a)  terms and conditions of the maintenance contracts awarded in relation thereto, 

and  

(b) name/s of the contractor/s therefor. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed that a tender exercise for the maintenance 

of Traffic Light Control system around the island was launched on 15 October 2014. 

The contract was awarded to Sobany & Sons Co. Ltd in February 2015 for the sum of 

Rs6,982,189.95, inclusive of VAT for a period of one year. 

The contractor is responsible, inter alia, for carrying out daily inspections of all sites 

and for ensuring that the Traffic Signal Equipment are functional at all times.  

The terms and conditions of the contract include - 

•  Replacement  and 

repair  works,  maintenance  and 

re-programming, 

submission of weekly reports and modification of traffic signal equipment. 

With  your  permission,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  detailed  terms  and 

conditions of the maintenance contract. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I ask a supplementary question to the hon. Minister? With regard 
to  the  maintenance  and  repair  of  traffic  lights,  can  the  hon.  Minister  tell  us  whether  he  is 
satisfied, whether the terms and conditions of the contract are respected, whether there are 
timely repairs because we all know we have problems on the main roads and subsidiary roads 
where traffic lights are broken, but they take too much time to have these repaired and this is 
a constant and permanent cause of accident? 

Mr Bodha:  I thank my hon. colleague for this comment. In fact, the terms of reference 
provide  for  a  submission  to  the  Officer-in-Charge,  that  is,  the  TMRSU,  the  Traffic 
Management & Road Safety Unit, by each Tuesday before 12 o’clock, of one copy of a report 
covering all the faults and any repairs made during the previous week, together with the list 
which has been submitted by the hotline. I am confident now that we are going to apply this 

 

71 

condition of the contract; I agree with my hon. colleague that sometimes the hotline may not 
be working or when the faults have been registered, they are not being corrected as soon as it 
should be done. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister inform us who is 
the owner of the software for the Traffic Light System and why it has not been commissioned 
publicly? 

Mr Bodha:  Who is the owner and why it has not been commissioned? 

Mr Jahangeer:  No, the system itself, the software. 

Mr Bodha:  From information I have, this is with regard to the maintenance, then you 
have the question as regard to the equipment itself. Well,  over the years now the equipment 
have been supplied by the same contractor. 

Madam Speaker: No, it is the software. 

Mr Bodha: The equipment have been supplied… 

Madam Speaker: Software. 

Mr  Bodha:  Yes.  The  equipment  have  been  supplied  by  the  same  contractor.  So,  I 

believe that the software must be processed by this company. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  some  traffic  lights  have  timers 
because, at Quatre Bornes, near the market, most of the time at 10 o’clock, the traffic light 
goes off? 

Mr Bodha: I believe so. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

TRUTH AND JUSTICE COMMISSION - MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE 
(No.  B/543)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether he will state if he is aware of a letter from Mrs D. T. of Association Justice et Vérité 
about unfinished business related to the Truth and Justice Commission and, if so, indicate if 
he has taken any action in relation thereto and, if not, why not. 

72 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise that barely one 
month after the Government came into power, a Ministerial Committee was set up under my 
Chairmanship to reconsider the recommendations contained in the Report of the Truth and 
Justice Commission.   

 The  Ministerial  Committee  has  had  several  meetings  and  has  decided,  in  the  first 

instance, to group the recommendations contained in the Report under three major themes - 

(i) 

Memorialising slavery as well as a better understanding of Mauritian history 
and culture; 
Dispossession of land and legal support, and 
Economic empowerment of descendants of slaves and indentured labourers. 

(ii) 
(iii) 
The Committee has made several recommendations - 

• 

• 
• 

• 

the setting of a Land Research and Mediation Unit, which we discussed this 
morning,  
the forwarding of the Mandary report to the Attorney-General,  
the Ministry of Arts and Culture to look for land to construct the Museum of 
Slavery to be located either in Port Louis or Le Morne.  In the meantime, the 
Ministry would arrange for the purchase of exhibits that could be displayed in 
the Museum, and 
the Ministry of Arts and Culture would submit a report on what has been done 
and what would need to be done for better memorialisation of the economic 
contribution of slaves in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, Government is committed to fostering a just, fair and equal society 

to give opportunity to all. It has and is taking many decisions to respect its commitment.  

In this connection, Government has taken a series of measures which are in line with 
the recommendations of the Report of the Truth and Justice Commission.  These are listed 
hereunder - 

•  The old age pension has been increased to Rs5,000/- per month. 
•  A salary compensation of Rs600/- per month has been granted to all full-time 

employees. 

•  Government will construct 2,000 social houses per year, with a larger surface 

area. 

•  The  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  has  regularised  and  is  continuing  to 

regularise hundreds of cases of squatters. 

 

73 

•  A  Marshall  Plan  on  poverty  alleviation  is  being  worked  out.  A  multi-
disciplinary team of UNDP experts is actually in Mauritius to start working on 
this. 

•  A Ministerial Committee has been set up under the chair of the Vice-Prime 

Minister to look into the issue of asbestos.  

•  Constitution of a national database of vulnerable households registered in the 

Social Register of Mauritius for targeting pro-poor services. 

•  The setting up of a Poverty Observatory. 
•  A new CSR policy has been devised to allow companies to directly provide 

help to those needy persons. 

•  An amount of Rs100 m. per year has been provided for the love-bridge project 

to address in an integrated way the issue of poverty. 

•  More  than  33,000  needy  students  have  benefitted  from  school  materials  in 

2015. 

•  A nine-year schooling plan is being implemented. 
•  A minimum salary wage is being devised.  
•  Zero  tolerance  policy  for  people  who  endanger  the  cohesive  fabric  of  our 

nation as recently demonstrated. 

•  All Boards of parastatal bodies to be multi-cultural. 
•  Review of the Certificate of Character Act. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  submission  of  the  Report  of  the  Truth  and  Justice 
Commission  in  2011,  and  the  setting  up  of  a  High-Powered  Committee,  which  again  I 
chaired,  many  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission  have  been 
implemented. I would like to mention but a few examples -  

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

An Equal Opportunities Commission has been set up. 
Creole  is  being  recognised  as  a  language  and  is  an  examinable  subject  at 
Primary level. 
The case of Ratsitatanina has been reviewed by the State Law Office and an 
interim report has been submitted.  

(iv)  A list of 20 historical sites associated with slavery has been listed as National 

(v) 

Heritage, and research is ongoing. 
The  “Festival  International  Creole”  is  being  held  every  year  to  promote  the 
Creole culture and it is in its 10th year. 

74 

Le Morne was listed as World Heritage Site in 2008. 

 
(vi) 
(vii)  The Workfare and Youth Employment Programme has been set up. 
(viii)  Free meals are provided in all ZEP Schools. 
(ix) 
(x) 

The freezing by Act of Parliament of land prescriptions. 
The  setting-up  of  Land  Administration,  Valuation  and  Management 
Information System (LAVIMS) which is a cadastre system, and 

(xi) 

The provision of artisanal fish farms to fishermen. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  list  is  too  long  to  be  enumerated  here  and  I  will  place  in  the 
Library the details of the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and Justice 
Commission. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  will  take  note  that,  in  terms  of  assistance  to 
deprived areas, numerous works have been undertaken, including in Port Louis: rehabilitation 
of Karo Kalyptis; provision of electricity at Quartier Robert Scott, Cité La Cure; relocation of 
squatters  at  Marjolin,  Cite  La  Cure;  rehabilitation  of  Cité  Roche  Bois;  construction  of  Sir 
Gaëtan Duval Leisure Park in Roche Bois and, of course, constant upgrading of Père Laval 
Historical Site.   

Mr  Lesjongard:  The  question  I  put  to  the  hon.  Minister  is  a  simple  question 
concerning a letter addressed to him or to the Prime Minister by the Association Justice et 
Vérité  related  to  those  families  who  have  been  dispossessed  of  their  land.  In  that  letter, 
Madam Speaker, they state that they have requested a meeting with the Ag. Prime Minister 
since 21 April 2015 and, until now, he has not responded to their request. May I know from 
the Ag. Prime Minister whether he will receive those families or whether there is a problem 
for him to receive those families? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the whole issue relates to land. My hon. 
friend, here, was Minister of Housing and Lands for so many years. What did he do? Why 
does it have to be left to another Government, another Minister to look at the issue? Madam 
Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  should  have  taken  his  responsibility  when  he  was  Minister  of 
Housing and Lands and he did not do so, and that is the truth. And maybe now, he is having 
some pangs of remorse, I understand. Nevertheless, Madam Speaker, I will receive the lady at 
the earliest opportunity. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  my  question.  I  am 

talking about land which those families have been dispossessed. 

 

75 

(Interruptions) 

If  you want to know!  We regularised the  cases of 2,000 squatters when  I  was Minister of 
Housing and Lands…. 

Madam Speaker: Put your question, hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: My question is simple. You have with you a report,… 

Madam Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Mr Lesjongard: …and you said that in your reply, submitted by Mr Mandary. They 
want to know what is in that report - those 43 families. That is why they have requested you 
for a meeting. It is as simple as that, Ag. Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, I am drawing your attention. Address the Chair! 

Don’t address the Minister directly! 

Mr Lesjongard: So, tell us why you cannot meet those people and those families! 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  will  meet  them  with  pleasure.  There  is  no  need  to  get 

excited. I will meet them with pleasure. 

(Interruptions) 

And I’ll mention again, five years he was Minister of Housing and Lands… 

(Interruptions) 

Five  years,  he  was  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  Madam.  These  people  have  been 
dispossessed for hundreds of years; he could have taken some attention to it. But now he has 
some  remorse,  he  is  pleading  for  them.  I  will  receive  them  with  pleasure.  But,  Madam 
Speaker, what we are doing, and I say that in no uncertain terms, we are providing help as 
never before to these poor people to recover, hopefully, and take possession again of their 
land malgré les problèmes légaux qui existent. 

Madam Speaker: You have a question, hon. Lesjongard? Last question on this issue! 

Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the Ag. Prime Minister, if we did not have that Truth and 
Justice Commission, this issue would not have been raised today in this House? We have had 
that Commission and you were at one time responsible to implement the recommendations of 
that Commission. My question is again very simple: will you meet those families and brief 
them on what the situation is? 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, address the Chair! Don’t address the Ag. Prime 

76 

Minister! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I answered, Madam Speaker, but I hope the hon. Member 
is not saying that he was not aware that during the 18th century, 19th century, people have 
been dispossessed and he wanted to wait for the report of the Truth and Justice Commission 
to learn about it. Thank you.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

PRIVATE SECONDARY SCHOOLS – STAFF - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/544) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recruitment  of  staff  in  the  private  secondary  schools 
funded  by  the  Private  Secondary  School  Authority,  she  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Authority, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the  composition  of  the  panel  of  interviewers  therefor  and  procedures  laid 
down and followed for the appointment of the members thereof; 

the  total  amount  of  money  disbursed  in  terms  of  salaries  of  the  staff  of  the 
educational  institutions  registered  with  the  Authority  for  the  year  ending  31 
December 2014, and 

if any mechanism is in place to appraise the performance of the non-teaching 
staff members of the private secondary schools. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, in the context of the implementation of 
Government  policy  for  free  education,  grants  are  disbursed  for  payment  of  emoluments  to 
teaching and non-teaching staff of registered Grant-aided Private Secondary Schools through 
the PSSA which is the authority responsible for payment of grants under section 15 of the 
PSSA Act.   

The staff of these Grant-aided Private Secondary Schools are not per se employees of 
the PSSA; the legal employer of all the members of staff employed is the school, represented 
by its Manager.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of the House to the effect that sections 
16(4)  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  PSSA  Act  clearly  provide  that  by  the  reason  of  payment  of 
emoluments to a school, the PSSA shall not be regarded as the employer.  This provision of 

 

77 

the  Act  further  highlights  that  the  school  shall  always  remain  the  employer  and  shall  be 
responsible for matters of promotion and supervision. 

As  such,  the  PSSA,  not  being  the  legal  employer  of  the  staff,  does  not  directly 
intervene  in  the  recruitment  made  by  the  schools  which  generally  have  their  recruitment 
mechanism.  

 However,  I  am  advised  by  the  PSSA  that  whenever  a  vacancy  arises,  the  authority 

ascertains that the person recruited - 

(i)   

holds the qualifications required as per the terms and conditions of  service of 
the Private Secondary Schools under the PRB, and 

(ii)  

falls within the entitlement of the school concerned. 

Grants towards the salary of the staff concerned are disbursed once these requirements 

are met and all necessary clearances are submitted to the authority. 

PSSA,  as  a  regulatory  body,  has  to  ensure  that  payments  of  grants  made  towards 
emoluments  (salaries  and  allowances)  are  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Pay 
Research Bureau.   

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the PSSA that, 
in regard to Grant-aided Private Secondary Schools, the total amount of money disbursed in 
terms of salary of staff, for the year ending 31 December 2014, stands at Rs2.5 billion. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) of the question, and as already pointed out earlier, 
matters pertaining to supervision and promotion of staff statutorily rest with the school which 
shall always be the employer as provided under section 16 of the PSSA Act.  I wish to add 
that  performance  appraisal  rests  upon  the  management  of  the  school  which  is  under  the 
responsibility of the Manager and the Rector. 

However,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  there  are  cases  whereby  the  PSSA  receives 
representations  with  regard  to  the  appraisal  of  performance  of  staff  for  the  purpose  of 
payment of increment in which case the PSSA examines such representations, on a case to 
case basis. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

78 

 
Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  amount  invested  for  the  year 
2014, therefore, as stated by the hon. Minister is Rs2.5 billion. The issue is one of quality of 
education  and,  of  course,  value  for  the  sum  invested.  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister if she is satisfied with the current structure and the functioning of the PSSA and if 
the institution has the resources to monitor to ensure that public funds amounting to Rs2.5 
billion invested almost yearly only on salaries and not in grant-in-aid? Do the resources that 
this institution has respond or do we need to have a serious look at the whole functioning? 
May I also know if the Board has already been constituted? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The Board has been constituted, Madam Speaker. As far 
as the quality assurance is concerned, this has been transferred to the Ministry of Education 
and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research;  the  Quality  Assurance 
Unit is under my Ministry and is being run by officers of the Ministry. 

As far as the money is concerned, the money that has been disbursed is in terms of 

emoluments of teachers as per the regulations, as per the PSSA Act. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: May I ask the hon… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur, could you, please, be brief in your question? 

Mr Rughoobur: Yes. May I ask the hon. Minister to, please, look into it because this 
institution has been the way it is since years?  Could she, please, see to it that there is a full 
review of its functioning, in light of the development that we have today and in light of the 
huge sum of money that is being invested? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the PSSA Act is being reviewed and, obviously, 
the Ministry is looking into the matter and we are trying to see how best to adapt it to the 
current situation. 

Mr Rughoobur: I believe the issue of formation est important. I know that we have 
got  a  series  of  institutions  looking  after  formation.  But  still,  I  would  request  the  hon. 
Minister,  while  looking  into  this  whole  structure  which  would  probably  be  revisited,  to 
ensure  that  in  the  new  structure  there  is  adequate  attention  given  to  this  whole  issue  of 
formation dans le secteur privé aussi.  

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: This is being taken into account. 

79 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

STIMULUS PACKAGE - LEASING EQUIPMENT MODERNISATION SCHEME 

(No. B/545) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Leasing 
Equipment Modernisation Scheme, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State 
Investment Corporation, information as to if –  

(a) it has been extended for the current financial year, and  
(b) any amount of leasing facilities approved by the Corporation is still due to leasing 

companies and, if so, indicate the – 

(i) 
(ii) 

total amount owed as at to date, and 
expected dates on which the arrears will be paid. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker,  the  Leasing  Equipment Modernisation Scheme (LEMS) 
became operational in 2009 and the averred object was supposedly to provide money to large 
companies to acquire equipment on lease allegedly for the modernisation of their operations. 
This  Scheme  was  part  of  what  was  called  a  Stimulus  Package  introduced  by  the  then 
Government in the context of the then prevailing global economic crisis.  

I  am  informed  that,  as  at  31  December  2014,  a  total  amount  of  Rs3.84  billion  in 
favour of 1,058 enterprises has been approved by the Restructuring Working Group (RWG), 
a Committee set up under the National Resilience Fund (NRF) for disbursement by SIC.  

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  RWG  has  ceased  to  operate  since 

December 2014 and no new applications are now being entertained. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, out of the amount of Rs3.84 billion, an amount 

of Rs520 m. has still to be disbursed to the leasing companies.  

The SIC is presently discussing with the leasing companies on the possibility for them 
to raise the capital amount from the domestic banking system in view of the excess liquidity 
situation instead of relying on funds from the NRF and on new modalities.  

Mr Uteem: I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister mention that the scheme has been 
stopped  and  that  now  SMEs  are  being  directed  to  look  for  Commercial  Banks.  But  this 

 

80 

scheme was set up precisely to help SMEs which could not raise finance from the banking 
system  and  that  is  the  whole  purpose  of  having  this  scheme.  So,  does  that  mean  that 
henceforth  the  Government  will  no  longer  support  SMEs  by  providing  these  leasing 
facilities? 

Mr Collendavelloo: We all know that all this was window dressing by that Minister.  

We know whom the hon. Member is talking about! 

No! 

The Stimulus Package, it was not him! 

Remember! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let us not go into polemics! I am just telling the hon. Member that as a matter of fact, as from 
December 2014, the Restructuring Working Group has been disbanded. So, the question does 
not arise! 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister has mentioned the amount disbursed today. 
May I know whether he has the information as to whether there has been any default, any 
non-repayment? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I don’t have that information, but I know that big financers took 

a lot of money and did not refund. This is public knowledge.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY - UNIVERSITIES - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/546) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the project 
for the construction of universities, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State 
Land Development Company Ltd., information as to - 

(a) the amount of funds invested in relation thereto as at to date, indicating the -  

 

81 

(i) names of the consultants and building contractors appointed therefor, and  

(ii) completion dates of works thereof, and  

(b) if the company is exempted from the application of the provisions of the Public 

Procurement Act. 

(Withdrawn) 

NATIONAL COMPUTER BOARD - NATIONAL PORTAL - BIDDERS 

(No. B/547) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the creation of 
the new national portal,  he will, for the benefit  of the House, obtain from the  Information 
Communications Technology Authority, information as to – 

 (a) the amount of funds invested therein, indicating the names of the bidders therefor, 

further indicating the price quoted in each case, and  

(b) if the successful bidder has strictly complied with the scope of services, as at to 

date and, if not, indicate the measures that are being envisaged against the latter. 

Mr  Bhadain:  As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  National 
Computer Board that the total amount of funds invested in the project for the creation of a 
new  national  portal,  which  I  shall  refer  as  the  Government  Portal,  amounted  to 
Rs57,532,247.39.  The project was completed in December 2012. 

Following a tender exercise, through the open advertised bidding and a two-envelope 

process, 10 bidders had submitted their proposals.  They were as follows -  

(i) 

(ii) 

Anglo African Ltd. 

Leal Communications & Informatics Ltd (LCI) 

(iii)  Africa Digital Bridges Networks Ltd (ADBN) 

(iv) 

(v) 

Formation Recrutement et Conseil en Informatique Ltée (FRCI) 

Harel Mallac Technologies (HMT) 

(vi)  Catalyst Business Partners 

(vii)  DCDM Consulting Ltd 

 

82 

(viii)  New Edge Solutions 

(ix) 

State Informatics Ltd (SIL) 

Data Communication Ltd (DCL) 

(x) 
 

After the technical evaluation of the offers received, only two bids were found to be 
technically responsive and were retained for financial evaluation.  The envelopes containing 
the financial offers of the eight bidders, who had failed the technical evaluation stage, were 
returned unopened to them.   

The financial proposals of the two responsive bidders, namely ‘Leal Communications 
&  Informatics  Ltd’  (LCI)  and  ‘Formation  Recrutement  et  Conseil  en  Informatique  Ltée’ 
(FRCI), were subsequently opened and their bid prices were as follows – 

 

BIDDER 

BID PRICE (incl of VAT) 

LCI 

FRCI 

Rs104,651,610.00 

Option 1: Rs55,145,680.00 
Option 2: Rs49,990,642.60 

 

 
Following  the  financial  analysis,  the  contract  for  the  creation  of  a  Government  Portal  was 
awarded to FRCI for a sum of Rs49,990,642.60, inclusive of VAT. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  during  the  project  implementation,  the  following  additional 
 
works were entrusted to the successful bidder, which I am informed was in compliance with 
the Public Procurement Act -  

1. 

The Mauritius E-Gov Portal Mobile version amounting to  
Rs1,504,200, inclusive of VAT, and 

2.  Mauritius E-Gov framework payment gateway amounting to  

Rs6,037,404.79, inclusive of VAT. 

The mobile version allows users to access the Government Portal through their mobile 

phones, whilst the e-payment gateway allows for online payment. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  cost  of  the  additional  works,  the  total  contract  price 
turned  out  to  be  Rs57,532,247.39,  that  is,  15%  over  and  above  the  original  contract  price 
which is within the statutory limit for contract variations, I am informed. 
 
with the scope of services which, inter alia, included the following - 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the contractor has complied 

83 

Supply of necessary hardware; 
Supply of necessary software; 
Networking; 
Portal solution; 
Portal technical architecture; 
Security solution; 
Scalability, operability and availability; 
Compliance with e-GIF (e-Government Interoperability Framework) 
standards; 
Training, and 
Post-implementation services. 

 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

 
The  contract  was  signed  on  09  November  2011  and  delivery  was  effected  on  03 
December  2012,  that  is,  within  the  14-month  time  frame.    The  two  additional  items  of 
contract  variations,  that  is,  the  mobile  version  together  with  the  e-payment  gateway,  were 
completed in December 2013.   

I  am  further informed that the post-implementation services went well  and that the 

contract has been completed without any problem, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Rughoobur: The hon. Minister speaks of a sum of Rs57 m. approximately for the 
value of contract, while, the report of the Director of Audit speaks of a sum of almost Rs80 
m. You have got a maintenance contract of Rs30 m. additional. May I ask the hon. Minister if 
he is aware of this award of Rs30 m. for the maintenance contract? How was it awarded and 
whether the provisions of the Public Procurement Act were complied with? 

Mr Bhadain: I am told that the provisions of the Public Procurement Act were indeed 
complied  with  and  the  information  that  I  have  been  supplied  regarding  the  details  of  how 
much was spent is as per the answer that I have given, but it is also true that I am chairing the 
Committee  with  all  the  Permanent  Secretaries  of  all  the  Ministries  regarding  the 
recommendations made by the Director of Audit and I will certainly look into this matter in 
that Committee and if there are any issues which should be looked at, I will certainly look at 
those issues. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  believe  the  portal,  as  it  is  now,  does  not  seem  to  satisfy  the 
requirements of modern age. May I request the hon. Minister to please look into the whole 
matter and also to ensure that there is, if need be, an investigation on this whole issue of 57-
80 million and the Director of Audit Report also speaks about the sum of Rs6 m. that has 
been spent on e-payment but, today, we can’t access e-payment facility. I would request the 

 

84 

hon. Minister to please get a whole investigation in the whole issue and probably to report to 
this House later on. 

Mr  Bhadain:  We  will  certainly  look  into  that,  Madam  Speaker;  the  Committee  is 

meeting tomorrow morning. 

NATIONAL AIDS COMMITTEE 

(No. B/548) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National  Aids 
Committee, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to –  

(a) the composition thereof;  

(b) when the Committee last met, and 

(c)  if  the  proposed  discontinuation  of  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy 
Programme  was  discussed  at  the  level  thereof  and,  if  so,  table  copy  of  the 
proceedings thereof in relation thereto. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  parts  (a)  &  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed that the National Aids Committee, at its inception, was made up of the hon. Prime 
Minister, the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, the hon. Minister of 
Tourism  and  External  Communications,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National 
Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare, the hon. Attorney General, the hon. Minister of Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of 
Life,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  and  the  Commissioner  of  Health  Rodrigues 
Regional  Assembly,  the  NGOs  were  the  Mauritius  Family  Planning  and  Welfare 
Associations;  PILS,  Vivre  Plus,  Action  Familiale,  the  Council  of  Religions,  Media  Watch 
Organisation,  Gender  and  Media  Southern  Africa  (GEMSA).  The  Committee  last  met 
Madam Speaker, in April 2006.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  for  part  (c),  the  question  does  not  arise  as  the  Methadone 
Substitution  Therapy  Programme  has  never  been  discontinued.  Beneficiaries  in  the 
programme are still receiving their daily doses of Methadone. 

85 

 
Mr Baloomoody: So, do I understand that there is no National Aids Committee now? 
There is a National Aids Secretariat, I understand. Do we have a National Aids Committee? 
Because this is one of the protocols of the SADC Parliamentary Forum, that there should be a 
National Aids Committee and the hon. Prime Minister; the list of participants is not correct, 
there was in that list as well a Member backbencher of the Government and a Member of the 
Opposition when it was first instituted. So, can I ask from the hon. Minister whether we have 
a National Aids Committee now? 

Mr Gayan: Well, as I have said, there is still a National Aids Committee, but it last 
met  in  2006.  The  National  Aids  Secretariat  has  come  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  from  the 
Prime Minister’s Office. 

Mr Baloomoody: Do I take it that the National Aids Secretariat has taken over the 

works of the National Aids Committee? 

Mr Gayan: My understanding is that the National Aids Committee still stays as an 
institution, but all the operational requirements of the National Aids Secretariat have gone to 
the Ministry of Health and that is where the work is being done. 

Mr Baloomoody:  With regard to the National Aids Secretariat, the hon. Minister has 
gone on record when saying that he is going to do with the supplies of methadone and the 
substitution thereof. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether with regard to the Secretariat 
this matter has been raised and discussed? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  the  issue  of  methadone,  Madam  Speaker,  has  been  a  matter  of 
consideration in my Ministry since this Government took over in December last year and we 
have had lots of meetings with the NGOs, with the experts working on the programme; I had 
myself had discussions with the WHO people and, in fact, we have a team of the WHO which 
is coming to review the whole programme and this is something which is of great interest to 
lots of people and we are doing the best we can in the circumstances. But let me say also that 
all those who are on the methadone treatment right now, which is about 4,700 and something, 
they are still being given their treatment as was the case before. However, modern research 
has  shown  that  those  who  are  on  methadone  addiction  for  long-term,  develop  all  sorts  of 
other complications and this is why, for those who want to join the programme, we have said: 
let us see if there are alternatives so that people do not become methadone addicted for life 
and this is what we are doing. 

 

86 

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  there  have  been  several 
meetings. May I know when the last meeting was held with regard to the methadone issue at 
the National Aids Secretariat? 

Mr Gayan: I don’t have the date, but I have the details in the office. 

Mr Baloomoody: May I ask the hon. Minister whether he has taken cognizance of the 
country report of the Aids Secretariat dated April 2015 where it is stipulated that, following 
the introduction of harm reduction strategies in 2006, that’s when there was the National Aids 
Committee,  namely  the  Needle  Exchange  Programme  and  the  Methadone  Substitution 
Therapy, the percentage of PWID - that is, People Who Inject Drugs - among detected cases 
decreased from 68.1% in 2011 to 42.2% in 2012, 38.1% in 2013 and in 2014, it was only 
31.1%, showing clearly that the Methadone Substitution Therapy is working positively? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, if we travel back in time to 2006, that was the 
time  when  the  HIV/AIDS  epidemic  was  creating  havoc  not  only  in  Mauritius  but  also  in 
Africa.  There  were  news  items  almost  on  a  daily  basis.  Whole  villages  were  destroyed 
because of HIV/AIDS.  Today, that is no longer the case.  There are new medicines on the 
market  and  then  the  ARV  treatment  was  given  to  the  HIV-positive  people  and  that 
programme is still ongoing, but we do have some vulnerable groups. Obviously, there will be 
some  vulnerable  groups  like  men  having  sex  with  men,  sex  workers  and  all  these  are 
vulnerable groups. So, as a Government, and I as the Minister responsible for public health,  
have to adopt a holistic approach to this issue and this is what I am doing with the assistance 
of the WHO, with the assistance of the people attached to my Ministry. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Hon. Minister - if he is going back years - this is a report from your 
Ministry, from the Secretariat. There is no longer in National AIDS Committee, there is the 
AIDS Secretariat in your Ministry. Now, this is dated April 2015, sent to the United Nations, 
and it is all praise to both the methadone, which can be improved of course, but it is all praise 
for  both  the  methadone  programme  and  the  syringe  distribution  system.  This  is  a  huge 
achievement which has  reached in  April from  your Ministry  and will  you confirm that, in 
fact, the National AIDS Secretariat is not being taken on board adequately with the changes 
that are being envisaged? 

 

87 

Mr Gayan: I will certainly not subscribe to the last part of the question, but let me 
also say, Madam Speaker, we hear lots of things in this country and with regard to the Needle 
Exchange Programme; the whole purpose of the Needle Exchange Programme - I am sure the 
hon.  Leader of the Opposition knows very well - was that I bring a used needle and  I  am 
given a new needle. That has not worked and this is why,… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, that was dated April. I will give you the facts and the figures. The average amount of 
needles that were being used per month last year was about 10,000. In the month of May it 
reached 65,000. That’s when I started asking questions and that’s when the Minister became 
the  target  of  criticisms  and  I  will  also  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  read  recently  the 
premises  of  CUT  (Colletif  Urgence  Toxida)  -  that  is,  the  NGO  responsible  for  needle 
exchange  were  burgled;  information  was  lost,  computers  were  lost.  Then,  as  a  responsible 
Minister,  I  am  concerned.  We  are  dealing  with  matters  which  are  highly  sensitive,  people 
who are injecting drugs, who need treatment, because at the end of the day all these people 
who need treatment, end up in the hospitals and we need to give them the treatment available. 
What I am saying to this House is that I… 

(Interruptions) 

The National AIDS Committee is a different thing. The National AIDS Secretariat is with the 
Ministry and we are working with the National AIDS Secretariat to ensure that people who 
wish to join the programme of detox do not become dependent for life on methadone. I was 
just doing some research while waiting for this question, Madam Speaker, and it says that 
prolonged use of methadone causes changes in the mental framework of people. It has lots of 
side effects and this is what…  

(Interruptions) 

You have Google. Please Google, go on methadone and mental health. You will see all the 
information there.  Methadone causes personality disorders. 

(Interruptions) 

This is why we need to have a look at alternatives. We cannot be wedded to a system that is 
not performing. We need to be open to new challenges. 

 

88 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  have  as  well  googled  the  Minister 
himself, and having googled the Minister, I have come across and connecting what the hon. 
Minister has stated today with what has been reported to have been said recently at the World 
Alzheimer’s Month event that was organised recently and which the hon. Minister attended, 
where he said there - he is reported to have said, at least - that methadone is connected to the 
possibility  of  dementia  and  it  is  also  connected  to  the  possibility  of  Alzheimer.  Now, 
methadone  happens  to  be  on  the  list  of  approved  treatments  by  the  World  Health 
Organisation. Is the hon. Minister telling this House or is he telling the country that the World 
Health Organisation allows - on its approved list of drugs substitution therapy - methadone, at 
the  same  time  knowing  that  it  is  something  that  can  provoke  dementia  and  can  provoke 
Alzheimer, and if he has a report to that effect, if he could please give us, make us happy by 
tabling such a report that gives us conclusive evidence of his amazing discovery? 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  certainly  place  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly research relating to mental disorders, psychiatric disorders of people on long-term 
methadone treatment. Research has also shown  that psychiatric disorder is up to ten times 
higher  in  the  population  on  long-term  methadone  maintenance  therapy.  So,  it  is  not 
something that I am inventing. I am just saying what is scientifically proven. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Methadone  substitution  is  partly  funded  by  the  Fonds  mondial,  the 
Global Fund. I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether he will refuse the funding 
from this organisation because they fund Methadone and Needle Exchange Programme? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, the Global Fund deals with HIV, Malaria and TB. There 
are now attempts being made to expand the range of the Global Fund to cancer. There was a 
time when the Global Fund was giving a lot of money to Mauritius. Because we have become 
an emerging country with a relatively sound economy, the funds are not as significant as they 
used to be. We are talking to the Global Fund. We will certainly accept whatever amount is 
given, but we will be accepting the money on terms that meet the concerns of health in our 
country. Mauritius as a Sovereign State must reserve that right for itself. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  even  if  he  says  that  the  methadone 
programme  has  not  been  discontinued,  but  in  a  certain  sense  newcomers  will  not  be 

 

89 

dispensed with this treatment now, which means that it has been discontinued for newcomers 
who will come and seek treatment. Why has not the hon. Minister talked, dialogued with the 
social  workers,  with  the  different  NGOs  who  have  been  very  active  concerning  the  fight 
against the drug addiction and rehabilitation? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I have spoken to them and, in fact, last Friday I was 
invited to pay a visit to the Headquarters of PILS and I had accepted the invitation.  Then 
they decided to cancel the meeting. So, I am trying to arrange another meeting. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Next  question,  hon.  Baloomoody!    Next  question!  We  have 

sufficiently discussed on this issue.  Next question! 

NINE YEAR CONTINUOUS BASIC EDUCATION PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/549) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  implementation  of  the  Nine  Year 
Continuous Basic Education Project, she will state how her Ministry is proposing to respond 
to the public concerns that - 

(a)  it  will  lead  to  the  introduction  of  an  additional  competitive  high  stake 

examination at the end of Year 9, and  

(b) the  introduction  of  mixed  schooling  in  existing  single  sex  schools,  to  be 

renamed Academies, in Year 10, may result in serious management issues. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, the Nine Year basic continuous schooling 
which is being introduced in the context of the reforms will bring in a transformation of our 
current educational structure and the accompanying measures are likely to usher in a systemic 
change.  The  new  project  aims  at  putting  in  place  a  system  which  eliminates  cut-throat 
competition  and  undue  stress.  It  will  promote  the  holistic  development  of  the  child, 
inculcating in them the desired skills, knowledge and competencies to become 21st century 
citizens.    Many  education  systems  worldwide  are  adopting  this  trend.    It  is  our  duty  as  a 
caring Government to relieve our children and to give them back their childhood by creating 
the right conditions for their cognitive and integral development.  

 

90 

This  is  a  holistic  and  integrated  approach,  Madam  Speaker,  which  will  involve  a 
paradigm shift, a change in the mindset of people. The new assessment system will take on 
board  not  only  the  students’  performance  level  but  also  their  talents,  aptitudes  and 
attainments. 

First  of  all,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  assessment  at  the  end  of  Year  9  is 
already in place since 2010 by way of the National Form III assessment/exams. The nine-
year  schooling  project  is  proposing  an  assessment  to  come  up  with  the  award  of  the 
National Certificate of Education (NCE).  

This assessment aims at -  

•  measuring the attainment of the students at the end of the nine years of basic 

education, and  
promoting students to Grade 10 in their respective schools. 

• 

It  will  also  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  admission  of  students  opting  for  seats  in 

Academies at Grade 10 level. 

The NCE is thus not an additional examination given that it is already the practice for 
students of Form III to sit for the National Form III Assessment at their school at the end of 
the year.  These examinations aim at assessing the learning outcomes of students and are also 
used for the purpose of promotion to Form IV and for the choice of subjects for Form IV and 
School Certificate. It will also help in the allocation of seats, as I said earlier, for students 
opting for Academies. 

The  current  National  Form  III  Assessment  will  therefore  be  replaced  by  the  NCE  in 
2020 where there will be a national assessment in all subjects.  The NCE will be organised by 
the MES which will also be responsible for the marking at the central level. 

As already stated earlier, the NCE will not be a high stake examination.  The reason is 
that  students  are  already  enrolled  in  a  secondary  school  and  will  be  able  to  pursue  and 
complete their secondary education at the same school. The very fact that the students have 
already secured a seat in a Regional Secondary School, it will be a matter of choice for the 
student to decide whether he or she will opt for a seat in the Academies or not. The students 
will be mature enough to take a decision at this age. 

 

91 

I would like to draw the attention of the House that the NCE will also come up with 
innovative modes of assessment, namely the school based assessment where all students have 
the possibility of demonstrating and being assessed on talents other than the merely cognitive 
ones. 

For the majority of them, the NCE will therefore serve the purpose of certification only.  
Furthermore,  this  reform  wishes  to  bring  in  its  wake  a  valorisation  of  the  TVET  with  the 
state-of-the-art  technology  so  that  it  becomes  a  pole  of  attraction  for  students.  Hence,  the 
NYS makes a case for different pathways and Academies are just one of those. 

Madam  Speaker,  students  remaining  in  their  Regional  Schools  will  have  a  further 
advantage  of  competing  for  both  National  and  Regional  Scholarships.  The  latter  are  not 
offered to students in Academies.  Thus, the examinations at the end of Grade 9 cannot be 
considered as a high-stake competitive one inasmuch as the student is already enrolled in a 
secondary school where he has undergone 3 years of schooling.   

His seat is guaranteed to pursue the remaining years of the upper secondary schooling. 

Opting for the Academies thus becomes purely a matter of choice. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I would like to remind the House 
that many of the Private Secondary Schools are mixed, and they have stood the test of time. 
We all know that co-education has been practised in many of our private secondary schools 
and the students have been performing well in all fields.  

We  have  good  examples  to  testify,  namely,  the  MGI  Secondary  School,  the  MGSS 
schools, St Andrews, among others, have a good track record of mixed schooling whether in 
terms of discipline, performance or adaptability as well as parents’ acceptability.  There have 
been  no  serious  management  issues  reported  till  date  in  these  schools.    Co-education  is 
known to have a positive effect, enhancing not only performance, but also the development of 
sound  interpersonal  skills.    That  being  said,  mixed  schooling  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  
Currently, pupils are already evolving in harmony in co-education environment in the pre-
primary and primary subsectors.  A similar condition prevails at the technical and vocational 
schools and at the Tertiary Education Sector, not to mention the private tuition classes which 
have been operating thus for years. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  worthwhile  noting  that  we  are  preparing  the  students  for  the 
world of work and for life.  In this natural endeavour, if boys and girls are instructed in a co-

 

92 

education environment, it will facilitate transition and integration in their workplace and in 
their adult life. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, time is nearly over.  Do you have a long statement? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  I  am  ending,  just  a  last  sentence.    Furthermore,  co-
education  schools  provide  the  opportunity  to  make  gender  mainstreaming  a  reality  in  our 
schools and provides for the same facilities for boys and girls following the same curriculum.  
The hon. Member may rest assured that regarding Academies, all necessary facilities will be 
made available in terms of infrastructure, special rooms, special facilities for either group and 
all  regional  schools  are  operating  as  single-sex  institutions,  as  such  we  retain  the  gender 
specificity.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody:  I thank the hon. Minister for the answer, but, unfortunately, there is 
still some confusion outside with regard to the CPE because looking at the document which 
was circulated when we attended the Minister’s invitation, the criteria for admitting students 
to  Grade  7  -  so,  we  are  talking  about  those  who  are  leaving  Standard  VI.  There  are  three 
criteria:  parental  choice,  but  the  second  one:  overall  grading  at  the  Primary  School 
Achievement Certificate which is now replacing the CPE examinations.  So, it is clear that 
that examination will have an impact on the future of the child.  So, he will still be competing 
one way or the other before going to Grade 7. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:   To  start  with,  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  straightaway 
that the National Schools will not be admitting students at Grade 7 level.  Students will be 
moving on to Grade 7 in all regional schools.  So, first of all, competition is reduced at this 
level only.   

Secondly,  when  we  talk  about  the  criteria  for  admission  in  Secondary  Schools,  it  is 
clear that we are going to take overall grading which means that there will not be any A+ nor 
very acute sort of progression from one level to the other. All students will be admitted into 
Grade  7  after  Grade  6,  no  matter  what  their  results  are  as  far  as  the  Primary  School 
Achievement  Certificate  (PSAC)  examination  is  concerned.  All  students  will  move  on  to 
Grade  7,  but  the  admission  will  be  done  on  a  regional  basis  as  it  is  done  right  now  for 
regional  schools  depending  on  the  students’  results,  the  proximity  of  the  residence  to  the 
school opted for and the priority of the parents. 

 

93 

Mr Baloomoody:  We have many local schools.  So, how will one choose to which 
school this child will go if we are not going to take into account the overall grading at the 
Primary School Achievement Certificate (PSAC) ? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  It is going to be the way it is done for regional schools 
right now, that is, according to the demand of the parents, the priority list, the proximity to 
the place and also the results of the students, but there will be no sort of ranking of students, 
no marks concerned; let’s say that if we say for ‘A’, if we are talking about A’s or whatever 
the grading system would be, it will be the same for all students having it.  They will be able 
to enter the school depending on the proximity of their residence to the school.  

Mr Baloomoody:  Now, with regard to the academic schools… 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The Academies! 

Mr Baloomoody: The Academies, are we in one way or the other keeping, what we 

call, the Star Schools where we have all the best talented teachers? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: First of all, the attribution or rather the way teachers will 
move from one school to the other would be the same as it is today.  So, there will be no 
special teachers for special schools.  All the Academies will admit students only at Grade 10, 
which means that the students will have the choice of going to an Academy or not and the 
Academies will be schools of excellence in areas. C’est-à-dire, they will have schools with 
certain specialism, with certain specialist areas, schools for Science, schools for Arts, etc, but 
there  will  be  no  sort  of  star  schools  as  such.  Students  will  be  admitted  according  to  their 
performance at level of grade 10. 

Mr Baloomoody: With regard to the exams… 
Madam Speaker:  Last question!  
Mr Baloomoody: Sorry, Madam Speaker. It is of national interest  this question. With 
regard to the Standard Form III Exam which will be run by the MES, up to now, according to 
my information from those who are in the sectors, the MES, itself, is not aware how to run 
this exam, what will be the syllabus, how it will be run? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: This is totally not true. The MES is working. We have 

got eight different implementation committees, the MES is working on that and the MES…. 

(Interruptions) 

 

94 

No, the MES has been working earlier. Now, we are talking about the nine year schooling 
with the NCE exams which will be held in 2020 and the MES is now working with other 
partners at the Ministry for the implementation of the NCE exams in 2020. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  Nos.  B/550, 

B/551, B/553 and B/561 have been withdrawn. 

Hon. Members, in the course of the Private Notice Question today, after hon. Rutnah 
had put a supplementary question, hon. Uteem rose on a point of order to the effect that hon. 
Rutnah had made a serious allegaiton of bribery against the hon. Leader of the Opposition. I 
asked hon. Rutnah as to whether he had uttered words of that nature and he stated that he had 
not  made  any  such  allegation  from  a  standing  position.  I  had  undertaken  to  listen  to  the 
recording and come back to the House.  I have to inform the House that I did listen to the 
recording  which  reveals  that  hon.  Rutnah  had  uttered  the  following  words  from  a  sitting 
position, and I quote - 

“Tone bribe dimoune”. 

The above words amount to serious allegation against the hon. Leader of the Opposition. I, 
therefore, request hon. Rutnah to kindly withdraw these words. 

Mr Rutnah: I withdraw. 
Madam Speaker: I also have to inform the House that hon. Baloomoody has uttered 

the word ‘ batchara’. 

Please! 

Hon. Rutnah, please, don’t start again! 

Please! 

Hon. Rutnah, please! Don’t provoke!  

Can I continue? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I also have to inform the House that hon. Baloomody has uttered the word ‘batchara’ 

and I also request him to kindly withdraw this word. 

Mr Baloomoody: I withdraw. 
Madam Speaker: I wish to draw the attention of hon. Members to the fact that any 
unparliamentary word, offensive words and allegations towards hon. Members, even from a 

 

95 

sitting  position,  is  not  in  order  and  does  not  add  dignity  to  the  decorum  of  the  House.  I, 
therefore, appeal to hon. Members to maintain the decorum of the House. Thank you. 

Mr  Gayan: On a point of order, Madam.  I just  wish to seek  your  guidance, is the 

word ‘roquet’ parliamentary? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, I just said that we should refrain! Hon. Members 
should refrain from using unparliamentary words. It is not good for the dignity of the House 
and it is not good for the decorum of the House. So, I, once again, appeal to all of you to 
refrain from using those sorts of words. 

 

PAILLES – TREATMENT PLANT PROJECT 

(No.  B/550)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Treatment Plant Project at Pailles, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Central Electricity Board, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

cost thereof, indicating the amount of variation costs; 

date on which it will become operational, and  

outcome of any inquiry carried out in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL – ACQUISITION 

(No.  B/551)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Apollo Bramwell Hospital, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

funds that have been used for the acquisition thereof; 

procedures that have been followed for the acquisition thereof, and 

monthly income and expenditure thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

 
The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  all  the  business  on 
today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

96 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 
At 4.32 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 5.10 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE MAURITIUS RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY BILL 

(No. XI of 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Second Reading of the Mauritius 

Renewable Energy Agency Bill (No. XI of 2015).  

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

(5.10 p.m.)  

Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Madam 
Speaker, the piece of legislation in front of us today is of utmost importance for our future 
generation.  The  Mauritius  Renewable  Energy  Agency  Bill  has  as  main  object  the 
establishment of an agency  for the promotion and the use of renewable energy and we go 
along with the setting-up of such an agency which was long overdue. 

In  his  speech,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities gave examples of countries where such agencies have been established, for example, 
in  India,  Australia,  Denmark  and  other  countries,  Madam  Speaker.  Today,  we  have  to 
acknowledge  that  renewable  energy  plays  an  important  role.  It  offers  the  world  a  unique 
opportunity to curb carbon emissions and, in doing so, we slow down the climate change. We 
also reduce our dependence on fossil fuel and strengthen our energy security. But the most 

 

97 

important  thing  is  that  it  safeguards  our  country  against  price  instability  of  petroleum 
products. 

Let us have an outlook of the global energy status. When one goes through the speech 
of the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, we note that he has not given us figures of what the situation 
is worldwide, but even in our country.  Let me give some figures on the global energy status, 
figures  which  have  been  published  by  REN21.  REN21,  Madam  Speaker,  is  a  global 
Renewable Energy Policy Network based at UNEP in Paris. Figures have shown that global 
energy  installations  were  very  successful  in  2014  and  have  proved  today  that  they  have 
decoupled economic growth and energy use from the energy sector greenhouse emissions.  

Figures for 2015 show that the sector is still resilient even with a decrease in price of 
fuel.  Renewable  energy  accounted  for  more  than  59%  of  all  new  electricity  generating 
capacity installed worldwide during 2014. Renewable energy targets and support policies are 
now  in  place  in  164  countries  around  the  world.  Global  carbon  emissions  associated  with 
energy consumption remained stable in 2014 - we should note that - despite an increase of 
1.5% in energy production and a global GDP growth of 3%. It is important to understand that 
this  dissociation  between  the  economic  growth  and  carbon  emissions  is  attributed  to  the 
increased penetration of renewable energy and improvements in energy efficiency. 

In 2014, over 135GW of renewable energy capacity was added, out of which 128GW 
came from wind PV, that is, photovoltaic and hydro. The total installed capacity of renewable 
energy worldwide is now 1712GW, that is, an increase of 8.5% from 2013 which is enough 
to supply an estimated 22.8% of global energy and, that too, where renewables have faced 
policy challenges. For example, Madam Speaker, in Europe they have imposed new taxes on 
renewable energy and in the US they have faced the expiration of tax credit. Even that, with 
these  two  issues  that  I  have  mentioned,  the  global  electricity  energy,  that  is,  the  share  of 
renewable energy in the global electricity of the world has been of the order of 22.8%.  

It  is  also  important  to  note  that  certain  renewable  energy  technologies  have 
experienced a very rapid growth in 2014. For example, today solar and wind power are the 
leading technologies in terms of investment. Solar PV accounted for more than 55% of new 
investment and wind power 36.8%. 

Having said that with regard to the situation of renewable energy worldwide, let me 
get to what the situation is in Mauritius and that is why I have said that the hon. Minister 

 

98 

responsible  for  Public  Utilities  should,  during  his  speech,  give  us  figures  so  that  we  can 
analyse what the present situation is because when I’ll be referring to reports that are being 
made public, I’ll have to go back to 2007 when the outline strategy for the energy sector was 
made public. Based on that outline strategy, a study was carried out to support the long-term 
vision over a period of 15 years, to include also a master plan for the energy sector. The final 
report was adopted in 2008, it was made public in 2009 and this is the referral document for 
the energy sector. After that, there was no master plan that was made public and it is not clear 
today  what  is  the  medium  to  long-term  strategy  for  the  energy  sector.  Now,  allow  me, 
Madam Speaker, to refer to that report that was made public in 2009 with regard to renewable 
energy. One of the most important recommendations of that report was to develop a master 
plan for renewable energy. When it was published in 2009, it was said that we should have 
that master plan by the end of 2010. We are today in 2015, we do not have a master plan for 
the  renewable  energy  sector.  Apart  from  that,  it  also  stated  that  we  should  look  into 
increasing the  contribution of based bagasse  electricity in the medium term from 350 GW 
hours to 600 GW hours annually, and this also has not been done. 

There  were  other  recommendations,  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  renewable 
energy being produced from solar PV and wind and I shall dwell with that later on. But the 
main recommendations that were made in that document targeted the potential of renewable 
energy  sources.  Two  Tables  were  published,  one  in  that  very  document  which  is  dated 
October 2009 and the same Table was reproduced in a document submitted by the Central 
Electricity Board in 2013 and stated the following. It stated that – 

 “The share of renewable energy in 2025 would be of the order of 35%...” 

“From 24% ...” - where we are today, actually it is 20%. I will explain why.  

“From 24% where we are today to 35% ...” 

This included – 

“...electricity  being  produced  from  bagasse,  electricity  being  produced  from 
hydro, electricity being produced from waste to energy ...”  

That is the waste-to-energy project which has never been implemented - never started. 

Then –  

 

99 

“The  share  of  wind  energy  and  the  share  of  solar  PV  and  last  the  share  of 
geothermal energy”.  

The increase over that period is stated, but we need today to correct this Table. When 
I refer to the share PV, I wonder whether I am referring to exact figures, whether we 
are going to attain that 35% in 2025, time only will tell, Madam Speaker, because we 
are very far from the figure that has been put into that Table.  

Now, if one goes to the website of IEA, that is, the International Energy Agency or 
the IRENA, that is, the International Renewable Energy Agency, we have an indication of 
what the situation is in Mauritius from 2009 to 2012 because these are the only figures that 
we have from those two agencies and it shows that. In 2009, with the introduction of the MID 
concept, the share of renewable energy was of the order of 609 GW hours. In 2010, with the 
introduction  of  the  feed  in  tariff  that  share  rose  to  654  GW  hours.  But  then,  in  2011,  it 
decreased to 552 GW hours and in 2012 it was 579 GW hours, that is, almost a decrease of 
10% after the introduction of the MID concept.  

What is the situation today? What are the figures of renewable energy in 2013 and 
2014? Is it still on the decrease, is it stable or is it increasing? I would wish the hon. Minister 
to  comment  any  figures  that  are  unavailable  -  to  share  the  figures  with  us.  Now,  the  hon. 
Minister, in his speech, mentioned the expression of interest that was launched by the Central 
Electricity Board recently to test the market appetite with regard to those who would wish to 
invest in renewable energy. He informed us that - at that time when he made his speech - the 
Central Electricity  Board had received 260 proposals for a total of 1,500 megawatts, but  I 
think  the  figures  vary  because  I  read  an  interview  of  the  General  Manager  of  the  Central 
Electricity Board the figures were different with regard to the proposals received and to the 
capacity also. Now, we were also told that there was a wide diversity of technology, but we 
understand that we are only the first phase of the project, from the expression of interest we 
have  to  move  to  (RFP)  that  is  the  Request  for  Proposal,  and  then  go  through  a  tender 
exercise. So, it will take us some time before decisions are taken with regard to who are those 
who will set up renewable energy projects in the country.  

The issue of absorption capacity of the grid was also stated and, here, I would wish to 
make  a  few  comments.  I  think  the  hon.  Minister,  himself,  in  his  speech,  stated  that  CEB 
cannot anymore be judge and party in the energy sector, and I agree to that statement because 
they  are  operating  in  a  situation  of  monopoly  and  are  in  full  control  of  the  generation, 

 

100 

distribution  and  the  sale  of  electricity  to  consumers.  It  is  of  utmost  importance,  Madam 
Speaker, that we have a regulator. I do not understand why - not for the present Government - 
it  has  taken,  and  it  is  taking  so  much  time  to  find  somebody  to  head  that  Regulatory 
Authority.  

I have come across documents where Government had launched tenders, applications 
to recruit the services of experts to assist in the setting-up and operationalisation of the Utility 
Regulatory Authority and that goes back in 2009. I have even come across an advertisement 
for the recruitment of a Chairperson for the Utility Regulatory Authority and when you have 
a  look  at  the  qualifications  or  experience  that  the  candidate  should  have,  for  example,  a 
university degree, with not less than five years proven professional, academic and managerial 
experience in the provision of any utility service, I don’t find why it is so difficult to find 
such  a  person.  I  think  it  is  high  time  because  when  we  go  back  in  time,  that  piece  of 
legislation, I think, was presented as far back as in 2004 by my colleague, hon. Ganoo.  It was 
amended in 2009. We are now in 2015 and still that regulator is not operational. When you 
have a look at the objects of that Authority, that Authority - as it is in the legislation - should 
protect the interests of both existing and future customers; promote competition to prevent 
unfair and anti-competitive practices in the utility services industry. That is why I think we 
should move very fast in finding someone to head that Authority and make it operational.  

Now,  let  me  get  to  an  important  point  which  I  want  to  underline.  When  the  hon. 
Minister  talked  about  absorption  capacity  of  the  grid,  we  understand  that  the  Central 
Electricity Board, as judge and party, is carrying out studies on its network, whether it is the 
low voltage network, the medium voltage network or the high voltage network in order to 
find out what is the absorption capacity of those networks, the capacity to absorb renewable 
energy. One question we should ask ourselves - true it is that with regard to generation, that 
is, the engines producing electricity, it belongs to the CEB, if I may put it this way.  When it 
comes to the high tension lines, that is, lines of the order of 132 kV or 60 kV, let us say it 
belongs to the Central Electricity Board, but when we come to the medium voltage, when we 
come to the low voltage network, it is not the sole domain of the Central Electricity Board. 
And I explain myself; today when somebody wants to extend a network, say, for example, a 
customer wants to have the low voltage network extended to his premises, he is the one who 
pays for that. If a commercial consumer, if an industrial consumer wants the network to be 
extended to his premises to supply him with electricity, he pays for that.  

 

101 

Now,  the  fundamental  question  is:  is  the  grid  the  sole  domain  of  the  Central  Electricity 
Board?  No,  I  don’t  think  so.  If  studies  are  to  be  carried  out  with  regard  to  the  absorption 
capacity, all those stakeholders have to be consulted and I think this will be the way forward 
if we really want a good penetration of the renewable energy on our grid. That is why I would 
request  the  hon.  Minister,  first,  to  look  urgently  into  getting  that  Regulatory  Authority 
operational  and  to  have  a  close  look  at  whatever  report  will  come  with  regard  to  the 
absorption capacity of the grid.  

Today,  we  know,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  been  able  to  surmount  what  we  call 
technical barriers or economic barriers and that too, with the help - and we have to say it in 
this House - of foreign institutions, for example, l’AFD, UNDP, they have been very helpful 
in getting us to get the necessary Consultants to be able to overcome those barriers. That is, 
the technical barrier which has told us today that, technologies that are there in the renewable 
energy sector are becoming more efficient, more cost-effective and more accessible.  

I made mention of the MID concept. Allow me to say a few words on this concept. 
Madam  Speaker,  it  was  back  in  2008  that  this  concept  was  introduced.  It  is  a  sort  of 
framework that operates on the taxation of fossil fuel to subsidise renewable energy projects. 
Later, they extended it to sustainable projects. It was based on a levy on the price structure of 
petroleum  products.  Initially,  it  was  of  the  order  of  15%  and  in  November  2010,  it  was 
increased  to  30%.  As  at  September  2013,  the  amount  collected  stood  at  more  than  Rs1 
billion.  We  have  a  list  of  projects  that  was  tabled  in  this  House  and  projects  which  were 
implemented under the MID concept.  

I will not go into details of these projects, but there are some 24 projects over a span of 
four years that were implemented under the MID concept. I had put many questions in this 
House and I am saying what I said before. The then Minister responsible for the dossier of 
MID did not have the drive to push that project forward. We wasted a lot of time and the 
former Minister did not show any willingness to advance the cause of renewable energy in 
our country. Instead, what we did was to use opaque procedures to implement projects related 
to renewable energy. We are  aware that at that  time a negotiating panel was set up at the 
Central Electricity  Board and the role of that panel was to consider large-scale unsolicited 
renewable  energy  projects  and  it  was  at  that  committee  that  approved  that  famous  Sarako 
project in Bambous, an unsolicited bid. I hope that that committee does not exist anymore at 
the Central Electricity Board. 

 

102 

Now, there are other projects that were introduced to promote renewable energy  and 
one project was based on the democratisation process which was advocated by the previous 
Government.  We  had  the  IPPs  and  they  named  that  project  SIPP,  that  is,  the  Small 
Independent  Power  Producers  which  was  later  on  called  SSDG  and  MSDG,  that  is,  Small 
Scale Distributed Generation and Medium Scale Distributed Generation.  This allowed a lot 
of people  to produce electricity, residential consumers mostly, to produce electricity for their 
own consumption and export any excess electricity to the grid.  

In the wake of that development, a Grid Code was adopted. That Grid Code defines all 
the  relevant  requirements  for  an  individual  to  produce  electricity  from  the  operation, 
performance, testing, safety and maintenance of the installation. And the most important tool 
that  was  developed  by  that  time  was  the  feed-in  tariff  which  is  an  essential  tool  for  the 
promotion  of  renewable  energy.  The  feed-in  tariff  was  for  a  period  of  15  years,  that  was 
during the first phase and we had tariff for electricity produced from wind, hydro and PV. 
When the first phase was launched, it was for a quota of 2 MW and it is interesting to note 
that the full 2 MW was used. At that time, CEB had received some 212 applications; 172 
residential  applications  and  40  commercial  applications,  and  today  those  consumers  are 
producing electricity. Because that one was full, a second window was opened later on for a 
capacity  of  2.9  MW  and  for  that  second  window,  341  applications  were  received:  280 
residential and 61 commercial. Both Windows were related to the feed-in tariff which is very 
attractive actually. 

Later  on,  we  had  a  third  window,  but  that  was  meant  exclusively  for  public, 
educational, charitable and religious institutions, that is, if we see the share of those small 
producers,  it  amounted  to  some  6.8  MW.  It  was  very  successful,  but  there  were  a  few 
problems and we should be careful now with the new scheme that is being introduced by the 
Central Electricity Board. It was noted that there was a lack of expertise which resulted in the 
poor performance of the system. No proper designs or calculations were done. I’ll give you 
one  example.  If  you  go  at  the  Municipality  of  Port  Louis,  they  have  installed  PV  system.  
They are producing electricity for their own consumption and selling excess to the Central 
Electricity Board. As it is today, I don’t think they are selling excess.  There is no excess to 
be sold to the Central Electricity Board. That is why I am saying we should be very careful 
for the next window that this is given due consideration.  

 

103 

Then, there is that legal proclamation to be able to export to the grid. That proclamation 
should be signed by the President of the Republic. It is time that we change that because it is 
a very tedious exercise to obtain that approval. I am happy to hear that this is going to be 
changed.  

Now, another problem that we might be facing in the future, il y a un engouement and it 
is clear, when you have a look today at the newspaper, you see a lot companies advertising 
for such systems. It is good that there is competition, but it should be fair and we should have 
value for money. We should not be in a situation where we have to face problems that we 
faced with suppliers of solar water heater systems. Again, there were questions in this House 
and it took us time to get the crooks - if I may say - out of the system. It is important that 
business companies in the field of renewable energy should be certified and accredited.  That 
should be the role of that renewable agency. Then, I believe we will not face such problems.  

In this window, CEB has come forward not with the feed-in tariff this time, but with 
what  is  called  net  metering.  In  the  feed-in  tariff,  the  prices  are  pre-defined,  but  in  the  net 
metering system, credits on electricity will be banked.  The surplus of electricity, it is stated 
and I think they have to correct on the website of the CEB. I refer to the website of the CEB.  
Let me make my comments first and then I will see what has to be corrected!  It is stated that 
the surplus energy banked into the grid may be set off against payment only upon closing of 
the account.  This Government, through the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, 
has introduced a very attractive measure by allowing a person who installs such a system to 
recoup the cost through a relief in tax payment, which has made this very attractive. This will 
be done every year. Now why can’t CEB, instead of making the payment only upon closing 
of  the  account,  we  do  not  know  when  the  person,  the  prosumer  –  not  the  consumer  the 
prosumer, who is producing electricity, will close his account. Why is it that CEB cannot pay 
that person? I am not saying on a monthly basis, maybe on a quarterly basis or on a yearly 
basis.  That  person,  who  has  invested  in  such  a  system,  who  is  producing  electricity  and 
supplying it to the grid, would wish, at least, to see the money he gets out from producing 
that  electricity.  That  is  why  I  think  we  should  have  a  fresh  look  at  that  aspect  of  the  net 
metering system. I said it earlier, it is not today. We have a legislation, we have an Act. It is 
not for the CEB to decide such things. It is for the regulator to decide on such issues, Madam 
Speaker. 

104 

 
Now,  we  understand  that  the  target  is  for  2,000  consumers  and  I  think  people  will 
queue  up  to  be  able  to  produce  such  electricity.  Correction  that  I  wanted  to  make.  In  the 
official document from the Central Electricity Board, at page 3, it is stated that part of the 
initial  investment,  15%  only  for  solar  energy  unit  can  be  recouped  through  a  relief  in  tax 
payment. Why is it only for solar energy unit? It should be for renewable energy units. In the 
legislation that we voted in this House, it was not stated that it has to be for this technology 
only? It is stated here that it is only for the solar energy unit. Maybe we should also have a 
fresh look at this aspect and bring the necessary corrections. 

Now, let me  get to a very  delicate issue. We are voiting  a piece of legislation that 
would put in place an agency called the Mauritius Renewable Agency which is going to be 
spearheaded by a Director. We also have  what  we call an  Energy  Efficiency Management 
Office headed again by a Director. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  trend  worldwide  is  to  try  to  combine  those  two,  that  is, 
renewable energy and energy efficiency. In doing so, we will save a lot of public money. I 
believe that, in due course, instead of having two agencies or two offices, we should have 
only  one  office,  that  is,  one  office  looking  after  renewable  energy  and  looking  also  after 
energy efficiency with one Director at the Head of that institution. 

There  are  a  few  comments  that  I  would  wish  to  make  on  the  Energy  Efficiency 
Management Office where certain important issues have not been tackled until now. We were 
supposed to publish Energy Efficiency Regulations with regard to electrical appliances. This 
has not been done. It has to be made mandatory, this has not been done. 

We  were  supposed  also  to  carry  out  energy  audits.  This  is  being  carried  out,  I 
understand,  on  a  pilot  scale,  but  we  have  to  make  it  mandatory  for  certain  industries  and 
commercial premises and I think we should move fast on those two issues. 

The last item that I would wish to comment is LNG. I think others have said it before 
me. LNG is not a form of renewable energy. The definition is clear. Where I find it uneasy is 
that tomorrow if you see you belong to an international organisation, when they will have a 
look at your piece of legislation and you would have included LNG into a legislation where 
we  are  dealing  with  renewable  energy.  I  do  not  think  this  should  be  in  this  piece  of 
legislation. 

To  conclude,  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  COP21  and  a  brief  history  of  what  the 
situation is and what is expected from COP21 which will be held in Paris, in December, this 

 

105 

year. Now, the international political response to climate change, Madam Speaker, began at 
the  Rio  Summit  in  1992,  where  the  Rio  Convention  included  the  adoption  of  the  UN 
Framework on Climate Change. This Convention set out a framework for action at stabilising 
atmospheric  concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases 
to  avoid  dangerous  anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) which entered into force on 21 March 1994, now has a near universal 
membership of 195 parties. This December, COP21 will, for the first time in over 20 years of 
UN Negotiations, aim to achieve a legally binding and universal agreement on climate with 
the aim of keeping global warning below two degrees. Let us, Madam Speaker, here, in our 
small Mauritius, contribute significantly. 

To end, I wish to quote former US Vice-President, Al Gore, when he made his speech 

in July 2008. I quote – 

“There  are  times  in  the  history  of  our  nation  when  our  very  way  of  life 
depends upon dispelling illusions and awakening to the challenge of a present 
danger. In such moments, we are called upon to move quickly and boldly to 
shake off complacency, throw aside old habits and rise, clear-eyed and alert, 
to the necessity of big changes. Those who, for whatever reason, refuse to do 
their part must either be persuaded to join the effort or asked to step aside.” 
A bon entendeur, salut! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dayal! 

(5.58 p.m.) 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Madam Speaker, I congratulate my colleague the Vice-Prime 
Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  hon.  Collendavelloo,  for  the  timely 
introduction  of  the  Mauritius  Renewable  Energy  Agency  Bill  that  provides  for  the 
institutional framework for promoting the development and use of renewable energy. I am 
convinced  that  this  long-awaited  dedicated  agency  for  renewable  energy  will  greatly 
contribute to reduce our dependency on fossil fuel and decouple our economic growth from 
carbon emissions.  

Mauritius  is  blessed  by  Mother  Nature  with  an  ideal  geographical  location  and 
geological  assets  with  a  huge  potential  of  renewable  energy  sources.  These  should  play  a 
more important role in the country’s energy mix. We are blessed with sun, wind, land mass 

 

106 

and the sea. Indeed, the House will note that Mauritius has the privilege to benefit from more 
than  2,900  hours  of  sunlight  per  year  and  the  South-East  Trade  winds  and  the  Malagasy 
winds  blow  over  the  island  for  respectively  10  and  2  months.  The  sea  also  opens  up  the 
possibility of marine and tidal power. 

Indeed,  the  sea  can  provide  us  with  an  opportunity  to  develop  an  air  conditioning 
cooling system to drive our homes, offices, industries and hotels. We, in Mauritius, already 
have plentiful natural lagoons and we should only be making good use of them. Opportunities 
to tap geothermal energy should be explored. 

I  had  the  privilege  of  meeting  the  Director  of  Gaia,  Ms  Nonaka  Tomoya,  former 
Minister of Environment of Japan during my visit to India where during a workshop session 
there was a presentation of the Okinawa OTEC (Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Power 
Plant). The station is the first of its kind in the world creating energy in a clean manner. The 
mineral which deep sea water is utilised by the Plant can be used in a variety of industries 
making  the  entire  process  more  efficient  and  beneficial.  The  plant  construction  and 
development have been part of a continuing dialogue between Kume Island Okinawa and the 
National Energy Laboratory of Hawaii together with the Saga Universities Institute of Ocean 
Energy.  

The technology for generating power from the deep sea water already exists. At the 
Kumejima Island  located  in  the  very  south  of  Japan  and  part  of  the  Okinawa  Islands,  the 
Japanese Government has implemented a power plant for generating up to 50KW - and this is 
only one plant - of electricity from deep sea water. The plant’s main role is power generation. 
Power  is  generated  by  the  variations  provided  by  the  warm  surface  water  28.70
  C  and  the 
deep cold sea water 8.60 C.  

The  sea  water  is  used  for  several  purposes  such  as  cooling,  energy  generation, 
aquaculture  and  the  production  of  drinking  water,  salts  and  cosmetics.  Correctly,  the  deep 
water-based industries at Kumejima generate an annual turnover of USD20 million. which is 
25% of the island’s Gross National Product. 

Here,  I  would  like  to  come  back  to  the  intervention  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition where he stated, and I quote –  

“(…) we will kill electricity production through bagasse (…)” 

 

And, 

107 

 « Ne comptez pas sur l’industrie sucrière pour investir des milliards in better boilers 
and efficient boilers and so on. Forget about it.» 

As the Minister responsible for the granting of EIA certificate for the production of energy in 
Mauritius, I would like to highlight that renewable energy, through the use of bagasse, is a 
reality and will continue to be so as a reliable clean biomass.  

In  fact,  Government  has  already  renewed  the  licence  of  Alteo  for  production  of 
electricity and the company is planning to reduce the use of coal by 20%. On the other hand, 
an EIA licence has been granted to Omnicane for production of energy for the first time using 
sugarcane  leaves,  including  bagasse.  In  so  doing,  the  sugarcane  planters  are  guaranteed 
higher revenue after sugarcane plantation in the context of dwindling sugarcane prices in the 
international market.  

Geothermal energy is also used at The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) Retreat 
Complex  at  Gual  Pahari,  India.  By  way  of  underground  Earth  Air  Thermal  system,  air  is 
heated in winter and cooled in summer instead of using fossil fuel for the air conditioning 
system. I met Dr. R. K.  Pachauri, the Nobel Prize winner for peace for collaborative effort on 
this field and he was agreeable and even dispatched somebody for a facility in our Ministry.  

In Mauritius also the Hypertek Hotel at Grand Bay uses geothermal energy for its air 
conditioning system. Sea water at a temperature of 100 - 140C is pumped and passed through 
chillers to further cool same to 50 C. The cold water is then, by way of the piping network, 
passed to the air conditioning systems in guest rooms for cooling purposes. This is a reality in 
Mauritius!  

All  these  sources  of  renewable  energy  should  be  at  the  forefront  of  research  and 
development as advocated in the Bill.  This is why the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is coming 
with  the  Bill.  A  similar  scheme  has  been  announced  by  the  British  Prime  Minister,  David 
Cameron,  on  the  Swansea tidal  lagoon  project.  The  outcome  of  this  research  and 
development will no doubt support us to attract green investment opportunities.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  enormous  renewable  energy  potential,  but  the  Silo 
approach  has  been  for  too  long  one  of  the  barriers  to  its  proper  development.  We  need  a 
coordinated and lateral mechanism as is being provided under the Bill and that will ensure a 

 

108 

synergistic approach to the development of  renewable  energy.  It is only by  having  greater 
coordination that we can unlock the renewable energy potential of this country.  

The Agency that is being set up will provide a platform to address the environmental, 
social and economic aspects associated with the development of renewable energy, including 
Waste-to-Energy Projects. I can say that we are going for Waste-to-Energy Project and just in 
one place, in Mare Chicose, we are going to produce, just with one factory, something like 
20GW  per  hour  and  getting  rid  of  the  landfill  site  of  Mare  Chicose  which  has  become  an 
environmental hazard as soil leachate can give rise to underwater contamination. Only Mare 
Chicose  can  generate,  as  I  said,  more  than  10GW  per  hour.  And  with  about  four  of  our 
transfer stations using about 100,000 tonnes of waste, we can again multiply the effect. With 
100,000 tonnes, we can produce something like 15GW of energy which can help us to attain 
neutral emission and we already have promoters! We already have projects! We just have to 
wait for the agency to study and evaluate all those projects. There is a possibility to install 
along  the  coastal  areas  in  shallow  lagoons  a  massive  network  of  wind  generating  power 
plants producing more than enough energy to sustain our energy development plan. It will 
also open and widen up the market for Renewable Energy Technologies, thereby promoting a 
widespread utilisation of renewable energy. This will not only ensure the sustainability of our 
energy  sources  and  protect  our  environment  but,  may,  in  the  long-term,  lower  prices  for 
consumers.  

I  would  like  to  reiterate  the  fact  that  our  geology  and  topography  can  sustain  the 
development of small, medium and large scale hydro power stations. We only have to look 
towards  Scotland  -  I  have  seen  it  with  my  naked  eyes  and  my  son  is  actually  piloting  the 
greatest project of renewable energy in the whole world in Scotland – where in the Tummel 
and  Conon  Valley  the  same  water  is  used  up  to  three  times  to  generate  power  through  a 
number of hydro schemes. The scheme would not have been possible if they did not have a 
strategy and coordinate approach. This is what our Vice-Prime Minister is opting for. We can 
aspire to same types of schemes with this Bill.  

Mauritius  carried  out  an  assessment  on  its  needs  for  environmentally  sound 
technologies to address climate change mitigation in the energy, transport and waste sectors 
as well as with agriculture, forests and other land use, water resources and the coastal zone to 
enhance  adaption  potential.  The  assessment  clearly  indicated  that  Mauritius  presents  an 
environment conducive for successful technology transfer to combat climate change and its 

 

109 

impacts. Existing barriers were identified and can be quite easily overcome with the support 
of the international community. Already, Mauritius is promoting cleaner technologies with its 
capability  to  guarantee  sustainable  development.  The  assessment  also  identified  some  key 
factors  preventing  technology  transfer  to  cope  with  climate  change  such  as  inadequate 
integration  of  climate  issues  in  long-term  development  plans,  policies  and  strategies  and 
insufficient  institutional  synergies.    It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  existing  enabling 
environment  has  to  be  enhanced  for  further  development  and  transfer  of  environmentally 
sound technologies.  

Technology  transfer  remains  nonetheless  a  delicate  and  difficult  issue,  namely 
because of Intellectual Property Rights and the usually high costs often associated with them. 
I am sure that the Green Climate Fund to the tune of 100 billion dollars can support Mauritius 
initiatives and I am already having talks with those concerned for transfer of technology on 
the  core.  Mauritius  has,  so  far,  resorted  to  mechanisms  such  as  grants,  bilateral  and 
multilateral  agreements,  soft  loans  and  private  finance  initiatives  such  as  the  IPPs 
(Independent  Power  Producers)  on  an  ad-hoc  basis  for  the  transfer  of  tehnologies.  I  am 
pleased to note that one of the core functions of the Agency would be to define a funding 
strategy for renewable energy projects. I am confident that the Agency will play a key role in 
addressing the constraints encountered so far in the diffusion and uptake of new technologies. 
Already in Mauritius Alteo is proposing a reduction of 20% of its consumption of coal with 
more  input  of  biomass  and  increasing  by  two  fold  its  production  of  energy.  The  same 
philosophy has guided Omnicane to incorporate the use of biomass in the form of cane leaves 
for increasing its production of electricity. My Ministry in collaboration with other relevant 
stakeholders is proposing to use Arundo Donax which will be grown in waste land for the 
production of pellets as biomass in the production of electricity.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  you  are  aware,  the  electricity  sector  and  its  infrastructure  are 

highly vulnerable - 

(a)  Stronger  cyclones  and  other  extreme  weather  conditions,  like  lightning  and 

torrential rainfall; 

(b)  Decrease  in  global  rainfall  amount  which  lead  to  a  decrease  in  hydro-power 

generation, and 

 
(c) Sea-level rise which may affect the two major fuels oil power stations and coastal 

110 

networks infrastructure. 

However,  these  vulnerabilities  can  be  properly  mitigated  through  a  comprehensive 
renewable energy strategy where we can focus on such sources where we have comparative 
advantage. Moreover, Budget 2015, no doubt, gives the right incentive to upscale the share of 
renewables  in  the  energy  mix  as  it  provides  for  a  Solar  Energy  Investment  Allowance 
Scheme  thus,  allowing  a  household  investing  in  his  own  solar  energy  to  deduct  from  his 
taxable income and total amount invested in such a unit that comprise photovoltaic kits and 
battery for storage of electricity.  

Madam Speaker, the House will recall the eager response of the population to the new 
Solar  Water  Heater  Scheme  currently  being  implemented  by  my  Ministry.  To  date,  the 
scheme is in the fourth phase and so far, for the first time a total of 74,000 households has 
benefited from it. 

My Ministry is planning, provided funds are available, to equip a solar water heater 
freely  to  the  160  new  housing  units  of  the  National  Housing  Development  Corporation 
(NHDC) for vulnerable people.  

I am delighted to inform the House that this scheme is meeting its intended objectives 

to - 

(a)  Encourage the use of renewable energy instead of fossils fuels; 

(b) Reduce greenhouse gas emissions; 

(c)  Assist the long-term development of the solar water heater industry, and  

(d) Increase public access to and create awareness of sustainable energy technology. 

Furthermore,  we  are  not  only  addressing  renewable  energy  at  the  level  of  power 
production in the National CEB grid, we are also addressing renewable energy at the level of 
logistics, smart means of transportation by having electric buses with the life span of 25 years 
with 100 seated capacity, with five-year pay back capacity and life span of 12 years for its 
batteries, thus reducing our dependence on fossil fuel. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  energy  industries  (electricity  generation)  is  one  of  the  main 
sources of GHG emissions within the energy sector. Computations indicate that during the 

 

111 

period 2000 to 2006, net GHG emissions rose to 16.8% from 3,914 GIGA CO2 equivalent to 
4,572 GIGA CO2 equivalent with an annual average increase of 2.7%. It is, therefore, in the 
interest of Mauritius to contribute to the reduction of GHG, be it in an infinitely small amount 
and we are committed to this objective.  

I therefore welcome the mitigating measures being envisaged for the electricity sector, 
namely  for  the  Central  Electricity  Board  to  switch  from  heavy  fuel  oil  to  the  less  carbon 
intensive fuel, the Liquefied Natural Gas. It is expected that Liquefied Natural Gas is readily 
available as the world natural gas proven reserves is estimated at 204.7 trillion cubic meters 
and in our region.  Recently, huge reserves of gas have been discovered in Egypt. 

Madam  Speaker,  according  to  the  5th  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change 
(IPPC)  Assessment  Reports  (released  in  November  2014),  the  world  is  heading  towards  a 
dangerous climate change pathway and urgent actions are required.  At the 19th Conference of 
Parties,  UNFCCC  in  2013,  Parties  agreed  to  formulate  and  communicate  to  the  UNFCCC 
Secretariat measures they intend to take at their respective national level to both mitigate and 
adapt  to  climate  change  impacts  in  the  form  of  an  Intended  Nationally  Determined 
Contributions (INDC) and here I must salute the collaboration of the Ministry of Energy and 
the Deputy Prime Minister together with all line Ministries and line Ministers who helped in 
the implementation of INDC which will be made public very shortly. 

INDCs  are  contributions  that  countries  make  towards  achieving  one  of  the  main 
objectives of the UNFCCC Convention, that is, to limit the temperature rise to below 20 C 
by 2100.  

The INDC mitigation and adaption diagnosis comprise –  

(a)  Data  and  information  to  be  collected  regarding  climate  change  mitigation 
which may include national objectives and priorities, future and current GHG 
emissions, on-going mitigation activities, mitigation potential, relation towards 
the 20 C goal, and the financing needed to reach the potential reduction; 

(b) Data to be collected regarding adaption may include current and future climate 
scenario,  current  and  future  vulnerability,  on-going  and  expected  adaptation 
strategies, adaption plans and policies, as well as financial needs. 

The INDC document will be finalised and submitted to the UNFCCC at the end of September 
2015, prior to the Climate Change Conference taking place in Paris in December 2015 and, 
for the first time, we are taking part - our delegation - and somebody from the private sector 

 

112 

as  well.  This  crucial  document  can  be  used  to  mobilise  resources,  both  financial  and 
technical, to support us in our quest to decarbonise our development.  

This Bill is, therefore, coming at an opportune time and will assist us in developing 

linkages both at regional and international levels. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to inform the House that our waste management 
strategy lays strong emphasis on tapping the energy potential from residual waste. Such an 
approach  will  not  only  enable  electricity  generation  but  will  also  result  in  diverting  waste 
from landfill, thus, allowing savings in terms of landfilling space and reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions. We are spending billions for so many years.  

However, the debate around energy recovery from waste can often be highly emotive. 
It is a complex area that is not easily or effectively addressed with a simple “it’s a right” or 
“it’s  a  wrong”  approach.  Similar  to  Singapore,  we  should  encourage  the  use  of  the  fuel 
source.  Energy recovery from waste must, at the very outset, not compete with recycling, 
reuse and prevention initiatives, but should ideally support them. There are many subtleties 
and  proposals  that  need  to  be  debated,  using  all  the  available  evidence,  and  with  due 
consideration of the wider environmental impact of managing our waste. We should consider 
recovering  energy  from  wastes  after  having  put  in  place  our  recycling  initiatives,  since 
technologies for energy recovery have to be diligently assessed and the costs thereof properly 
weighed.  Only  through  full,  informed  discussions  and  proper  assessment  can  we  deliver 
energy from waste which this Bill is heading for. 

 I am sure that whilst compiling and analysing data on use and benefits of renewable 
energy, which forms part of its functions, the Agency will look at the waste energy options 
and come up with clear recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has, in its Programme 2015-2019, proposed a host 
of measures to promote sustainable development. Furthermore, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, also stated in his Economic Statement that this Government remains 
committed to adopting a responsible and environmentally sustainable policy regarding energy 
production,  waste  management  and  physical  infrastructural  development.  Rightly  so,  since 
2015 will be a major turning point in the history of mankind and sustainable development 
with the forthcoming adoption of a New Development Framework, Post 2015. 

 

113 

On the national front, the Bill will create the enabling conditions for its promotion and 
use  of  renewable  energy.  The  Bill  will  help  address  the  energy  environmental  challenges 
lying ahead. The heart of this Bill rests on innovation and shows our commitment to energy 
security, diversity and efficiency. Diversification of energy supply towards alternate sources 
can  greatly  relieve dependence on  conventional  energy sources over time while helping to 
cope with growing environmental concerns.  

This Bill will, no doubt, renew and extend our commitment to the environment, both 
resolving and supporting a future of cleaner energy. It is important to remember that there is 
no single solution to meeting energy demand and Mauritius will have to rely on an array of 
resources to meet the energy needs and this will, inter alia, include renewable sources and 
traditional fossil fuels linked with new technologies to reduce their environmental impact. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  aware  that  the  work  lying  ahead  of  us  is  of  course,  a  tall 
order,  a  difficult  and  tedious  process.    But  we  are  confident  that  once  Renewable  Energy 
Agency  is  fully  operational,  it  will  make  provision  for  incentives  and  subsidies  for  the 
promotion of renewables such as wind and solar energy and also for the future development 
of economically competitive fuels and technologies. By so doing, we will be moving steadily 
towards implementing the new formulated Sustainable Development goal for Energy in the 
new global development framework. That would be the footprint of l’Alliance Lepep.  

Once again, I would like to congratulate my colleague for a Bill that is well-balanced 
and with clear objectives, functions and other provisions that will allow such an Agency to 
play its role fully. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Baloomoody rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 
Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Tuesday 29 September 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

114 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

MATTER RAISED 

(6.25 p.m.) 

BEL OMBRE, CHAMOUNY & SURINAM - INFRASTRUCTURAL WORKS 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):    Madam  Speaker,  I 
have given notice to the Clerk that I intend to raise a matter at Adjournment Time today and 
the matter concerns the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and 
Beach Management and it is entitled: “The plight of the flood victims of the regions of Bel 
Ombre, Chamouny and Surinam and the infrastructural works to be carried out thereat.”  

Madam Speaker, nous sommes à la fin du mois de septembre.  Dans une semaine nous 
entamons de plein-pied, nous allons entrer dans le mois d’octobre, and this means in about 
two  months’  time  rainy  season  will  start  from  January  onwards  and  these  three  villages, 
which I have mentioned in the subject matter I wish to raise today, are villages which have 
been, in the beginning of this year, subject to heavy rainfall. In fact, during the weekend of 
the 07 and 08 March of this year devastating rainfall have caused and have provoked so much 
havoc, distress and misery to the population of these areas.  

In fact, the village of - in this very House there have been several PQs on this issue 
dating  back  since  in  the  early  year  2000  -  Bel  Ombre  is  in  a  peculiar  situation,  Madam 
Speaker. Flooding is a recurrent problem in this area. The village and the sea level is nearly 
the same. The village is at the foot of the mountain and the rainwater from the mountains 
flow directly into the village. Therefore, the geographical situation is a heavy drawback to the 
villagers. The village itself constitutes a bore and this prevents water to be evacuated from the 
village and the soil in this area contains underground water and cannot absorb excess of rain. 
Therefore, there is little amount of absorption, and this, of course, prevents accumulation of 
water during heavy season. On top of those natural drawbacks, in the recent past there have 
been a lot of property development in the area with the IRS and so on, and therefore this can 
explain  why  during  the  heavy  rainfall  the  situation  is  as  dramatic  as  it  was  during  the 
beginning  of  this  year  and  several  houses  were  flooded.  During  the  first  weekend  of  the 

 

115 

month  of  March,  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach  Management,  hon.  Dayal,  visited  the  area  during  those  days,  and  he  witnessed  this 
dreadful situation at Bel Ombre. Several houses were flooded as I just said, Madam Speaker 
and in the past, some relief measures were taken. There was the construction of a  mur de 
soutènement, of a nouveau barrage, but, unfortunately, these were piecemeal measures which 
did not, in fact, offer any sustainable solution to the problem. So, this is why, today, I wish to 
appeal to the hon. Minister to see to it that infrastructural works start as soon as possible.   

I  am  quite  aware  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  informed  the  House  in  a  recent  PQ  that 
tenders will be launched soon, but I am just appealing to him that the bids be launched as 
quickly as possible and the works start as soon as possible because, as I have said, there are 
only two months left before the rainy seasons.  I wish to ask the hon. Minister also to use his 
good offices, Madam Speaker, to see to it that these several victims of the floods - of course, 
they did receive the allowance of Rs133 per day for three days as the regulations provide, but 
many of these families lost their furniture and many electrical appliances during the flood and 
I appeal to him to use his good offices also to see to it that these flood victims of Bel Ombre 
area are compensated.  

Close to the village of Bel Ombre, Madam Speaker, as you know, there are the villages 
of Chamouny and Surinam also.  Both of these villages were also subject to the same trauma. 
In Chamouny, the Rivière Rafia overflooded. About 50 houses were completely hit by these 
floods.  In one case, there was a poultry where there were about 10,000 chickens which died 
and had to be buried and, as I said, about 50 families were subjected to these floods.  Their 
furniture and food and all their stuffs were destroyed and they also, have been living the same 
trauma as the village of Bel Ombre.  Such was the case also for the village of Surinam where 
the Rivière Moulin-Cassé was overflooded, Madam Speaker.  The house, especially of the 
Gian family, was completely devastated by the flood at Rivière Moulin-Cassé at Veerasamy 
Lane in Surinam.  Water overflowed into the houses and consequent damages were caused to 
all  these  families.    The  river  overflooded  so  much  that  the  water  entered  into  their  house, 
wrenched  and  destroyed  the  aluminium  window  panels  and  doors,  swept  the  whole  house 
completely, damaged the furniture and the appliances.  

So, Madam Speaker, my humble appeal to the hon. Minister is to see to it that matters 
are expedited.  In view of climate change, in view of the property development which has 
taken place in Bel Ombre, as I have just said, I wish to appeal to the hon. Minister today to 

 

116 

avoid the villagers living in these three villages, not to experience the same nightmares and 
trauma that they have experienced during the beginning of this year and I appeal to him to see 
to it that in the case of  Bel Ombre especially, the infrastructural works  start as quickly as 
possible.    The  river  is  desilted  and  drenched  and  in  the  cases  of  the  two  other  rivers  at 
Chamouny and Surinam also, that the infrastructural works start as soon as possible.  

I would also like to table, for the hon. Minister, certain photos which were taken during 
the  flood  in  the  beginning  of  this  year  which  show  clearly,  Madam  Speaker,  how  bad  the 
damages were and how traumatic were these experiences for the occupants of these different 
houses and I am sure, knowing the hon. Minister, that he will see to it that the proper works 
are effected as soon as possible. 

Thank you. 

(6.33 p.m.) 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management  (Mr  J.  Dayal):    Madam  Speaker,  since  December  2014,  I  was  given  the 
portfolio for Disaster Risk Reduction and Management.  It has been an obvious success story 
throughout with a 100% success story and zero fatality.  I must say it has been thanks to my 
colleagues in Government and outside Government and also the PPS, hon. Thierry Henry. 

(Interruptions) 

It could not be better for all intents and purposes for the Government of l’Alliance Lepep.   

The flooding that occurred during the first week of March 2015 is the direct result of 
improper  handling  of  infrastructural  works  thereat  within  the  established  framework  of 
proper disaster management.  Had the vulnerabilities of the local residents been addressed 
within sustainable goals for mitigating vulnerabilities projects, such flooding could have been 
avoided sparing the inhabitants the trauma and prejudice of which they were victims.  

In flooding and disaster management, what is of vital importance are – 

(i) 

(ii) 

proactive responses in terms of hardening of targets to prevent loss of life and 
property; 

mitigation of risks while attending to physical vulnerability of certain regions 
in  the  coastal  zones  prior  to  flooding  with  adequate  storm  water  evacuation 

 

 (iii) 

117 

methods,  to  ensure  security  of  inhabitants  and  to  protect  the  eco-system 
thereat; 

investment  in  the  upgrading  of  the  infrastructure  to  face  situation  of  flash 
floods in a systematic manner.  This was not done over the  years, and, as a 
result,  such  disasters  occurred,  which  I  had  the  opportunity  to  view  from 
ground  and  air.    It  is  mandatory  for  proper  disaster  management  to  have  a 
bird’s-eye  view  with  aerial  surveys  by  helicopter  to  assess  the  situation 
professionally and come up with adequate remedial measures. In order to take 
proactive  actions,  we  are 
investigating  on  disaster  management  and 
infrastructural structures to ensure the safety and livelihood of the inhabitants, 
more particularly, accessibility to the region, and also to maintain the beauty 
of the landscape, and safeguard the rich mangrove plantation including its rich 
biodiversity.   

In order to bring sustainable development and capacity building with reliable, adequate 
measures,  the  following  decisions  were  taken  by  me,  my  Ministry  and  the  Government  in 
collaboration with all stakeholders concerned, including Compagnie Sucrière de Bel Ombre, 
Les Villas de Bel Ombre Ltée and Heritage Golf Ltd., I carried out a site visit on 08 March 
2015, following which the following short-term measures were taken – 

(i) 

immediate measures include – 

(a)  Pumping of stagnant water from residential area, namely Cité Longtil 
by  the  Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue  Services,  with  the  support  of  the 
SMF. 

 (b)  Clean-up  of  the  affected  area  undertaken  with  the  assistance  of  Bel 

Ombre Sugar Estate.  

(c)  Larviciding  and  fogging  by  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life 

with the assistance of Bel Ombre Sugar Estate. 

(d) Distribution  of  free  meals  and  other  basic  needs  items  such  as 
mattresses  and  school  materials  by  NDRRMC  of  my  Ministry  in 
collaboration with District Councils, Caritas and Villas Valriche. 

 
(ii) 

118 

Rehabilitation  of  the  whole  area  to  prevent  accumulation  of  water  and 
flooding as well as the stabilisation of the river banks. 

Consultations  have  been  held  with  the  various  stakeholders  of  the  region  to  find 

solutions to the problem of flooding in the medium term.  

Proactive measures have been designed by my Ministry to desilt the river St. Martin to 
increase water flow and construction of a rock bund on the upper side of the river bank to 
ensure protection and stability of the river.  The whole works are estimated at Rs10 m.   

Bids will be launched shortly and works are expected to start within a month following 

the award of the contract.  The contract will be of four months’ duration.  

Furthermore, I directed Mrs Ng Yun Wing, Director of Environment at the Ministry 
of  Environment  and  Mr  Bholah,  Chief  Project  Manager,  that  Compagnie  Sucrière  de  Bel 
Ombre  Ltd,  Les  Villas  De  Bel  Ombre  Ltée  and  Hermitage  Golf  Ltd,  through  their 
consultancy  firm  Arup  SIGMA  Ltd.,  to  submit  a  report  on  flood  mitigation  measures  to 
minimise the risk of potential floods and  also to advise the RDA for the upgrading of the 
bridge along the coastal road. 

As  directed  by  me,  during  a  site  visit  effected,  the  consultants  are  contemplating  a 
holistic approach of the whole catchment area in consultation with my Ministry. They will, 
according to their financial and other resources, implement remedial measures through CSR 
in a phased manner within their respective sites. 

The report also covers the runabout which is subject to flooding, the St. Martin bridge 
and  the  restoration  of  the  wetland  and  drain  network  from  the  incoming  upstream 
watercourses. 

As far as the villages of Chamouny and Surinam are concerned where there has been 
no  severe  flooding,  we  will  work  with  competent  authorities  to  ensure  the  safety  of 
inhabitants. There has been no report of flooding so far. 

Thank you. 

At 6.39 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 29 September 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

119 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

SHELTER FOR CHILDREN IN DISTRESS - CARERS 

(No.  B/552)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 
whether, in regard to the shelter for children in distress, she will state the number thereof, 
indicating in each case the - 

(a) number of children staying therein, and  
(b) ratio of carers to children. 
Reply: The total number of shelters for children in distress is 21, out of which 5 are 
under the aegis of my Ministry. In fact, 4 of these 5 shelters are managed by NGOs and a 
remaining one by the National Children’s Council.     

Concerning part (a) of the question, the total number of children placed in shelters as 

at 17 September 2015 is 556 (268 boys and 288 girls). 

As regards part (b), I am apprised that the ratio of carers to children varies according 
to  the  age  and  the  number  of  children  as  well  as  their  physical  and  mental  abilities.    The 
average is 1:5 during day time and 1:4 at night time.   

 

PLAINE VERTE - GYMNASIUM & MULTIPURPOSE COMPLEX - 

CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/553)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed 
construction of infrastructures in Plaine Verte, Port Louis, he will - 

(a)  state  where  matters  stand  in  relation  to  the  proposed  construction  of  a  new 

gymnasium on the premises of the Concorde Garden, Plaine Verte, and 

(b)  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis, 
information  as  to  where  matters  stand  in  relation  to  the  construction  of  a  new 
multipurpose complex at Renaissance, Plaine Verte, indicating - 
(i) the amount of money earmarked therefor, and  
(ii) if fresh tenders have been launched therefor and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

LA CAMBUSE - HOTEL DEVELOPMENT 

(No. B/554) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed hotel development by Le 

 

120 

Chaland Resort Hotel, at La Cambuse, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
District Council of Grand Port, information as to if it has granted a Building and Land Use 
Permit therefor and, if so, indicate - 

(a) when; 
(b) the number of organisations and individuals who had objected thereto;  
(c)  the  date  on  which  the  Ramsar  Committee  Clearance  was  granted  therefor, 

indicating the names of the committee members thereof, and  

(d) if the subject site is located within environmentally sensitive areas. 
Reply:  I  am  informed  that  a  Local  Authority  issues,  according  to  established 
guidelines under relevant legislations, a Building and Land Use Permit after it has obtained 
all the necessary clearances and permits in respect of an application. 

I am, in this context, informed by the District Council of Grand Port that following the 
obtention of the relevant clearances from the following Ministries and Departments, namely 
Wastewater Management Authority, Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit, Ministry of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, Disaster and Beach Management, Ministry of Agro-
Industry  and  Food  Security,  Department  of  Civil  Aviation,  Road  Development  Authority, 
Ministry of Housing and Lands, National Heritage Fund, the Council on 09 September 2015 
issued  a  Building  and  Land  Use  Permit  to  Currimjee  Jeewanjee  and  Co.  Ltd  for  the 
construction  of  Le  Chaland  Resort  Hotel  (Phase  I)  comprising  of  164  rooms,  and  other 
related amenities. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  ten  non-governmental 

organisations and 1370 individuals had objected to the project. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the clearance of the Ramsar 
Committee  of  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  was  obtained  on  23  June 
2014. As regards the names of the Committee Members, I am arranging for the information 
to be placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 

As  far  as  the  last  part  of  the  question  is  concerned,  I  am  informed  by  the  Chief 
Executive  of  the  District  Council  that  the  site  where  the  hotel  will  be  constructed  is  not 
earmarked  as  an  Environmentally  Sensitive  Area  according  to  the  Grand  Port  Savanne 
Outline Scheme. In fact, it is the Blue Bay Marine Park which is listed as an Environmentally 
Sensitive Area. 

 

 
 

 

121 

CEB - ‘PAY AS YOU USE’ PRE-PAID METERS 

(No. B/555) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public whether, in regard to electricity, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to - 

(a)  the  number  of  households  in  mainland  Mauritius  which  have  had  their  supply 
thereof  disconnected  since  01  January  2013  to  date,  indicating  the  reasons 
therefor, and  

(b) if the Board is still contemplating the introduction of ‘Pay as You Use’ pre-paid 

meters for certain categories of consumers. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  that  it  has  disconnected  the 
electricity supply of 69,738 households in mainland Mauritius since 01 January 2013 to date 
for non-payment of electricity bills and at customer’s requests. 

 As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that in September 2012, the CEB in 
collaboration  with  the  Mauritius  Telecom  and  the  then  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and 
Economic  Empowerment  introduced  a  prepaid  metering  project  targeting  400  vulnerable 
households. Only 24 households registered for the project. 

 I  have  been  informed  by  the  CEB  that  it  is  reviewing  the  project  to  address  the 
numerous  technical  and  administrative  impediments  and  consider  the  implementation  of  a 
proven and tested prepaid solution.  

 

PARASTATAL BODIES & STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISE – FINANCIAL 

STATEMENTS 

(No. B/556) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the parastatal bodies 
and  State-owned  enterprise,  he  will  give  a  list  of  the  ones  which  have  negative  balance 
sheets, indicating in each case, the amount of debt as at to date. 

Reply: I presume that by negative Balance Sheet, the hon. Member is referring to a 
situation where an entity has negative equity in the case of a company or a negative capital in 
the case of a statutory body.  

An  exercise  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  each  of  the  175  statutory  bodies  and 
State-owned  companies  is  being  carried  out  and  the  list  requested  will  be  tabled  upon  its 
completion. 

 
 

 

122 

COURTS LTD – WORKERS – LAID OFF 

(No. B/557) Mr O. Mahomed  (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  laying  off  of  the  workers  at  Courts  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain information as to –  

(a) the number thereof;  
(b) if the ‘last in first out’ principle, as promised, has been fully adhered to, and  
(c) the compensation being paid thereto.  
Reply: In regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed that in the wake of 
the taking over of Iframac Retail Ltd (also known as Courts) by Mamouth (Mauritius) Ltd, 
the  Special  Administrator  appointed  in  BAI  Co  (Mtius)  Ltd  and  Related  Companies 
terminated the employment of 188 workers, out of a total workforce of 917 workers on 10 
September 2015.  

According to the enquiry carried out by officers of my Ministry, I am informed that 
the  Special  Administrator  has  applied  the  principle  of  ‘Last  In  First  Out’  based  on  the 
respective specific occupations of the workers and the departments where they were posted 
whilst establishing the list of workers to be made redundant.  He has taken into account the 
various outlets that are being kept in operation and the exigencies of the specific departments.  
However, I am informed that the principle of ‘Last In First Out’ was not adopted in the case 
of two drivers and two sales representatives.  

My  Ministry  is  pursuing  discussions  with  the  Special  Administrator  and  Mamouth 
(Mtius)  Ltd  with  a  view  to  finding  a  mutually  acceptable  solution  in  regard  to  the  four 
workers concerned. 

 I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  176  out  of  the  188  redundant  workers  have  been 
admitted  in  the  Workfare  Programme.    The  remaining  12  workers  have  not  yet  made  an 
application to join the Programme. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the Special Administrator has 

decided to pay to the 188 laid off workers as provided in the Employment Rights Act - 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
 

all outstanding wages up to 10 September 2015; 
one month’s wages as indemnity in lieu of notice; 
refund of outstanding annual leave, and 
End of Year Gratuity on a pro-rata basis. 
Additionally, Government has agreed to make an ex-gratia payment of 15 days 

for each completed year of service. 

 
 As at today, 42 out of the 188 redundant workers have accepted the offer made by the 

123 

Special Administrator and have already been paid their dues. 

 

PETIT-VERGER, SAINT PIERRE - RIVER WATER - INQUIRY 

(No. B/558) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the recent “whitening” of the  river water over  a 
long  distance  at  Petit  Verger,  Saint  Pierre,  he  will  state  if  an  inquiry  has  been  carried  out 
thereinto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof.  

Reply:  Following  a  complaint  received  on  Sunday  13  September  2015  concerning 
“whitening” of river Moka at La Laura, an immediate site visit was effected on the same day 
by officers of Police de L’Environnement. I am informed that at the time of visit, the river 
water  was  found  to  be  turbid  and  no  dead  fish  were  found.  Samples  of  river  water  were 
collected for analysis.  

As per information gathered from St Pierre Police Station, dredging works were being 
carried  out  at  river  Moka,  opposite  La  Laura  village  hall.  The  District  Council  of  Moka 
confirmed that these works were being undertaken in the context of the forthcoming religious 
festival, Ganesh Chaturthi. 

It  was  confirmed  that  dredging  works  were  being  carried  out  with  an  excavator 
without mitigating measures. The excavated soil which contains clay materials resulted in the 
whitish-brown  colour  observed  downstream.  Water  analysis  carried  out  by  the  National 
Environmental Laboratory revealed that all parameters analyzed were within standards except 
for Total Suspended Solids which was due to the dredging works. 

The  contractor  of  the  District  Council  of  Moka  was  requested  to  immediately  stop 
works  and  install  geotextile  membranes  across  the  river  to  capture  all  existing  loose  soil 
particles, rocks and mud, to which he complied with. During a follow-up site visit effected 
the day after, it was observed that the dredging works had been completed and the river water 
was clear.   

 
 
 

 

124 

CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT IN COASTAL PROTECTION AND 

REHABILITATION IN MAURITIUS PROJECT 

(No. B/559) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the  project  on  “Capacity  Development  in  Coastal 
Protection  and  Rehabilitation  in  Mauritius”  undertaken  by  the  Japan  International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA), he will state the outcome thereof. 

Reply: With regard to the project, I am informed that the field activities have been 
completed and that the final report will be submitted by end of October 2015. The objective 
of  the  project  is  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  coastal  erosion  around  Mauritius  in  a  holistic 
manner  using  innovative  and  long-term  resilient  coastal  protection  and  reef  conservation 
measures. 

During  the  project,  the  experts  carried  out  a  survey  of  the  coastal  zone  around 
Mauritius and they reported that on the whole, 11 % of the coast has been eroded, 30 % of the 
coast has been accreting and 59 % is stable. Severe erosion has been noted at Albion, Mon 
Choisy and Bel Ombre. Percentage of living corals in the lagoon has been estimated to be 27 
%. A decrease from 50 % in 2001 to 27 % in 2012 has been noted. 

 Coastal conservation plans for 14 sites have been prepared. The main recommendations 
are improvement of vertical structures, adherence to setback policy, beach nourishment, sand 
recycling, coral transplantation, seagrass and mangrove plantation. The 14 sites are; Pointe aux 
Cannoniers, Mon Choisy, Quatre Cocos/Trou d’Eau Douce, Ile aux Cerfs, Pointe d’Esny, Bel 
Ombre, Le Morne, Flic en Flac, Albion, Pointe-aux-Sables, Albion (Lighthouse),  Grand Sable, 
Baie du Tombeau, and Bras d’Eau . 

As  part  of  the  project,  demonstration  projects  have  been  carried  at  two  coastal 

stretches to ensure capacity building of the relevant stakeholders, namely - 

• 

• 

Grand  Sable  Village:  Physical  demonstration  project  in  the  form  of  gravel 
beach  nourishment  also  referred  to  as  flexible  beach  revetment,  as  an 
innovative technique, has been tested successfully against coastal erosion and 
wave  overtopping.  On  the  advice  of  the  experts,  My  Ministry  intends  to 
replicate this technique on other similar sites. 
Pointe  d’Esny:  Non-physical  demonstration  project 
the 
community  participation  through  adherence  to  land  use  regulation,  setback 
policy, sand nourishment, sand bypassing, and monitoring, amongst others.  

together  with 

125 

 
With regard to capacity building on coastal protection and rehabilitation, a number of 
seminars, workshops and technical exchange programmes has been organised for concerned 
stakeholders.  Furthermore,  officers  of  my  Ministry  and  other  organisations  have  also  been 
provided training in Japan. Such capacity building programmes on coastal zone management 
include beach erosion control techniques and monitoring, coral reef ecology, wave measuring 
and analysis, water quality monitoring and beach reprofiling. 

My  Ministry  has  already  approached  the  JICA  for  further  assistance  in  the 
implementation  of  recommendations  as  a  second  phase  to  this  project,  taking  on  board 
Rodrigues and outer islands. 

 

PUBLIC BEACH - REHABILITATION 

(No.  B/560)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the  public  beaches,  he  will  state  the  measures,  if  any, 
which have been taken to - 

(a) 
(b) 

prevent the erosion thereof, and  
rehabilitate the public beach of Blue Bay/Pointe d’Esny. 

Reply:  With regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to highlight that coastal erosion is 

a natural phenomenon, exacerbated by human interferences and climate change.  

My Ministry has, so far, taken several measures to address coastal erosion. Some of the 

important measures are - 

(i)  Application  of  a  setback  policy  for  construction  of  structures  on  the 
shoreline  as  per  the  Planning  Policy  Guidance  and  through  the 
Environment  Impact  Assessment  and  Preliminary  Environmental 
Report mechanisms; 

(ii)  Implementation  of  the  recommendations  made  in  Baird’s  Report 
(2003) on “Coastal Erosion in Mauritius”. Beach rehabilitation works 
have been accordingly carried out at a number of eroded sites around 
Mauritius.    The  works,  based  on  site  specificities  and  severity  of 
erosion, consisting of both hard measures such as rock revetment, and 
soft  measures  such  as  beach  replenishment  with  sand,  have  been 
completed.  

 

126 

The sites where major works have been carried out, include - Trou aux 
Biches, Grand Baie, Cap Malheureux, Poudre d’Or, Belle Mare, Trou 
d’Eau  Douce,  GRSE,  Quatre  Soeurs,  Rivière  des  Galets,  Le  Morne, 
Flic en  Flac and Pointes aux Sables.  Works are  currently ongoing at 
Baie Du Cap and Bain Boeuf public beach. Works will soon start at Le 
Morne village public beach, La Prairie public beach, and La Preneuse 
public beach; 

(iii)  Completion  of  a  3-year  integrated  coastal  erosion  assessment  project 
with the help of highly qualified international experts hired under the 
aegis of the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). The main 
objective  of  this  project  is  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  coastal  erosion 
using  innovative  and  long  term  resilient  coastal  protection  and  reef 
conservation measures, as well as build capacity of relevant authorities 
to  address  this  issue.  Under  the  project,  an  innovative  technique, 
namely,  gravel  beach  nourishment,  also  referred  to  as  flexible  beach 
revetment has been tested successfully at Grand Sables against coastal 
erosion  and  wave  overtopping.  On  the  advice  of  the  experts,  My 
Ministry intends to replicate this technique on other similar sites. I am 
informed that the final report of the project is expected to be submitted 
by  October  2015.  My  Ministry  has  already  approached  the  JICA  for 
further  assistance  in  the  implementation  of  recommendations  as  a 
second  phase  to  this  project  taking  on  board  Rodrigues  and  outer 
islands; 

(iv)  Implementation of the Climate Change Adaptation Programme in the 
coastal zone of Mauritius funded by the Adaptation Fund set up under 
the United Nations. This is a 5-year programme which is fully funded 
through a grant to the tune of Rs270 m. and which started in July 2012. 
The  programme  is  addressing  current  climate  change  risks  at  three 
vulnerable coastal sites, namely Mon Choisy, Rivière des Galets and 
Quatre Soeurs and will involve the application of specific adaptation 
measures for coastal protection. Activities are still on-going; and 

(v)  Rehabilitation works for the period 2015-2017.  Seven priority sites for 
coastal protection works and seven sites for beach rehabilitation works 
have  been  identified.  In  this  endeavour,  provisions  to  the  tune  of      

 

127 

Rs116 m., have been made in my Ministry’s budget for 2015-2016. My 
Ministry is presently in the process of recruiting a consultancy firm for 
the design and supervision of proposed works.  

Furthermore, there is an Integrated Coastal Zone Management Committee comprising 
relevant stakeholder set up under the Chair of the Director of Environment of my Ministry 
which, inter alia, follows up and makes recommendations on approaches to address coastal 
erosion around Mauritius.  

With regard to part (b), my Ministry carried out beach nourishment works with sand 
and  removal  of  an  existing  retaining  wall  in  November  2012  at  Blue  Bay  public  beach. 
However,  following  the  passage  of  a  cyclone,  loss  of  sand  from  the  beach  was  observed. 
Following continuous beach profile monitoring carried out at this site, I am informed that the 
beach has already stabilised. Should there be  any  significant  erosion occurring  at this site, 
appropriate actions will be taken. 

I wish to inform the House that at this point in time, there is no declared public beach at 

Pointe d’Esny. 

However, a coastal conservation plan for this campement site area has been prepared 
under  the  JICA  project.  The  main  objective  is  to  involve  and  raise  awareness  among 
stakeholder  on  beach  conservation,  setback  policy,  groin  removal,  and  beach  nourishment, 
amongst  others,  to  ensure  that  the  measures  are  implemented  in  a  holistic  and  sustainable 
manner.  

HAJJ 2015 – MAURITIAN PILGRIMS – SCREEN & FOLLOW-UP 

 

(No. B/561) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the emergence of the 
virus causing MERS in Saudi Arabia which has recently caused several deaths, he will state – 
the  Mauritian  pilgrims 

information  have  been  given 

if  adequate 
to 
accomplishing the Hajj 2015 in relation thereto, and 
the  measures  that  have  been  taken  to  screen  and  follow-up  the  pilgrims  on 
their arrival. 

(a) 

(b) 

(Withdrawn) 

 
 
 

 

128 

SPECIAL OLYMPIC WORLD SUMMER GAMES – 

 ATHLETES - PERFORMANCE 

(No. B/562) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Special Olympic World Summer 
Games which was held from 25 July to 02 August 2015, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the  number  of  athletes  who  represented  Mauritius  thereto,  indicating  their 
respective performances, and  
if  any  provision  has  been  made  for  a  cash  price  for  our  Gold,  Silver  and 
Bronze Medals Athletes. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Mentally Handicapped Persons Sports Federations that, a 
delegation of 18 persons comprising 10 athletes (5 boys and 5 girls) and 8 cadres participated 
in the Special Olympics World Summer Games held in Los Angeles, USA from the 25 July 
to 02 August 2015. 

The  athletes  won  16  medals:  5  gold,  3  silver  and  8  bronze  medals  in  Athletics  and 

Bocce 

As regards part (b) of the question, the High Level Sports Unit of the Ministry of Youth 
and Sports has not yet received the official results from the concerned federation.  Once the 
official  results  are  obtained,  High  Level  Sports  Unit  of  the  Ministry  will  meet  to  make 
appropriate recommendations to the Ministry for the payment of cash prizes. 

 

PAILLES - WASTEWATER SEWERAGE NETWORK PROJECT - 

IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/563) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Wastewater Sewerage Network Project in the region of Pailles, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Wastewater Management Authority, information as to where matters 
stand as to the implementation of Phases 1 and 2 thereof respectively, indicating if there has 
been any delay in the carrying out of the tender procedures in relation thereto and, if so, give 
details thereof and, if not, indicate the timeframe set for the implementation thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority that with regard to 
Phase 1 of the project, it invited bids for construction of 40 Km of trunk sewer and a pumping 

 

129 

station  on  28  November  2014.    The  closing  date  was  25  February  2015.    The  Central 
Procurement Board submitted its recommendation to the WMA on 29 May 2015. 

The WMA issued the notification of award on 09 September 2015.  This delay is 
due  to  communication  problems  in  obtaining  the  no  objection  from  the  Arab  Bank  for 
Economic  Development  in  Africa  and  the  OPEC  Fund  for  International  Development.  
Works are expected to start early next year. 

Regarding  Phase  2,  according  to  information  from  the  WMA,  the  design  and 
preparation of the Bidding documents are under preparation. The works contract is expected 
to be awarded by end of 2016. 

 

MINISTRIES, GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & PARASTATAL 

BODIES - TELEPHONE COSTS 

(No. B/564) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien)  
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Ministries,  Government  Departments  and  parastatal  bodies,  he  will  state  the  measures  that 
have been initiated or will be taken to reduce the monthly telephone costs, indicating if –  

(a) dormant telephone lines and telephone lines with rentals only will be cancelled to 

avoid the payment of monthly rental fees and surcharges, and  

(b) directives will be given thereto for the installation of GSM gateways for mobile 
phones  to  their  existing  PABX  telephone  systems  with  a  view  to  reducing  the 
monthly telephone costs when calling to a mobile service provider. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

CAMP CAROL, KENYA - STATE LAND - SALE 

(No. B/565) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the sale 
of State land to lease holders at Camp Carol, Kenya, in Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and 
Plaine  Magnien,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand,  indicating  if  the  survey  carried  out  in 
relation thereto has been completed and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

