No. 18 of 2015 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 
 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 
 

FIRST SESSION 

WEDNESDAY 08 APRIL 2015 

 
 

 

 

 
                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTION (Oral) 
MOTION 

 
 
            BILLS (Public)   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

       Reforms 
Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

Madam Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 
      GCSK 
Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 
Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 
Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 
Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 
Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  
Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

(Temporary  

Deputy Speaker 
Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 
Deputy Clerk  
Clerk Assistant 
 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 18 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 08 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 
 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

SUGAR INDUSTRY – SUSTAINABILITY MEASURES 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the sugar industry, he will 
state –  

(a) 

(b)  

(c)  

 (d)  

in 2005, and  
as at to date;  

the number of employees, planters and metayers thereof, respectively – 
(i)  
(ii)  
the  impact  thereon  to  date  and  in  the  near  future  of  the  fall  in  the  price  of 
sugar;  
if Government is proposing to introduce amendments to the Sugar Insurance 
Fund Act to allow the payment of the one-off compensation referred to in the 
last Budget Speech, and 
the other measures that Government is proposing to take to support the sugar 
industry for the sustainability and survival thereof. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, the sugar sector has had to 
face numerous challenges since 2006 following the decision of the European Union to review 
its sugar regime which resulted in the drop in the price of sugar on the European market by 
36% fully effective as from 2009. 

The Cotonou Agreement was, thereafter, challenged at the level of the World Trade 
Organisation which eventually led to the termination in 2009 of the sugar protocol which had, 
for  decades,  ensured  that  sugar  produced  by  ACP  countries  had  access  on  the  European 
market quota free and at a guaranteed price.   In 2017, the internal sugar quota for the EU 
market will be abolished completely, that is, much earlier than the date expected by us, that 
is,  2020.   The  most  serious  effect  for  our  sugar  industry  is  the  wide  fluctuation  in  sugar 
prices.  In fact, the sugar price obtained in 2014 is Rs12,400 per tonne compared to the year 
2013 price of Rs15,830.  This is impacting negatively on the international competiveness of 
our sugar industry. 

 The Government, over the years, has taken measures to address the problems faced 

by the sugar industry, namely - 

• 
• 

the Action Plan 1985 – 1990; 
the promulgation of the Sugar Industry Efficiency Act in 1988; 

 

8 

the democratisation of the milling sector; 
the centralisation of the sugar factories; 
the adoption of the Sugar Sector Strategic Plan 2001 – 2005, and 
the implementation of the Multi Annual Adaptation Strategy 2006 – 2015 

• 
• 
• 
• 
I wish to remind the House that back in the  year 2001, the then Government, fully 
conscious of the threats and challenges facing the Sugar Industry, decided that a Sugar Sector 
Strategic Plan be elaborated after consultation with all stakeholders. 

The  sugar  industry  was  facing  serious  difficulties  and  needed  a  major  urgent 
rethinking.  The erosion of preferential access on our traditional export markets for sugar and 
the  challenges  imposed  by  the  trade  liberalisation  process  call  for  immediate  action.    The 
long-term  viability  of  our  sugar  industry  depended  on  its  ability  to  cut  down  its  cost  of 
production and ensure a selling price for our sugar that would enable it to compete with the 
least developed country suppliers. 

The  reform  process 

implied  more  centralisation,  cost  reduction,  enhanced 
productivity,  manpower  rightsizing,  an  optimal  use  of  cane  sugar  resources,  well-planned 
diversification activities, improvement of value added, and the creation of new opportunities. 
The  targets  set  for  the  2001-2005  periods  a  certain  number  of  targets  had  to  be 

attained, namely - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 

(vi) 

ensure that export market commitments are fulfilled;  
reduce cost of production; 
reduce  number  of  sugar  factories  from  14  to  ideally  7  or  8.   Reduce  sugar 
losses at harvest time and in factory processing to a strict minimum; 
 generate as much electricity from renewable sources, in particular bagasse; 
create  the  enabling  environment  for  dynamic  and  efficient  field  operations, 
and 
effect  a  substantial  reduction  of  the  labour  force  through  socially  feasible 
Voluntary  Retirement  Schemes  and  adapt,  wherever  applicable,  relevant 
labour and pension laws. 

The  Multi  Annual  Adaptation  Strategy  Plan  2006-2015  was  devised  along 
components  and  sub-components  destined  to  respond  to  the  then  new  market  environment 
and address the constraints of the sugar industry.   The objectives of the MAAS included - 

(i) 
(ii) 

cost reduction; 
additional revenue; 

 

9 

optimal use of by-products; 
pro-poor dimension, and 
debt-alleviation 

(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
A special project in the Field Operations Regrouping and Irrigation Project commonly 
known  as  FORIP,  aimed  at  the  preparation  and  replanting  of  an  area  of  12,000  hectares 
belonging to small and medium planters.  As at now, some 9,000 hectares have been covered 
at  a  total  cost  of  Rs2.6  billion.   The  project  purports  to  increase  productivity  by  20%  and 
reduce cost by 30%.  A provision of more than Rs600 m. has been made in the two present 
budgets to continue the project. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the information is as follows 

– 

  
 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

 

  

 
No. of Employees 
Planters 
Métayers 

2005 

 
13,803 
26,257 
630 

2015 

Should be around  
8,000 
14,662 
260 

As  regards  part  (b),  the  impact  resulting  from  the  fall  in  the  price  of  sugar  is  as 

follows - 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

the  extent  of  land  harvested  has  decreased  from  67,404  hectares  in  2005  to 
49,791 hectares in 2014; 
sugar  production  has  decreased  from  521,541  tonnes  to  401,146  tonnes  of 
sugar; 
the  profit  margin  has  decreased  for  all  stakeholders,  particularly  the  small 
planters, and 
an  increasing  number  of  small  planters  are  moving  out  of  sugar  cane 
cultivation. 

It is foreseen that if no remedial measures are taken at the appropriate time, especially 
in the wake of the complete abolition of sugar quota in 2017, more planters may move out of 
the sugar cultivation and this may further impact on the viability and feasibility of the sugar 
industry.  This is why Government has commissioned a study to address these issues.  The 
draft  report  from  the  Consultant,  Landell  Mills  Consulting,  has  been  received,  and  the 
recommendations are being currently examined. 

 

10 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  necessary  amendments  will  be  brought  to  the 
Sugar  Insurance  Fund  Act  to  allow  for  the  payment  of  the  one-off  compensation,  as 
announced in the Budget Speech 2015. 

As regards part (d) of the question, with a view to facing the new challenges lying 
ahead  in  the  sugar  sector,  Government,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  has  commissioned  a 
study on the Economic, Social and Environmental Impact on Mauritius of the Abolition of 
Internal Quotas of sugar in the European Union market. 

A draft report has been  submitted by the Consultants  Landell Mills Consulting  Ltd 
who  has  proposed  the  following  measures  which  are  being  analysed  and  which  will  be 
implemented after consultations with all stakeholders. 

The measures recommended by this report refer to - 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

the  preservation  of  land  under  cane  cultivation  in  difficult  areas,  a  measure 
which was recommended in the MAAS but was never implemented; 
reform  of  institutions  to  lower  the  charge  (CESS)  on  industry  proceeds  and 
grant greater freedom in sales and marketing.  
alignment of terms of employment with those in other sectors of the Mauritian 
economy; 
a more attractive payment for bagasse and cane biomass; 
a mandatory blending of ethanol and gasoline with a premium for ethanol; 
a higher contribution by distiller-bottlers for potable alcohol used for the home 
market; 
taxing fossil fuels and transferring the proceeds to foster biomass energy; 
introducing a custom duty on imports of raw materials for refining to ensure 
that  the  producer  community  derives  benefits  from  the  sale  of  sugar  on  the 
domestic market, and 
the use of reserves of the producers accumulated at the Sugar Insurance Fund 
to  allow  the  industry,  at  least  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  to  attain  its 
viability price while the above-mentioned measures are implemented. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I am sure everybody will agree that the figures, in 
terms  of  numbers  of  employees,  planters  and  métayers  provided,  are  nothing  less  than 
absolutely dramatic.  The hon. Minister said that Government has received a draft report from 
a consultant.  I am sure he is aware of the Sugar Insurance Fund Board actuarial review - 
latest - of October 2014.  Will he agree with me that what the actuarial review is, in fact, 

 

11 

saying is that the very survival of the sugar industry is in danger, threatened?  Can I, Madam 
Speaker, with your permission, quote two paragraphs under the subtitle ‘key findings’ – 

 
“The sugar price is predicted to fall even further from the 2013 level whilst 
production costs are steadily increasing.  This will have direct consequences 
on the profitability and hence sustainability of the industry.  There is a lot of 
uncertainty, in terms of the industry outlook for the immediate future.  This is 
mainly due to the fall in the sugar price and rising costs of production.  The 
impact on planters/producers is expected to be significant.  In addition, there 
is significant uncertainty on the impact of the removal of the European Union 
quotas will have post 2017.” 

 

Will,  therefore,  the  hon.  Minister  agree  with  me  that  these  are  diplomatic  words  from 
actuaries,  but  that,  in  fact,  they  are  pointing  out  that  the  survival,    la  survie  même  de 
l’industrie sucrière est en question? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is right in saying 
that  the  survival  of  the  industry  is  at  stake.    That  is  why  the  Government  is  taking  all 
measures to ensure that everything is done to, at least, keep on with that industry and ensure 
that all the stakeholders involved in that industry keep on having a living from that industry. 
It is not a surprise that we embarked into a major reform in the early 2000 so as to ensure that 
we could for that particular difficult phase move on and that is why we have diversified in 
that industry. We have moved from the sugar industry to a cane industry; probably, we will 
move again to a biomass industry now.  

We are now producing beyond sugar energy, and research has been undertaken to see 
if we can also have value added product like bio plastics, and other varieties of cane that can 
be produced through research that could be high in fibre to produce cane that could produce 
more energy generated product, and also, as I said, bio plastics. Beyond that, we have also 
seen  how  we  can  move  closer  to  our  consumers  and  that  is  why  the  Mauritius  Sugar 
Syndicate  has  had,  in  the  past  few  years,  an  agreement  with  a  German  firm  Sudzucker, 
whereby they  would market the sugar  and export sugar through that firm. That contract is 
ending in October this year and new contracts have been already signed with three suppliers 
in Europe, one French supplier Crystal Co. and two British firms so that we could get closer 
to  the  customers  and  have  a  premium  price  on  the  sugar  that  we  are  exporting.  So,  these 
measures are being taken to ensure that we can mitigate that reduction in the price of sugar 

 

12 

but, at the same time, we have to reduce the cost of production and these measures that have 
been proposed in that report by Landell Mills Consulting, go in line with the philosophy of 
the Government to ensure that the industry could thrive through the difficult times. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  being  given  the  seriousness  of  the 
situation,  whether  his  Ministry,  with  the  people  concerned,  have  tried  to  project  future 
production of sugar, what it will be in the very few years ahead? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, if we look at the production for the year 2014 the 
production  of  sugar  roams  around  400,000  tonnes  of  sugar  with  the  surface  area  covered 
about  nearly  50,000  hectares  for  the  future.    If  we  are  to  keep  on  with  that  industry,  we 
believe that we have to stabilise the production around that figure of 400,000 tonnes of sugar 
and for us to be  able to produce that amount of sugar, we need to have that level of land 
under cane cultivation. So, one of the aims of the Government is to ensure that the number of 
people moving  out of cane cultivation should be avoided so that we could continue with that 
level of land under cane cultivation to be able to produce that amount of sugar production. If I 
may add, we need that particular critical mass to be able to allow the industry to survive. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as ethanol is concerned - the country had several Governments, 
the country has got tremendous time - being given the urgency of the situation, do we take it 
that this new Government is going to move? We have wasted so much time that the private 
sector is producing with its money ethanol for export, and we are not using ethanol on the 
local market. Do I take it that the new Government will move full steam ahead in the case of 
ethanol and use ethanol on the local market? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  true  to  say  that  the  project  has  been  long 
overdue because there was a pilot project that was initiated by the last Government, but it 
seems that - I do not know for what reason - it remained at the level of a pilot project beside 
the fact that it was very conclusive. Therefore, at the level of my Ministry, I have already 
asked to reactualise that project. I had discussions with Omnicane which is the sole producer 
of  ethanol  locally,  and  they  are  quite  willing  to  supply  the  ethanol  to  have  that  blend  of 
ethanol and gasoline for our vehicles here. That would be something that we will give the 
utmost attention to ensure that it goes ahead. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  the  short-term,  in  fact,  in  this  financial  year,  I  heard  the  hon. 
Minister say, as the hon. Minister of Finance has said in the Budget Speech, that there would 
be a one-off support, subsidy, compensation to everyone in the sugar industry. I am sure he is 
aware that the Sugar Insurance Fund Board Actuarial Review dated October 2014, in fact, 
recommended two things and over two years - not one year, not a one-off - special financial 

 

13 

assistance,  but  also  a  premium  waiver,  that  those  in  the  industry,  everybody  concerned, 
should have a premium waiver with two measures  over two years - not one year - worth for 
crop  2014,  Rs225  m.  of  premium  waiver;  Rs833  m.  of  special  assistance,  that  is,  slightly 
more than Rs1 billion but, also crop 2015, Rs220 m. for premium waiver and Rs820 m. for 
special  assistance,  that  is,  for  the  second  year  slightly  more  than  Rs1  billion  of  special 
assistance over two years.  

Now,  has  the  previous  Government  decided  to  throw  those  recommendations  out  - 
they decided to  go to a  one-off over one  year  and only no premium waiver? Has the new 
Government discussed that? Has the hon. Minister discussed that with the new Minister of 
Finance, with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and is there going to be 
change  in  that  refusal  of  the  previous  Government  to  go  by  what  the  actuarial  review 
recommended? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, actually we have taken note of the recommendation 
of that Actuarial Report, where they did indeed mentioned compensation over two years of 
Rs2,000 per tonne of sugar and about the waiving of the premium to be paid to the Sugar 
Insurance  Fund  Board.  We  have,  in  the  Budget  Speech,  announced  that  the  cash 
compensation to be paid to the growers would be to the tune Rs2,000 to all sugar planters, but 
a special effort is being made to small planters producing up to 60 tonnes of sugar. They are 
going to get an additional compensation of Rs1,400 per tonne of sugar produced. This is an 
effort which is being made to support those small planters that are the most vulnerable and 
are touched by the effect of the reduction in the sugar price.  

As regard to the two-year issue, it is, in fact, mentioned in the report, but it is also said 
that if it is not an event year - if we know now that 2014 has been a non-event  year, it is 
within  the  possibility  of  the  Fund  Board  to  pay  for  that  compensation.    In  that  report,  the 
actuarial recommendation is that it should be over two years, but with the qualification that if 
it is not an event year. Therefore, next year, when we come to it we will probably look at it.  

As to the waiver, of course, the Government is all for to consider that and at the level 
of the Ministry, we are working together with the Ministry of Finance to see ways and means 
how to apply that recommendation. 

Mr Bérenger: I am, of course, all in favour of an additional compensation being paid 
to the small producers, the small planters additionally, but that additional sum will it come 
from the Sugar  Insurance Fund Board because that was not recommended by the actuarial 
review or will it come out of the Consolidated Fund? 

 

14 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as it is today, when the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development announced in his  Budget Speech that special effort is going to be 
made to the small planters to grant them Rs3,400 per tonne of sugar produced, it is mentioned 
that  it  is  going  to  come  from  the  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  Board  fund,  that  is,  from  that 
particular fund and we have had discussions with the people from the Sugar Insurance Fund 
Board to explain the reasoning behind granting that additional compensation and so far they 
are all aware of the reason why we have made that special effort to support the small planters 
and I think that’s going to be the way. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask, being given the urgency of the situation whether the hon. 
Minister has had consultations since the last elections with all the stakeholders, including the 
planters,  the  métayers,  the  employees  and  the  big  planters  also,  whether  he  has  had 
consultations  with  all  the  stakeholders  explaining  the  situation  and  looking  ahead  and 
whether proposals have been made, if yes, if they are being considered for financial schemes 
to get the planters directly, financially involved in not only the survival but in the financial 
progress of the different estates at estate level? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, ever since I took office, I have been meeting all the 
stakeholders of my Ministry, particularly those of the sugar industry.  I have met the small 
planters communities; I have met the different institutions that work for the industry; I have 
met  the  members  of  the  MSPA  and  only  last  week,  I  have  met  again  the  Director  of  the 
MSPA and explained to him the reason with regard to the compensation being paid to the 
small  planters  and  we  are,  of  course,  like  it  is  mentioned  in  the  report  of  the  consultant, 
Landell Mills, streams of revenue are also being looked at to ensure that they are prepared to 
face the difficulties that are looking ahead in that industry. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker,  I  will just follow up on the question raised by the 
hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.    L’abandon  des  terres  de  la  part  des  petits  planteurs,  ça 
continue à une vitesse vertigineuse.  The figures speak for themselves. The hon. Minister has 
made mention of the FORIP project. What is being done at least to re-actualise this project, at 
least  to  make  it  more  attractive  to  the  small  planters,  even  having  meetings  with  all  the 
stakeholders, as pointed out by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, at least to see to it that this 
reduction in the cultivation process by the small planters at least be curtailed, that is, to give 
them more incentives? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madame  la  présidente,  effectivement  ce  projet  FORIP  qui  date  de 
2007, et à ce jour on a dépensé R 2.7 milliards dans ce projet pour réaménager les terres et on 

 

15 

a  touché  à  presque  9000  hectares  de  terre  sous  cannes.  L’objectif  était  d’améliorer  la 
productivité, le rendement, par 20% et de baisser le coût de production par 30%. Mais, en 
2015,  il  y  a  encore  un  certain  nombre  de  superficies  à  couvrir  parce  que  l’objectif  était 
d’atteindre 12,000 hectares et donc on va continuer. Mais j’ai aussi demandé au niveau du 
ministère  et  du  MCIA  en  particulier  de  travailler  et  de  faire  une  analyse  de  voir  si 
effectivement l’objectif est atteint en ce qui concerne la baisse du coût de production de ceux 
déjà touchés par ce réaménagement de leur terre, de leur champ et est-ce qu’il y a aussi une 
augmentation de la productivité en terme de rendement. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Madame la presidente, en fait il n’y a rien de moins qu’une menace de 
mort  qui  plane  sur  la  tête  de  l’industrie.  We  have  heard  that  a  Consultant  report  is  being 
examined  but  will  not  -  being  given  the  dramatic  situation  we  are  in,  all  of  us,  the  whole 
country, that, in fact, after that Consultancy Report has been absorbed, what we should do, all 
of  us  together  and  all  the  stakeholders,  is  to  come  with  a  Master  Plan  pour  la  survie  de 
l’industrie sucrière. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am very aware of the situation and I am very glad 
that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has come up with that PNQ today to make the public 
aware  of  where  we  are  today.  We  need  a  national  effort  to  ensure  that  the  industry  could 
survive and still be one of the major industries in this country. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  all  the  business  on 
today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 
Second Reading 

 

16 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

 Question again proposed. 

 
(12.04 p.m.) 

Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac): Madam 
Speaker, allow me to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, 
Mr Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo and his team for a well-engineered Budget. Madam Speaker, 
many of my hon. colleagues have already enumerated the merits of this Budget. It has all the 
elements  for  a  long-awaited  economic  boom.  Madam  Speaker,  this  Government’s 
development goal is to enhance the quality of living of Mauritians and to create a resilient 
economy that will buffer the impact of external economic shock on our population. 

Madam Speaker, practically all sectors are being taken care of in this Budget. Even 
new  ones  are  being  created,  like  ocean  economy,  with  SME  sector  being  the  backbone  of 
economic development.  

Madam Speaker, now I would like to address three issues of the Budget that I feel can 

be enhanced -  

First issue: the unemployment problem.  
Though  the  Budget  caters  for  job  creation  through  the  implementation  of  some 
megaprojects, this solution is not going to happen now, because any project, it takes time, 
minimum 6 to 8 months. You have 2 to 3 months for choosing a consultancy firm, 2 to 3 
months for tendering and by the time you award, it will almost be 10 months. This means, 
this year, we will not be able to start providing employment. For sure, the Government alone 
will not be able to absorb all the jobless and this is a major issue. I am sure all hon. Members 
of this House experience the same problem of having their mandates knocking at their door 
for a job daily. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  unemployed  have  waited  long.  There  is  no  doubt  the 
megaproject will create thousands of jobs. I can explain. Unfortunately, hon. Reza Uteem is 

 

17 

not here, I would have explained to him how this would create thousands of jobs. Right now, 
we need a short-term policy. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Jahangeer: We need a short term policy right now.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Order, please! 
Mr Jahangeer:  Madam Speaker, there is an interim solution to our predicament, but 
it  is  a  pragmatic  one,  that  is,  seeking  a  gateway  to  the  GCC  countries  to  access  the  job 
opportunities there. Countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, but 
this is a temporary solution.  I am not talking about… 
(Interruptions) 

I kindly request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Minister of Finance… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, please! 
Mr  Jahangeer:    …to  walk  down  the  memory  lane  in  the  80s  when  the  level  of 
employment was high; many people went to the Middle East to work and send money back 
home and that money was well spent. People were queuing up in front of Sir Gaëtan Duval’s 
office here in this building.  I was one of them - at that time, he was Deputy Prime Minister - 
to go to the Middle East. This process did help to alleviate the unemployment burden. If it 
worked before, it will work again as there is no recession in these countries. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister set up a special committee 
under the aegis of hon. Soodhun and the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier Duval and other 
hon. MPs to visit those countries and assess the real potential for employment there. 

I said ‘other’! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please do not interrupt! 
Mr  Jahangeer:    Madam  Speaker,  on  the  Internet  you  can  see  thousands  of  job 
opportunities.  If you click on ‘Jobs Abu Dhabi’, ‘Jobs Dubai ’, there are thousands of jobs.  
Make no mistake! As an individual, it is very rare to access to these jobs.   

(Interruptions) 

You  need  the  Government’s  approved  manpower  agencies.  Then  it  will  happen!    Madam 
Speaker, it is noteworthy that, according to a World Bank report, such migration contributed 
to 6% India’s GDP in 2013, that is, overseas remittance was around 70 billion US dollars and 

 

18 

the  second  country  was  China  with  60  billion  US  dollars.  We  do  not  want  to  reach  that 
amount. We only need decent jobs for our people right now.  

Madam Speaker, therefore, I humbly request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. 
Minister of Finance not to ignore this proposal for a short-term policy to our problem. We 
have wasted billions of rupees in the drain; what is it to give a fair trial for unemployment 
solution by spending only a few thousands rupees on such road show. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now,  with  your  permission,  address  the  second  suggestion.  
We appreciate the concept of creation of smart cities.  It is a big and fantastic project, but, in 
reality, it will not serve its purpose unless we come with proper legislation.  For the sake of 
explanation, let us say I take a fictitious conglomerate Omni power. Omni power has an in-
house construction company, a mechanical and electrical engineering company, then when it 
will be time to start the project it will be a circle within the circle because the concept of 
SME will be defeated if the contract is awarded only in-house. So, Madam Speaker, to get 
things  right  we  need  to  come  up  with  some  legislation  that  construction  permits  for  such 
projects will be given if and only if, 70% to 80% of manpower to be deployed should be local 
and subcontracting will be through open tendering and not restrictive ones, then SMEs will 
benefit. 

Madam  Speaker,  last  but  not  least,  on  the  greener  and  sustainable  aspect  of  our 
Budget, the hon. Vice Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities already defined 
his water and energy policy be it a long or short term policy. There is nothing to be added 
except, in my opinion, I fail to understand the logic behind the St Louis Power Station for a 4 
X15 MW because we wonder why 15 MW engine. Since the country is walking on a tight 
rope, why not go for a bigger capacity like 20 MW to 30 MW? The country needs power now 
and the project - for some hon. Members who are not aware of the project - it is to dismantle 
an  existing  building,  and  build  a  new  one,  and  then  make  space  for  four  engines  to  be 
sheltered in that building. This is a new power station; therefore, we can still go for higher 
capacity thus saving money in the long-run with a higher return on investment ratio and cater 
for  the  next  ten  years.  Thus,  I  kindly  request  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  hon.  Vice 
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities to give more force to this issue. 

Madam Speaker our hon. Members of the House will remember that, by shifting from 
incandescent lamps to eco lamps, the CEB campaign save approximately 10 MW on energy 
consumption. Now, I suggest we do the same but using led lamps which consume one third 
less than eco lamps.  However, the disadvantage is that led lamps are still expensive and eco 
lamps  are  not  really  eco-friendly  as  they  contain  a  high  level  of  mercury.  Such  a  national 

 

19 

campaign, according to calculation, will save approximately another 5 MW and that is a lot 
of money we are talking about.   

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  designed  by  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo  is  set  to 
materialise the vision of our Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Madam Speaker,  some have already 
started to talk about l’après SAJ, but let me reassure them they will be no l’après SAJ.  There 
will  be  simply  Jugnauth  through  his  son,  the  hon.  Minister  Pravind  Jugnauth,  who  will 
perpetuate social justice and economic development. 

Thank you Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

 

(12.15 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Madam Speaker, let me right from the  outset congratulate 
hon. Jahangeer for his maiden speech on the Budget.  Allow me also, Madam Speaker, as the 
tradition is, to join the other orators on this side of the House to congratulate very warmly the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for his, what adjective can I use if not 
excellent, excellent Budget he has presented before this august Assembly.   

You will agree with me that his speech has given new hopes to the whole population. 
There  is  sense  of  feel  good  factor  prevailing  all  over  the  island  and  the  Budget  proposals 
reflect the sincerity, attention, care and, if I may say, seriousness of this present Government. 
The measures announced clearly indicate that the Government, unlike the previous one, has, 
at  heart,  the  long-term  interests  of  the  population  at  large.  We  all  know  that  the  previous 
Government was not doing well at all. There was a feeling of laissez faire, laissez-aller, so 
we have dared to be different.  Election is over.  We have won.  Now, it is time to move 
ahead and to move ahead in the right direction. Indeed, the Budget is a harmonious blend of 
social justice, equity, transparency, meritocracy and good governance in the management of 
public affairs while, at the same time, encouraging people to discipline themselves. This is, 
therefore, perfectly in line with the new ideals of a good and caring Government.  It is above 
all a Budget that paves the way to the future.  

Let me remind ourselves that our future depends on what we do as a nation today. We 
are here; our aim is to govern for the people, with the people and in the best interest of the 
people.  The  Government  has  obtained  a  very  clear  and  overwhelming  mandate  to  set  the 
country  right,  to  set  it  on  the  path  of  sustained  growth  when  we  consider  in  what  mess, 
economic and otherwise, the outgoing Labour Government has left the country.  

 

20 

The country is headed by a solid political leader, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. This is 
the  whole  change,  Madam  Speaker.  This  is  the  message,  not  the  literature.  This  is  the 
personality, humble, down to earth, simple, the background, the longstanding experience, the 
test  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  undergone  after  so  many  years  which  make  the 
difference. We are all so proud, on this side, that hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth is our Prime 
Minister. 

Madam Speaker, we fully agree that the Opposition Members need not agree to all the 
measures proposed in the Budget of the new Government. I have listened carefully to all the 
intervenors, on the other side of the House, but one thing I don’t understand, they want us to 
change the whole thing in four months. How do we do this? We are not miracle makers. It 
has  only  been  four  months  since  we  took  office.  They  have  to  understand  that  everything 
cannot be done at one go. We have five  years ahead. I will humbly advise the Opposition 
Members to be patient. 

What is the philosophy behind the first Budget? This Budget, therefore, is not a mere 
exercise  of  matching  revenue  and  expenditure.  It  clearly  reflects  the  top  priorities  of  the 
whole  population.  It  shows  the  willpower  and  determination  of  the  present  Government. 
Opposition needs to understand that we have to, first of all, come up with practical solution to 
re-establish confidence in the population, redress our economy and the situation at large, lay 
foundation of a sustainable society, social justice, restore transparency and fairness, boost up 
the  economic  development  of  the  country,  restore  discipline  in  the  nation  inasmuch  as 
nothing is free in this world.  We have to toil, work hard to earn a decent living and above all 
we have to provide more resources to those who need them more. This Budget, therefore, is 
not a mere exercise of matching revenue and expenditure. 

Now,  as  Minister  responsible  for  the  welfare  state,  I  must  pay  tribute  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development for the trust he placed in the social security 
to help the most vulnerable of our society and for the resources he has put at our disposal. 
The hon. Minister says, I quote – 

 
“Madam  Speaker,  earlier  in  the  speech  I  spoke  on  the  necessity  to  place 
sharing at the centre of our development agenda. We cannot maintain social 
peace  without  a  policy  of  sharing  and  caring,  and  without  social  peace,  no 
sustainable economic progress is possible.”   

 

 

21 

The budgetary provision for the Ministry of Social Security has been increased from Rs14.7 
billion for the financial year of 2014 to Rs8.8 billion for period January 2015 to June 2015 
and finally Rs18.7 billion for period July 2015 to June 2016. This represents a yearly increase 
of 27%. Why? Because we want to ensure a fair distribution of income and provide social 
protection to the less fortunate. 

On this side of the House, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and his able team have come a 
long way towards protecting the vulnerable and lifting the less fortunate. Let me here refer to 
one  example  relating  to  the  welfare  aspect.  The  considerable  increase  in  the  pension  rate 
speaks for itself. Peut-on dire le contraire? We have to admit, whether we like it or not, that 
this new Government a à coeur les intérêts du peuple et surtout ceux au bas de l’échelle. A 
policy for sharing is crucial to maintain social peace without which no sustainable progress is 
possible. There is no doubt that the Budget promotes social justice. 

During the electoral campaign, we realised that the amount of pension that was given 
at that time to the old age, disabled orphans and widows were not sufficient to make both 
ends meet. These categories of people were facing a lot of difficulty to live their daily life. 
With a view to redress the matter and to ensure that the people do not suffer any more, it was 
proposed  in  the  electoral  manifesto  to  review  the  basic  retirement  pension  to  Rs5,000. 
Following the historic decision of the people to entrust the Government to our team, the week 
following the swearing-in post of all Ministers, the pension rates were reviewed accordingly. 
Not  only  was  the  basic  pension  for  those  between  60  and  less  than  90  years  increased  to 
5,000,  but  also  sufficient  increases  were  brought  to  other  categories  of  basic  retirement 
pension and same was extended to widows, orphans and invalid pension. The increase was 
also  extended  to  allowances  paid  such  as  carer’s  allowance  and  child  allowance.  For 
example, those aged between 90 to 99 years old are now receiving a monthly old age pension 
of Rs15,000 instead of Rs10,789 and the centenarians are now obtaining Rs20,000 instead of 
Rs12,300. The increase ranges from 20% to 63%. 

To further show the commitment of this Government to redress the gross disparity in 
income and support to the most vulnerable, the increase applied in the month of December 
2014 itself. Special arrangements were made to effect the payment of the increased pension 
to all beneficiaries before the end of December 2014. For the whole Republic of Mauritius, 
234,043  beneficiaries  were  concerned  and  had  their  monthly  income  changed  as  from  last 
December. Some Rs2.5 billion was paid in December 2014 representing the pension at the 
new rates and the bonus month. 

 

22 

Madam Speaker, in the Budget 2015-2019, the Government has once again confirmed 
its commitment towards improving the well-being of the elderly and to combat loneliness in 
old age. Projects like recreation centres are commendable endeavour to show that we value 
our  elders  and  care  for  their  well-being.  These  projects  not  only  provide  our  elderly  and 
persons with disabilities with residential facilities in a hotel set up at a very highly subsidised 
rate, but it also gives them opportunities to socialise among friends and revitalise themselves. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  Government  is  putting  emphasis  on  what  is  important  for 
Mauritius, that is, the people. Government has provided funds for the setting-up of a fourth 
recreation centre for the elderly in the south of Riambel. The Ministry of Social Security will 
double its efforts to make this project realisable in the scheduled time frame. 

Moreover, in order to prevent the same association or group of senior citizens from 
benefiting from a stay in the three present recreation centres, the Ministry is working on a 
centralised booking system to provide all our senior citizens an opportunity to enjoy a stay at 
one of the recreation centres. The protection and security of our elders is high on the agenda 
of the Ministry of Social Security. Hence, provisions have been made in the new Budget to 
help charitable institutions equip themselves with CCTV cameras. 

On  behalf  of  the  elders,  I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  for  giving 
consideration to their well-being and security. Disabilities and dependencies in old age are 
common and Government has to reduce the burden of people caring for those persons. The 
Ministry of Social Security will, therefore, come up with a project “service de proximité” to 
deserving elderly persons and persons with disabilities and those living alone so as to provide 
them with special support care, such as the service of trained carers, occupational therapists 
and psychologists. 

Madam Speaker, at present domiciliary visits are carried out for the elderly, above 75 
years, with severe disabilities, disabled children below 18 years and those who are 90 years 
old  or  above.  The  Ministry  wants  to  bridge  the  gap  between  18  and  74  and  to  extend  the 
service  to  the  neediest  people  with  severe  disabilities.  As  such,  Government  is  extending 
monthly  domiciliary  medical  visit  to  any  severely  disabled  person  irrespective  of  age, 
requiring 24-hour  attention and  care. Strict  eligibility criteria will be therefore  established. 
The expected number of cases in 2015 is 500 and strict criteria will be observed for the age 
group 18 to 74 years. 

Madam Speaker, as a responsible Government, we have to fulfil our obligation to our 
people and the international community with regard to the issue of disability. Mauritius has 
signed and ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. This has to 

 

23 

be  translated  into  reality  and  the  provisions  of  the  Convention  have  been  reflected  in  our 
programmes and policies. In this respect, Madam Speaker, a Disability Bill will shortly be 
introduced  in  the  National  Assembly.  The  overall  objective  of  the  Bill  is  to  promote  and 
protect the rights of persons with disabilities and to eliminate discriminations against them. 
The Bill will also provide for the establishment of a One Stop Shop. The National Disability 
Authority will bring under its umbrella the different existing institutions that are providing 
services to persons with disabilities in a dispersed manner. The One Stop Shop is expected to 
deliver more cost-effective and customer friendly services to persons with disabilities while 
avoiding duplication and dispersal of resources. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  probation  and  after-care  service  of  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Security was established in 1947. Its vision is to contribute in the promotion of a safe and 
functional  society  and  its  mission  includes  the  effective  rehabilitation  and  reintegration  of 
offenders, the prevention of criminal behaviour and helping to foster family and community 
harmony. The probation and after-care service will play a major role in the implementation of 
several measures announced in the Budget. Madam Speaker, the new Prison Bill is expected 
to  bring  about  important  reforms  in  the  management,  detention  and  rehabilitation  of 
prisoners.  The  probation  service  will  be  very  much  involved  as  it  is  expected  that  more 
prisoners will be offered the opportunity to be rehabilitated in the open through their release 
on parole.  

Government is conscious of the problem of domestic violence and in the fight against 
this social ill, the involvement of many stakeholders is warranted. The probation service will 
be called upon to continue to provide its services in this domain. The probation service is 
already  involved  in  the  submission  of  social  enquiry  reports  to  court  cases  of  domestic 
violence and in ensuring that perpetrators of domestic violence comply with the conditions 
attached to the protection order. 

Madam Speaker, in line with the pledge of the Government to govern for the people 
and  with  the  people,  Government  is  coming  up  with  a  host  of  measures  to  enlist  the 
participation of young entrepreneurs in the creation of wealth for the economy. Experience 
has shown that young entrepreneurs who have the zeal, talent and know-how to engage in a 
particular line of business on their own are often faced with hardship at the stage of setting up 
their business. The One Stop Shop approach is a salutary initiative of Government to alleviate 
hardship in this regard. The approach caters for a comprehensive package in the facilitation 
process which includes the provisions of seed capital, form the SME Bank, a One-Stop Shop 

 

24 

under  one  roof  for  information,  delivery  of  permits  and  licenses  aimed  at  promoting  the 
emergence of an entrepreneurship culture among young people. 

On the social front, there is also need to instil a culture of social entrepreneurship in 
the  NGOs.  Conscious  of  such  an  imperative,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National 
Solidarity and Reform Institutions is promoting social entrepreneurship amongst NGOs with 
a  view  to  enable  NGOs  to  attain  the  sustainability  goals  and  economically  empower  their 
beneficiaries.  

Mauritius  being  a  Welfare  State,  the  protection  of  the  poor,  needy  and  vulnerable 
groups remains mainly the responsibility of a caring Government. However, the Government 
is  also  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  NGOs  are  key  partners  with  which  it  can  team  up  a 
strong partnership for the achievement of its social objectives. 

The  Ministry  of  Social  Security  is  implementing  initiatives  so  as  to  build  a  strong 
NGO community. One such project is the recognition of prior learning in the field of social 
work  aimed  at  the  professionalization  of  the  social  services  sector.  There  is  need  to 
professionalise  and  upgrade  the  quality  of  services  being  offered  by  NGOs  and  the 
recognition of prior learning is therefore a crucial step in that regard. The RPL will enable 
social  workers  at  grassroots  level  to  have  the  experience  recognised  by  obtaining 
qualifications,  enhance  their  employability,  pursue  lifelong  learning  and  boost  their  self-
esteem and self-confidence.  

Madam  Speaker,  to  conclude,  let  me  say  that,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  we  mean 
business. We will attend to the needs of the population unlike the previous Government who 
has  allowed  opportunities  to  be  wasted  over  nine  years.  The  Budget  contains  all  the 
determination and willpower of this Government. I have no doubt that the Budget proposal 
will indeed improve the life of the people.  Indeed, the credo of the new Government is to 
serve the people to the best of our abilities and not to serve ourselves, not like the old regime. 
We are sincere in our words. We will work under the very able leadership of the Rt. hon. Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth  to realise our aims.  I seize this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development for his excellent Budget and  I believe that the whole 
nation also thanks him. 

Thank you, Madam! 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Toussaint! 
 

 
 

 

(12.35 p.m.) 

25 

Mr S. Toussaint (Second Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. Let me first of all congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance for his smart Budget as 
well as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth for his smart vision! 

(Interruptions) 

A smart Prime Minister!  Le titre,  Madame la présidente, c’est ‘At The Crossroad’.  Quand 
quelqu’un arrive à une croisée de chemins, il a quelques options; à droite, à gauche, retourner 
sur  ses  pas  ou  bien  avancer.  Il  est  déplorable  de  dire  et  de  noter  que  les  membres  de 
l’Opposition  ont  choisi  de  retourner  sur  leurs  pas  tandis  que  nous,  nous  avons  décidé 
d’avancer avec un Premier ministre comme Sir Anerood Jugnauth qui a le gouvernail bien 
entre ses mains. Les discours et les critiques de certains membres  de l’Opposition - je dis 
bien,  certains  membres  de  l’Opposition  -  ressemblent  à  un  vieux  disque  de  gramophone,  
Madame la présidente.  

Mais oui ! Nepli éna gramophone aster, nous servi Blu-ray ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Enfin,  on  les  comprend.  On  essaye  de  comprendre  tout  au  moins.  Hier  j’ai  écouté  avec 
beaucoup de plaisir mon ami l’honorable Lepoigneur et je comprends, quel poigne! 

Exactement! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Quand il a dit c’est de la jalousie, je suis d’accord avec lui ! Je vais avancer encore un peu 
plus loin, ’leker fer mal’,  ‘leker kassé’, Madame la présidente. Que voulez-vous ? C’est la 
vie ! 

(Interruptions) 

Leker  saigné!    Nous  sommes  là,  ‘lepep’  nous  a  envoyé,  ici,  Madame  la  présidente,  pour 
nettoyer ce pays, pour sauver la population. Nous allons faire notre travail envers et contre 
tous. Ce matin même, en venant, ici, au Parlement, j’ai rencontré un vieux monsieur - enn 
grand dimoune - il travaille comme cleaner pas loin de la municipalité de Curepipe.  Donc, il 
s’est avancé vers moi pour me dire - et me serrer la main - ‘zott pe fer bon travay.  Dir Sir 
Anerood zott pe fer  bon travay’.   

(Interruptions) 

 

 

26 

Pé nettoyer! C’est ça le sentiment de la population aujourd’hui. Il n’y a pas de masque qui est 
tombée, il n’y a pas d’euphorie qui est terminée.  Ce n’est pas ça. La population est satisfaite 
de notre travail, Madame la présidente. 

Plus que 80 %.  Merci, hon. Seeruttun! 

(Interruptions) 

Aussi, les gens que je rencontre à la Cité Malherbes – et où j’habite -  m’ont rappelé, 
encore une fois, ce que j’avais dit dans mon discours, que Sir Anerood, à l’époque, dans les 
années 80, avait apporté ‘coltar, tapis velours’ dans la Cité Malherbes.  Parce qu’il n’y avait 
que des coraux et les taxis ne voulaient pas entrer ! On devait prendre les mariés par les bras 
et les emmener plus loin ‘pou rentre dan taxi pou alle l’eglise’. C’est à la suite d’un site visit 
que  les  travaux  ont  démarré,  ‘coltar,  tapis  velours  dans  Cité  Malherbes’.    Et  aussi  la 
connection à la CWA, car il n’y avait qu’une fontaine. Les gens me rappellent cela encore -  
je  vois  l’honorable  Gayan  qui  acquiesce.  C’est  un  Curepipien  et  il  sait  de  quoi  je  parle. 
Aujourd’hui, les gens de la Cité Malherbes me disent : ‘’Sir Anerood ine donne nou  6m3 de 
l’eau cadeau.  Li ti donn nou robinet et aujourd’hui il nous donne 6 m³ de l’eau cadeau !’’ 
Merci, encore une fois. 

Le combat contre la pauvreté, Madame la présidente, est pour moi quelque chose de 
très importante, étant issu moi-même d’une famille pauvre. Durant ma carrière de professeur, 
j’ai  rencontré  beaucoup  de  misère,  beaucoup  de  pauvreté  et  beaucoup  de  souffrance. 
J’approuve  et  j’applaudis  les  mesures  de  ce  budget  qui  vont  nous  aider  à  combattre  le 
problème  de  la  pauvreté.  Et  là,  j’inviterais  certains  membres  de  l’Opposition 
  - 
malheureusement l’honorable Uteem n’est pas la, lui-même il avait parlé de ça - à venir avec 
moi  à  la  Cité  Anouska.  N’est-ce  pas  mes  chers  amis ,  16eme  Mille!  Et  alle  dire  sa  bane 
dimoune-là  que  vous  êtes  contre  ce  que  le  gouvernement  est  en  train  de  faire,  que  le 
gouvernement va trouver un parrainage pour aider la Cité Anouska - venez avec moi pour 
leur dire ça dans leurs yeux et vous allez voir ce qui va vous arriver - ainsi que les différentes 
régions ici nommées. On ne fait pas de la politique sur la misère des gens.  On ne peut pas. Et 
moi, je parle ici de quelque chose que je connais personnellement. Le parrainage, peu importe 
etc. at the end of the day, nou inn réussi soulage la misère dimoune.  That’s all! C’est tout! 

Je vais avancer certains points qui m’interpellent personnellement. Malheureusement 
je n’aurais pas, en 15 minutes, le temps de parcourir le tout - l’honorable Jhugroo me regarde 
déjà avec de gros yeux. Alors je vais que citer: notre planète est en détresse. Donc, tout ce qui 
concerne l’environnement, et je cite l’honorable ministre des Finances : ‘Notre planète est en 
détresse’. Ce ne sont pas de vains mots, Madame la présidente. Moi-même dans ma carrière 

 

27 

de professeur, j’ai tout le temps conscientisé mes élèves par rapport à tout ce qui touche à 
l’environnement - voilà que le ministre Dayal me regarde avec un joli sourire, il sait de quoi 
je parle puisque j’ai été dans le passé l’enseignant de sa fille.  

Je cite, Madame la présidente – 
 
“We  should  not  underestimate  the  urgency  for  exceptional  measures 
worldwide to save our planet.” 
 

Nous n’avons qu’une seule planète. Et que faisons-nous pour la garder en etat, pour l’aider à 
respirer ?    Voilà,  les  mesures  sont  dedans !  Aller  le  lire,  s’il  vous  plaît!  Faites  votre 
homework, s’il vous plaît! 

Bannir le plastique, bravo ! Magnifique ! Je félicite nos frères de Rodrigues qui ont 
déjà une avance sur nous sur ce dossier. Merci, mes frères! C’est une mesure, parce que je ne 
sais pas si parfois certaines personnes réalisent, quand nous sommes dans nos belles voitures 
et nos limousines à vitres teintées, nous ne voyons pas la saleté dehors. Il faut aller marcher. 
Il  faut  aller  regarder  la  quantité  de  plastique  qui  sont  devenus,  allons  dire,  une  décoration 
naturelle de notre île Maurice. Ce n’est pas possible. Cela ne peut plus continuer. C’est une 
décision très, très forte et ce n’est qu’un leadership fort de Sir Anerood Jugnauth qui a pu 
prendre une telle décision.  

Non à la nation ‘zougadère’ ! Encore une fois une décision très, très forte. Oui, à une 
nation d’entrepreneurs, Madame la présidente. Arretez ‘gratte gratter’ ! Allez travailler, s’il 
vous plaît ! Et je vois le ministre des Finances qui fait son entrée, tout sourire. Alors, merci 
pour cela, l’honorable ministre des Finances. 

 Il y a toutes sortes de débats dessus,  conscientiser, etc. Ce n’est pas possible, il fallait 
que cela s’arrête. Il y a des gens qui parlent à la radio, etc. Non, il ne fallait pas retirer, il 
fallait conscientiser. Hé ou la, ou trouve diable refuse camphre ou ? Ce n’est pas possible, 
Madame la présidente. Il fallait une décision très, très forte et très solide.  Arrêtez avec ces 
jeux du hasard ! Arrêtez, ‘nation zougadère’ ! Mais par contre. nous avons toute une série de 
mesures qui vont encourager l’entreprenariat, qui vont encourager les mauriciens à aller créer 
leurs  propres  petits  business.  Et  c’est  cela  qui  nous  mènera  vers  une  deuxième  miracle 
économique.  Nu pas deuxième république nu. 

C’est un deuxième miracle économique que le peuple attend. C’est cela qui apportera 
le bonheur et la joie dans le cœur des mauriciens, Madame la présidente. J’avais aussi, dans 
mon discours, parlé de la souffrance des artistes ces dernières années parce que rien n’avait 

 

28 

été fait et là je suis très content et soulagé que nous ayons plusieurs mesures qui concernent 
les artistes. Je dois saluer au passage l’excellent travail de l’honorable ministre des Arts et de 
la Culture. C’est un travail extraordinaire qu’il est en train de faire.  Par exemple, à la page 
36, paragraphe 222 - 

 
‘All  Smart  Cities  will  be  required  to  invest  in  dedicated  space  for  the 
development of arts and culture”. 
 

Mais si on réfléchit à cela, quelle énorme possibilité pour nos artistes mauriciens.  Plusieurs 
ont  déjà  pris  contact  avec  moi  pour  me  dire :  Chapeau !  Nous  sommes  sur  la  bonne  voie. 
Encore une fois, je remercie le ministre des finances d’avoir écouté ces propositions.  

Je profite de l’occasion pour faire un petit appel aux ministres concernés, il  y en a 
plusieurs qui sont concernés. C’est par rapport à l’Hôtel de Ville de Curepipe, si on pourrait 
ensemble  trouver  une  solution  pour  redonner  à  l’Hôtel  de  Ville  de  Curepipe  sa  brillance 
d’antan. Donc, j’espère que très bientôt on pourra travailler ensemble sur ce dossier.  

Madame la présidente, c’est un budget qui va apporter de la dignité. Il n’y a rien de 
plus important pour une personne que d’avoir sa dignité. C’est un budget rempli de mesures 
comme je viens de dire : « Arrêter avec nation zougadère! » L’emploi, la sécurité et le côté 
artistique, c’est tout cela qui va donner aux Mauriciens leur dignité. Ce ne sont certainement 
pas les macaronis du Parti Travailliste à la veille des élections municipales 2012 qui allaient 
donner de la dignité aux Mauriciens. Surement pas! C’est un gouvernement sérieux avec un 
leadership fort, avec des idées, avec une vision, c’est tout cela, Madame la présidente, qui 
nous donnera une dignité. C’est cela que la population attend ; c’est cela que la population 
espère  et,  comme  je  l’ai  dit  au  commencement  de  mon  discours,  c’est  cela  que  nous 
entendons tout autour de nous.  

Nous avons plusieurs autres mesures dans ce budget et je fais référence à l’honorable 
Gobin qui, dans son discours, avait dit qu’il fallait l’étudier ce document, qu’il fallait prendre 
la  peine  de  regarder  et  d’étudier,  et  peut-être  aussi  qu’il  fallait  prendre  la  peine  de 
comprendre un peu - je ne sais pas si certains ont compris ou pas.  Il fallait prendre la peine 
de comprendre et non critiquer pour critiquer, ce n’est pas cela le but.  

Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  terminer  ici,  avant  de  recevoir  un  papier,  je  termine 
mon discours ici.  J’ai essayé d’être court et mon message à la population c’est de nous faire 
confiance. Ils nous ont donné un mandat net et clair pour diriger ce pays pendant cinq ans et 
je demande à la population de nous faire confiance. Nous sommes en de très bonnes mains, 

 

29 

nous  avons  comme  j’ai  dit  un  smart  Prime  Minister  avec  des  smart  leaders  et  un  smart 
Minister  of  Finance.  Donc,  faites-nous  confiance,  nous  emmènerons  ce  navire  à  bon  port, 
Madame la présidente.  

Au matin du 12 décembre, après les résultats, le coq a chanté, Madame la présidente, 

un nouveau soleil s’est levé, carré carré, sur ce pays, Madame la présidente.  

Merci beaucoup. 
Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for lunch. 
At 12.53 p.m., the sitting was suspended.  
 
On resuming at 2.31 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes):  Madam 
Speaker, it is my sacred duty to comment on the Budget in my capacity as Member of the 
Opposition in as objective and constructive a manner as possible.  

Notwithstanding  that  this  Budget  is  a  significant  improvement  over  what  we  have 
been hearing over the last decade, there are nonetheless some missed opportunities. I am not 
going to do opposition just for the sake of opposition. An Opposition being the alternative 
Government, it is imperative that when commenting on a measure or policy to bear in mind 
the  necessity  to  be  scientific  and  critical  in  a  thoroughly  credible  manner  cannot  be 
minimised. No sensible Member of this House has the right to say things that may jeopardise 
future development nor do we become complacent as to become loyal. We are the watchdog 
albeit  not  with  many  teeth.  We  have  to  do  justice  to  our  electorate,  to  the  nation  and  to 
ourselves. We have to be honest to ourselves so that, at least, readers read and appreciate our 
contribution  on  debates  on  the  Budget.  We  can  no  longer  in  a  modern  democracy  paint  a 
glowing  picture  when  we  are  in  Government  and  a  dark  picture  of  the  same  budgetary 
measures often wrapped in a gift box of a different colour. It is with this brief introduction 
that I propose to share my views on the budgetary debate.  

Like it or not, practically all the political parties espouse similar economic policies. 
We  have  little  choices  in  view  of  globalisation,  regional  integration,  scarce  economic 
resources within our narrow resource base and welfare system. We are in the same boat. We 
are all in agreement, for instance, of the need to develop tourism, protect the environment, 
correct the deficit in infrastructure or strengthen the welfare system. The differences often lay 
in  the  priorities;  the  degree  of  importance  attached  to  projects,  policies  and  measures,  the 
clarity  of  vision,  the  blend  in  the  economic  recipe  and  the  timely  response  to  global  and 
domestic  changes,  ethical 
transgression  and  good  governance.  The  perception  of 

 

30 

responsibility  and  democratic  principle  versus  the  urge  towards  authoritarism.  Sometimes, 
out of sheer political consideration, we may also shy away from good long term measures 
that unfortunately may be politically unpopular in the short run.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  famous  statement  of  Lord  Acton:  ‘Power  corrupts,  absolute 
power corrupts absolutely’ - we have lived this experience in a recent past and we should be 
on  guard  that  similar  experiences  are  not  duplicated.  The  temptations  to  ignore  basic 
principles of equity and fairness when a party has a huge majority and is intoxicated with the 
power of sheer numbers in the Assembly often blind those wielding the sceptre of power with 
arrogance. It is always a wise approach, therefore, to temper our decisions and daily practice 
with humility, tolerance and fairness. I shall come back on this point as I comment on the 
budgetary measures.  

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  admittedly  quite 
skillfully  presented  a  blend  combining  welfare  measures  and  development  policies  while 
ensuring a manageable deficit. For a long time, we have not seen such a general feel good 
factor and satisfaction in the days following the Budget. The hon. Finance Minister deserves 
all the praise and congratulations for this achievement because it creates a conducive climate 
for  development  to  progress  rapidly.  Good  for  our  country  for  a  start,  but  this  does  not 
suffice.  

The last five years have seen an annual growth of 3.5%, significantly below potential 
growth while unemployment hovered nearer to  8% most of the time. For 2015, we expect 
4.1% albeit higher than the 3.5% of 2014. While this looks like an improvement, actually it is 
not. If we look at growth rates after each election, the feel good factor that accompanied each 
elected Government had led to an increase in growth rate of, at least, 1%. In 2005, growth 
rate went up to 3.1% against expected growth rate of only 1% while in 2010 it rose to 3.1% to 
4.2%. So, an improvement of only 0.6% is an underestimate and below the trend. The least 
we could expect should have been, in all logic, 4.5%. At the rate of 4.1% it is unlikely there 
will be any serious inroads in the unemployment rate.  

I  did  not  emphasise,  Madam  Speaker,  the  plight  of  those  unemployed,  especially 
women, youth and graduates, who had looked with great expectations to the arrival of a new 
Government to address their problems. I see very little signs in the immediate term for the 
Government in drastically reducing the misery of the unemployed. After almost a decade of 
high unemployment, the population legitimately aspired to better prospects for a job, and I 
urge  the  Government  to  address  this  issue  as  a  matter  of  priority.  There  are  immense 
opportunities  for  Government  to  undertake  basic  infrastructural  works,  protect  the 

 

31 

environment  and  address  the  frequent  problems  our  citizens  face  during  spells  of  adverse 
weather  conditions.    By  raising  the  capital  expenditure  slightly  and  with  proper  planning 
through competitive bidding, there was opportunity to kill three birds with one stone; create 
jobs, address environmental problems at local level and improve the quality of life.   

Linked to high unemployment is the issue of poverty.  It is true poverty is a relative 
term and the degree of poverty may not be as pronounced in other countries. Even so there 
are  families  and  children  who  do  not  have  a  full  belly  every  evening  and  remain 
undernourished for a long period of their life, and therefore, easily vulnerable to diseases and 
socially undesirable activities.  This is a cost to society and a shame to the nation.  A job is a 
best vehicle to alleviate poverty.  The GINI coefficient keeps widening.  At this rate, we will 
be creating new problems of rising income inequality unless we address the problems from its 
root causes. 

A first approach, Madam Speaker, is to get updated data, and I urge the hon. Minister 
of Finance to explore the possibility of ensuring the proper collection of data to help address 
this  problem  if  our  goal  is  for  a  fairer  and  more  equitable  society.  I  believe  Statistics 
Mauritius should be strengthened both in terms of human and financial resources to provide 
essential data for analytical and policy formulation whereas in the past Statistics Mauritius 
used to gather data on the basis of quintiles, deciles and percentiles income distribution and 
provide  a  basic  analysis.  This  exercise  is  no  longer  carried  out,  or  at  least  not  published 
regularly and publicised.  

The  other  exercise  which  this  country  requires  is  an  Essential  Needs  Approach  in 
terms of basic access to facilities of common usage like water, housing, education, electricity, 
sewerage,  health  care  including  dental  care,  food,  clothing,  household  capital  goods  like  a 
fridge, radio, television for access to knowledge and information, connectivity to telephone 
and  Internet,  ownership  of  mobile  phone  or  even  toilet  facilities.  Successive  Governments 
have  done  their  part.  However,  it  is  time  to  do  it  in  a  more  comprehensive  framework, 
polishing where deemed fit because in the long run it becomes less costly to Government by 
ensuring access to these facilities to every citizens.  

Some  of  these  goods  may  appear  luxury  goods,  but  in  view  of  the  changes  in  the 
social and economic landscape, our social interaction has changed dramatically. We do not 
talk as our ancestors used to do. We have less social visits.  The nature of our work and the 
availability of time have altered drastically.  We therefore have to facilitate social interaction 
through technological changes so that we do not isolate ourselves or lose touch with family 

 

32 

values and ties.  It is equally important to take productivity and the need to bring down long-
term cost. This is why access is critical in a modern society to foster inclusion.  

Security of travelling people is another aspect to take into account. Many countries 
update  regularly  data  on  essential  needs,  which  is  also  an  essential  input  to  calculate  the 
Human  Development  Index  and  the  Human  Happiness  Index.  More  importantly,  for  any 
enlightened  Government  which  claim  to  call  itself  a  caring  Government  and,  Madam 
Speaker,  all  the  political  parties  in  this  House  which  at  one  time  or  the other,  have  called 
themselves  a  caring  Government,  making  life  of  our  citizens  a  prerequisite  in  the  broad 
development  sense.  Just  identifying  pockets  of  poverty  and  giving  a  list  of  38,  be  it  only 
indicative,  38  poor  or  destitute  households  in  an  appendix  to  the  budget  is  too  facile  an 
approach. We, as Mauritians - I am not saying just the Government in place but all the hon. 
Members in this august House - we should join hands in hands to eradicate the problem of 
poverty for it touches all of us closely.  We have one advantage.  We are a small country in 
terms  of  landed  area  and  population  size.    This  problem  should  not,  therefore,  be 
insurmountable.   

Madam Speaker, during the tenure of the hon. Minister of Finance in the1980s, the 
savings rate rose steadily and anchored quite close to 30%.  This high savings rate in turn 
generated very high investment. It is common knowledge that since savings are usually equal 
to investment, Mauritius was able to generate high injections in the economy, prerequisite for 
sustained high economic growth which the country expectedly  achieved  during the second 
half of the 1980s.  The beauty of the success story during the 1980s was that investment was 
domestically driven with low reliance on Foreign Direct Investment.  In the present situation, 
savings continue to be low, slightly above 10%, visibly insufficient to match the investment 
needed to generate sustained high growth and absorbed the cumulative high unemployment.  
Unless, we attain annual 6% growth rate, unemployment will remain chronically high 
and  manpower  resources  will  stay  idle,  in  turn  adversely  affecting  growth.    Last  year,  we 
achieved a savings rate of only 10.7 % while investment was only 21% of GDP.  Mauritius 
has  to  depend  on  external  sources  to  meet  the  balance  of  10.3%.    In  this  Budget 
notwithstanding an improvement, I am sad to note that the problem of savings and investment 
is not being addressed with sufficient ambitious zeal.  Here was an opportunity for the hon. 
Minister of Finance to go with a big bang approach, address simultaneously the problems of 
growth, investment, employment and savings. Thousands of people have built expectations 
on the hon. Minister to come with a set of comprehensive measures, given his past records, to 
boost  savings.    People  expected  incentive  measures  in  the  form  of  exemptions  or  higher 

 

33 

returns. Very little, if at all, appear in the Budget.  Talking of a second economic miracle is 
more likely to be an illusion with such low savings and investment rate.  

While the marketing skills of the hon. Minister of Finance keep us in admiration, I 
sincerely believe we require, in the interest of the nation, to be honest with ourselves.  First, 
there  is  an  overdependence  of  Government  to  rely  on  the  private  sector  with  regard  to 
investment.  

Concerning the smart cities, the hon. Minister announced and gave the impression that 
they are public projects when they are not. The second weakness, which is one reason to be 
sceptical with regard to growth and investment, is that some of the Smart Cities are already in 
progress and have had little impact on growth or employment, partly because they are not 
sizeable. They are not as new as we are led to believe nor are they Government-sponsored 
project. The Rs120 billion rupees mentioned span over the life of the projects and this is not 
clearly spelt out to gauge the full impact on growth and employment in 2015. I concede it 
will  have  a  positive  impact  on  construction  -  which  must  be  noted,  is  already  showing 
positive - after showing negative growth for four years in a row. 

As regards the SME projects, the intentions are good.  At the same time, successive 

Governments came and announced positive measures for SMEs. 

The Minister himself recognised that access to credit facilities, which the commercial 
banks  claim  has  exceeded  the  limit  agreed,  this  was  clearly  insufficient.  Something  went 
wrong in the estimates computation and forecasts. The creation of the SME bank will be a big 
step  in  this  direction.  My  fear  or  incomprehension  about  this  bank  is  how  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius will treat the SME bank. There are serious rules, procedures and concepts like level 
playing field to be addressed, liquidity or performing loans. Recent experiences in the past 
like  the  Cooperative  Bank,  or  more  recently  the  failure  of  Bramer  Bank  for  reasons  of 
liquidity has to be clearly spelt out, failing which we will kill the project in its embryo. 

While I agree we cannot explain everything in the Budget Speech, I would like to be 
enlightened  how  non-performing  loans  would  be  addressed,  whether  Government  will 
provide  collateral  and  how  will  the  performance  of  the  applicant  SME  be  monitored  and 
corrected, where it is deemed necessary. My other observation is that we may not be fully 
addressing  the  SME  sector  the  more  so  as  we  are  relying  on  this  sector  to  generate  both 
growth  and  employment.  It  is  not  known,  for  instance,  in  what  specific  areas  the  SME 
industrial projects would take place. Is there not the need for a Master Plan with indicative 
feasibilities to guide potential SMEs entrepreneurs or are we leaving SME entrepreneurs in a 
thick jungle to grope in the dark? If we want to support them and encourage them to export, 

 

34 

should  we  not  be  concerned  about  scale  economies,  competitiveness  of  the  product  and 
similar related issues? The Budget document asks pertinent questions in paragraph 29 and in 
paragraph  31  recognise  that  policies  have  been  ‘piecemeal  fragmented’  and  expectedly 
‘outcomes  have  been  far  below  expectations’.  Taking  into  account  that  a  significant 
proportion - not all – of SMEs entrepreneurs are those who have struggled to obtain a job in 
the Civil Service or in large enterprises and failed to make it, or drop out from schools, we 
may continue asking the question whether we should not have gone much further that ‘the 
coherent strategy’ of the ‘one-stop shop’. The 10 measures announced as well as commitment 
of  Government  to  the  SME  development  are  welcome.  It  would  be  wise  if  a  strong 
monitoring, evaluation and research unit is set up to supplement the one-stop shop. Too often 
we  have  no  learning  curve.  We  allow  a  situation  to  rot.  We  do  not  carry  economic 
intelligence  exercises  and  we  do  not  come  with  regular  reports  to  analyse  changes.  My 
proposal to the Minister is – 

• 

• 

• 

to  supplement  the  SME  project  with  a  Master  Plan  to  act  as  a  guide  to  the 
nation and potential entrepreneurs; 
modernise the SMEs as in advanced countries so that they remain competitive 
through efficient delivery, accessibility to latest technology (already implicit 
in  the  one-stop  shop),  and  above  all  ethical  behaviour  in  terms  of  honesty, 
compliance  with  environmental  and  quality  norms,  good  governance,  and 
timely delivery, and 
the  close  follow-up  of  the  SMEs  through  a  proper  surveillance  to  assist  the 
entrepreneur and help Government with regular reports on SME intelligence 
through the Monitoring, Evaluation and Research Unit. 

 
Madam Speaker, it is comforting that the tourism sector is picking up, although we 
are still far from attaining its full potential. Increasing the Budget is good initiative, but we 
require cost-effectiveness and impact analysis to see how every rupee of taxpayer’s money is 
spent. It is not clear if such exercises are carried out, and if they are, whether the MTPA has 
the proper methodology to conduct such analysis. Therefore, the restructuring of the MTPA 
is  seen  as  a  positive  move  in  terms  of  reinforcing  institutional  capacity  building,  and 
hopefully a proper cost-effective analysis is included as part of the restructuring exercise. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  need  for  a  more  liberal  approach  was  long  overdue,  and  this 
present policy announced is consistent with countries where tourism represents a mainstay of 

 

35 

the economy. I also rejoiced to learn that both Austrian Airlines and Lufthansa will operate 
again by the last quarter of 2015. The diversification strategy towards the East starts to bear 
fruit, but needs deepening. We should not wait until a crisis appears to start thinking. It is 
time  start  thinking  of  becoming  a  lead  tourism  destination  through  an  extension  of  our 
network. Both the Japanese and South Korean markets need to be explored now. Many actors 
may  dismiss the idea  as utopian. Yet  who would have believed in the  Chinese or Russian 
market  a  decade  ago.  It  is  vital  that  we  explore  all  potential  avenues  and  have  a  coherent 
policy to give the right signals to potential operators and the business community at large. We 
must be clear, for instance, if we are giving permits to new applications or not, and spell out 
the  conditions  and  reasons.  This  is  essential  to  enable  the  business  community  and  divert 
their energy and resources in other potential development areas. We do not do the country 
any  good by being ambiguous or coming with conflicting  assessment. Certainty is vital in 
decision-making. 

Over the last few years, it would appear we drew our lessons, but took actions a little 
belatedly. Better late than not all! The main errors that we keep repeating, Madam Speaker, 
are the absence of in-depth market intelligence and proper monitoring and evaluation on a 
continuous basis using quantitative methods. An intelligence unit was set up by hon. Bodha 
when  he  was  Minister  of  Tourism,  but  unfortunately,  later  this  was  abolished  by  his 
successor. We can no longer manage sectors on mere sweet talks, though necessary, but not 
sufficient. Mauritius needs to carry regular analysis and forecasts on a country basis to see 
how  sensitive  the  market  is  to  changes  in  specific  variables  like  price,  income,  cultural 
attraction,  the  distance  factor  and  similar  variables.  The  strategic  paper  presented  by  the 
Minister of Tourism speaks on such terms. In the past, such exercises were carried out by 
consultants, often financed by UNDP or the World Bank. 

It is time, Madam Speaker, build the expertise. For these reasons the MTPA has to 
build a strong data bank on a country-to-country basis with data on all variables including 
seasonal airfares from each generating point and the price of jet fuel. There is some evidence 
that Mauritius often on periodic intervals out-prices itself either through prices of its hotels or 
its airfares. Then, operators start crying wolf and then ensured warfare between airlines and 
hotel  operators.  The  all-inclusive  package  has  to  be  seriously  looked  into  if  we  want  full 
integration  of  the  sector,  fair  distribution  of  the  benefits  and  the  proliferation  of  SMEs 
clustering around the tourism activities. Finally, both the environment and sex exploitation 
have to be watched closely. 

 

36 

Madam Speaker, I wish just to raise some passing remarks on the Bramer Bank and 
BAI issue. This is a source of great concern, and there seems general convergence that some 
actions were deemed necessary to ensure stability and good governance in the system. We 
support the Government in its crusade against  malpractice or deviations from international 
norms of banking ethics. Yet what puzzles me is that Mauritius is reputed for its institutional 
capacity  building,  and  despite  earlier  Ponzi  schemes  and  embezzlement  of  funds,  our 
institutions did not see abnormal signs. Were the writings on the walls? Have our institutions 
risen to the circumstances in taking preventive measures before the situation started rotting? 
There are already casualties, as the demise of the 68-year old saver testifies. The FSC should 
have monitored the insurance issue and, in particular, examined the several adverts relating to 
the insurance policies. 

We are a Financial Sector which accounts for double-digit share of GDP, with equally 
impressive  growth  potential.  We  can  imagine  the  signals  this  conveys  to  the  international 
actors. It is imperative that a full-fledged enquiry be set up. The FSC, too often, gives the 
impression  of  waking  up  from  slumber.  Mauritius  needs  a  more  dynamic  approach  to 
preserve its assets. 

 Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi,  ici,  d’aborder  quelques  aspects  du  budget, 
notamment  en  ce  qui  concerne  le  secteur  de  l’immobilier.  Ceux  qui  sont  concernés  par  le 
secteur  de  l’immobilier,  les  mauriciens  consommateurs  en  général,  les  promoteurs,  les 
institutions  créancières  ne  souhaitent  qu’une  chose,  la  stabilité  en  matière  fiscale.  Nous 
savons tous combien cela pèse lourd dans les feasibility plans ou les budgets familiaux des 
acheteurs potentiels ou des familles en général.  

De 2006 à ce jour, les différents budgets ont apporté des régimes différents. Prenons 
le cas des first-time buyers, ceux qui achètent pour la première fois. Le régime des first-time 
buyers a été aboli en 2006 et les frais d’enregistrement ramenés à un taux uniforme de 5 %. Il 
faut le dire, le Budget de 2006 demeure le Budget le plus difficile pour la classe moyenne. 

Le régime des first-time buyers a permis à un nombre important de mauriciens d’avoir 
accès à la terre ou à un logement. En 2010, le régime fut introduit et en 2012 le plafond fut 
rehaussé à R 1 million pour les terrains vagues et R 4 millions pour les immeubles bâtis ou 
les  appartements.  J’accueille,  bien  sûr,  favorablement  le  rehaussement  du  plafond  pour  les 
terrains vagues à R 1.5 millions, alors que le plafond pour les appartements et les immeubles 
bâtis restent malheureusement échangé à R 4 millions.  

Madame  la  présidente,  une  contrainte  de  taille  demeure  que  les  acheteurs  doivent 
subir une injustice de taille qui est le prix de vente. Je m’explique.  Tous ceux qui achètent 

 

37 

pour la première fois ne pourront bénéficier de l’exemption de first-time buyers si le prix du 
terrain vague dépasse R 1.5 millions ou R 4 millions pour les immeubles ou les appartements. 
Il  aurait  été  plus  juste  de  mettre  un  bénéfice  d’exemption  de  Registration  Duty  de,  par 
exemple, R 75,000 pour les terrains vagues et de R 200,000 pour les maisons et ce quel que 
soit le prix de vente. Vous conviendrez que quelqu’un qui achète une portion de terrain à un 
R 1,510,000 ne pourra pas bénéficier de l’exemption parce que son prix dépasse le plafond 
par  R  10,000  seulement  et  il  payera  les  frais  d’enregistrement  pour  R  1,510,000  pour  la 
totalité et ça c’est vraiment injuste. 

Madame  la  présidente,  on  tente  d’encourager  le  secteur  de  l’immobilier.  C’est  un 
sentiment  partagé  que  bon  nombre  de  secteurs  bénéficient  de  l’effet  domino  quand  la 
situation s’améliore dans le secteur de l’immobilier. Le ministre lui-même a été à la base du 
concept de Société Civile Immobilière d’Attribution qui était à la base de plusieurs projets 
immobiliers dans les années 80, 90 et 2000. Ce concept a été rendu très contraignant en 2013, 
au  point  que  les  transactions  sont  aujourd’hui  taxées  au  full  price,  bien  que  les  projets 
immobiliers,  les  complexes  immobiliers  ont  atteint  seulement,  par  exemple,  le  niveau  de 
soubassement.  On  ne  taxe  plus  selon  le  progrès  des  travaux  mais  bien  à  la  valeur  d’un 
appartement  fini.  Cela  est  assez  dur  pour  les  acheteurs  potentiels  ou  même  pour  les 
promoteurs. Cela est injuste et décourageant. Le ministre attache une importance particulière 
à l’investissement et la consommation comme il est mentionné dans le préambule du budget. 
Mais il faut reconnaître que cela ne pourra se faire aussi longtemps que les concepts qui ont 
été à la base du boom de l’immobilier ne sont pas réactualisés. 

Madame la présidente, je souhaite saluer les annonces faites quant à la possibilité de 
déduire des impôts les intérêts payés, des dettes contractées par les first- time buyers et ce 
pendant toute la durée de la dette. Lors de la présentation du Budget précédent, l’annonce a 
été faite de la baisse du quantum requit de 10 % à 5% comme dépôt des emprunteurs. Il est 
quand  même  regrettable  de  constater  que,  depuis  l’annonce  qui  a  été  faite  lors  du  dernier 
Budget, très peu de mauricien on put bénéficier d’un tel régime en raison tout simplement 
d’une  politique  contradictoire  du  Gouverneur  de  la  Banque  de  Maurice.  Les  banques 
commerciales,  malgré  les  mesures  annoncées  dans  le  Budget,  ont  été  ainsi  contraintes  à 
exiger un dépôt des plus contraignants des emprunteurs en raison des restrictions imposées 
par  la  Banque  de  Maurice.  Il  est  souhaitable  qu’en  matière  d’emprunt  et  des  charges 
bancaires qu’il y ait une politique cohérente entre le ministère des Finances et la Banque de 
Maurice.  

 

38 

Madame la présidente, un des calvaires des familles mauriciennes est l’endettement 
des familles. Bien sûr, je salue l’annonce du ministre en ce qui concerne la baisse des taux 
d’intérêt dans la vente à tempérament de 19 à 12 % et des pénalités de 5 à 2 %. Dans cette 
même  optique,  je  souhaite,  ici,  suggérer  à  ce  que  le  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau 
(MCIB)  puisse  couvrir  non  seulement  les  banques  commerciales  et  les  autres  institutions 
créancières mais aussi les commerces pratiquants la vente à tempérament. C’est un fait connu 
des  autorités  que  le  hire  purchase,  la  vente  à  tempérament  est  la  composante  majeure  de 
l’endettement des familles. Une telle couverture constituerait non seulement une protection 
des institutions créancières mais surtout assurer une responsabilisation des familles. Il est vrai 
que cela nécessiterait des mesures additionnelles quant à la dissémination des informations, 
mais la famille se trouvera à coup sûr mieux protégée. 

Madame la présidente, dans les Financial Stability Reports successifs de la Banque de 
Maurice, sous le titre  Household Sector Credit, l’endettement des ménages  est un sujet de 
préoccupation d’une année à une autre. Rien que pour la consommation, l’augmentation a été 
de  17  %.  Idem  pour  les  crédits  pour  les  besoins  résidentiels.  L’endettement  des  ménages 
représente aujourd’hui plus d’un quart, plus de 25 % du crédit total du secteur privé. Cela 
reflète ma préoccupation de l’endettement des ménages. Il est un fait que le crédit alloué aux 
ménages a augmenté de 20 % comme un pourcentage de notre GDP. 

Madame la présidente, je ne peux que me réjouir face à la reconnaissance ou l’aveu 
que  l’Ile  Maurice  est  devenue  une  nation  zougadère.  Des  mesures  concrètes  ont  été 
annoncées, abolition des publicités relatives aux jeux, non émission de permis pendant une 
période  de  cinq  ans,  les  cartes  à  gratter  sont  bannies,  une  augmentation  des  taxes  et  une 
relocalisation des maisons de jeux. J’ai personnellement posé pas mal de questions relatives 
aux  jeux  lors  du  mandat  précédent.  Mais  il  était  quand  même  paradoxal  qu’on  trouvait 
inacceptable  les  publicités  des  boissons  alcoolisées  alors  qu’on  trouvait  toujours  des 
justifications pour les publicités zougadère. On avait annoncé un High-Powered Committee, 
présidé  par  l’ancien  Premier  ministre  sur  tout  l’aspect  de  jeux,  de  relocalisation,  etc.  mais 
jusqu’à présent aucun rapport n’a été soumis. 

Les mesures annoncées dans le Budget sont correctes mais je considère que tout cet 
arsenal  aura une portée  limitative sans une responsabilisation des mauriciens en  général  et 
des  opérateurs.  C’est  dans  ce  sens  que  je  préconise,  Madame  la  présidente,  un  Gaming 
Responsibility Act comme cela existe dans de nombreux pays.  Ce Gaming Responsibility Act 
est essentiel et cela préconise, entre autres, des règles strictes quant à la limite des paris, la 
limite  des  crédits  qui  sont  offertes  par  des  maisons  de  jeux,  le  bannissement  de  certains 

 

39 

joueurs  invétérés  dans  des  gaming  houses,  le  self-exclusion  des  joueurs  comme  mesure  de 
réhabilitation sont autant de mesures qu’on peut  prévoir dans  cette loi. Rien n’est inventé, 
c’est une loi qui existe déjà dans bon nombre de pays. Il est temps de légiférer pour protéger 
les mauriciens de leur vulnérabilité aux jeux. 

Il appartient au gouvernement de venir de l’avant avec une étude approfondie avec un 
échantillonnage honnête de la population et d’analyser les retombées du jeu sur l’endettement 
des  familles  et  ces  répercussions  sur  la  famille  et  la  société.  À  ce  jour,  il  n’existe  aucune 
étude à cet effet. Cette mentalité zougadère ne disparaîtra pas avec une simple limitation du 
nombre de jeux car ces joueurs trouveront toujours des moyens à satisfaire leurs vices.  

En ce qui concerne la relocalisation des maisons de jeu, Madame la présidente, dans 
un délai de trois ans, cela est louable et ambitieux. Toutefois, il faut reconnaître que rien n’a 
été prévu à cet effet dans le présent budget et nous connaissons tous l’état financier précaire 
des  collectivités  locales.  Que  cette  mesure  ne  se  limite  pas  seulement  aux  gaming  houses, 
mais aussi aux détenteurs de permis de totalisers car il est un fait que le nombre de points de 
vente du loto, par exemple, a été multiplié par 10 ces dernières années. 

Madame  la  présidente,  à  la  section  52  du  budget,  mention  est  faite  de  la 

restructuration des concepts d’IRS et de RES. 

Le Scheme IRS fut introduit par le gouvernement MSM/MMM en vue d’attirer plus de 
FDI au pays. À ce jour, 10 projets ont été approuvés et deux projets ont été complétés, six 
projets  sont  en  cours  et  six  projets  sont  en  phase  de  lancement.  Depuis  le  lancement  des 
projets IRS en 2005, les projets IRS et RES ont rapporté R 40 milliards à l’État avec 1,423 
unités vendues. Les projets IRS ont été une composante sociale  bénéfique à la communauté 
locale. Chaque projet  IRS a une composante sociale obligatoire  à être améliorée, bien sûr. 
Valeur  du  jour,  un  total  de  R  85  millions  ont  été  investies  dans  les  projets  sociaux.  Les 
revenus du gouvernement en termes de registration duty et de land transfer tax avoisinent les 
R 4.4 milliards. 

À ce jour, les projets IRS et RES représentent 1% du GDP et environ 24% de FDI 

pour la période 2005 à 2013. 

Les  projets  RES,  Madame  la  présidente,  introduit  en  2007  a  pour  mérite  d’avoir 
ouvert  le  marché  de  l’immobilier  aux  petits  propriétaires  fonciers.  19  projets  ont  été 
complétés  et  25  sont  en  cours.  Même  si  on  est  aujourd’hui  réfractaires  aux  gated 
communities,  il  faut  aujourd’hui  se  rendre  à  l’évidence  qu’il  existe  bel  et  bien  des  gated 
communities des simples morcellements dédiés aux mauriciens où bon nombres d’honorables 
parlementaires des deux côtés de la Chambre sont propriétaires. 

 

40 

L’idée c’est d’avoir un cadre de vie assurée par le syndic que malheureusement les 
collectivités locales ne peuvent assurer et d’assurer un minimum respect du law and order qui 
est aujourd’hui un véritable défi pour tout un chacun. 

La  question  d’intégration  se  posera  toujours.  Il  appartient  au  Syndic  des  lieux 
d’assurer une démocratisation des services par l’embauche des habitants de la région et aussi 
d’encouragement à la participation de vie de village avoisinant. 

Madame  la  présidente,  à  mon  humble  avis,  sous  l’Investment  Promotion  Act  et  le 

Business Facilitation Act, le problème se trouve ailleurs. 

Je  veux  parler  ici  des  occupational  permits  sous  les  catégories  des  investors,  self-
employed, professional et les retraités. Nous savons tous les abus qu’il y a eu dans le passé en 
ce  qui  concerne  l’octroi  des  occupational  permits.  Le  Business  Facilitation  Act  prévoit 
qu’après une période de trois ans, après avoir respecté des conditions de turnover, d’annual 
income,  de  transfert  de  R  40,000  dollars  pour  les  retraités  et  d’un  salaire  minimum 
respectivement pour les quatre catégories mentionnées, ces personnes ont droit de faire une 
application de Permanent Residence Permit de 10 ans. Ce même permis donne la possibilité 
d’acquérir un bien immobilier. En 2012, la loi fut amendée pour permettre l’acquisition d’un 
appartement des immeubles ayant plus de deux étages pour une résidence personnelle. 

À la base des réponses fournies lors du mandat précédent, il est tout à fait justifié de 
remettre en cause certaines applications des plus de 11,000 occupation permits qui ont été 
délivrés  par  le  gouvernement  jusqu’à  présent,  y  compris  le  gouvernement  précédent. 
Desquelles applications on dénote des retraités âgés de 31 ans seulement, un salaire minimum 
de R 30 000 ou encore occupational permits octroyés à des gérants de restaurants ou de tours 
opérateurs  et  qui  sont  aujourd’hui  détenteurs  de  ces  fameux  occupational  permits.  De  ce 
nombre, il existe bel et bien ceux qui ont décroché le jackpot ont eu leur permanent residence 
permit leur donnant droit à l’acquisition d’un bien immobilier à Maurice. Un investissement 
de 500,000 dollars dans un projet IRS ou RES donne droit automatiquement au permanent 
residence permit. 

L’affaire était tellement sensible et juteuse que l’octroi du permis fut référé aux bons 

soins du Bureau du Premier ministre par la BOI. Je parle de l’ancien Premier ministre. 

Madame la présidente, je souhaite ici aborder quelques problèmes spécifiques relatifs 
à ma circonscription et je termine là-dessus. La circonscription de Belle Rose/Quatre Bornes 
m’a donné son plébiscite à deux reprises face à l’Alliance Travailliste/PMSD/MSM en 2010 
et  face  à  l’Alliance  MSM/ML/PMSD  en  2014.  Pour  ces  deux  échéances,  les  alliances 
respectives  ont  remporté  les  élections  générales  avec  une  majorité  confortable.  Mais 

 

41 

l’électorat de Quatre Bornes a renouvelé sa confiance en moi. Je suis, bien sûr, éternellement 
reconnaissant envers cet électorat qui m’a plébiscité et ce quel que soit sa classe sociale, quel 
que soit sa partisannerie politique, son déterminisme ethnique ou religieux. Avec cette même 
dévotion et humilité, je souhaite aborder quelques problèmes pressants de ma circonscription. 
La ville de Quatre Bornes a grand besoin d’une politique d’urbanisme. Elle connaît 
des développements conséquents que ce soit à Ébène ou à l’autre extrémité à Palma. Quatre 
Bornes  émerge  comme  une  ville  avant-gardiste.  Mais  on  doit  reconnaître  le  désordre  qui 
existe et qui relève de la responsabilité de différentes autorités à commencer par la Mairie de 
Quatre Bornes et le gouvernement à travers ses différents ministères. 

La règle de base du respect des zones de délimitation est bafouée, comme cela existe 
en bon nombres de villes et villages du pays. On arrive difficilement aujourd’hui à faire la 
différence  entre  les  zones  résidentielles,  commerciales  ou  industrielles.  Les  zones 
résidentielles sont sauvagement converties en bureau ou autres commerces tout en faisant fi 
de la quiétude des habitants. 

Madame la présidente, c’est un fait connu que le problème de trafic dans le centre-
ville de Quatre Bornes et des régions avoisinantes est révoltant. Aujourd’hui, on ne trouve 
pas mieux que d’augmenter le nombre de traffic lights alors que ce qui est nécessaire pour la 
ville  de  Quatre  Bornes,  c’est  un  programme  d’ensemble  de  trafic  pour  la  ville  de  Quatre 
Bornes dans son ensemble.  

Il est plus qu’urgent qu’on vienne de l’avant avec un transport intra urbain desservant 

les différents quartiers de la ville. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  ville  de  Quatre  Bornes  a  connu  un  développement  sans 
précédent  en  matière  de  constructions  immobilières.  Il  est  évident    aujourd’hui  que  les 
infrastructures pour les sewerages, l’eau, électricité et le trafic routier subissent des pressions 
énormes en raison de la construction en hauteur ou le nombre de personnes au mètre carré a 
sensiblement augmenté. 

Pour  finir,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  laisse  la  construction  du  nouveau  marché  aux 
bons soins des deux ministres de la circonscription et que ce projet ne restera pas au stade 
d’une dotation budgétaire. 

Sur ce, Madame la présidente, je vous remercie. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Gungah! 

 
 
 

 

(3.15 p.m.) 

42 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais,  dès  le  départ,  féliciter  mon  collègue,  le  ministre  des 
finances et du développement économique pour la présentation du budget qui a été très bien 
accueilli par la majorité de la population dans le monde des affaires.  

Après la victoire historique de l’Alliance Lepep aux dernières élections générales, la 
présentation  du  premier  budget  a  été  une  autre  étape  historique.  Un  budget  puissant  qui 
marque  un  changement  de  direction  sociale,  avec  des  mesures  qui  préconisent  à  la  fois  la 
sérénité parmi la population et l’espoir d’une ère pour une nouvelle Ile Maurice.   

C’est  un  budget  à  visage  humain,  qui  marque  une  autre  étape  pour  construire  une 
nation plus équitable, plus juste. Ce gouvernement, sous le leadership éclairé de Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, a mis le cap vers le second miracle économique,  tout en apportant une forte dose 
de mesures pour ramener la justice sociale. L’histoire retiendra que ce sont les deux mêmes 
personnes, en l’occurrence Sir Anerood Jugnauth et Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, qui ont fait le 
premier miracle économique et ils sont de retour pour le deuxième.  

Madam Speaker, what this country needed was the creation of a feel-good factor - and 
it has been well said by hon. Ramano, the feel-good factor is here.  It is the basic element 
needed to boost an economy. It is renewed optimism for a brighter future.  

I must say that all stakeholders have supported this Budget. They recognise that we 
are  shaping  a  new  economy  for  greater  prosperity,  social  justice  and  equity  within  a 
framework of good governance and economic transparency. 

There is no doubt that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has it 
right  and  has  created  the  right  environment  to  attract  FDI  and  private  sector  investment. 
These  are  sine  qua  non  ingredients  to  face  the  challenges  of  the  new  global  economic 
situation.   

Madame la présidente, le pays a besoin d’un nouveau départ. On se souvient de 1982, 
quand le pays était à genoux. Il fallait prendre des décisions courageuses et audacieuses. Très 
peu  d’institutions  internationales  et  le  pays,  avaient  misé  sur  notre  réussite,  but  we  did  it 
Madam Speaker and I am sure, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, we will do it 
again.  

Il nous faut une autre Ile Maurice où chaque mauricien sera au centre du progrès. On 
ne peut parler de pays moderne tout en oubliant ceux qui y contribuent. It is another step in 
the realisation of the Mauritian Dream - un rêve adapté aux réalités sociales de notre nation.  

 

43 

Madam Speaker, the population was at the crossroads in December 2014. Our nation 
had the choice between the Labour Party/MMM alliance and l’Alliance Lepep. Our people 
needed change. Though some, on the other side, were talking about ‘nettoyer le pays’, we all 
know the situation that prevailed with the Government under the leadership of the previous 
Prime Minister, it would have been the same politic of favoritism, nepotism and passe-droit.  
They had proposed a chemistry formula which did not respond to the aspirations of 
the  people.  For  them,  it  was  only  a  matter  of  power.  L’un  des  deux  avait  comme  seule 
ambition de remplir son coffre. Our country did not need that sharing of power; instead our 
people need the sharing of national wealth.  

Madam Speaker, this Budget defines clearly our economic strategy. The Government 
is  taking  bold  and  courageous  measures  to  fight  unemployment,        social  injustice  and,  at 
same time, promoting investment to revitalize the economic sectors. We did take the difficult 
path, but we are convinced in what we are doing for our country.  

We  want  a  country  where  unemployment  recedes,  poverty  disappears  and  social 

inequality is no longer a threat to social cohesion. 

Allow  me  Madam  Speaker,  to  comment  briefly  on  some  of  the  main  measures 

announced in this Budget.  

For  years,  we  have  been  talking  of  mismatch  between  our  qualified  youth  and  the 
needs of the labour market. There was no career guidance for our young generation, and the 
mismatch becomes inevitable. Il nous fallait rectifier le tir.  

This  Budget  has  made  provisions  for  an  amount  of  two  hundred  and  forty  million 
rupees (Rs240 m.) to ensure that our gradués chômeurs be provided the necessary training to 
enhance the skills and aptitude to become employable.   

Madam Speaker, le secteur de PME a toujours été considéré comme le parent pauvre. 
Ce gouvernement a démontré sa ferme volonté de relancer ce secteur qui est vu comme étant 
un pilier important de l’économie. C’est un créneau porteur d’avenir pour nos jeunes pour 
devenir des entrepreneurs. Dans ce contexte, le gouvernement a fait provision d’un fonds de 
10 milliards de roupies pour innover et revigorer ce secteur.  

Our objective is to make the SME sector one of the driving forces for job creation and 

we are sure that we will succeed where others have failed.   

La jeunesse mauricienne a des opportunités avec le changement du pouvoir politique. 
Nous sommes conscients que les jeunes attendent beaucoup de nous. Ils sont les plus touchés 
par le chômage.  Nombreux attendent d’être employés dans le service gouvernemental. Il faut 

 

44 

être réaliste et raisonnable. C’est pour cette raison que ce gouvernement mise beaucoup pour 
que nos jeunes d’aujourd’hui deviennent des entrepreneurs de demain.  

Nous n’abdiquons pas de nos responsabilités. Nous sommes des facilitateurs pour la 
création  d’emplois.  C’est  pour  cela  qu’un 
investissement  massif  a  été  alloué  à 
l’entrepreneuriat. Nous avons des jeunes qui ont l’envie, l’enthousiasme, la conviction et le 
talent pour réussir. Le gouvernement met toutes les facilités pour alléger les procédures afin 
de bâtir une nation d’entrepreneurs.   

Madame la Présidente, comme l’a affirmé le ministre des Finances, Maurice sera un 
vaste chantier de développement. Ce n’est pas qu’un slogan.  Ce sera bientôt une réalité avec 
la création des smart cities.  

Infrastructural  development  will  be  one  key  measure  to  move  to  a  higher  phase  of 
growth  and  improve  other  economic  fundamentals.  The  thirteen-mega  projects,  of  a 
magnitude  never  implemented  before,  will  go  a  long  way  to  revitalise  and  modernise  the 
economic and social landscape of Mauritius.  

Everyone  will  agree  that  investment  to  the  tune  of  Rs120  billion  will  not  only 

rejuvenate the construction sector, but will have multiplier effects on the economy.  

These mega projects rest on the model of a strong public and private partnership. It is 
in line with Government vision to enlist participation of all stakeholders in the developmental 
process. 

Madame  la  Présidente,  ce  budget  est  une  capsule  de  réveil  pour  le  pays.  On  a 

malheureusement vécu une période sombre avec l’augmentation des fléaux sociaux. 

On  sait  tous  que  le  pays  a  été  sous  l’emprise  néfaste  de  la  corruption  et  l’absence 
totale de la bonne gouvernance sous le régime travailliste. Les effets combinés de tous ces 
maux ont contribué à l’appauvrissement de la société et la perte de confiance dans le pays. 

Pas plus tard que la semaine dernière, le rapport de la commission d’enquête Parry a 
démontré la mafia qui opère dans les activités des courses hippiques. Sous le règne de Navin 
Ramgoolam, l’Ile Maurice était devenue une nation zougadère. Le gouvernement ne pouvait 
rester  insensible  aux  dégâts  causés  par  le  gambling.  Il  nous  fallait  arrêter  ce  fléau  qui 
gangrène notre société. Comme un gouvernement responsable, c’est un devoir de rétablir les 
valeurs humaines et sociales dans notre pays. Et je dois ici saluer le courage de l’honorable 
Premier  ministre  et  aussi  bien  du  ministre  des  Finances  pour  les  mesures  prises  pour 
combattre  ce  fléau.  Nous  ne  pouvons  tolérer  le  fait  que  des  millions  de  roupies  soient 
dépensés par des pères et des mères de familles dans tous types de jeu alors que des enfants 
doivent en souffrir.  

 

45 

Alliance Lepep has been elected by lepep,  for lepep.  
Nous  avons  pris  des  engagements.  Nous  les  respecterons.  Parole  donnée,  parole 

sacrée. Ce Budget devient un testament de notre engagement envers la nation. 

Madam  Speaker,  nation  building  implies  that  no  one  is  left  outside  the  stream  of 
economic and social development process. Economic development and prosperity should be 
socially inclusive. Measures including the mega projects and the transformation of Mauritius 
into a regional hub will have positive spill over effects on the population as a whole.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Marshall  Plan  to  combat  poverty  and  redistribute  wealth 
constitutes  another  breakthrough  measure  to  unite  our  people  through  social  stability.  The 
increase in old-age pension and other financial provisions for widows, orphans and disabled 
persons has been a revolutionary measure.  It is often said that the yardstick to measure the 
real GDP of a nation is to see how the most vulnerable group of our society is being treated. 
This  Government  is  a  pro-poor  Government  and  will  ensure  that  the  national  cake  is  not 
shared  among  a  few  privileged  only  but  is  distributed  equally  to  one  and  all.    The 
construction of 1,700 housing units is another important measure to alleviate the sufferings of 
those who are within the poches de pauvreté. 

Madam  Speaker,  consumer  protection  is  another  main  concern  of  the  Government. 
Consumers  have  been  facing  high  interest  rates  on  hire  purchase.  A  large  majority  of  our 
households are trapped in this system and they find it difficult to make both ends meet at the 
end of each month.  

Dans  ce  souci,  de  soulager  la  population,  le  gouvernement  a  ainsi  revu  l’Annual 
Percentage Rate à la baisse de 19% à 12% et le penalty rate sur le late payment de 5% à 2% 
annuellement.  Ces  mesures  permettront  à  la  fois  d’augmenter  le  pouvoir  d’achat  et  de 
soulager le fardeau de l’endettement de chaque famille mauricienne.  

At the level of my Ministry we are aware that there are some unscrupulous traders 
who are trying to “arnaquer les consommateurs”. Inspections are being conducted in various 
trade premises. We will not tolerate any abuse, Madam Speaker.  

 Government  is  committed  to  promote  competition  as  it  is  in  the  interest  of  both 
consumers and traders. Il y a eu des chasses-gardées dans le passé. On parle même de cartel. 
Et en conséquence, ce sont les consommateurs qui en paient les frais.  

C’est inacceptable que certains abusent de leur position pour contrôler le marché. Je 
cite comme exemple le commerce du bétail et de la viande que ce soit du bœuf ou du mouton. 
Pendant  la  période  des  fêtes  religieuses  et  de  fin  d’année,  le  prix  de  la  viande  prend 
l’ascenseur.  Un  comité  technique  a  été  mis  sur  pied  pour  revoir  toutes  les  procédures 

 

46 

d’importation et de vente. Nous prendrons les mesures qui s’imposent afin que le prix soit 
revu  à  la  baisse,  non  seulement  pour  les  fêtes,  mais  sur  le  long  terme.  Le  gouvernement 
donnera toutes les facilités aux opérateurs, qui respectent les procédures, afin qu’il y ait plus 
de compétition.  

Dans ce même contexte, mon ministère revoit le système actuel en place concernant 
l’importation  et  l’exportation.  Des  comités  techniques  ont  été  mis  sur  pied  pour  revoir 
certaines clauses légales entourant notamment l’importation et la vente de véhicule second 
main et l’organisation des foires dans le pays. Des “regulations” sur ces deux aspects doivent 
être revus.  

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the measures relating to bunkering. The vision 
to transform Port Louis from a destination port to a regional hub is a clear indication of the 
foresightedness of this Government.  

Indeed, maritime traffic in the Indian Ocean is growing steadily. This trend is driven 
by increasing trade between the emerging economies of Asia and Africa/South America. It is 
estimated that the size of the bunker market in the region is about one million metric tons. 
Mauritius has a share of 30% only but has the potential to expand this share based on the 
market trend. It is estimated to increase around 3 million metric tons in five years’ time.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  looking  beyond  the  horizon  and  we  aspire  to 

grow as a leading regional petroleum hub.  

Statistics  have  revealed  that  annually  some  35,000  vessels  pass  off  the  shores  of 
Mauritius on their trips between Asia, South Africa and South America. Out of these only 
about 3500 stop over at Port-Louis Harbour to have recourse to maritime services including 
bunkering.  

With the enhancement of bunkering in Port-Louis, it is expected that the number of 
vessels  entering  the  harbour  will  increase  exponentially.  The  benefits  to  be  derived  by 
Mauritius  are  many  folds.  Besides  the  bunkering  activity,  other  related  maritime  activities 
such as changing of crew, water supply and ship handling will also take place.  

There  exists  a  unique  window  of  opportunity  for  the  country.  The  time  is 

exceptionally opportune for the development of bunker business in Port Louis. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  current  shortage  of  tankage  for  petroleum  products  is 
constraining any possibility of growth of any significance. The present 186,000 metric tons 
tankage must be doubled, at the least. With a view to moving fast in the bunkering business, 
the advent of floating storage as a temporary arrangement is a serious option. This will in turn 

 

47 

trigger  investments  in  onshore  storage  tanks  to  eventually  put  the  business  on  a  fully 
sustainable and durable basis. 

The elaboration of a strategic approach is auspicious for positioning of Mauritius as a 
regional hub in petroleum trading. It will establish a strong new pillar in the economy that 
would  service  the  region.    The  position  of  the  country  will  be  reinforced  as  an  air  and 
maritime hub, and generate related activities towards provision of goods and services. 

In  this  context,  a  consortium  comprising  Vivo  Energy,  Total  Mauritius,  Engen 
Petroleum  and  Indian  Oil  will  construct  new  storage  tanks  of  25000  metric  ton.  A  joint 
venture, the Mer Rouge Oil Storage Terminal (MOST) which represents the four companies 
has been set up, for the implementation of the project. I had meetings with the representatives 
of the consortium and requested them to expedite the project. As at date, the consortium has 
submitted an EIA application to the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and 
Disaster and Beach Management.  

After this step, the construction work of the storage facilities will start. I am informed 
by  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management that it is considering the project on a fast track basis.  

Madam Speaker, Government has a clear mandate to get rid of malpractices and to 
restore good governance. We took a bold decision, in the interest of the nation, to terminate 
the  long-term  contract  with  Betamax  Ltd  for  the  transportation  of  petroleum  products  to 
Mauritius. The STC paid Betamax an average rate of 31 US dollar per ton since 2011. As a 
transitory  measure,  the  STC  at  present  contracts  spot  voyage  charters  through  an  open 
bidding process.  To date, better freight rates have been obtained for all the spot vessels than 
with Betamax’s tanker. My Ministry, after negotiation, is paying less than the amount paid to 
Betamax. Up to now, we are paying an average of 23.4 USD per ton. Any future contract of 
affreightment  shall  be  allocated  after  full  and  transparent  tender  procedures.  The  STC  has 
already initiated action to launch the bid.  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  come  now  to  trade  facilitation  to  improve  the  business 
climate in the country. All related institutions and agencies are called upon to work in close 
collaboration  for  further  streamlining  trade  procedures,  accelerating  trade  facilitation  and 
improving  ease  of  doing  business.    My  Ministry  will  coordinate  efforts  at  all  levels  for  a 
concerted action to ensure that trade occurs in the best possible manner with the least cost and 
time to the benefit of one and all.  We will ensure that non-tariff measures enforced in the 
country  are  only  for  reasons  of  strategy,  security,  sensitivity  and  environment  and  do  not 
become  unnecessary  barriers  to  trade.  My  Ministry  will  soon  amend  the  regulations  to 

 

48 

remove 10 items from the list of controlled goods and four items from the list of prohibited 
goods.  

This is in line with the Government strategy to streamline procedures and processes 
for ease of doing business and trade  facilitation. Moreover, in line with the e-Government 
strategy,  my  Ministry  is  embarking  on  the  Single  Window  Project  where  there  will  be  a 
single  submission  of  application  by 
trade  efficiency  and 
competitiveness.    Trader  will  be  able  to  make  online  application  for  import  and  export 
permits.  It  will  reduce  time  for  approval  of  such  permits  and  enable  operators  to  track 
progress of the status of their applications. Trade will be more efficient with the reduction of 
time and accelerate the process of trade liberalisation and eliminate non-tariff barriers.  

to  enhance 

the 

traders 

Madame la présidente, je vais maintenant aborder le secteur industriel qui constitue 

l’épine dorsal de notre économie, parmi les autres secteurs majeurs. 

Avec  tous  les  dangers  qui  nous  guettent,  si  on  reste  les  bras  croisés,  l’industrie 
manufacturière va à sa fin. Rien n’a été fait ces dernières années, pas une idée innovatrice. 
Nous piétinons alors que les autres pays producteurs avancent dans un contexte où la main-
d’œuvre et les coûts de production sont plus avantageux. Notre secteur est caractérisé par une 
diversification inadéquate des produits et des marchés. 

Tout le monde reconnait l’importance d’un nouveau dynamisme dans ce secteur, pour 
la création d’emplois et soutenir l’économie dans son ensemble. Il faut des moyens innovants 
pour  que  le  secteur  manufacturier  aborde  l’avenir  avec  davantage  de  résilience  et  de 
compétitivité.  

Madame la présidente, je voudrais faire ressortir ici que le secteur manufacturier n’a 

pas pu prendre l’envol nécessaire pour soutenir la croissance économique. 

Le secteur manufacturier comprend actuellement 117,000 employés qui contribuent à 
16,6% du GDP. Toutefois, la croissance moyenne pour ces quatre dernières années était très 
basse.  

L’essoufflement  du  secteur  textile  au  cours  des  dernières  années  doit  être  une 
préoccupation majeure.  En fait, la croissance de ce secteur qui se chiffrait à 2,6% en 2013 est 
retombée à 1,5% en 2014. 

Madam Speaker, it is important to give a new  impetus to the manufacturing sector 
which I am confident will continue to be the main engine of growth, exports and employment 
creation for many years to come.   

 

49 

Here,  I  have  in  mind  that  the  manufacturing  sector,  which  will  be  driven  on 
innovation,  fashion,  creativity  and  high-end  technology.  L’innovation  est  un  tremplin 
nécessaire pour le développement d’un ‘Smart Innovation-led manufacturing sector’. 

There is no doubt that innovation confers value addition and expands profit margin. 
The provision of Rs125 m. for a National Innovation Programme will foster a new culture of 
research  and  development  and  promote  creation  of  innovative  products  and  services.  I  am 
confident that with the array of measures provided in this Budget, we will be able to look at 
the future with renewed optimism.  

We  will  focus  on  attracting  foreign  investors  who  can  bring  with  them  new 
technology, innovative practices as well as new products and markets. The region remains a 
new frontier and we will capitalise on the buoyancy in Africa.  FDI  will be crucial for the 
growth of the sector.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  successful  investment  promotion  strategy  requires  much 
groundwork  in  the  targeted  countries.  It  is  only  then  that  we  can  better  identify  potential 
investors,  sensitise  them  on  opportunities  in  Mauritius  and  plan  effectively  investment 
promotion campaigns.  

In  this  context,  the  posting  of  eight  trade  and  investment  managers  in  strategic 

countries will be necessary to carry out much needed groundwork.  

Madam Speaker, the Africa Strategy in the budget is opportune to leverage on new 
opportunities in Africa. The Mauritius Africa Fund, extension of the Freight Rebate Scheme 
and  the  setting  up  of  a  regional  shipping  line  will  be  critical  measures  to  expand  regional 
trade.  

Toutefois, Madame la présidente, je dois affirmer que ces dernières années Enterprise 
Mauritius a failli dans sa tâche. Je me pose la question à quoi servaient ces voyages aux frais 
des contribuables. This company must be more result-oriented. It is public funding.  

Enterprise Mauritius a un rôle important à jouer pour vendre le produit mauricien. Et 

de ce fait, un Export Development Plan a été établi pour la période 2015-2016.  

Ce plan comprend des activités pour créer un nouveau dynamisme à la diversification 
des  marchés.  Dans  ce  contexte,  nous  sommes  en  train  d’élaborer  un  programme  avec  des 
événements  phares  pour  consolider  et  diversifier  l’exportation  en  Europe,  en  Afrique  et 
d’autres pays.  

Le  gouvernement  a  la  volonté  de  soutenir  l’effort  de  nos  entreprises.  Ainsi,  une 
somme de R135 millions a été allouée à Entreprise Mauritius. Le ministère veillera à ce que 
ce fonds soit utilisé judicieusement.  

 

50 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  stratégie  à  la  promotion  de  l’exportation  sera  remodelée 
pour permettre une cohérence effective parmi les différents secteurs du pays. C’est dans ce 
contexte que nous soutenons fermement l’élaboration d’un National Export Strategy (NES). 
Ce  sera  un  plan  d’action  pour  les  cinq  ans  à  venir  qui  permettra  un  développement  pour 
différents secteurs d’exportation. L’objectif est de créer une synergie entre les partenaires du 
secteur pour mieux affronter les demandes du marché international.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  smart  and  innovation  industrial  sector  is  not  possible  if  our 
products  are  not  innovative  with  original  designs  and  if  they  cannot  compete  in  niche 
markets.  

The Fashion and Design Institute which is now under the aegis of my Ministry will 
have  a  revamped  role  in  enhancing  skills  in  the  area  of  fashion  and  design.  Tout  comme 
Enterprise Mauritius, cette organisation est restée inactive depuis quelques temps malgré le 
fait que le Fashion and Design  Institute a un très gros potentiel. Il nous faut faire de cette 
institution une référence de renommée internationale et que Maurice soit reconnue dans le 
secteur de la mode et du design. Nous établissons une nouvelle stratégie pour le Fashion and 
Design Institute qui travaillera de concert avec Enterprise Mauritius, la MEXA et les autres 
stakeholders au niveau national et international.   

Madame la présidente, Maurice a des talents et le potentiel qui demandent à mettre à 

jour. 

Avant de conclure Madame la Présidente, c’est un fait indéniable qu’il y a un feel-
good  factor  dans  le  pays.  Le  peuple  voit  l’avenir  plus  sereinement  et  la  jeunesse  porte  un 
espoir  en  nous.  Nous  avons  tous  un  devoir  envers  nos  mandants  et  le  peuple  dans  son 
ensemble. Que ce soit le gouvernement mais aussi les membres de l’opposition. 

Nous avions un choix, et comme je l’ai dit plus haut dans mon discours, nous étions à 
la  croisée  des  chemins.  Nous  avons  choisi  une  route  qui  n’est  pas  obligatoirement  la  plus 
facile, mais  elle nous mènera vers le développement économique et social qu’il nous faut. 
C’est  un  choix  courageux  et  audacieux  que  le  gouvernement  a  fait.  Les  annonces  ont  été 
faites,  le  travail  a  déjà  commencé.  Après  un  an,  les  médias,  le  peuple,  la  société  civile 
pourront nous juger.   

Après  les  neuf  dernières  années  sous  le  règne  de  l’Etat  Travailliste,  le  peuple  s’est 

tourné vers Anerood Jugnauth car tout le monde sait «sa ki li dir, li fer».  

Madame la présidente, 2015 restera  une année mémorable pour l’île Maurice. 2015 

est l’année d’un cheminement vers un nouveau destin pour le pays.  

 

51 

Ever since taking over the reins of power in  December 2014, this Government has 
already taken several measures to fulfil its promise. This budget is another milestone to pave 
the way towards the construction of a modern, prosperous and more equitable Mauritius.  

The Budget 2015-2016 is a bid to bring to reality the vision of our leader, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to create a second “miracle économique”. During the 
electoral campaign, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister travelled far and wide over the island. He 
constantly interacted with the people  at large in  order to  get the pulse of the development 
requirements,  the  people  aspirations  and  governance  challenge.  Today  this  Government  is 
working towards living up the promises and assurances given in the manifesto. The measures 
are effectively meant to alleviate the sufferings of the poor.  

Madame la présidente, je voudrais terminer avec cette citation, I quote –  
 
“Miracles start to happen when you give as much energy to your dreams as 
you do to your fears.” 
 
This  budget  is  the  stepping  stone  to  achieve  the  second  economic  miracle.  This 
Government under the humble guidance of Sir Anerood Jugnauth will continue on the path of 
development without fear or favour.  All our energy will be directed in fulfilling this dream.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Boygah! 

 
(3.47 p.m.)  

Mrs  D.  Boygah  (Second  Member  for  Vieux  Grand  Port  &  Rose  Belle):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker.  In fact, today I prepared my speech for this budget, but just before 
lunch, I got a mail and I am very much in a fix either I read the budget speech I prepared or I 
read what I have in mind.  First thing I did, I run to the Chief Whip and asked: “Can you, 
please, give me five minutes more in my speech so that I can express myself to this august 
Assembly”. And he did, indeed, Madam. Thank you, hon. Chief Whip. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, I got a mail from a friend, and the mail reads as follows.  I 

quote – 
 
“It is a very great day for you dear.  You will stand in the Parliament to read 
your speech on the national Budget.  Remember the day you were deprived to 
be seated on the seat as the first lady of District Council North and prohibited 

 

52 

to read  your first speech to the local assembly.  We are all with  you, but a 
little sad as we are not in the Local Government Amendment Bill. When will 
our dream come true?  How much and how long we will have to fight more?  
You are our voice.  Good luck.  Bisou. 
Rita” 
 
She is a good friend of mine and she is a  village councillor, Madam Speaker. As you 
can see, in this Council we have not only one, not only two, but many members of the local 
authority who are today in this august Assembly, be it the village council, the district council, 
the municipal council - city council. 

Myself and my friend, hon. Rughoobur, are the byproducts of village council, Madam 
Speaker. We have been fighting since quite long and, unfortunately, in 2005, when we were 
supposed to get a ticket for the general election, after hard work, years of fidelity with the 
Labour Party, we did not get our tickets.  And what did we do?  I think we just ended our 
MBA exams, and what we decided in 2005 was to start from scratch, to start from the bottom 
of the ladder of the political era.  Me and my friend, hon Sudesh Rughoobur, formed a party 
at the village council level.  We said: “Why not?  We can do it together Sudesh! Why not?”   
In 2005, I remember very well, I just delivered my baby – three weeks baby - and I had a CS.  
Hon Rughoobur can confirm this.  I could not even walk.  I was just holding my belly like… 

(Interruptions) 

I was just holding my stomach and walking and hon. Rughoobur and all my friends were very 
much worried.  Fortunately, Madam, we won 12-0 in Rivière du Rempart, our village.  It was 
after 23 years that we took the village from another party, another regime.  After that, I got 
the privilege, with the help of my friends, to be in the District Council and to be among 36 
members. We were only two ladies.  Two ladies sitting in the District Council.  And with two 
ladies at that very much time, I presented myself, I did the campainging, and I was elected 
among the 36 members sitting out there as Vice-Chairperson of District Council North. 

2007 came. I served the District Council North, I served my village. Unfortunately, 
when it came to be nominated as the Chairperson of District Council North, I never got the 
chance.  I was always told by my leader: “To tour pou vini, attan. Attan to tour pou vini.” 
Because it was a male domain politics which has and has always been in the local authorities, 
especially  in  district  councils.    2010  came,  and  I  did  my  campaigning,  canvassing  with 
Ministers,  with  all  authorities,  with  the  Prime  Minister  himself.    I  begged  him,  Madam 

 

53 

Speaker.  He did not want to nominate me to stand for the election.  He never gave any sign. I 
did my campaingning, and I was elected as the first lady of Disctrict Council North. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker!  I want this National Assembly to know how women 

have to fight, how we have to pave our way with hard work to reach where we are today. 

 (Interruptions) 

It was in the Labour Party.  In the Labour Party, Madam Speaker, if you are a poupée, you 
will have your chance.  But if you are not poupée and you do not tousse salie, you do not 
have your chance. 

Only half an hour, Madam Speaker, after my election… 

(Interruptions) 
You have to be ram ke goolam or to be a lèche-botte. 

Half an hour after my election, I got a call from a lady Minister - avec tout le zèle 
qu’elle a - who told me: “To fair la honte a la femme et ine dire pou fini toi”. You know does 
it mean, Madam?  Just being elected as a first lady of District Council North, being menaced 
by another Minister woman.  Today, when you look on the other side, there is not even one 
woman!  Madam Speaker, péché paye lors la terre.   

There is one thing that I want to tell you.  Standing here would not have been possible 
at all without the blessing of hon. Pravind Jugnauth, Leader of the MSM, without the blessing 
and guidance of Sir Anerood Jugnauth who has always given the chance to women.  If we are 
here women sitting on this side and no women on the other side, you can imagine, Madam.  
We do not have to do any dirty work, we do not have to tousse salie.  You are the example, 
Madam Speaker, to be the first lady Speaker of this National Assembly.  And I recommend 
on behalf to all my friends, Rita, whoever she is, be it a district councillor, be it  a village 
councillor, though in the Local Government Act to our good friend, hon. Dr. Husnoo, that 
there  is  no  provision  for  women;  we  have  a  quota,  but  we  do  not  have  any  provision  for 
women to be nominated –  I repeat nominated – either as a District Chairperson or a Vice-
Chairperson.  I will make a request to the hon. Minister.  In the years to come, do not forget 
women,  please  make  an  amendment  so  that  women  have  a  place  in  district  councils  and 
municipalities. 

Madam Speaker, it is an immense to addresss to you my views on the first National 
Budget of this present Government.  I need not come to praise the Budget, which has already 
been acclaimed and appreciated by the whole population. 

 

54 

Laissez-moi vous dire haut et fort ma fierté, Madame la présidente, de faire partie de 
cette  superbe  équipe  gouvernementale,  dirigée  d’une  main  de  maître  par  l’honorable  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, majestueux et impérial. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  faillirais  à  mon  devoir  si  je  ne  faisais  pas  mention  de 
l’homme qui a orchestré admirablement ce budget ; un budget qui transcende le plus simple 
cadre budgétaire et qui donne de l’espoir et fait revivre un peuple désespéré et sans repères. 
Je  nomme  l’unique  et  le  plus  grand  ministre  des  Finances  que  l’île  Maurice  ait  connu : 
l’honorable  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo.    Du  fond  de  moi-même,  permettez-moi  de  vous 
saluer : - il n’est pas là - Chef, chapeau ! 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  10  décembre  dernier  a  marqué  un  tournant  décisif  et 
salutaire dans la destinée de notre pays. Le peuple admirable, pas que de nom, comme le fait 
croire l’autre côté, a démontré une maturité et une intelligence hors pair en plébiscitant dans 
sa sagesse  l’alliance Lepep ; une alliance par le peuple, pour le peuple. D’une pierre deux 
coups, Madame la présidente, car en premier lieu il s’est débarrassé des dinosaures de notre 
paysage  politique  tout  en  instaurant  un  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  revigorer  comme  Premier 
ministre. Et deuxièmement, les rois autoproclamés de  quatre points  cardinaux (le nord, le 
sud,  l’est  et  l’ouest)  furent  envoyés  dans  un  placard,  bon  pour  les  oubliettes.  Les  lions, 
requins et autres sirènes furent ramenés à leur juste proportion bien que quelques vautours 
rodent encore, ils sont toujours à l’affût des moindres morceaux de chair putréfiée pour se 
faire  quelque  calories.  Les  réactions  de  l’Opposition  à  la  saga  BAI/Bramer  Bank  en 
témoigne. J’y reviendrai, Madame. 

Madame la présidente, ce gouvernement n’a pas tardé à se mettre au travail. Dès son 
installation au pouvoir, ce gouvernement réalisa certaines de ses promesses électorales, telles 
que  l’augmentation  des  pensions  de  nos  aînés,  veuves,  orphelins,  handicapés  et  autres 
bénéficiaires  des  prestations  sociales.  Le  feel  good  factor,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  une 
condition sine qua non pour la réalisation d’un deuxième miracle économique. Ce sentiment 
de  bien-être  fut  renforcé  par  le  discours-programme  qui  tracera  le  Road  Map  pour  une 
projection de cinq ans avec, comme ultime but, un deuxième miracle économique. 

Madame  la  présidente,  les  sceptiques  et  mal  pensants  furent  ramenés  à  la  cruelle 
réalité. Ils sont off pour de bon - regarder de l’autre côté ! L’Opposition fut prise de court ; les 
partis,  jadis  perçus  comme  étant  puissants,  firent  face  à  une  crise  sans  précédent.  Les 
démissions de ses dirigeants, non des moindres, se succédèrent à une vitesse vertigineuse, et 
elles ne sont pas prêtes à s’arrêter. Le point zéro, Madame la présidente, n’est pas loin pour 
un certain jadis grand parti, militant que de nom. L’autre ex-grand parti est dans le flou total. 

 

55 

Il  a  un  rapporteur  comme  pseudo-leader,  Madame  la  présidente,  lui-même  battu  à  plate 
couture aurait du mal à justifier les frasques de son leader, en congé politique indéfini. Ceux 
qui veulent abandonner le Titanic rouge ne trouve preneur dans aucun autre parti politique. 
Certains attendent avec appréhension le département des officiers de la CCID, car ils n’ont pu 
prendre le vol du 11 décembre,  car  celui-ci était rempli de valises, de coffres,  et peut-être 
même des ATM. En plus, ils n’ont pas pu, eux, se procurer de Rolls ou de villas à Londres ou 
des appartements ou gondoles à Venise. Passons, laissons-les à leurs moutons, Madame la 
présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai  été  écœurée  de  voir  les  nombreux  problèmes  de  ma 
circonscription numéro 11. En tant que PPS, j’ai fait un état des lieux et je le dit à haute voix, 
l’ancien  gouvernement,  à  travers  son    Roi  du  Sud,  a  complètement  failli  en  tant  que 
représentant de cette circonscription - 27 ans, Madame la présidente. 27 ans de députation ! 
Madame  la  présidente,  pas  un  seul  projet  digne  de  ce  nom,  peu  ou  presque  pas  de 
microprojets. Prenons l’exemple du Stade de Rose Belle construit du temps de l’honorable 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  qui  n’a  toujours  pas  de  vestiaires  20  ans  après !  Le  marché  de  Rose 
Belle… 

(Interruptions) 

a un parking indigne de ce nom. Les infrastructures embellissant les sites côtières datant de 
l’ère MSM/MMM sont dans un piteux état. Les rues, ruelles,  drains, nécessitent une urgente 
attention.  Les  poches  de  pauvreté  abondent.  Je  me  demande  comment  cet  ex-ministre  qui 
aspire  au  leadership  de  son  parti  ait  pu  laisser  pourrir  une  telle  situation.  Est-ce  un  acte 
délibéré ? - Ou occupé avec des macaronis à Curepipe, je m’interroge. A Deux Bras, New 
Grove, Madame la présidente, j’ai rencontré les proches d’un patient qui, après son dialyse, a 
dû être porté cent mètres jusqu’à son domicile, car l’ambulancier ne pouvait aller plus loin à 
cause du piteux état de la ruelle ! Une légitime demande pour une réparation est restée lettre 
morte pendant plus de 10 ans ! Madame la présidente, ce patient est décédé depuis et la ruelle 
toujours pas réparée ! 27 ans de députation du Roi du Sud, 10 ans de demande, la ruelle est 
toujours dans le même piteux état. 

Madame  la  présidente,  les  fléaux  tels  que  la  drogue  et  l’alcoolisme  sont  en  nette 
progression, surtout faute de loisir. Le chômage fait rage. Et dire que le projet Business Park 
de  Rose  Belle,  Madame  la  présidente,  fut  mis  au  frigo  et  torpillé  parce  qu’il  fut  initié  par 
l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, leader du MSM.  

(Interruptions) 

 

56 

Quel cynisme ! Ils ont ainsi privé des milliers de jeunes d’un emploi, passeport pour vivre 
décemment et dans la dignité. Ce projet inclus dans le présent Budget, rebaptisé technopole 
est en chantier, avec une possibilité d’emploi pour 20,000 jeunes. 

Madame la présidente, un drame s’est abattu sur la famille Purmasing de Rose Belle 
dans  ma  circonscription.  Une  étudiante,  Keshnee,  à  la  fleur  de  l’âge,  a  perdu  la  vie  en 
tombant  d’un  autobus.  Un  décès  dans  de  telles  circonstances  est  affligeant.  Madame  la 
présidente,  je  tiens  à  présenter  mes  sympathies  les  plus  vives  à  cette  famille.  Je  salue  au 
passage,  le  ministre,  l’honorable  Bodha  qui  est  venu  avec  des  mesures  appropriées  pour 
prévenir d’autres cas semblables à Keshnee à l’avenir. 

Dans un autre ordre d’idées, Madame la présidente, je tiens à dire, haut et fort, mon 
étonnement  sur  le  retard  à  résoudre  l’affaire  du  gaz  lacrymogène  lancé  vers  des  femmes, 
enfants,  handicapés  lors  de  la  dernière  campagne  électorale.  Ce  n’est  qu’à  la  suite  d’une 
question  parlementaire  de  l’honorable  Jhugroo  que  le  dossier  fut  dépoussiéré  et  remis  sur 
table, avec l’arrestation de deux agents connus du parti travailliste. Les cris pour que justice 
soit  faite  se  font  entendre  de  plus  en  plus.  Le  commanditaire  de  cet  ignoble  acte  doit  être 
démasqué. Qu’il soit Roi ou Prince, il doit payer afin de décourager les futures pyromanes de 
notre démocratie de récidiver. Le respect pour l’adversaire doit être maintenu, car les actes 
similaires sont contraires à l’esprit qui anime une campagne électorale dans notre île Maurice, 
havre de paix.  

Madame la présidente, le budget 2015/2016 a pris de court les observateurs politiques, 
les experts en matière économique et surtout l’Opposition. Le Leader de l’Opposition - qui 
n’est pas là, sauvé ! - de par sa déclaration première, donnant l’impression de n’avoir rien 
compris et patauge toujours dans des contradictions. Tantôt ce Budget s’inspire du MMM, 
donc positif, tantôt ce Budget est du bluff. Alors ! A l’entendre, on constate que l’honorable 
Paul Bérenger ne changera point. Depuis 1983, Madame la présidente, il trouve à redire sur 
tous les budgets, sauf, bien entendu, un ou deux qu’il a présentés en tant que ministre des 
Finances. 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  proposons  une  révolution,  dira  l’honorable  ministre 
Lutchmeenaraidoo, un budget innovateur, sortant des sentiers battus dans sa forme et dans 
son contenu. Même le ton était novateur. Coup de maître pour un maitre de bons coups ! Le 
gouvernement  voit  sa  côte  grimper  de  52  %  à  83.8  %.  La  confiance  est  là,  Madame  la 
présidente. Une première étape est franchie. 

Madame la présidente, ce budget se démarqua du traditionnel grand oral de mots et de 
chiffres. Ce budget jette en effet les jalons pour une vraie révolution, une projection dans le 

 

57 

futur avec une croissance inimaginable à 5.7%. Des mesures jamais évoquées avant, jamais 
effleurées  même  pas  par  les  experts  en  la  matière.  Je  dois  dire  que  j’étais  étonnée  par  la 
réaction de l’honorable Ameer Meea, hier, qui disait que ce budget est un budget insolent.  

En tant que femme et mère, je salue les mesures annoncées en faveur des démunis, 

des femmes, des enfants et de la famille. 

Madame la présidente,  
(i) 

le Plan Marshall est une approche révolutionnaire pour éradiquer la pauvreté 
dans la famille où les femmes et les enfants sont les victimes premières ;  
l’augmentation, Madame la présidente, par 50% … 

(ii) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order ! 
Mrs Boygah:… du staff de la CDU;  
(iii) 

l’embauche de six psychologues pour s’occuper des femmes et des enfants en 
détresse ; 
les  initiatives  pour  les  entrepreneurs,  femmes  comprises,  pour  des  emprunts 
sans garantie bancaire;  
la SME Bank, et  
doubler  les  fonds  pour  initiatives  prises  pour  le  support  des  femmes  et  des 
enfants en détresse. 

(iv) 

(v) 
(vi) 

Ce  budget,  Madame  la  présidente,  projette  notre  petite  Ile  Maurice  dans  le  future 
grâce à un chapelet de mesures, mais surtout grâce à un optimisme frisant la démesure pour 
les  petites  pensées,  les  passéistes,  les  have  been.    L’honorable  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  et 
l’honorable  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo  ne  sont  pas  nés  de  la  dernière  pluie.  Madame  la 
présidente, toutes nos promesses seront tenues en temps et lieu. Toutes les conditions sont 
réunies pour projeter notre pays vers un lendemain meilleur où – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

les richesses abonderont;  
les emplois peineront à trouver preneurs; 
nos enfants d’outre-mer reviendront à leur famille et à leur patrie; 
l’argent du peuple ne se retrouvera pas dans des coffres ou des valises; 
le soleil de l’espoir brillera comme la flamme olympique;  
la nourriture, empreinte de pesticides/fertilisants laissera la place au Bio; 
les Smart Cities émergeront du sol rural et urbain; 

 

58 

• 

• 

• 

les  flyovers  rivaliseront  en  hauteur  avec  les  technopoles  nouvellement 
construits;  
les maisons de jeu laisseront la place pour les entrepreneurs des microprojets 
financés par la nouvelle SME Bank, et 
Roches  Noires  sera  célèbre  plus  pour  son  Smart  City  qu’autre  chose,  un 
certain campement, par exemple. 

Madame la présidente, notre pays fut frappé comme un séisme de magnitude  9 sur 
l’échelle  Richter  vendredi  dernier.  La  révocation  de  la  licence  de  la  Bramer  Banking 
Corporation  entraina  dans  son  sillage  un  effondrement  du  groupe  British  American 
Investment.  Une arnaque de l’ampleur jamais imaginée fut mise  à jour.  Un pyramid Ponzi 
Scheme impliquant plus de R 25 milliards fut évoqué qui connaît ni communauté, ni race, 
Madame la présidente. 

The writing was on the wall, Madam Speaker.  
L’éternel Leader de l’opposition en a fait mention dans cette même Assemblée. Mais 
grâce  à  un  lien  incestueux  entre  le  pouvoir  d’alors  de  l’ex-Premier  ministre,  Navin 
Ramgoolam, la Banque de Maurice du Gouverneur Bheenick et le clan Rawat/Beebeejaun, 
cette situation malsaine fut laissée perdurer jusqu’à son éclatement vendredi dernier. 

Madame la présidente, ce gouvernement a promis de mettre de l’ordre là où il le faut. 
Nous avons agi dans l’intérêt supérieur du pays. Certains essaient de tirer un capital politique. 
Les  mêmes  qui  ont  parlé  de  pyramid  Ponzi  Scheme  ou  qui  ont  soulevé  le  seuil  de  10% 
d’investissement maximal, pour remettre en question le financement de la BAI pour les autres 
filières du conglomérat Rawat parlent aujourd’hui de mishandlement et de holdup de l’État. 

Mais ce gouvernement, Madame la présidente, a su éviter une crise sociale annoncée, 
en agissant très vite ce weekend dernier. The culprits will have to face the consequences.  The 
various institutions concerned are fully committed to bring light to all the malpractices. 

Madame  la  présidente,  vu  le  nombre  grandissant  des  scandales  qui  sont  déterrés 
presqu’au  quotidien,  je  propose  qu’une  unité  soit  mise  sur  pied  pour  s’occuper  de  ces 
scandales. Cette unité siègerait sur une base permanente et se composerait des représentants 
de toutes les institutions concernées telles que  la Police, l’ICAC, l’ADSU, CCID, FSC, FIU, 
Bank of Mauritius et les autres. Cette unité serait placée sous la responsabilité du ministre de 
la  bonne  gouvernance.  Trop  de  temps  et  de  ressources  humaines  sont  engagés  dans  cette 
‘opération nettoyage’ -  qui ne termine pas ici  - le nombre des scandales dépassant de loin 

 

59 

notre imagination, Madame la présidente. Cette unité travaillerait dans une sérénité, loin des 
feux des projecteurs et je suis convaincue du bien-fondé de cette unité. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  paves  the  way  for  a  bright  future.  We  have  a  clear 
overview of Mauritius of tomorrow. Let those who want to dwell in the past spend their time 
in  devising  winning  formalised,  concocting  dirty  alliances,  staging  back  stabbing  so  as  to 
grasp power. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  futur  se  construit  aujourd’hui.  Prions  tous  ensemble  pour 
que la vision de ce gouvernement aboutisse pour le bien de nos générations à venir où il ferait 
bon  de  vivre,  où  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  entrera  dans  l’histoire  et  sa  présence  planera 
éternellement sur notre île, telle que la statue du Christ a Corcovado qui elle, veille sur la 
ville de Rio de Janeiro. 

Before taking my seat, Madam Speaker, I do hope that my views are nothing, but a 
truth and a reality that this governing team will materialise without any  doubt and beyond 
dispute, the ultimate goal, le deuxième miracle économique. 

What  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  has  done  once,  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood 

Jugnauth can do it and will do it twice. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 

(4.16 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  Leopold  (Second  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  been 
listening to the Budget speech of the hon. Minister of Finance and the people of Rodrigues 
had followed his speech. I am glad to tell you, Madam Speaker, that the overall feeling of the 
people of Rodrigues is positive towards this Budget. The people of Rodrigues feel that the 
Central Government understands that we have the same needs are the main island, Mauritius. 
The people of Rodrigues Island know and understand that for Rodrigues to be sustainable in 
development, we need to have sufficient manpower, adequate infrastructure and appropriate 
support. We have a population of about 40,000 inhabitants, but our needs are the same as that 
of  the  main  island  Mauritius,  that  is,  we  need  proper  road,  modern  hospital,  good  airport, 
good seaport, adequate  water supply, proper housing,  adequate schools  and colleges,  good 
telecommunication services and so on, just the same as the main island. 

In  this  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Rodriguan  people  feel  that  the  Central 
Government is listening to them. The Rodriguan people are so grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister and his Minister of Finance for having been very considerate to Rodrigues in this 
Budget.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  right  in  stating  that  this  Government  owes  the 

 

60 

Rodriguan people that consideration. The Rodriguan people, especially the young ones, are 
starting to ask questions on how come we are in the same Republic, but Rodrigues has such a 
delay in development compared to Mauritius. Now this Budget is giving our young people 
hope  and  they  are  waiting  to  see  how  all  those  measures  announced  be  implemented.  In 
addition,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  people  of  Rodrigues  as  well,  by  their  hard  work  to 
make  maximum  use  of  all  the  supports  and  opportunities  that  the  Central  Government  is 
giving us and at the end it’s the Rodriguan people themselves who need to be responsible for 
its future and well-being. 

The  Rodriguan  people  do  immensely  appreciate  the  visit  of  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance to Rodrigues prior to the preparation of his Budget. He has been able to see and hear 
the great concern of our young people during a meeting with them, and to see as well what 
are the elements needed to help Rodrigues to take the right track from the crossroad. 

The people of Rodrigues especially the young are well aware of the social economic 
situation  of  Rodrigues.  They  are  aware  that  Rodrigues  has  so  often  been  forgotten  and 
neglected that is why there is such a huge gap in term of development between Rodrigues and 
Mauritius.  They  often  ask  this  question:  how  come  we  are  in  the  same  Republic  but 
Rodrigues has a lower living standard compared to the main island Mauritius? If we compare 
the gross national product of Rodrigues to Mauritius, Rodrigues will be classified as poor but 
still  we  are  in  the  same  Republic.  If  we  look  at  the  average  income  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Mauritius per year per head, we will see that Mauritius is doing a lot better compared to its 
neighbours of the Indian Ocean. 

This  Budget  is  an  acknowledgement  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  of  the 
specificities of Rodrigues; he took time to consult the people of Rodrigues and the regional 
Government prior. 

Madam Speaker, with the acquisition of a new vessel in replacement of the Mauritius 
Pride, the extension of the airport, the installation of the undersea fibre-optic cable linking 
Rodrigues to Mauritius and the rest of the  world, the setting of SME  ICT, the SME Agro 
Industrial Park, the development of the seaport, placement scheme to our young graduates, 
the purchase of our agricultural products at guaranteed prices and the development to palliate 
acute  shortage  of  fresh  water  in  Rodrigues  -  all  those  measures  announced  by  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  will  help  us  to  bridge  the  economic  gap  between  Mauritius  and 
Rodrigues, therefore enhancing equality, social justice, democracy by redistribution of wealth 
to the less fortunate, and to become more productive.  

 

61 

With those positive measures which we are so long waiting for, this will eliminate the 
prejudice  of  a  very  few  stating  that  Rodrigues  is  a  financial  burden  to  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius but we all know with the extension of the Exclusive Economic Zone to Rodrigues 
and the importance of the strategic position of Rodrigues in the Indian Ocean this is not the 
case. Rodrigues is indeed an asset to the Republic of Mauritius. 

The  people  of  Rodrigues  Island  share  the  same  hope  and  dream  of  our  nation,  we 
want to reclaim our future and make it brighter. We are hopeful that this national Government 
can work hand-in-hand  with the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to design and implement a 
positive plan to build a strong and prosperous economy for the island of Rodrigues. 

We  appreciate  that,  through  this  Budget,  the  Government  of  Mauritius  and  its 
Minister  of  Finance  have  given  such  consideration  so  as  to  bridge  that  gap  of  inequality 
which  exists  between  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues  Island.  Addressing  inequalities;  income 
inequality  in  particular,  as  it  has  a  statistically  significant  impact  on  economic  growth, 
therefore it is of paramount importance to the success and sustainability of the growth of the 
economy of Rodrigues. 

Countries that promote equal opportunity for all from an early age are those that will 

grow and prosper. 

Rodrigues had not been forgotten in the national plan this time. We cannot miss the 
plane, we have missed too many already. We can no longer afford to wait for the next one. 
Rodrigues  can  no  longer  wait  to  be  connected  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  We  can  no  longer 
afford to have only one ship, as our sole maritime connection to the rest of the world, which 
supplies us with basic commodities. We can no longer afford to have a small plane as our 
sole aerial connection to the rest of the world. We can no longer afford not to be connected to 
the fibre optic cable that is only miles from our island and most of all we can no longer afford 
to put back the development of our domestic water production. 

I am convinced that the hon. Minister of Finance has taken swift decisions on those 
issues  so  as  to  support  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly’s  effort  to  rejuvenate  our  local 
economy  and  to  create  jobs  and  chances  for  everyone  who  makes  the  effort.  Substantial 
upgrade  to  our  port  and  airport,  high-capacity  broadband  connection  and  investment  to 
increase  our  water  storage  capacity  will  go  a  long  way  in  helping  boosting  Rodrigues 
economy and reduce unemployment rate in Rodrigues. We firmly believe that it will be much 
better if the people of Rodrigues get a fair shot to live to their God’s give potential, like every 
citizen of our beloved nation. 

 

62 

As  I  have  stated  in  my  very  first  address  to  the  august  Assembly,  the  Rodrigues 
Regional  Assembly,  in  its  2015  Budget,  is  finding  ways  to  encourage  young  people  to 
continue  the  Rodriguan  entrepreneurship  spirit  by  providing  appropriate  environment  and 
opportunities for the growth of small and medium size businesses. The measures taken by the 
Minister of Finance in putting Rs10 billion in this sector will propel Rodrigues further in its 
endeavour in creating jobs and food security for the people of Rodrigues and why not for the 
whole nation. 

Development in the sector of agriculture and fishing will take a new dimension, this 
Budget is supporting the two sectors tremendously by ensuring guaranteed market on the five 
agricultural products namely le gingembre, l’ail, l’haricot rouge, l’oignon et le safran. On the 
announcement of these measures, the Agricultural Marketing Board is collaborating with the 
Rodrigues Trading and Marketing Company Ltd. for that matter. 

As  an  autonomous  island,  we  have  proved  to  ourselves  that  we  are  able  to  take 
measures  to  improve  quality  of  life  and  preserve  nature.  Rodrigues  has  been  cited  as  an 
example  in  many  places  of  the  world  for  the  decision  taken  by  the  Rodrigues  Regional 
Assembly  in  banning  plastic  carrier  bags;  now  the  main  island  is  following  the  same 
example.  France,  Canada  and  some  States  of  the  United  States  of  America  are  taking 
measures to cancel plastic bags by 2016. That is what autonomy is all about, it is to show 
what we can decide for ourselves what is right for the people of Rodrigues. 

We  have  also  an  octopus  close  season  that  has proven  to  be  very  beneficial  to  our 
fishes  and  the  regeneration  of  our  lagoon  –  it  has  been  proven  by  evidence  that  we  are 
yielding more fishes inside our lagoon with the decision of octopus closing. 

There is also the plan for segregation of waste and turning waste to energy in the view 

of closing the only existing landfill in Rodrigues. 

With all these efforts, we have a Minority Leader in Rodrigues, who, ignorant as he 
is,  is  saying  that  those  decisions  taken  are  taking  Rodrigues  50  years  backyard.  Madam 
Speaker,  50  years  ago  there  were  no  electricity  in  Rodrigues,  no  television  broadcast,  no 
telephone. How dare he come to say that Rodrigues is going backward. This person has no 
vision. He is not thinking of keeping the island liveable for our future generation and our fore 
children.  I  wonder  why  he  is  doing  politics  –  is  it  to  serve  himself?  Is  Mauritius  going 
backward by banning carrier plastic bags? 

Madam Speaker, all those measures taken for the future generation and for Rodrigues 
small island, but we want to show to the rest of the world what good governance is all about. 
We do not want any bad publicity to our small island. As you may know, there was an ex-

 

63 

Chief Commissioner of Rodrigues who was sentenced three months of imprisonment for bad 
governance while he was in office. This is very bad publicity for the island of Rodrigues and 
the people of Rodrigues have kicked him out as he is setting a bad example for the island. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member  please  refrain  from  making  comments  on  people 

who are not in this House and cannot then rebut your argument. 

Mr  Leopold:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  glad  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development has given due consideration in his Budget for the improvement of 
health services. For the people of the Republic of Mauritius to have a high quality of life, we 
need  to  have  an  adequate  health  services.  The  primary  health  care  service  will  need  to  be 
improved,  curative  care  need  to  be  properly  managed,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security, 
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions and the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 
need to be more collaborative to look after people who suffer from mental illness, and with 
the growing trend of ageing population, a holistic approach is needed to look after the elderly 
and the most vulnerable.  

It is good that the hon.  Minister of Health and Quality of  Life,  at the very start, is 

finding ways to reduce pressure on the hospital and to reduce waiting times.  

With  the  prevalence  of  chronic  illnesses,  namely  diabetes  and  with  an  ageing 
population, much effort is needed to prevent those people from going to hospital so as not to 
put extra pressure on the hospital. It is good that the Community Health Centres are open out 
of  hours  so  as  to  reduce  influx  of  patients  to  hospital.  However,  we  need  to  review  our 
community  services,  more  community  nurses  need  to  be  recruited  to  manage  chronic 
illnesses in ambulatory services so as to prevent complication and unnecessary admission to 
hospital. 

The  roles  of  community  nurses  are  to  manage  ambulatory  health  services.  With  an 
ageing population, it is important that we have enough community nurses to look after our 
elderly at home.  We need these specialised nurses to manage the medication of the elderly 
and  to  take  care  of  their  problems  and  that  will prevent  them  from  going  to  hospital.  The 
service of community nurses need to be made available on a 24-hour basis. 

The  nursing  and  residential  home  services  need  to  be  regulated  properly  and 

standardised. 

With the computerisation of the health service, the e-Health, the quality of services 
will improve. The management of stock of consumables and medications will be made easy 
by the computerisation of hospitals.  The loss of blood results, other medical tests and delay 
in diagnosis will be no longer a problem. But it has to be done properly with, for example, 

 

64 

unique patient number, that will allow healthcare professionals to access the file of patients 
while  attending  any  public  health  services,  that  will  prevent  duplication  of  treatment, 
eliminate  excessive  waste  of  medications  in  hospitals  and  proper  management  of  patients’ 
illnesses.  

To my opinion, there has been a lot of investment in the healthcare service, but to 

optimise healthcare service a hospital economist is of great importance. 

Much emphasis is needed to train doctors in scarcity areas. It is unacceptable that at 
the time I am speaking, there is only one  gynaecologist posted on the island of Rodrigues 
who goes there on a monthly basis.  This is not fair for the Rodriguan women and it is not 
safe as well. The issue needs to be addressed in the short-term and in the long-term. I make 
an appeal to the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life to look into the matter urgently.  
Talking  about  social  care  and  wellbeing  of  our  citizen,  Mauritius  has  recently 
recruited  six  child  psychologists.  There  is  an  increasing  need  for  these  professionals  in 
Rodrigues  as  well  and  it  would  be  very  much  appreciated  if  the  hon.  Minister  concerned 
could look into the matter as we do not have any child psychologist in Rodrigues. 

In  relation  to  the  direct  flight  to  Rodrigues  from  Reunion  Island,  the  Rodrigues 
Regional  Government  is  starting  working  on  it  so  as  to  be  fully  prepared.  The  Rodrigues 
Regional Government has already met the travel operators so as to work together to ensure 
quality services and explore opportunities that it will bring. 

The direct flight will bring along new job opportunities and small businesses to our 

young people. 

The  twice  weekly  flight  will  also  give  added  value  to  our  local  products  and  this 
comes  right  as  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  ensure  the  quality,  standard  and  prevention  of 
counterfeiting to our local projects by our label of certification “Rodrigues Naturellement” - 
this will be on all local products, which pass quality control test. 

The Rodrigues Regional Assembly has recruited a consultant in this line to update the 

existing study on tourism sector so as to set up new strategies. 

With the provision of the SME Park announced by the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development in his Budget Speech, the Rodrigues Regional Assembly is wasting 
no time in working with “le centre national des arts et metiers” so as to be ready to optimise 
ways of transforming local products, especially in the field of charcuterie. 

On page 21 of the manifesto of the last regional election  -  Organisation du Peuple 
de Rodrigues intitulé -  Espoir et Libération – on a fait mention d’un plan d’action pour tirer 

 

65 

Rodrigues de l’urgence économique par la création d’un Economic and Infrastructural Fund.  
This present Budget is answering to this quest, Madam Speaker. 

This  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  will  bring  a  meaningful  change  to  the  economy  of 

Rodrigues, to the wellbeing of the Rodriguan people and the whole Republic of Mauritius. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your attention. 
Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 
At 4.34 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
 
On resuming at 5.07 p.m with the Deputy Speaker in Chair. 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Perraud! 
The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
A.  Perraud):    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  congratulate  my  colleague  hon.  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  a  commendable 
budget  which  brings  forth  innovative,  social  and  economic  measures  geared  at  boosting 
investment, job creation, protection and empowerment of vulnerable groups and mitigating 
adverse impacts of climate change. The hon. Minister has come up with bold and innovative 
measures including a “No tax budget” against the backdrop of a weak global economy. 

I also wish to thank the hon. Minister of Finance on behalf of children, women and 
families  in  Mauritius  for  having  spared  them  a  thought  in  his  budget.  The  measures  he 
advocates reflect the vision of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Government which are in 
line with the pre-electoral Manifesto of  L’Alliance Lepep and the Government Programme 
2015-2019.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  our  children  are  the  citizens  of  tomorrow.  As  Minister 
responsible for children, I am most delighted to note that the Budget 2015-2016 reaffirms the 
commitment of this Government to uphold the principles advocated under the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child.  

With family values falling apart along with an increase in divorce rates, violence and 
dysfunctional families in Mauritius, many parents are shirking from their responsibilities to 
look after, cherish and educate their children. As a result, the emotional and psychological 
needs of these children are not being met. Thus, the number of children at risk and removed 
from their parents and placed in Residential Care Institutions or Foster Care has increased. 

M. le président, être à la tête du ministère de l’égalité du genre, du développement de 
l’enfant  et  du  bien-être  de  la  famille  est  un  honneur  mais  surtout  une  très  grande 
responsabilité  que  j’assume  avec  beaucoup  d’humilité  et  un  sens  de  devoir.    C’est  un  des 

 

66 

ministères par excellence qui s’occupe de l’être humain, de la société.  Un ministère qui est 
une vitrine du gouvernement puisqu’il s’agit, M. le président, des enfants, des femmes, de 
l’égalité entre hommes et femmes de la famille.  Pas de gouvernement sans le peuple.  Pas de 
peuple sans les familles. Pas de famille sans les membres qui la composent: femme, homme, 
enfant.   

M.  le  président,  on  reconnaît  le  progrès,  le  développement,  le  modernisme, 
l’humanisme d’un gouvernement dans sa façon de traiter et sa capacité de s’occuper des plus 
faibles et des plus vulnérables de la société.  Ce gouvernement, le  « gouvernement lepep » 
dans ce budget démontre sa volonté, sa détermination de mettre au centre l’être humain et 
surtout ceux qui en ont le plus besoin. Les enfants, M. le président, la situation des enfants à 
Maurice  nous  interpelle,  m’interpelle.    Il  ne  se  passe  pas  une  semaine  sans  que  nous 
entendions, nous lisions dans les journaux un cas d’abus et de maltraitance sur les enfants. 
Aucun cas n’est banal.  Aucun cas ne peut être traité comme un fait divers. Il faut prendre le 
taureau par les cornes.  Je tiens à remercier l’honorable ministre des finances qui a su être à 
l’écoute.   Il a été attentif et sensible face à la souffrance et la détresse  de nos enfants; les 
petits mauriciens innocents victimes d’adultes irresponsables. 

In 2014, there has been  an increase in the reporting of cases of children victims of 
violence to the Child Development Unit (CDU). Some 5,900 such cases, including cases of 
abuse and neglect were reported to the six CDU outstations across the island, out of which 
445 were cases of sexual abuse.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I welcome the increase in the number of technical staff of the 
CDU by over 50 %, this, I would say, is a long-awaited measure, not to say one which was 
long overdue.  In the year 2000, a Consultant, namely Dr. Terrence Murphy, even proposed 
that 40 Child Welfare Officers carry out child protection services for our children in distress.  
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  good  to  know  that  the  normal  case  load  of  a  FWPO 
(Family Welfare Protection Officer) of the CDU should have been at most six cases per day 
and  this  excludes  doing  field  visits  in  respect  of  court  appearances,  home  visits,  attending 
hospitals  and  emergency  support.  The  case  load  of  CDU  is  from  2010  to  February  2015, 
some 15,000 live cases are being handled by only 15 FWPOs, so much that the ratio of staff 
per  case  is  1:1000.  As  regards  psychologists,  the  normal  case  load  should  have  been  five 
cases per day excluding field visits.  Psychological interventions comprise clinical interview, 
assessment, evaluation, forensic evaluation and counselling for both minors and their parents 
and siblings where available.  As it is right now, the psychologist is being forced to attend to, 

 

67 

at least, 12 cases per day catering for both new and old cases, leave apart the need to move 
where emergency cases arise.  

It is to be noted that, in his report, in year 2000, Dr. Terrence Murphy who undertook 
a study in this particular area of child protection, did state the need to have some 40 officers 
to undertake child protection interventions at outstations level. 

At  present,  there  are  557  children  placed  under  court  orders  in  21  shelters  out  of 
which five shelters fall  under the purview of my  Ministry.  I have taken cognizance of the 
Audit Report on the management of Shelters.  

All States have the duty to investigate and to intervene in cases where a child has been 
harmed, or where there is a reasonable belief that a child is being harmed. The problems of 
abused and neglected children often throw up issues where psychologists are called upon to 
address. 

Psychologists, as an important part of the team of professionals who intervene with 
child protection, are indeed positioned to contribute significantly to decision-making in child 
protection matters. These professionals from the CDU are often required to provide the courts 
with evaluations which are relevant to child protection issues and child custody.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  worth  noting  the  fact  that  both  the  psychological 
evaluation report and the psychologist testimony as expert witness in these cases have a great 
impact upon court decisions as far as a child’s security and welfare are concerned. 

Psychological  intervention  is  also  requested  by  the  DPP  in  investigation  issues 
pertaining to children.  Such interventions require CDU psychologists to attend cases at court 
as  expert  witnesses.    These  professionals  have  to  be  physically  present  in  court  till 
deliberation of cases and their termination.  At present, we have only six psychologists posted 
at  the  CDU  to  cater  for  six  outstations,  21  residential  institutions,  foster  care  department, 
child-mentoring programme and cases referred by family court and the DPP.  These officers 
are also on call during weekends and after normal working hours in order to attend to cases of 
emergency. 

Thus, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the availability of more psychologists to handle and 

provide timely professional support to children victims of violence is particularly welcome. 

The provision of funds for the recruitment of some 14 FWPOs for the CDU shall no 
doubt relieve the pressure endured by existing skeleton staff and improve the response time 
and quality of intervention in the best interest of children. 

M.  le  président,  beaucoup  d’allégations  de  mauvaise  gérance,  de  maltraitance, 
d’exploitation sont faites à l’encontre des shelters. Ici-même dans cette Chambre, beaucoup 

 

68 

de questions parlementaires ont été posées sur les shelters. Ces accusations sont persistantes, 
et je dois avouer que je ne suis pas satisfaite de la façon dont les choses se passent dans ces 
places of safety. Je suis convaincue que seulement un Fact-Finding Committtee peut jeter la 
lumière sur les allégations qui sont faites. Un Fact-Finding Committtee peut nous éclairer si 
vraiment, pour mieux contrôler les enfants, on les dope avec du Valium; si pour les punir on 
leur  rase  la  tête;  si  lorsqu’on  ne  peut  plus  les  contrôler  on  les  envoie  à  l’hôpital  Brown 
Sequard ou au RYC. 

Oui, M. le président, on ne peut pas prendre ces allégations à la légère ; on ne peut pas 
faire la sourde oreille. C’est notre devoir d’agir, de protéger ces enfants innocents qui nous 
sont  confiés,  c’est  notre  devoir  de  faire  de  ces  places  of  safety  des  havres  de  paix,  une 
passerelle  de  bonheur,  de  joie,  et  un  lieu  sûr.  Pour  certains,  c’est  le  seul  endroit  qu’ils 
connaissent, où ils vivent toute leur enfance. M. le président, je suis allé visiter ces shelters, 
et je peux vous dire que le regard, le sourire ou l’absence de sourire de ces enfants restent 
dans  votre  mémoire  à  jamais.  M.  le  président,  motivée  d’un  sens  de  devoir  et  de 
responsabilité envers ces enfants, j’ai demandé qu’un Fact-Finding Committee soit institué. 

My Ministry, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, also has, within its mandate, over and above 
the  responsibility  to  ensure  the  protection  and  the  promotion  of  child’s  rights,  the  holistic 
development of young children in the cohort of three months to three years. 

It is a fact that most of the information learnt by human beings occurs between birth 
and the age of three. Although adults play a huge part in early childhood development, the 
most  important  way  children  develop  is  interaction  with  other  children.    Children  develop 
close relationships with the children they spend a lot of time with. 

As  such,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  investing  in  Child  Day  Care  Centre  catering  for 
cohort three months to three years is investing in the future, most probably leading to savings 
in the health, education and social sectors. 

M.  le  président,  nous  savons  tous  que  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances,  l’honorable 
Xavier-Luc  Duval,  avait  à  cœur  le  projet  de  crèches,  et  à  quel  point  il  a  donné  tout  son 
soutien  à  la  mise  sur  pied  des  crèches  de  qualité,  avec  un  environnement  propice  au 
développement et à l’éveil des enfants. 

I am, therefore, pleased, and I welcome the financial assistance scheme for upgrading 
the level of services provided by crèches, especially in deprived areas in this current Budget.  
Actually, there are 358 Child Day Care Centres, out of which only 88 are duly registered. 

This will make for consistent professional development of child carers as well as the 

development of safe child-friendly environment. 

 

69 

Furthermore, an Inspectorate for the proper monitoring and supervision of Child Day 
Care Centres operating island-wide is essential if we want to maximise on security and full 
development  of  children  under  their  care.  The  provision  for  Enforcement  Officers  for  this 
particular purpose to my Ministry is highly acclaimed and we are thankful for that. 

This  measure  will  perhaps  also  contribute  to  more  women  taking  up  employment 

outside their homes. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Mauritius presented its 3rd, 4th and 5th Combined Periodic 
Report on the Convention on the Rights of the Child at the 68th session of the UN Committee 
on the Rights of the Child in January 2015 in Geneva.  My Ministry in collaboration with 
various  stakeholders  shall  endeavour  to  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  CRC 
Committee of Experts. 

The Committee has strongly recommended the urgent adoption of a Children’s Act to 

consolidate the legislation covering all aspects of children’s rights. 

The  Children’s  Bill  is  expected  to  incorporate  the  spirit  of  the  Convention  on  the 
Rights of the Child (CRC) and include all the main principles and obligations under the CRC.  
The Bill is in its finalisation stage. 

Finally, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that an Inter-ministerial 
Committee is being set up to work on a comprehensive Policy and Strategic Plan on children.  
This  Committee  will  also  serve  as  a  body  to  ensure  thorough  implementation  of  the 
recommendation of the Concluding Observation of the UN Committee of the CRC.  Such a 
mechanism  shall  ensure  early  identification  of  duplication  of  intervention  at  the  level  of 
various stakeholders, gaps in the chain of protection and welfare services, as well as missing 
links in the support system available for children.  Such an exercise by  hon. colleagues in 
other  ministries  and  myself  shall,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  allow  for  greater  efficiency  and 
effectiveness as well as good governance in service delivery in general. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  domestic  violence  remains  a  serious  social  problem  affecting 
mostly women.  For the year 2014, 1,680 new cases of domestic violence have been reported 
to my ministry. 

To  combat  the  social  problem,  my  Ministry  is  implementing  several  projects  and 
programmes  involving  the  community  because  we  strongly  believe  that  a  common 
understanding  of  the  causes  of  domestic  violence  can  help  communities  develop  more 
effective responses to the violence. Being given that this Government has acknowledged that 
domestic  violence  is  a  national  problem,  a  National  Coalition  against  Domestic  Violence 
Committee has been set up under the Prime Minister’s Office.  I sincerely believe that this 

 

70 

will create a synergy among stakeholders to strive to put an end to this fléau. In addition, my 
Ministry  is  reinforcing  the  protection  from  domestic  violence  framework  with  a  view  to 
further assist survivors of domestic violence. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the need for balancing work and family life is essential. In 
this respect, my Ministry is coming up with a balancing work and family life programme to 
enable policymakers to identify practical measures and develop guidelines for the creation of 
a family friendly work environment.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  are  some  key  measures  in  the  Budget  which  will 
positively impact upon women empowerment and gender equality. For instance, the issue of 
unemployment has, in the last few years, been more blatant amongst the female population. 
Statistics  for  2013  revealed  that,  out  of  17,600  unemployed  persons  in  the  16-24  age-
brackets, 9,600 were women compared to only 8,000 men. 

It, therefore, goes without saying that the decision of the Minister of Finance to invest 
massively in employment creation will be able to bring significant relief to the unemployed. 
Similarly,  we  need  to  applaud  other  measures  which  are  directly  linked  to  employment, 
namely  the  up-skilling  of  young  unemployed  graduates.  It  was  high  time  that  the  issue  of 
mismatch of qualifications and labour market be effectively dealt with. 

Allow me, at this point in time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to inform the House that at 
the level of my Ministry, we are also reorienting our training policies to meet the changing 
employment related needs of young girls and women. For too long, courses being offered in 
Women  Centres  have  remained  stereotypical  and  my  predecessors  have  not  been  able  to 
prepare unemployed women for the labour market. Today, academic qualifications only do 
not suffice to access jobs. Job seekers have to be smart, assertive and confident. With this in 
mind, I have decided to introduce, during the course of the year, soft skills training for young 
girls and women, such as leadership, self-assertiveness, and communication skills, amongst 
others.  

When we refer to unemployment, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we cannot afford to ignore 
the  gender  implications  of  unemployment  and  it  is  important  to  highlight  as  we  invest  in 
training  and  job  creation  that  we  should  encourage  young  women  to  maximise  on  all  the 
opportunities wherever possible. 

Twenty years back, Ms Gertrude Mongella, the UN Assistant Secretary-General and 

Secretary at the World Women Beijing Conference in 1995 stated that, and I quote –  

 
“Poverty has a woman’s face”.  

 

71 

Unfortunately,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  statement  still  holds  good  today. 
However, as we look forward to the forthcoming Women’s Summit in September 2015, we 
shall  be  able  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  feminisation  of  poverty  from  the  Marshall’s  Plan 
perspective. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  shall  shortly  be  setting  up  Social  Action 
Committees at the level of its 15 Women Centres wherein, the private sector and NGOs will 
be sensitised on women’s empowerment and gender equality issues. These Committees will 
offer  strategic  platforms  to  stakeholders  to  identify  factors  which  undermine  women’s  full 
empowerment.  The  issue  of  feminisation  of  poverty  will,  undoubtedly,  be  one  area  of 
intervention  for  these  Social  Action  Committees.    This,  in  turn,  will  ultimately  enable 
stakeholders to formulate poverty alleviation projects for funding by the private sector. 

Innovative measures in the Budget which are associated with the environment are to 
be equally acknowledged. I wish, in particular, to refer to the banning of the use of plastic 
bags.  Doing  away  with  plastic  bags  not  only  contributes  to  the  safeguarding  of  our 
environment, but it will also open up new avenues for our women entrepreneurs to engage in 
green projects. Women can now engage in bag  production using diverse materials such as 
jute  and  cloth.  We  should  be  able  to  support  women  entrepreneurs  to  “go  green”  by  also 
using recycled paper for bag production, marketing and sales.  

The setting up of the SME Bank will boost the spirit of entrepreneurship among the 
Mauritian  population,  particularly  women  and  youth.  Potential  and  existing  women 
entrepreneurs  will  benefit  from  the  facilities  and  support  of  the  new  SME  Bank,  and  the 
“One-Stop Shop” which will be managed by SMEDA. 

Allow  me,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  express  my  appreciation  to  the  Minister  of 
Finance for the very laudable initiative in his Budget Speech regarding the water sector.  He 
rightly pointed out that water is a human right. The decision to allocate six cubic metres of 
water per family free of charge and an ‘envelope’ of Rs3.5 billion to the Water Sector for 
enhanced distribution networks of water has, indeed, been well received by the population at 
large.  By  virtue  of  their  gender  roles,  women  are  definitely  the  ones  who  will  be  most 
relieved.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the family is a universal institution of society but never has 
the existence of the family unit in Mauritius been threatened as it is now.  Major challenges 
faced  by  the  family  today  are  the  result  of  the  rapid  social  and  economic  development  in 
society and the world of labour, for example - 

• 

ageing of our population and the ensuing need for more elderly care; 

 

72 

• 
• 

increasing participation of women in the world of work, and 
shift  from  extended  to  nuclear  families,  resulting  in  the  need  for  ancillary 
support for childcare.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on-going global economic and social changes are exerting a 
lot  of  stress  on  family  life.  The  budgetary  measure  announced  by  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  on  ‘nation  zougadère’,  will  bring  great  relief  to 
vulnerable  families,  and  reduce  the  urge  for  breadwinners  not  to  spend  their  hard-earned 
recklessly.  This  tendency  has  been  impacting  negatively  on  family  units  and  is  one  of  the 
factors contributing to domestic violence and family breakdown.  

The  different  measures  announced  have,  no  doubt,  taken  into  consideration  the 
different perspectives and facets of the external environment; physical, socio-economic and 
welfare systems so as to provide support to the family. I am confident that all the measures 
announced in the 2015-2016 Budget will definitely pave the way for strengthening family ties 
and providing a better environment all-round for a prosperous population. The provision for 
protecting consumers regarding hire purchase is commendable.  The decrease of the interest 
rate from 19% to 12% will have a significant impact on the Household Budget.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  strengthening  the  unity  of  the  family  and  enhancing  the 
capacities of family members are crucial for the well-being of the nation. The Empowering 
Families Programme will provide support to families who may be at risk because of social, 
psychological and financial stress.  It will also aim at preventing further family breakdown 
and will provide families with opportunities to become positive role models. 

The  budgetary  measure  regarding  low  cost  housing  is  a  major  step  forward, 
particularly for vulnerable families, women victims of domestic violence and single mothers 
amongst others who will be able to benefit from basic facilities which will cater for children 
as well. 

The concept of “parrainage” deserves to be acclaimed due to its twin-track approach. 
Engaging the private sector to work towards poverty  alleviation enables it to contribute to 
social  inclusion.  On  the  other  hand,  communities  in  deprived  regions  will  become 
empowered and feel better in terms of jobs, infrastructure development and/or upgrading of 
the environment.  

The increase in the allocation of funds from Rs17 m. to Rs34 m. to support children 
and women in distress, will encourage NGOs to come forward with more projects to alleviate 
their hardship.  

 

73 

Furthermore, the decision to review the CSR system is welcomed. Companies would 
now be in a better position to allocate the 2% of CSR funds to a wider range of beneficiaries. 
A greater number of small NGOs and community-based organisations dealing with distressed 
women  and  children  may  take  advantage  of  the  funding  to  implement  their  projects  or 
embark upon new projects. 

As Minister responsible for the promotion of gender equality, child development and 
family welfare, I shall ensure that all measures are taken for the promotion of a more stable 
and cohesive society.  In line with our commitments to reinforce the well-being of women, 
children and families, policies and programmes will be reinforced and implemented through a 
multi-dimensional and multi-agency approach. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
has  indeed  been  sensitive  to  the  needs,  concerns  and  aspirations  of  the  nation.  He  has 
responded positively to the expectations of the population.  

The budgetary measures for period 2015-2016 have also articulated the philosophy of 
“sharing”  well,  thus  ensuring  that  all  segments  of  our  society  experience  the  “feel  good 
factor”. 

More  broadly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  and  to  paraphrase  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Nobel 

laureate in Economics, I quote -  

 

“Growing social inequalities are largely a result of policies – of what we do 
and  don’t  do.  Every  aspect  of  our  economic,  legal,  and  social  frameworks 
helps  shape  our  inequality  [or  equality  for  that  matter]:  from  our  education 
system and how we finance it, to our health system, tax laws, and regulations 
governing bankruptcy, corporate governance, the functioning of our financial 
system...”  
 
In virtually every domain, the last Government took decisions which have helped to 
enrich people at the top at the expense of the rest of the population. I am now confident that, 
with  the  strong  measures  contained  in  this  Budget,  Mauritius  is  set  on  a  path  leading  to 
growth,  investment  and  sharing,  and  with  everybody  on-board  the  country  will  achieve  a 
second economic miracle in the years to come. 

Je  tiens  aussi  à  remercier,  M.  le  président,  le  ministre  des  finances  d’avoir  fait 
provision dans les dotations budgétaires pour un bâtiment abritant tous les départements du 
ministère. Je pense que c’est important que les officiers du ministère travaillent dans un cadre 

 

74 

agréable,  accueillant  et  propre.  Comme  expliqué  plus  tôt,  ces  officiers  travaillent  souvent 
dans  des  conditions  difficiles  et  avec  des  personnes  difficiles.  M.  le  président,  avec  ce 
gouvernement, avec ce budget, le ton est donné. Au niveau de mon ministère, nous l’avons 
bel  et  bien  compris.  Il  y  a  beaucoup  à  faire  et  nous  sommes  prêts  à  relever  le  défi.  Si  en 
décembre dernier, on disait « virer mam », aujourd’hui nous disons « travaille mam. » 

M. le président, le PMSD, mon parti auquel je suis fière et honorée de  m’associer, 
célèbre  cette  année  ses  60  ans  d’existence.  Six  longues  décennies  au  service  de  la  nation 
mauricienne.  Depuis  sa  création,  M.  le  président,  le  PMSD  n’a  jamais  été  dévié  de  ces 
principes idéologiques et encore moins de ces philosophies politiques. Nous avons toujours 
été  constants  et  nous  en  serons  ainsi  dans  nos  démarches  citoyennes.  À  savoir  œuvrer 
résolument vers une société mauricienne plus unie, plus égale et plus prospère. Notre arme 
politique qui transgresse tous les clivages communaux est fondamentalement conçue rien que 
pour  servir,  servir,  et  servir,  dans  l’unité  tout  en  privilégiant  les  grandes  valeurs 
démocratiques. Le peuple ne se souviendra pas du PMSD comme étant des démagogues, des 
assoiffés du pouvoir qui ont tergiversé pour finalement mener tout un électorat au gouffre. M. 
le  président,  le  peuple  retiendra  du  PMSD  comme  un  des  vecteurs  du  développement 
économique comme un véritable garant de la démocratie, de l’unité nationale, de la stabilité 
et de la justice sociale. 

M. le président, pour nous, la vérité, la loyauté et la confiance sont des éléments clés 
dans toutes nos relations politiques envers nos partenaires dans le gouvernement du jour et du 
passé.  Le  Leader,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  nous  a  inculqué  ces  valeurs  qui  sont 
d’ailleurs  à  la  base  de  la  réussite  de  tout  gouvernement.  M.  le  président,  la  vérité  finit 
toujours par triompher. Rappelez-vous de tout ce qui a été dit sur le PMSD dans un passé pas 
trop lointain que nous sommes un ti-parti, des béquilles, nou pas vaut plus que 2%. Comme 
on dit en créole « crache en l’air tombe lors nené. » Aujourd’hui, ensemble avec le MSM et 
le Mouvement Libérateur, le PMSD fait partie de ce gouvernement, plébiscité par le peuple. 
Si l’Alliance Lepep est élu pour gouverner, l’opposition elle a le devoir d’être des chiens de 
garde pour, par exemple, veiller à ce que les mesures budgétaires soient mises en pratique. 

M. le président, pour que ces mesures budgétaires se traduisent dans la réalité, pour 
que le peuple en sorte gagnant, il doit pouvoir compter sur ses parlementaires de deux côtés 
de la chambre. Il nous faut être tous des patriotes et des politiciens responsables. Comme l’a 
si bien dit le grand argentier, « nous sommes à la croisée des chemins et un grand défi nous 
attend ». Faire partie de l’opposition ne veut pas dire s’y opposer systématiquement, mettre 
des  bâtons  dans  les  roues,  attaquer  rien  que  pour  le  plaisir  de  critiquer  ou  de  nuire. 

 

75 

Heureusement,  nous  avons  devant  nous  une  opposition  intéressante,  disparate,  désunie, 
tâtonnante, mais intéressante. Parce que certains dans l’opposition reconnaissent qu’ils n’ont 
pas  pris  les  bonnes  décisions,  qu’ils  n’ont  pas  fait  le  bon  choix  politique,  qui  n’ont  pas 
toujours  choisi    le  peuple  avant  tout  et  ils  ont  fait  leur  mea  culpa.  D’autres,  des  jeunes 
politiciens  refusent  d’être  des  yes  men,  d’être  la  voix  de  leur  maître  et  prennent  une  voie 
différente, se démarquent, s’affirment et s’affranchissent. 
Monsieur le président, ne dit-on pas avec raison:  

 
«On reconnaît la grandeur d’un homme dans sa capacité de reconnaître 
ses erreurs».  
 

Malheureusement certes il y a ceux qui sont toujours à la vieille école et qui font leur show. 

Monsieur le président, à chaque fois qu’un membre de l’Opposition sera tenté de nous 
dire au MSM ou au PMSD que nous étions en alliance avec le Parti Travailliste et que nous 
sommes aussi responsables ; il faudrait vite, immédiatement lui rafraîchir la mémoire et lui 
rappeler  que  nous,  nous  avons  eu  la  sagesse,  l’intelligence  mais  surtout  le  courage  de 
démissionner, de quitter le pouvoir … 

(Interruptions) 

parce que nous avons des valeurs, nous avons à cœur l’intérêt du peuple alors qu’eux, ils ont 
accourus  dans  les  bras  du  Parti  Travailliste  et  ont  tout  fait  pour  concrétiser  une  alliance 
jusqu’à  y laisser des plumes. Monsieur le président, de quels droits nous critiquent-ils? Ils 
n’ont aucun droit moral de le faire. Le 10 décembre dernier les mauriciens, comme un seul 
peuple  uni,  ont  voté  massivement  l’Alliance  Lepep.  La  nation  mauricienne,  dans  son 
ensemble,  a  rejeté  une  politique  qui  prône  l’arrogance,  le  noubanisme,  l’hypocrisie,  la 
malhonnêteté intellectuelle, l’accaparement des biens de l’État parmi tant d’autres.  

Monsieur le président, il est clair que le peuple mauricien a porté son choix sur une 
alliance qui travaille dans l’intérêt du peuple, une alliance composée d’hommes et de femmes 
qui se mettent au service du peuple, des patriotes. Nous, l’Alliance Lepep, nous avons une 
grande  responsabilité  parce  que  l’île  Maurice  a  placé  sa  confiance  en  nous.  L’île  Maurice 
nous a choisi nous et c’est à nous d’honorer cette confiance.  

Monsieur  le  président,  il  faut  reconnaître  les  mérites  des  mesures  budgétaires 
préconisées par le ministre des Finances. Ce budget démontre cette volonté inébranlable du 
gouvernement Lepep de conduire son peuple vers un avenir plus prometteur et plus sécurisant 
bien  que  les  séquelles  des  crises  financières  internationales  sont  toujours  palpables  sur  les 

 

76 

grandes  puissances  économiques  mondiales.  La  panoplie  de  mesures  y  contenant  est 
courageuse, audacieuse et avant-gardiste. Il va sans dire que ce Budget a été concocté par un 
gouvernement responsable. 

Merci à tous pour votre attention. 
 

(5.51 p.m.) 

Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, there was a time in this country where our economy grew at a rapid pace. That 
was a time when we had a relatively well-developed human capital, we had full employment 
and we had, what I will call, a sufficient, and an adequate increase of wealth that was good 
for  the  country.  This  was  possible  because  it  was  an  era  when  Mauritius  had  achieved 
considerable success in the exporting manufactured products. It had at that time built up a 
significant base of export related skills and there were, at that time, reliable institutions far 
ahead of the neighbouring African countries. 

It  had  moved  from  a  heavy  dependence  on  foreign  firms  in  the  EPZ  sector  to  a 
position where the majority of exports now come from domestically owned companies. Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, over time as wages have risen, exporters have managed to substantially 
upgrade  the  quality  of  their  products,  some  have  built  up  their  own  design  and  marketing 
capabilities. These were impressive achievements of those times. At that time, I remember in 
Mahebourg where I grew up and lived, there was a well-known textile factory, it was called 
‘l’usine  Grove’  and  that  factory,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  was  employing  thousands  of 
workers from and around Mahebourg. At that time, my father owned a shop and, at that time, 
the people, in that village, had the money to buy provisions for the whole month. At that time 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  villagers  were  saving  each  and  every  single  cent  that  they  were 
investing in the future of their children. That was the time when Mauritius was shining and 
we, the young generation today, have to be proud for the hard work; we have to be proud for 
all the sacrifices that have been done by our parents. Then came the time when, unfortunately 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we missed the boat. Our export-oriented economy was unfortunately 
too heavily dependent on a range of export products that were relatively narrow. 80% of our 
manufactured exports came from one product group which was textile. When, at that time, 
Singapore and later on Malaysia took advantage of the semi-conductor assembly boom which 
drove  the  growth  of  the  economy  and  led  to  a  variety  of  related  electronic  and  electrical 
exports;  we,  in  Mauritius,  remained  stagnant  knowing  full  well  that  the  Multi-Fibre 
Agreement and the EU market preferences were set to disappear which happened eventually. 

 

77 

Some  survivors  in  the  textile  industry  have  courageously  taken  bold  decisions  and  have 
geared  the  industry  and  their  people  towards  high  quality  products  and  they  are  now 
performing well. That textile factory in Mahebourg, however, has closed down. The villagers, 
who once had the means to purchase goods for the whole month, now cannot even afford to 
buy  basic  commodities  for  the  day.  People,  instead  of  saving,  are  trying  their  luck  at  the 
bookmakers in the hope that lady luck will strike and will make them happy for the weekend. 
Instead  of  generating  a  culture  of  hardworking  and  productivity,  the  inhabitants  have 
inadvertently been submerged in that culture of zougadère. It is a pity when we look at the 
youth, when we look at the young from my Constituency. They are struggling night and day 
to  find  a  decent  job  and  it  is  also  alarming  to  see  the  number  of  drug  addicts  in  my 
Constituency.  This  is  why  I  welcome  some  of  the  measures  proposed  in  this  Budget  to 
promote greater equity and social justice, for example, the Marshall Plan against poverty, the 
building of the low-cost housings, the reduction on the payment of interest on hire purchase 
and  more  importantly,  the  measures  proposed  for  reversing  this  culture  of  ‘Nation 
Zougadère’ which is haunting our society.  

On the issue of promotion of investment and creation of employment, once again, I do 
welcome the proposals for the creation of the 13 mega projects as well as the measures taken 
for boosting up the SME sector. Those measures, certainly, are relevant to face the challenges 
that our society would be facing in the near future, but are we doing enough to set the scene 
for the second economic miracle? That is my question. We should, in my humble opinion, be 
careful not to limit the concept of smart cities to yet another real estate development like the 
IRS and the RES just designed for the further enrichment of a few landholders. Nor should 
we limit this concept to the parcelling of agricultural land into villas designed for foreigners 
with the only benefit of increasing FDI for a short-term.  

The  smartness  in  the  project  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  activities  that  those  cities  are 
going to attract. The whole concept of building smart cities and technopoles is based on high 
technology and innovation. It is those smart activities that would generate wealth and create 
employment and we have to ensure that it provides larger social and economic benefit to the 
population in general.  

For the population at large to reap the benefit of those smart cities, we have to help 
our SMEs, to equip them with the required technology and knowledge for them to participate 
and reap the benefits of these projects. We also need, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to work on the 
skills requirement for jobs that would eventually be created and, therefore, provide for the 
adequate education and training of the jobseekers. So, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we need to 

 

78 

know, at the end of the day, what definition do we attach to this concept of a Smart City, 
because if we limit it to a mere project of real estate development then we are moving in the 
wrong  direction.  Instead  of  creating  a  miracle  économique,  we  will  be  creating  a  mirage 
économique.  

Île Maurice, nation d’entrepreneurs; this ambitious goal of this Government making 
the SME sector the backbone of our economy is to be welcomed. Entrepreneurship is le fil 
conducteur which has brought economic success elsewhere around the world and although I 
have to say that successive Governments have always been protective to the SME sectors, 
this Budget, however - when I read it - provides for a one-stop shop approach rather than a 
piecemeal and fragmented approach. Fiscal incentives are also being proposed to alleviate the 
financial  burden  of  the  SMEs,  but  we  have  to  ensure  that  these  financial  incentives  will 
benefit  the  SMEs  and  that  the  SMEs  would  use  those  financial  incentives  in  a  judicious 
manner. 

The real problem, however, with the SME sector, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is that it is 
not so much about financing than it is about making the SMEs more productive and finding 
the proper market for them to exhaust their products. This is the real problem. We have to 
categorise  those  SMEs  into  two  categories  and  this  would  depend  on  the  nature  of  their 
activities. There are those SMEs operating on the domestic market and there are those SMEs 
that are export-oriented.  

The problem that is being faced by those trading in the domestic market is that there 
is, what we call, no level playing field between the local products and those that are imported. 
The  elimination  of  tariffs  and  the  lack  of  control  on  the  quality  of  imported  goods  have 
created  a  situation  where,  unfortunately,  our  SMEs  are  struggling  against  the  increase  of 
dumping  practices  from  countries  like  China.  I  read  an  interview  by  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives where he rightly said:  

 
“C’est écœurant qu’il y ait, par exemple, des tubes de terres de sept couleurs 
fabriqués en Chine, qui sont vendus ici dans nos marché.”  
 

Alternatively, we might even see dodos being fabricated in China and available in the local 
market here.  

I, therefore, welcome the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development who 
has also taken a wise decision to set up an Interministerial Committee to look into the issue of 

 

79 

tariff  protection  and  dumping  practices,  and  I  do  hope  sincerely  that  we  do  come  with 
adequate measures as soon as possible to protect those SMEs who are trading locally.  

For those SMEs that are export-oriented - in fact, I have to say it frankly that I was 
surprised  to  hear  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade, during his intervention, when he said that under the AGOA, the African 
Growth and Opportunity Act, there exists about 7,000 products that can be exported, but 90% 
of our exportations are only in clothing. This has to be imparted to the SMEs and we have 
also to revisit, in my humble opinion, the role of the SMEDA, get the right personnel and 
give  the  right  finance  to  make  this  institution  more  aggressive.  There  is  the  Enterprise 
Mauritius which is also a very important institution which, in my humble view, can play a 
pivotal role for the SMEs to explore new international markets. That institution as well has to 
be  empowered  with  the  right  personnel  and  sufficient  finance  so  that  it  may  carry  out  an 
aggressive campaign for the SMEs on the international market. Productivity and innovation, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is yet another important factor that should be encouraged.  SMEs 
should  be  equipped  with  the  latest  technology  and  software  to  remain  competitive.  They 
should also be encouraged to invest in research and development.  

Last, I will come to training and human resource development.  When we look at the 
youth, no one can honestly tell what he or she will be doing one decade or two after leaving 
school.  We must each develop through life, adapting to changes in the job market and the 
new opportunities that will come up.  Whichever field we are in or the job that we do, we 
must,  as  Mauritians,  aim  to  gain  expertise  and  achieve  mastery.  Singapore,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, when they came out of the financial crisis in 2009-2010; they aimed at raising 
productivity,  quality  jobs  and  higher  incomes.  The  way  they  achieved  those  goals  was 
through deepening skills and expertise and innovating to create more value.  The Government 
there had skills and development as the backbone of their economy.  They have progressively 
built up a first-class system of continuing education and training, not only for the young, but 
also for the adults. In this year’s Budget 2015, the Singaporeans are talking now about ‘skills 
future’  which  is  a  new  phase  of  development  in  their  people.  They  are  adapting  their 
education system to reflect the changes in the global economy in order to gain expertise and 
achieve mastery.  

In Mauritius the problem is not so much about reskilling employed workers because 
we do have the Levy Grant System which is managed by the HRDC and is financed, not by 
Government, but by the private sector which is dealing with reskilling of employed workers. 
Although  I  should  say  here  that  there  are  a  few,  very  few  who  abuse  the  system  to  make 

 

80 

money without giving proper training to their workers and there is a need there to empower 
the  relevant  institutions  like  the  HRDC  or  the  MQA  to  constantly  monitor  the  training 
courses. The problem, however, is more for those young job seekers who lack training and 
skills and this is where there is need to be a proper mechanism or a platform between the 
relevant institutions in the education sector and industries so that there is constant reviewing 
of  the  curriculum  which  should  reflect  the  demand  of  the  industry.  It  is  this  interaction 
between  the  education  sector  and  the  industries  that  will  eventually  solve  the  problem  of 
mismatch. Otherwise, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I do welcome the measures that have been 
taken regarding the financial incentives given to the 3,000 gradués chômeurs as well as the 
use  of  the  three  campuses  in  related  technical  fields  that  would  reflect  the  demand  of  the 
industry. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  plea  I  am  making,  therefore,  to  the  hon.  Minister 
Finance, to this Government, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is that we have to ensure that 
these projects that have been proposed in the budget are adequately driven.  We have to make 
sure  that  these  projects  are  eventually  implemented  in  the  proper  way  so  that  the  whole 
society and the whole population reap the benefits of those projects. This is a plea. I have 
heard the hon. Minister Finance in an announcement to the press saying that he has put under 
his  Ministry,  committees  that  would  monitor,  that  would  overview  the  implementation  of 
these projects.   

Now,  I  would  have  very  happily  ended  my  speech  all  fair  and  square,  but  for  the 
remarks made on the last occasion by the First Member for Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, 
hon. Hurreeram, when he made a remark about my bilan at the HRDC.  I am not going to 
stoop so low so as to use the precious time of this august Assembly to make unfounded or 
baseless  allegations  against  any  Member  of  this  august  Assembly.  I  am  going  to  refer  the 
hon. Member to my achievement as Chairman at the HRDC for three years and these projects 
- I am going to table them - I have to point out, were proposed and implemented with zero 
budget from Government.   

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  No cross-talking, please! 
Mr Ramful: I am thankful and I do wish good luck to the present Government and I 

hope that the projects would be implemented and Mauritius will come out happy.  

Thank you. 
 
 

 

(6.15 p.m.)  

81 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Abbas Mamode! 
Mr S. Abbas Mamode (Fourth Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis 
East):  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for giving me way.  All have already been said 
by my hon. colleagues; so do not worry hon. Chief Whip, I will not be that long.   

This  National  Assembly  has  witnessed  the  seriousness  and  will  to  work  of  this 
Government.  This budget supports working families.  It is on the side of aspiration.  This 
budget is to bring a resilient economy.  This budget rewards works.  If you are a maker, a 
doer or a hard worker, you will see this budget is for you.  We choose the future. We choose 
economic security.  We choose creation of jobs. We choose responsibility.  We choose, in 
fact, the whole nation, le peuple. 

L’exercice du budget n’est pas un simple exercice de mathématique gros zéro manze 
ti zéro.  Il y a toute une philosophie derrière, le pays d’abord réziltat lor réziltat.  Certains au 
sein de l’opposition ne semblent rien comprendre.  Je dis bien certains parce que l’honorable 
Ramful, même s’il a été critique, il a été positif dans bien des cas. 

(Interruptions) 

Ce budget donne la chance au pays de se redresser et de voir l’avenir avec sérénité et non 
comme  certains  dans  l’opposition  qui  regardent  toujours  dans  le  rétroviseur,  une  approche 
rétro en  contraste avec le gouvernement qui pense au modernisme.  Un  budget préparé en 
accord  avec  le  peuple  qui  a  soif  de  justice  sociale,  de  la  méritocracie  et  de  la  bonne 
gouvernance. Donc, le grand argentier a tout fait pour satisfaire l’aspiration de ce peuple qui 
a su prendre la bonne décision un 10 décembre 2014. La philosphie de ce budget nous permet 
un  choix  réfléchi :  la  sauvegarde  de  l’emploi,  la  création  de  l’emploi,  le  combat  contre  la 
pauvreté, le combat contre la fraude et la corruption. 

Sous  le  leadership  du  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  et  de  l’honorable 
Xavier-Luc  Duval,  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  de  l’honorable  Showkutally  Soodhun  et 
l’honorable Ivan Collendavelloo, vice-Premiers ministres, le pays est assuré d’une croissance 
économique  soutenue  et  durable.  Le  peuple  sentira  venir  avec  nous  le  deuxième  miracle 
économique,  et  les  générations  futures  diront :  “This  is  a  caring  Government”.  Quand 
l’honorable Ramful a pris comme exemple une usine dans sa localité, je suis sûr et certain 
que c’était l’honorable Sir Anerood Jugnauth qui était Premier ministre. 

Surely this Budget gives ample opportunities to the population who has been greatly 
in need of further economic outlet to have a better standard of living.  The water sector is the 
backbone  of  a  healthy  and  wealthy  society,  and  that  is  why  the  Government  is  investing 

 

82 

massively in this sector.  24-hour water to every family is achievable with proper monitoring 
supervision,  and  active  participation  of  the  public  is  of  paramount  importance  in  terms  of 
informing  about  leakage,  wastage.    And  for  that,  it  will  necessary  to  set  up  area  advisory 
groups to provide information so that immediate action can be taken. 

L’opposition  amoindrie  repose  ses  arguments  sur  la  perception  alors  que  nous,  au 
gouvernement, mettons l’emphase sur la réalisation. Pas de bla-bla-bla, bien plus d’actions, 
quand le peuple veut voir et non entrendre ! Ce  peuple est vraiment admirable, car il a su 
faire le bon choix lors des dernières élections. Maintenant il nous incombe de ne pas le trahir, 
car pour la trahison on a un prix à payer. 

L’île  Maurice  a  besoin  de  build  up  ses  compétences,  et  il  nous  faut  revoir  notre 
système éducatif. Et avec un budget de R 14 milliards, on peut aspirer à avoir une éducation 
de qualité supérieure et moderne, afin de pouvoir faire face aux défis qui guettent le monde 
en mutation permanente. 

Nos  jeunes  doivent  se  retrouver  dans  ce  concept  de  globalisation.  Un  gradué  par 
famille c’est bien, mais un gradué qui trouve de l’emploi c’est mieux ! Certainement pour ce 
budget a pris cela en considération. Le monde du travail connaît un profond changement. Il 
faudra apprendre, à savoir, à s’adapter aux nouvelles permutations mondiales. Pour cela, la 
formation  continue  est  une  condition  sine  qua  non.  Les  vraies  institutions  éducatives  sont 
appelées  à  revoir  leur  cursus  scolaire  afin  de  répondre  à  l’attente  de  la  population,  et  ce 
budget doit permettre l’émergence des institutions fiables et crédibles et non des universités 
bidons, et non de family business. 

Before ending, I would like to say a few words concerning the National Development 
Unit.  As everybody is aware, the NDU is under the responsibility of the Prime Minister’s 
Office.  Unfortunately, last year, during the electoral campaign, many works were carried out 
out of the budget of the National Development Unit, and today we are compelled to pay for 
these tasks. Bribe électoral!  Even with this, we know the result.  Nevertheless, we, at the 
National Development Unit, will do our utmost to satisfy our mandate. 

Deux mots, M. le président, concernant Agalega.  Concernant mon collègue, le député 
de  l’opposition,  l’honorable  Aadil  Ameer  Meea,  si  vous  parcourez  le  discours  du  budget, 
vous verrez que R 750 m. will be invested in the construction of a new airstrip and new jetty 
facilities. 

(Interruptions) 

C’est faux, M. le président, de dire que no contact was made.  In fact, during the first 
days, we did contact people from Agalega; working session already made - published in the 

 

83 

press - and with my colleague, the Minister, we already set up the Board, and Agaleans are on 
board. 

It is in our constituency, hon. Ameer Meea. 

(Interruptions) 

Pour conclure, M. le président, je demanderai à nous tous ici, députés de l’opposition 
ou au sein du gouvernement, de se serrer les coudes afin que le feel good factor du budget se 
traduise par le feel good realisation, et avec résultat lors résultat, pour un avenir meilleur. 
Coq  pou  santer,  soleil  pour  lever,  carré  carré  nou  pou  amene  sa  pays-là  vers  un  avenir 
meilleur. 

Merci. 
At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

 
(6.25 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Selvon! 
Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis): Madam Speaker, we, 
as the Government majority, are proposing a Budget that aims to create the conditions for the 
yearly national economic growth to exceed 5%, so as to trigger a new economic miracle, as 
happened during the mandates of Sir Anerood Jugnauth from the early 1980s. 

There  is  only  one  way  of  obtaining  such  a  result:  improving  radically  the  way  the 
country does business through its entrepreneurs; big, medium and small.  In two words, this is 
called business facilitation.  In paralell, the Budget reinforces two other policy objectives, the 
first  of  which  started  to  be  applied  from  the  first  week  we  came  to  power  after  being 
announced during our victorious electoral campaign. 

The first of those objectives was to get rid of poverty.  The second major objective 
was to introduce transparency in governance following a total absence of such transparency.  
To name just a few, such areas as allocation of contracts, and in appointments, nominations 
and promotions in the public and parastatal sectors from 2005 to the last day in power of the 
last Government. 

I wish now to complete the essential national objectives with a fourth one to propose 
the two items be symbolically introduced in the Budget to, amongst other things, demonstrate 
that  our  islands  of  the  Chagos  and  Tromelin  belong  to  Mauritius  as  per  international  law 
established by the United Nations just as they were included in the Constitution of Mauritius 
by Sir Anerood Jugnauth from the 1980s. This would be yet another bold statement of our 
legitimate and legal claim of sovereignty. 

 

84 

 Avant  de  continuer,  je  vais  répondre  à  certains  détracteurs,  visiblement  des 
antipatriotes sinon des esprits chagrins et des ignares, qui m’ont pris à partie parce que j’avais 
consacré mon discours résumant les débats sur le discours-programme à un item d’actualité et 
d’intérêt  national  de  ce  discours-programme,  soit  la  revendication  mauricienne  sur  les 
Chagos.  J’ai  d’ailleurs  eu  raison  de  soulever  la  question  de  Chagos  et  de  demander  au 
gouvernement de mobiliser toute la population car quelques jours après il y a eu le jugement 
du Tribunal international du droit de la mer qui nous donne beaucoup d’espoir aujourd’hui et 
aussi la décision de Sir Anerood Jugnauth, comme faisant écho à mon appel de constituer un 
comité interparlementaire, l’Opposition incluse.  

Je  déplore  également  la  mentalité  bon  marché,  pour  dire  le  moins,  de  certains 
commentateurs qui ont trouvé que les députés ne doivent pas poser de questions sur nos îles 
volées des Chagos et de Tromelin et de poser plutôt leurs questions sur leur circonscription. 
Faisant fi du fait qu’un député représente toute la population autant qu’il ou elle représente 
une  circonscription.  Il  fut  un  temps  jadis  où  pareille  ignorance  n’était  pas  étalée  dans  la 
presse  mauricienne  qui  était  d’un  autre  niveau.  Les  journalistes  savent-ils  que  certains 
officiels  venus  de  France  dans  les  années  70  manœuvraient  pour  détacher  Rodrigues  de 
Maurice pour rattacher cette île à la France ? Ou bien savent-ils que selon l’Encyclopaedia 
Britannica de 1910, et je cite –  

 
“Amsterdam  and  Saint  Paul  uninhabited  islands  in  the  South  Indian  Ocean, 
included in an official list of the dependencies of Mauritius, drawn up in 1880 
were in 1893 annexed by France.” 

 
Pouvons-nous  alors  accepter  que  nos  anciens  colonisateurs  continuent  à  nous  voler  des 
parties  de  notre  territoire  et  que  nous  suivons  le  conseil  de  certains  journalistes 
antipatriotiques et de politiciens à l’esprit tordu en nous taisant sur ces actes illégaux contre 
l’intérêt  national ?  Et  que  je  me  taise  comme  le  veulent  certains  journalistes  et 
politiciens, alors qu’il y a une importante population Chagossienne parmi mes mandants dans 
la circonscription numéro 1?  

Je  reviens  au  budget.  Il  faudrait  que  cessent  les  critiques  qui  affirment  que  nous, 
Mauriciens, serions incapables de réaliser les croissances de plus de 5 % dans un avenir pas 
trop  lointain.  D’abord  puisque  l’économie  repose  avant  tout  sur  un  élément  intangible  ou 
plutôt un sentiment, soit la confiance. Il ne faudrait pas, tant au gouvernement que dans les 

 

85 

partis de l’Opposition, parler et agir de manière à saper ce sentiment parmi les investisseurs. 
Il est bien connu que la parole suffit pour détruire la confiance. 

Heureusement,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  le  Budget  a  été  dans  l’ensemble  bien 
accueilli par l’opinion dans le milieu des affaires. Cependant je ne peux pas revenir, ici, sur 
toutes  les  nombreuses  mesures  budgétaires  parce  que  mon  discours  est  axé  plutôt  sur  les 
perspectives  d’un  miracle  économique  que  ce  Budget  offre  à  notre  pays.  Il  me  suffit  de 
rappeler  que,  dès  la  prise  du  pouvoir,  nous  avons  commencé  à  attaquer  la  pauvreté  en 
augmentant  les  pensions  pour  plus  de  240, 000  de  nos  citoyens.  Ce  qui  a  porté  le  budget 
social de la nation à R 27,5 milliards en tête de la liste des dépenses budgétaires.  

En  ce  qui  concerne  mon  propos  aujourd’hui  sur  l’effet  potentiel  du  budget  sur  la 
croissance économique par le biais de la confiance qu’il a créée parmi les investisseurs, je 
cite, ici, certaines des réactions.  

I quote now the Joint Economic Council which held a press conference on Monday 
night of 23 March after the Budget 2015-2016 Speech. Director Mr Raj Makoon said, among 
other things, –  

 
“This is a courageous Budget that promotes private investment. It is through 
these private investments that the country will achieve a rate of 5.3% growth 
in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and thus create jobs for young people in 
particular.  The  incentives  to  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs)  are  a 
good thing, but they also need technical support. It is important to achieve a 
growth of 5.3%. There is an incentive for private sector investment. There are 
efforts on the water supply as well as the marine and digital connectivity.” 
 

De  son  côté  M.  Jocelyn  Kwok,  le  Chief  Executive  de  l’AHRIM,  Association  des 
Etablissements  Hôteliers  et  Restaurateurs  de  l’île  Maurice  a  déclaré  au  quotidien  ‘Le 
Mauricien’ du 24 mars, et je cite –  

 
« Un budget pro-investissement et pro-emploi. 
 L’AHRIM accueille de manière positive ce budget très pro-investissement et 
pro-emploi.  Il  a  le  mérite  d’être  clair  dans  ses  intentions  de  dynamiser  les 
opérateurs  économique  et  de  construire  la  croissance  positive  avec  les 
ingrédients  classiques  d’une  économie  axée  sur  la  relance.  Il  y  a  aussi  un 
recentrage  très  fort  sur  nos  ressources  principales  que  sont  notre  capital 

 

86 

humain et nos compétences, autant dans l’île Rodrigues ou  ailleurs. Pour le 
secteur  du  tourisme,  nous  constatons  une  intention  renouvelée  d’ouvrir 
davantage  notre  ciel  à  d’autres  lignes  aériennes  et,  surtout,  la  mise  à 
disposition de moyens substantiellement plus élevés en faveur de la MTPA et 
de la promotion de la destination. » 
 

Par ailleurs, lors d’une récente réunion des secteurs - public et privé, présidée par M. Gaëtan 
Siew le budget a été favorablement accueilli selon la presse quotidienne en date du 07 avril.  
Il nous faut être honnête lorsqu’on parle du système de développement. De tout temps 
en  cours  de  son  histoire,  l’économie  mauricienne  a  reposé  sur  des  formes  relevant  du 
capitalisme  dont  le  mercantilisme  depuis  les  Hollandais,  puis  le  développement  du 
capitalisme agro-industriel. Aujourd’hui, nous vivons à l’ère du libéralisme une autre forme 
de capitalisme mais Maurice reste un de ces pays tels certains pays nordiques, où il y a une 
dose extraordinaire de socialisme. Ce qui nous permet de combattre les excès de ce mode de 
développement.  Cela  a  été  reconnu  par  le  prix  Nobel  de  l’économie,  l’Américain  Joseph 
Stiglitz,  dans  un  article  publié  dans  ‘The  Guardian’  en  Grande-Bretagne  et  d’autres 
publications  internationales  prestigieuses,  un  article  intitulé  ‘The  Mauritius  economic 
miracle, or how to make a big success of a small economy.’ Stiglitz a même invité les États-
Unis à apprendre certaines choses du modèle mauricien, ce qui fait que les critères actuels 
contre le budget et qui, volontairement ou involontairement, tendent à détruire la confiance 
des investisseurs dans le potentiel d’un nouveau miracle économique sont tout à fait déplacés. 
Le  présent  budget,  rédigé  dans  un  langage  plus  clair  et  plus  simple  qu’auparavant,  a  été 
interprété à tort comme un budget manquant de sens, de direction alors qu’il est en rupture 
avec  le  passé  récent  et  rejoint  les  budgets  Jugnauth/Lutchmeenaraidoo  du  miracle 
économique des années 80 dans sa philosophie, ses objectifs et la facilitation extraordinaire 
du  business  en  donnant  un  formidable  coup  de  fouet  aux  affaires  et  à  l’entreprenariat  au 
niveau  des  grands,  petits  et  moyens  entrepreneurs.  En  fait,  les  nombreux  projets 
gouvernementaux comme ceux concernant le logement, le business en général, les cybercités, 
les smart cities et autres ont le potentiel de ne mener vers une croissance supérieure à 5 %, 
pourvu que l’on ait le niveau de confiance nécessaire au niveau des investisseurs. 

Madame la présidente, je voudrais, ici, faire appel non seulement à l’Opposition, aux 
syndicalistes  et  aux  mauriciens  en  général,  mais  aussi  à  tous  les  membres  de  l’Assemblée 
Nationale  de  tout  mettre  en  œuvre  pour  que  les  objectifs  de  ce  budget  soient  atteints  en 
s’abstenant  des  déclarations  qui  pourraient  saper  la  confiance  des  investisseurs  dans  la 

 

87 

capacité  de  notre  pays  à  sortir  de  l’ornière  où  nous  sont  placés  les  multiples  déficits 
accumulés de manière irresponsable, sous l’ancien gouvernement. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  profiter  de  l’occasion  également  pour  demander 
aussi  que  chacun  de  nous  fasse  l’effort  considérable,  nécessaire  pour  renfoncer  une  unité 
nationale  menacée  par  des  dérapages  qui  ne  pourraient  que  nuire  aux  chances  du  pays  de 
redresser  son  économie.  Ainsi  nous  devons  renforcer  la  lutte  contre  les  fléaux  du 
communalisme, du népotisme et de la corruption ainsi que celui représenté par des violations 
de l’Equal Opportunities Act. Il ne se passe pas de semaines que je ne reçois des complaintes 
du public sur ces sujets tant dans ma circonscription que dans d’autres régions du pays, des 
complaintes. 

Pour conclure, Madame  la présidente, je voudrais encore une fois attirer l’attention 
sur la situation dans ma circonscription Grande Rivière Nord-Ouest/Port Louis Ouest, No.1, 
je souhaite que ce budget ne tarde pas à financer et à mener à l’exécution rapide des projets 
contre la pauvreté que nous avons annoncés successivement durant la campagne électorale, 
dans  le  discours  programme  et  dans  le  discours  du  budget.  L’attente  est  grande  dans  la 
population face à ces promesses en particulier en ce qui concerne le Marshall Plan contre la 
pauvreté.  Je  suis  d’accord  avec  le  ministre  des  finances  lorsqu’il  parle  des  dangers  à 
l’instabilité du pays, que pose la très  grande misère qui existe dans le pays et qui n’a fait 
qu’augmenter  sous  l’ancien  régime.  Il  nous  faudrait  peut-être  créer  une  commission 
parlementaire spéciale ou un observatoire de la pauvreté pour faire du monitoring constant et 
rigoureusement scientifique de la misère à travers le pays. Cela aiderait sans aucun doute le 
ministère  de  l’Intégration  Sociale  et  toutes  les  parties  concernées  par  le  combat  contre  la 
pauvreté, y compris le secteur privé, dont le ministre des finances attend beaucoup en termes 
de Corporate Social Responsibility. 

Enfin, je tiens à remercier tous les membres de la Chambre pour l’attention portée à 

mon discours. 
Merci. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. François! 
 

(6.40 p.m.) 

Mr J. F. François (First Member for Rodrigues): Madam Speaker, I stand up today 
to respond to Budget Speech 2015/2016, with a deep sense of political, moral responsibility 
as an elected Member from Rodrigues. 

 

88 

This is just after the ordeal of banking and near fiscal collapse of crisis, which could 
have been a social disaster for the country, as the nation witnessed during holy Friday last. 
This is a time-bomb situation for many who are shaky about their dreams that might not come 
true. This unpredictable circumstance reveals that life is full of surprises, both positive and 
disastrous. 

Madam Speaker, being neither an economist nor an accountant, I am looking at the 
present situation as an ordinary people out there, asking how our banks are being capitalised, 
managed and supervised today. People want to know how economic and fiscal consolidation 
can harness local and international trust, credibility and confidence for both our private and 
public finances. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  the  Budget,  I  will  be  very  short  and  brief  as  it  is  an 
acceptable  and  a  very  good  budget  for  our  country,  which  is  bound  to  foster  economic 
prosperity for one and all along a safe journey. Before going further different questions need 
firstly to be asked –  

 What are the ultimate goals and benchmarks of Government?  

(i)  What are the general feelings of our nation today?  
(ii) 
(iii)  How mindful is our society for the future?  
(iv)  What is the real estate of our current financial sector status today?  
(v) 
(vi)  What are the critical issues and risks facing our economy based on   local and 

  Could one afford to let our Republic fail today?  

global forecasts and scenarios?  

These  are  the  very  basic  and  simple  questions  which  require  our  good  sense  of 
commitment in responding to what people want to see happening sustainably for the future of 
our country. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  can  only  be  materialised  through  fiscal,  monetary  discipline, 
good  governance  and  hard  work  for  the  prosperity  of  the  nation.  A  few  weeks  ago,  I  was 
watching on MBC/TV a programme on the life of Sir Anerood Jugnauth. In its last part, Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth’s  inspiration  and  dedication  to  the  nation  was  to  encourage  the  nation 
towards hard work, discipline and unity. This is the way forward.  

Madam Speaker, in the same line, this Budget reminds us that we are at the crossroad 
while  we  charter  the  right  path  towards  the  future  through  new  approaches  and  paradigm 
shift.  

 

89 

The hon. Minister of Finance has adopted responsibly an economic model that foster 
economic growth, create jobs, lowering unemployment, reducing poverty and, importantly, 
gathering momentum leading towards a higher standard of living for our people. 

This is the very first Budget of this Government along a long journey for an action 

plan for the nation by getting the basic rights.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  qualify  this  present  Budget  as  un  budget  d’orientation 
économique  et  sociale  vers  un  nouvel  cap  de  notre  société.    It  is  a  very  simple  economic 
model of socialisation for economic and social prosperity. Madam Speaker, allow me to go 
through a few selective sectors. 

 
Public Sector Reforms 
The  drive  towards  more  effectiveness,  the  revolutionary  towards  a  New  Public 
Management Culture, Policy and Governance must be given higher priority for public sector. 
The installation of a Civil Service College will surely substantiate this endeavour. However, 
what will be the modalities for civil servants of the Regional Assembly Establishment from 
Rodrigues?  How  will  they  benefit  from  this  College?  Madam  Speaker,  from  a  practical 
insight,  Government  must  simply  simplify  everyday  life  for  public  service  users, 
entrepreneurs and people at large. What are required today are simple rules, less bureaucracy 
and more active use of ICT, making digital technology more pervasive in the public service, 
for example, a new culture of email as an official document. 

When I listen to private radios in the morning, for example, in programmes like ‘Xplik 
Ou  Cas’,  my  first  reaction  is:  why  people  have  to  ring  radios  to  resolve  certain  problems 
which require the intervention of public officers. It is quite clear that there is a problem or a 
puzzle  missing  somewhere.  Shall  Government  create  a  new  entity?  What  I  call  a  Public 
Relation  Unit  (PRU)  centralised  under  the  aegis  of  PMO  as  it  is  the  case  for  NDU,  with 
hotlines to listen to daily public queries. It is clear that we, as politicians, also have a great 
responsibility  to  remain  connected  -  this  is  important  this  word    -  to  the  population  and 
resolve their problems. That is our main responsibility. 

 
Smart Cities 
With the adoption of the concept of Smart Cities, Madam Speaker, Government must 
reconcile our development plans. It is imperative that new National Development Plan will 
have to provide strategic guidance plans that are to be developed and integrated combining 
the  Public  Sector  Investment  Plan  (PSIP),  a  National  Investment  Strategy,  a  National 

 

90 

Physical and Local Area Plans as Mauritius - I say Rodrigues also - we have lagged behind, 
in terms, of planning strategies.  

I welcome the coming into force of a new planning policy guidelines and a review of  

a National Development Strategy both for Mauritius and Rodrigues. 

Madam  Speaker,  Smart  Cities,  we  have  to  foster  a  new  development  model  of 
urbanisation  of  our  rural  areas  while  providing  efficient  civic  infrastructure  and  associate 
services. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  vision  ‘de  faire  de  la  Republique  une  nation  entrepreneurs’ 
requires a further step and that is to make entrepreneurship studies mandatory in our schools 
curriculum as from early childhood up to university level. Let us follow successful models 
from countries like Canada, Québec.This is perfectly working there. 

Coming to environmental sustainability Madam Speaker, Mauritius will embrace the 
footsteps  of  Rodrigues  by  banning  the  use  of  plastic  bags  which  will  pioneer  sustainable 
development  and  develop  a  new  model  of  our  citizen  responsibility  towards  our  fragile 
society. 

Madam Speaker, a healthy nation requires that our consumers need to put quality food 
in their mouth.We are all well aware of the danger of commercial food such as, what I call, 
‘poule  synthetic’  légumes  remplis  des  produits  chimiques,  sans  aucun  goût  Madame  la 
présidente. Je soutiens cette nouvelle culture de produits bio de mon ami l’hon. Seeruttun et 
c’est  cela  l’avenir.  C’est  là  que  Rodrigues  peut  devenir  ce  grenier  avec  ses  produits  de 
qualité. Aussi là je fais une appel à la population de Rodrigues, elle doit être plus productive 
en  créant  cette    économie  agricole.  A  Rodrigues  l’honorable  Soodhun  encourage  la 
population à produire et consommer local, des produits bio c’est vrai! ‘Nou poule qui faire 
l’exercise’  -  parce  qu’ils  marchent  nos  poulets!  Les  légumes  plantés  en  utilisant  des 
compostes 100% bio. Peut-être je fais un appel aussi – il faut être plus sévère conçernant les 
lois et les réglements. On ne peut pas laisser la population continuer à manger ces poulets aux 
hormones  ou  les  légumes  remplis  de  produits  chimiques  car  le  taux  de  cancer  et  d’autres 
maladies nous interpellent tous. 

Madam  Speaker,  energy  policy,  the  hon.  Collendavelloo  is  right  by  promoting  the 
vision of a sustainable society through renewable electricity production  strategy and  I  will 
add  that  one  sector  of  our  economy  which  consumes  a  lot  of  energy  is  the  transportation 
sector both public and private. Our country must commit itself by taking an immense stride to 
achieve energy independence by combining unconventional renewable energy sources such 
as  wind,  solar  with  others  and,  in  that  case,  together  with  what  I  call  a  new  traffic 

 

91 

management strategy so that our country can cut down cost on fuel consumption both public 
and private. 

SMEs,  Madam  Speaker,  I  welcome  the  measures  for  a  one-stop  shop  for 
entrepreneurs  together  with  the  setting  up  of  a  new  SME  bank  and  this  is  interesting  the 
principle behind the announced Central Government guarantee undertaken for new SMEs. It 
entails  that  the  Central  Government  will  provide  a  surety  for  someone  else’s  payment 
commitment. 

This is fantastic. However, it incurs a financial risk for the Central Government but 
what else can one ask more about a caring and handholding Government. In Rodrigues, this 
bank,  Madam  Speaker,  will  clear  a  lot  of  obstacles  to  get  access  to  finance  for  potential 
entrepreneurs in the field of agriculture, fisheries, tourism and others. However, the issue of 
MCIB  (Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau)  for  those  entrepreneurs  who  have  not  been 
sucessful  in  the  past  remains  a  problem  and  my  question  is:  how  will  that  be  considered 
within the new SME bank? 

Madam Speaker, the tourism industry  goes beyond the tradional sand, sun and sea, 
rather necessary investments to be engaged we will have to consider the cultural aspects as 
well.  As  raised  by  hon.  Baboo,  cultural  tourism  is  a  new  pillar  of  our  tourism  industry. 
Rodrigues, in that sense, is a plus value to Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, housing and NEF – (National Empowerment Fund). I totally agree 
with  my  good  friend  hon.  Roopun  that  the  National  Empowerment  Fund  needs  to  be 
redressed. This applies to the local branch in Rodrigues as well. The delays in the distribution 
of schools and construction materials to beneficiaries is an actual point of concern. Madam 
Speaker, in addition I have to plead also for those people in Rodrigues living in what we call 
Vieux Cité complètement délabrée et invivable dans certains cas. That Government through 
NEF and the Regional Assembly has a matter of urgency and security to look into rebuilding 
new social housing units for those concerned inhabitants in Cité Patate, Cité Papayes, Cité 
Rivière Cocos, Terre Rouge and others. C’est invivable. 

Madam Speaker, let me come to Rodrigues. Je dis toujours ici – 
 
‘Rodrigues  mon  ile  bien-aimé,  que  j’aime  très  bien,  que  j’aime  tant, 
Rodrigues qui est debout et qui est en marche aujourd’hui vers son destin’. 
 

Within this Budget itself, one can observe the progress being made. Rodrigues is mentioned 
at a much earlier position in the Budget Speech for the first time of our budget history.  

 

92 

(Interruptions) 

This is well appreciated by the people of Rodrigues. I remember looking at the face of a hon. 
Member here when the hon. Minister of Finance said – 

 
“I now move to Rodrigues…” 
 

This psychological reaction was –  

“Is that all for the national budget measures!” as we are moving to Rodrigues. 

This is a meaningful change; a great signal, reconnaissance to Rodrigues and it’s a huge step 
forward. This is encouraging for Rodrigues as the hon. Minister of Finance, with the blessing 
of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, has inspired us that the courage and vision of our founding father 
has always dreamed of a prosperous Rodrigues as this is being materialised actually. 

I  remember  the  heartfelt  words  of  a  great  Rodriguan  patriot,  my  neighbour,  late 
Antoine Perrine who teached me the fundamental philosophy of our local politics and he said, 
I quote – 
 
 ‘Rodrigues can go far and do things differently but what is required is enough 
support  from  Central  Government  and  the  will  of  our  people  to  understand 
and adhere to the political vision of OPR party in organising the people and 
Rodrigues itself”. 
 
Madam Speaker, today, we are witnessing the good will of Government be it central 
or  local  in  providing  Rodrigues  with  the  means  for  making  things  happened  and  become 
reality.  The  guaranteed  purchase  of  local  production  of  planters  from  Rodrigues  by  the 
Agricultural  Marketing  Board  as  announced  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  an 
encouragement to boost our high production strategy. Our agricultural sector with the budget 
provision will graduate from subsistence agriculture to employment and job opportunities for 
a new entrepreneurship culture with added value change. Rodrigues has to think big, produce 
more with value processing and  avoiding disadvantages of small-scale production. Madam 
Speaker, I also call our fellows in diverse sectors of our economy in Mauritius to extend their 
support to Rodrigues in the process of a new paradigm shift. 

Yesterday itself, I was quite surprised to have the accolade of two Rodriguans ladies, 
during lunch time who are on placement for capacity building with Mrs Jaqueline Dalais to 
improve their knowledge in catering services and for economic empowerment. This is great. 

 

93 

All  those  companies  like  Food  and  Allied,  and  others  who  have  understood  and  have 
voluntarily embarked in this endeavour I thank them on behalf of the people of Rodrigues for 
their support. Madam Speaker, this is the kind of corporation that Rodrigues requires beyond 
simply budgetary monetary value.  

I believe that Rodrigues will become an example to follow and will be a landmark 

reference to many fronts in the future.  

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  already  started 
materialising this vision, when he refers, in paragraph 118, of the Budget Speech, and I quote 
- 

 
“On  our  last  mission  to  Rodrigues,  I  was  impressed  by  the  decision  of  the 
Rodrigues Regional Assembly to ban plastic bags.” 
 

This is our vision for creating the concept - this is a new concept - of eco-entrepreneurship in 
Rodrigues by bridging the gap between environment and businesses while generating green 
jobs. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  vision  to  build  a  stronger  Rodrigues  by  addressing  major 
outstanding  infrastructural  needs  while  creating  more  jobs  and  pushing  our  youth  towards 
excellence, is our utmost priorities. 

Rodrigues  deviendra  aussi  un  chantier  de  développement  sans  précédent,  and  the 
physical  infrastructural  development  forms  part  of  the  growth  strategy  and  social 
development  of  Rodrigues,  mainly  roads,  ICT,  undersea  fibre-optic  cable,  port,  airport, 
construction  industry  and  the  water  sector.  Plaine  Corail  Airport,  through  the  connectivity 
vision  of  the  Regional  Assembly,  will  undergo  further  extension  for  the  economic 
development of Rodrigues for bigger planes and international flights. 

Madam Speaker, I have to point out here that negative and demagogical comments, as 
always from the degrading Opposition side in Rodrigues, shall be set aside or simply ignored, 
as rightly pointed out by hon. Leopold. 

Madam  Speaker,  you  will  recall  the  shameful  attitude  of  previous  local  politicians 
from Rodrigues who, during Budget negotiation with Central Government used ‘chantage’ as 
a negotiation tool instead of a more humane partnership approach … 

Hon. Soodhun is quite right! I will come to that later on when I will talk about NDU.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

94 

…instead  of  a  more  humane  partnership  approach  to  earmark  funds  for  Rodrigues 
development projects. This is not the case with the OPR Party today. 

Fortunately,  the  people  of  Rodrigues  do  not  want  our  autonomous  island  to  be 

committing political suicide with these kinds of irresponsible politicians. 

That  is  why,  during  the  elections  in  December  last,  there  was  an  unprecedented 
massive victory of OPR in Rodrigues and OPR will govern Rodrigues for many more years 
to come.  

Madam  Speaker,  Rodrigues  is  mentioned  in  the  National  Economic  and  Social 

Council Report as the least developed region of our Republic and that is absolutely correct. 

However, Madam Speaker, the Rodriguan population at large is very happy about the 
stand of the Central Government today to ensure that the development of Rodrigues keeps 
pace with that of Mauritius, as mentioned in paragraph 141 of the Budget Speech. 

Madam Speaker, being myself ‘enn politicien lor terrain’, I have seen and interacted 

with fishermen, planters, entrepreneurs and people from all walks of life around Rodrigues. 

The youth of Rodrigues also welcome the Budget in favour of Rodrigues, especially 
with  regards  to  ICT/BPO  activities,  Placement  Scheme  for  Rodriguan  graduates  and 
definitely  the  major  projects  such  as  airport  development  and  optical  fibres  that  concern 
them,  as  announced  in  the  speech.    There  is  a  feel-  good  factor  and  confidence  in  this 
endeavour to move Rodrigues forward. 

However,  Rodrigues  requires  additional  human  resources  in  various  fields  such  as 
social workers, where, I believe, more STM shall be recruited to help the Regional Assembly. 
The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is right also in saying that 
there is a  great scope in Rodrigues for rapid progress in diverse  economic sectors. This is 
what OPR party has always voiced out, but what were required are the means to achieve them 
and  we  are  having  the  means.  We  have  been  having  it  and  we  are  having  more  means, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, a last point, coming to climate change effects, Government, through 
the National Development Unit, is committed to implementing mitigating flooding measures. 
In Rodrigues, it concerns mainly our flooded ‘Raider or fords’, there are about 20 of 
them around the islands, which during heavy rains or cyclone, deprive villagers of access to 
these flood prone areas.  

It  is  worth  to  put  on  record  that  with  my  nomination  as  PPS,  for  the  first  time 
Rodrigues  will  benefit  from  NDU  funds  to  implement,  at  least,  four  drains  projects  in 
Rodrigues by April 2016… 

 

95 

(Interruptions) 

to  mitigate  flooding  risks  et  pour  soulager  la  population  de  Rodrigues.  In  addition,  a 
Rodrigues version of CAB office to extend community services will be set up shortly which 
will also be used as my office in Rodrigues.  

Madam Speaker, however, yesterday a political detractor in Rodrigues, during a press 
conference,  argued  that  he  is  against  the  installation  of  a  CAB  office  in  Rodrigues,  with 
necessary officers, as this will cause confusion to the autonomous status of Rodrigues. 

Madam  Speaker,  a  CAB  office,  tailored  to  the  Rodrigues  specificities  without 
infringing the autonomous status of Rodrigues, is most welcome. People of Rodrigues want 
to see development happening in their interest and they have nothing to do with demagogical 
comments. 

A  CAB  office,  with  the  presence  of  additional  human  resources  such  as  a  project 
manager,  engineer  and  other  persons,  will  be  a  plus  for  Rodrigues,  given  that  there  is  a 
considerable shortage of professionals in Rodrigues to implement and monitor civil works. 

As  a  result  thereof,  everyone  knows  how  much  delays  are  caused  to  some  projects 

execution. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  thankful  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  who  agreed  with  the 

forward-looking steps for the development of Rodrigues through NDU. 

Let  me  reassure  the  House  and  reiterate  that  Rodrigues  needs  honest  and  serious 
politicians,  not  those  who  have  very  poor  records  of  bad  governance  and  have  been  even 
found guilty by the Court of Justice, with a charge of three months’ imprisonment despite 
there is an appeal. 

Madam Speaker, National Development Unit will play a major role in implementing 

the various proposed land drainage works long awaited in Rodrigues. 

The  population  of  Rodrigues  is  happy  that  their  radier  or  low  cross  drains  will  be 

constructed shortly. And, that is what matters! 

If  you go and ask the people of the villages of Camp du Roi, Jardin Mamzelle, St. 
François and all around the island, they will tell you that OPR Party promised them to resolve 
their flooding problems and we will do it, Madam Speaker. 

I reiterate, Madam Speaker, that the NDU will, in any case or at any moment, under 
the guidance of the hon. Prime Minister and myself as PPS, interfering with the autonomous 
status of Rodrigues, being myself an autonomist and a great defender of that cause. 

 

96 

NDU will certainly give due consideration to the views of the Regional Assembly as 
is actually being done. The Regional Assembly is not an agent for NDU, but they will work 
as partners in implementing projects for Rodrigues. 

Under the blessing of the hon. Prime Minister, NDU in partnership with the Rodrigues 
Regional  Assembly  Executive  Council,  will  do  whatever  is  possible  to  implement  these 
projects. 

Madam Speaker, to conclude on Rodrigues, this Budget provides for Rs2.4 billion for 
RRA without including centrally and other ministries managed funds to the tune of another 
Rs1.5 billion for the next financial year. Thus the provision for Rodrigues is around Rs3.9 
billion and I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for that. 
(Interruptions) 
Madam Speaker: Do not interrupt him, please! 
Mr François:  Madam Speaker, a last word on nation zougadère before concluding. 
A mindful and peaceful society like ours requires for a conscious choice to be made by all of 
us.  Our society has to be free from social polluters like ‘carte la gratelle et jeux du hasard.’ 

One cannot be oblivious to the fact that there is a poor segment of our population who 
are  below  the  poverty  line  and  who  dream  to  become  millionaires  overnight  through  ‘la 
gratelle’ but not through hard work and empowerment. 

In  Rodrigues,  we  feel  that  ‘une  mentalité  ‘zougadère’  est  en  train  de  détruire 
certaines valeurs culturelles de la société Rodriguaise, dont nombreux O.N.G. et même mon 
parti politique l’OPR, nous avons toujours dit non à ces pollutions sociales.’ I conclude by 
saying  that  we  are  at  the  crossroad,  as  our  country  requires  more  investment,  more  job 
creation,  more  opportunities  for  our  people  and  more  growth.    Growth  is  the  imperative 
leitmotiv of our nation.  Madam Speaker, there is a good call for this budget, but I shall also 
join my predecessors to commend the Bill to the House and I thank you for your attention 
and your time. 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 
Mr Armance rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 
Debate adjourned accordingly. 
 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Thursday 09 April 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

97 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 
 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     
At 7.08 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 09 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m.  

 

