 

No. 43 of 2015 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

FIRST SESSION 

 

THURSDAY 03 DECEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 
 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 43 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 03 December 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CEB - TANK FARM PROJECT, GAS TURBINES & TARIFFS  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to 
–  

(a) 

(b) 

if the St. Louis 60 MW contract has been awarded;  

if it is going ahead with the –  

(i) Tank Farm Project at Bain des Dames, indicating - 

A.   whether a new location and EIA are being sought therefor, and  

B.  where  matters  stand  concerning 

the  National  Ramsar 

Committee;  

(ii) purchase of two Gas Turbines, indicating the –  

A. estimated cost thereof;  

B. price of electricity using diesel oil, and  

C. impact on the environment of diesel oil as compared to coal, and  

(c) 

when the tariffs thereof will be lowered. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:    Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I 
informed  the  House  in  my  reply  to  the  PNQ  of  01  April  2015  that  in  February  2014  the 
Central Electricity Board had initiated a procurement process for four diesel engines each of 
15 MW capacity. 

Five  prequalified  bidders  had  been  invited  to  submit  proposals.    Only  one  was 
received  and  the  Central  Procurement  Board  found  that  the  bid  was  substantially  non-
responsive and that it was not in a position to approve any award of the contract. 

Based  on  that  decision,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  cancelled  the  procurement 

process after consulting the African Development Bank which was the funding agency. 

There  was  a  challenge  at  the  Independent  Review  Panel  and  subsequently  in  the 

Supreme Court.  On 13 November 2015, the bidder withdrew his case. 

8 

 
In July 2015, the Central Electricity Board, on the advice of the African Development 
Bank, initiated a second procurement exercise with revised specifications for a total 60 MW 
with  10%  plus  or  minus.    The  new  bid  specifications  were  approved  by  the  African 
Development Bank. 

At the closing date on 01 October 2015, five bids had been received at the Central 
Procurement Board.  On 11 November 2015, the Central Procurement Board informed the 
Central  Electricity  Board  that  it  had  approved  the  award  of  the  contract  to  Burmeister  & 
Wain  Scandinavian  Contractor  A/S  (BWSC)  for  the  total  evaluated  contract  price  of 
EUR85,185,404+Rs823,922,094, excluding VAT.  The Central Procurement Board requested 
the Central Electricity Board to proceed with the notification of the award in accordance with 
the Public Procurement Act after having sought the concurrence of the Funding Agency, the 
African  Development  Bank,  and  to  revert  to  the  Central  Procurement  Board  after  the 
notification period or earlier. 

On  12  November  2015,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  informed  the  African 
Development Bank of the Central Procurement Board’s decision and has sent the Evaluation 
Report to the Bank. 

The reply from the Bank is expected by mid-December 2015.  It is expected that the 
award of the contract will be made early next year and the project would be completed by 
June/July 2017. 

As regards part (b), following the clearance from the National Ramsar Committee, the 
Central Electricity Board has repositioned the Tank Farm on the same site at Les Grandes 
Salines. 

The Contractor has been advised that he may proceed in the meantime with the design 

part of the Tank construction.  Physical works will start as soon as possible. 

In November, the Central Electricity Board informed the Ministry of Environment of 

the repositioning of the tanks on the same site. 

The Central Electricity Board has also appointed Hydro Geological Experts to address 
the requirement of the National Ramsar Committee and the experts are expected to carry out 
their assignment in the course of this month. 

As regards part (b) (ii) - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

9 

A  consultant  will  be  appointed  in  January  2016  to  proceed  with  the 
implementation  of  two  30  MW  gas  turbines  as  a  first  phase  for  the  final 
Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) configuration. 

The estimated cost of the two gas turbines is Rs1.6 billion. 

The  current  price  of  electricity  generation  using  diesel  fuel  at  Central 
Electricity  Board  Thermal  Station  ranges  from  Rs3.35/kWh  to  Rs3.98/kWh 
(These are the figures for June 2015). 

The  impact  on  environment  is  measured  in  tonnes  CO2/MWh  (tonnes  per 
Megawatt hour).  With coal it ranges from 1.29 to 1.63 t/MWh.  With diesel 
oil in Central Electricity Board stations it is currently 0.58 tonnes/MWh. 

I now come to part (c) of the question. I informed the House in my reply to the PNQ on 22 
September 2015 that an overall tariff decrease is not envisaged. 

I wish to reiterate that contrary to other organisations, the Central Electricity Board 
took the judicious decision not to resort to hedging at the time that heavy fuel oil and coal 
prices were increasing on the world market.  This enabled the Central Electricity Board to 
benefit  from  the  current  drop  in  the  prices  of  these  commodities.    The  CEB  has  to  invest 
heavily in new generation capacity in the coming years as advised by the World Bank and the 
African Development Bank. 

I  also  drew  the  attention  of  the  House  that  the  electricity  tariff  is  not  indexed  to 

inflation and foreign currencies for payment of loans.  This may erode the surplus. 

I  had  stated  that  I  would  look  into  a  lower  tariff  for  lower  income  groups.    I  am 
pleased to announce that on 27 November 2015, Government has endorsed the decision of 
the CEB to introduce a new Social Tariff 110A as from 01 January 2016. 

When the Social Tariff 110A was introduced in 2012, there were 30,629 customers 
whose electricity consumption did not exceed 75 kWh.  By September 2015, this number had 
reduced to 7,875. 

I asked the Central Electricity Board to review the scheme and it has come up with a 

new one which would benefit about 70,000 households. 

With  the  new  scheme,  households  with  an  average  monthly  consumption  of  up  to 

85kWh will benefit from a lower tariff, that is - 

10 

Rs2.18/kWh for the first 25 kWh instead of Rs3.16; 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

Rs3.04/kWh for the next 25 kWh instead of Rs4.38, and 

(iii)  Rs3.28/kWh instead of Rs4.74/kWh for the next 35 kWh. 

The  CEB  is  working  in  close  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security, 
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions and the National Empowerment Foundation for 
the implementation of the scheme. 

The households benefitting from the scheme will include - 

(i) 

(ii) 

households  receiving  social  allowance  from  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security, 
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, Social Register of Mauritius for 
Child allowance, irrespective of the criteria defined by CEB; 

households  identified  by  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  (NEF)  as 
registered by the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions, irrespective of the criteria set by CEB, and 

(iii) 

domestic consumers, of course, excluding those on the Social Register, who 
satisfy the criteria set by CEB. 

The CEB will work in consultation with the NEF and the Ministry of Social Security, 
National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  to  disseminate  the  scheme  to  the  potential 
beneficiaries and provide assistance through its Customer Desk to households who have to 
make an application. 

Mr  Bérenger:  For  today  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  confirmed  that  we  are 
going to BWSC, this Scandinavian firm, which had been the only firm to be qualified under 
the previous tender. Will he confirm that, in fact, BWSC was the most expensive offer under 
the latest tender and that, therefore, purchasing those machines from BWSC will cost Rs700 
m. additional compared to what we would have paid if we had not wasted time? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is quite correct. The first bid was non-responsive. I can’t 
say the figures offhand, but I am sure these figures must be more or less what they are. There 
was the first bid. There was a price X and the second bid was X plus Y. But do not forget that 
the first bid was non-responsive and that is why probably it was cheaper because they had not 
put up a programme according to specification.  

11 

 
I have the figures now. The bid price of the Scandinavian was Rs3.6 billion at that 
time  comprising  numerous  major  deviations.  This  is  why  the  Procurement  Board  had  not 
considered  to  be  responsive.  The  new  price  with  compliance  with  specifications  for  66 
megawatt capacity is Rs4.3 billion. I am advised that the difference in costs is attributed to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

change of technical specifications by the CEB; 

correction of deviation leading to rejection of first tender; 

(iii) 

higher rating of units by 10%, and 

(iv)  market conditions prevailing. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  the  figures  speak  for  themselves.  On  the  question, 
some time back, when we were discussing the Bain des Dames project, the CEB insisted that 
Bain des Dames project site was the right site for both the tank farm and the combined cycle 
plant to be set up in the future. When that met with the trouble that we know about, the Chief 
Executive of the CEB said: ‘On n’a pas d’alternative’, whereas the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
said: ‘Si jamais il y a l’espace nécessaire pour la centrale, nous la construirons sur le même 
terrain.  Si on ne peut le faire, ce ne sera pas la fin  du monde’.  Deux longueurs d’ondes! 
Can I know whether any alternative site is envisaged for both the tank farm and the combined 
cycle plant? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I must confess that we were taken aback by this allegation 
of wetland. I had myself gone to the site. I did not fall in any wetland and I could not see any 
wetland. But we have worked and this is probably why there were answers which were not 
quite in tune. I do not meet the General Manager of the CEB to work out replies beforehand. 
We  give  them  as  we  believe  them  to  be  true.  The  worst-case  scenario,  the  first  two  gas 
turbines  will  be  constructed  on  a  portion  of  land  which  is  leased  to  the  CEB,  which  is  in 
existence and which was destined for the coal transit associated with CT Power. The site is 
close to the existing Fort George station and is well located from the environment standpoint.  

Then, afterwards these turbines will be transferred to the new site for implementing 
that project. The Central Electricity Board has already written to the MPA for the release of 
six  hectares  plot  of  land  which  has  not  been  allocated  yet  in  replacement  of  Les  Grandes 
Salines,  if  this  is  warranted.  This  site  is  at  ex-Dockers  Flat,  Baie  du  Tombeau..  But  our 
preferred spot is still Les Grand Salines, if it can be worked out and if everybody reaches a 
consensus with CEB. 

 
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister himself, on the Ramsar issue, said, and I 

12 

quote from the Press – 

“CEB  has  accepted  all  the  Ramsar  conditions.”  set  up  by  the  so-called  Ramsar 
National Committee.  

Is that the case? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Perhaps I could explain in limine first of all. When we had this 
problem of the wetland and the matter was referred to the Ramsar Committee, we had two 
choices, either to stick to our guns and to state clearly that we do not believe that there were 
wetlands on the site or to comply with the conditions of Ramsar Committee. I advised the 
CEB that we were not going to waste time and energy fighting Ramsar Committee. On the 
contrary, let us work together with them. We are not sure whether everybody is clear in their 
minds that this is a site where there are wetlands, but this is precisely when we do not need to 
quarrel. Ramsar Committee, being unclear itself, asked CEB to appoint an expert. I believe he 
is called geological or something of the sort, hydrological, geological expert, condition 9, if 
my memory does not fail me. He has been appointed and we expect his report very soon. As 
soon as we get his report, we shall send it to the Ramsar Committee and then we shall see 
whether, in fact, there is wetland or there is no wetland. Visually, there is no wetland, but we 
are not experts on wetlands. 

Mr Bérenger: I thought the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities were, the way he talked to the Press! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, concerning the storage plant, I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, I 
think, say that they are going ahead, that CEB is going ahead, and he said on the same site.  
My point is that, in the EIA, it is spelt out that this new tank farm must be at the other end of 
the  terrain,  of  the  site,  that  is,  farthest  from  the  maisons,  from  the  inhabitants.  Is  that  the 
case?  Because otherwise we would need another EIA certificate. 

Mr Collendavelloo: It is not going to be near the houses or far from the houses or 
whatever. It is really a repositioning on the site. We need to look at the map, which I tabled at 
the National Assembly, in order to see that it is not a great repositioning.  But what is more 
important is what happens with the Ministry of Environment and the Municipal Council of 
Port  Louis.  Those  are  the  most  important  aspects.  Whatever  I  think  or  CEB  thinks  is 
irrelevant. So, what we have done is that the Municipal Council of Port Louis will examine it 

 

13 

and, with regard to environment, we have informed the Ministry of Environment of the new 
location. If I can put it broadly, in the beginning it was going to be to the north of the site, 
now it is going to be to the south of the site. 

Mr  Bérenger:  It  is  my  concern  because  to  me  the  most  important  thing  is  the 
inhabitants of that part of Port Louis. Can I quote the EIA, the present EIA obtained.  I quote 
paragraph 17 – 

“The tank shall be located at the northern extremity of the site, furthest away from the 
residential area”. 

So, if we are changing the site for the tank farms, we will need a new EIA. 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is why we have informed the Ministry of Environment. We 
have  not  sought  clearance,  we  have  not  applied  for  a  new  EIA.  We  have  informed  the 
Ministry of Environment to see whether the change in location is of a nature to affect the 
environment to such an extent as to require us to apply for an EIA licence. We shall stand 
advised.    From  the  information  that  I  have,  although  it  would  have  moved  nearer  to  the 
habitations, the distance is not too significant. 

Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that the CEB is going ahead with 
the purchase of two gas turbines. The CEB is appointing or has appointed, I am not sure, two 
consultants. One to look at the possibility of liquefied natural gas being used in the future, 
whether it is feasible, and the second one to look whether the combined cycle plan is feasible 
in Mauritius. My question is: are we going to issue the tender? Are we going to go for the 
purchase of these two gas turbines even before these two consultants have reported back? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the short answer is no! We are not going to do anything of 
the sort. Let me just dissociate the two: gas turbines, which will run on light diesel oil, and 
LNG. Those two are fuels for these machines. The LNG process is still in its infancy. We 
have a committee working with various Ministries.  We have progressed, and we hope to be 
able to put a position paper before the House very soon, probably when we resume in March, 
so that the House be kept fully informed as to what is the progress being made. The most 
important aspect of it is source of supply and mode of transportation, which are the two items 
which can be very costly. At the end of the day, we might decide not to go for LNG at all!  It 
is a question of cost.  So, our preliminary meetings are for this. But notwithstanding what 
happens on LNG, we are going to place these two combined cycle gas turbines, which will 
run - I have called it initially.  Initially might be for quite some time! - initially on diesel oil, 

 

14 

which will be on light fuel oil, that is, at Rs32 the litre compared to Rs22 the litre for heavy 
fuel oil. The advantage is that it is a new technique and that, as far as the experts tell me, the 
switch over to LNG is quite feasible and easy. 

Mr Bérenger: That is my worry.  It’s that we are going to use this light diesel oil for 
we  don’t  know,  in  fact,  how  long.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  he  is 
standing by those figures which the CEB is providing, how much it will cost as compared to 
other modes of production of electricity? The figures - I am prepared to take a bet - are very 
much on the very low side.  And we must compare like with like! CEB has provided figures 
of what they produce with machines that have been written off, that have been and so on and 
so on.  So, is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister going to stand by those figures - Rs3 something?  
Because my information is totally to the contrary, namely that producing through diesel oil is 
going to cost much more than that through new machines, new gas turbines. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, as usual, I always pay attention to remarks coming 
from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  of  other  hon.  Members  of  this  House.  This 
question has been raised before. I have consulted not only the CEB but also my own advisers 
who have indeed told... 

(Interruptions) 

No! My own adviser, as the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows, is Mr Robertson - to have 
an objective view of that.  Quite he has also expressed certain doubts, but without finalising 
these  doubts.  For  the  moment,  CEB  commits  itself  to  telling  me  that  the  final  cost  of 
generation expected from combined cycle gas turbines, CCGT operation on light diesel fuel, 
will be Rs5.63.  That is what I have. Of course, in these matters, prices are almost esoteric. 

But that is how it is. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can ask a question and then give the floor. We 
know that coal pollutes, but we know that we have progressed a lot to decrease the pollution 
that coal causes, and I read the Chief Executive of CEB - dismiss coal! We are going to use 
diesel for God knows how long.  Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that using diesel oil 
is  nearly  as  polluting  as  using  coal  under  state-of-the-art  technology?    If  I  can  quote  the 
Financial Times of 03 November 2015 – 

15 

 
 “According  to  the  International  Energy  Agency,  diesel  electricity  production  emits 
only slightly less carbon than burning coal”. 

Therefore, are we prepared to review the whole situation? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  am  sure  the  House  will  recall  how  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition scoffed me when I made my first statement in this House on electricity and I said 
there are ways of having clean coal and we must work on it. I went back to my books and I 
now know that clean coal - let us call it clean coal, it is never very clean - is possible, but it is 
terribly expensive. So, what do we do? We spend a lot of money in cleaning coal, getting the 
particles because, let us not forget, coal is not only CO2, it is also mercury and all sorts of 
things - I don’t know their names - which have got to be trapped and treated and all that, and 
that is expensive. Yes, clean coal is possible; but, are we in a position to pay the price or do 
we  pay  something  which  is  a  bit  more  polluant  but  which  will  meet  the  exigencies  of 
everything?  

Let me  come to the point of coal. When  I made my first statement, it  was in what 
context?  It  was  in  the  context  that  we  were  not  dismissing  coal,  but  since  the  time  I  took 
office and up to now, there are tremendous developments on the international front, including 
what is happening at COP21 which we will have to await to see what will be the funding 
which will be associated because there are subsidies which probably we will obtain from this 
World Green Fund and we will have to determine the issue as from these new facts. We must 
not  also  forget  that  associated  with  this  is  renewable  energy.  Right  now,  there  will  be 
probably  another  50  MW  of  solar  photovoltaic  which  will  come  on  the  network.  We  are 
almost for finalising a waste-to-energy project. We will continue with the Sotravic landfill 
gas at Mare Chicose. The aeolian, which was told for ages in the ancient Government, now is 
starting. I am going to visit the last installation very soon. Put together, it means we are not 
putting  all  our  eggs  in  our  basket,  but  I  repeat  one  thing,  all  that  I  am  saying,  I  have  not 
invented; I am not a magician. I have read it from the Manraj Report and from the Strategic 
Plan of 2009 which was more on electric, but the National Energy Commission Report, well, 
we may grumble, but it has been accepted unanimously in Mauritius. So, I have been going 
on the books which I have. They may be wrong, but I am not going to invent things myself. I 
am not an inventor. I am just a lawyer who happens to be a Minister. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 

16 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to welcome the 
lower  tariff  for  the  lower-income  group.  Pressure  was  from  several  quarters,  including  a 
specific question of mine in the PNQ of the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you for that. My 
question this morning pertains to the 60 MW St. Louis Power Plant. In his reply, the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  said  it  is  going  to  be  on  line,  on  the  grid  in  2017,  and  my  question 
specifically pertains to power security. What is the current peak being faced by the CEB these 
days  in  summer  when  people  are  using  their  air  conditioners,  fans  and  all,  because  in  my 
Constituency there has been very frequent power tripping off. And I would like to know from 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether these are being associated with load shedding from the 
CEB because it is not able to cope with the peak that he is going to provide to us?  

Mr Collendavelloo: No. There is no load shedding. I can assure the hon. Member of 
that, there is no load shedding. The current peak, I am going to wait for confirmation but for 
the meantime, let us say that it is 462 MW or 492 MW - I keep forgetting; I get it now. It is 
460 MW. Yesterday, it was 435 MW. There is no load shedding; I am getting confirmation 
now on the agenda.  If there are some tripping off, well, CEB has just informed me that the 
chauves-souris are now going haywire and they are disturbing all the electricity supply near 
Réduit. So, let us blame the chauves-souris, again. 

(Interruptions) 

So,  in  Réduit,  this  is  what  CEB  tells  me,  they  have  a  problem  with  the  shooting  of  those 
chauves-souris. 

 Madam Speaker:  Time is over, but there is one last question. 

Mr Bérenger: My last question, of course, will relate to the new CEB tariff which has 
been announced. We will have to study it carefully, but my last question, Madam Speaker, is 
to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. We know that prices of oil products and  coal have crashed 
on the world market. As a result, the prices of diesel and l’essence have been brought down 
but not enough, far from enough as per the crash on the world market. Now, we know that 
CEB works with both coal and oil products. So, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell the 
country  why  is  not,  as  in  the  case  of  diesel  and  l’essence,  a  general  decrease  in  the  CEB 
tariffs plus, as in the past, an extra effort for the people on the lowest rank economically? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  diesel  and  essence  (mogas),  they  have  got  their  own 
regulations for the fixing of prices. I am not going to make comparisons. Insofar as the CEB 
is concerned, I do not have a policy of just hiking down the tariffs, and then what happens? I 

 

17 

have put, with the Accountants of CEB, a financial plan where we will try and reimburse the 
debts  that  we  have  and  invest  in  machines.  I  know  I  have  the  support  of  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister on this because we need to use the money at bon escient. I don’t think that the ‘gro-
palto’  of  Mauritius  need  a  10%  decrease  on  their  electricity  tariffs.  I  don’t  think  that 
commercial or industrial undertakings need a 10% decrease - which is the figure.  

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry, but that is my policy. I am the Minister. This is what I have decided and 
the lowest classes have benefited from a 30% increase. I have said it publicly, hon. Ganoo 
and hon. Mahomed had this strategy in mind, I do not share the view of the hon. Leader of 
the  Opposition.  We  must  agree  to  disagree.  With  the  plan  which  we  have  put  up, 
reimbursement,  reinvestment,  by  2018,  this  Rs2.5  billion  profit  which  we  are  making,  not 
Rs5  million,  not  Rs4.7  billion  but  Rs2.5  billion  which  we  are  making  now,  will  all  be 
finished. What do we do? We re-increase the tariffs, again? No. We can’t do that, and I am 
not going to do this. The hon. Leader of the Opposition knows what sort of person I am and 
he is also the same sort of person as I am. 

MOTION  

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INTEGRITY REPORTING BILL 

(NO. XXX OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  Good 

Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Teeluckdharry! 

 

(12.12 p.m.) 

18 

Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  &  Triolet):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, yesterday, we, Members of this legislature, pursuant 
to our constituent powers, we voted the Constitution (Amendment) Bill. Today, pursuant to 
our legislative powers, we are called upon to pass a law, this legislation which is before us, as 
Members  of  this  legislature,  and  pursuant  to  our  duty  as  legislator.    This  duty  has  been 
enshrined in section 45 of the Constitution which provides that, subject to the Constitution, 
Parliament shall make laws for the peace, order and good government of Mauritius.  

This legislation that has been introduced by hon. Minister Bhadain,  I pause here to 

congratulate him, his officers and the officers of the State Law Office. 

This Bill has five main objects.  This Bill is one of the rare instances where law and 
public morality coincide.  Hon. Bhadain rightly said that by passing this piece of legislation, 
we intend to send a signal to the population that honesty and integrity remain the values of 
the day.  There have been many criticisms against this Bill. I have listened carefully to the 
interventions  of  hon.  Members,  some  are  seasoned  politicians  and  some  are  less  seasoned 
politicians.  The criticisms against this Bill, one of the harshest criticisms is that there was no 
need for such legislation. Unfortunately, my learned friend, hon. Ramful is not present.   

Second criticism: we are legislating in vain.  This legislation offends the Rule of Law.  
It  infringes  the  right  to  silence.    It  infringes  presumption  of  innocence.  It  amounts  to  the 
reversal of burden of proof.  We have other commentaries that its constitutionality will be 
successfully challenged before the Court. It will be used as a political tool to oppress political 
opponents.  The methods of appointment are highly questionable and this constitutes criminal 
proceedings  disguised  into  civil  proceedings  and  there  were  also  criticisms  that  we  need 
popular survey. 

Now, prior to coming to those criticisms, replying to those criticisms, let me point out 
that  this  legislation  which  was  brought  five  weeks  ago,  precisely  on  23  October,  hon. 
Bhadain  made  it  a  duty  to  have  popular  consultation;  consultation  with  professionals  in 
Ebène; consultation with the Bar Council; consultation with the members of the public. The 
Press, the population have had enough time to react to this Bill and this is a very laudable 
initiative.  We  would  remember  that  in  the  past,  important  legislations  were  passed  on  the 
same  day,  all  the  readings  on  the  same  day  with  a  Certificate  of  Urgency  and  legislations 

 

19 

which infringe fundamental rights besides being a major financial scandal, for example, ID 
card scheme. 

At that time, there was no hue and cry for popular consultation.  There was no hue and 
cry  for  a  referendum.    Why  is  there  today  hue  and  cry  for  referendum  for  popular 
consultation? Though this has been done!   It has been said that we are legislating in vain.  
The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  rightly  pointed  out  when  it  comes  to  fundamental  rights,  the 
Courts interpret fundamental rights generously and purposively to give effect not only to the 
letters of the Constitution, but also to the spirit of the Constitution. But suffice it to say that 
whilst  rights  are  interpreted  generously  and  purposively,  limitations  and  provisos  are 
interpreted  very  restrictively.  That  is  why  there  was  need  to  bring  the  constitutional 
amendment.  The  Constitution  contains  the  empowering  section  and  this  legislation  is  the 
enabling Act. Whether we are legislating in vain, I will leave it to the population, to members 
of the public and the Press. 

Hon.  Bhadain  pointed  out  and  it  is  the  concern  of  this  Government,  fraud  and 
corruption  has  become  a  national  scourge.  My  friend  Ramful  said:  “targeting  political 
opponents”.  Our foes are not political opponents.  Our foes are the ills of the society, fraud 
and  corruption  and  ill-gotten  gains.    As  legislators,  we  are  called  upon  to  legislate  for  the 
welfare of the nation.  There have been criticisms that this legislation infringes the Rule of 
Law, that this legislation can be used as a tool by the Executive. But suffice it to say that who 
will  decide  that  there  should  be  an  Unexplained  Wealth  Order?  It  is  not  the  agency.  The 
agency will enquire and will give opportunity to the owner of the property to come forward 
with explanations. Should the explanations not be satisfactory, there shall be another step.  It 
will go to the Board who will consider again whether there is need to apply to the Court.  As 
from then, if the matter goes to the Court, it is no longer in the hands of the Executive; it is in 
the hands of the Judiciary. In Mauritius, the framers of the Constitution made it a point and 
we do have an independent and impartial Judiciary. 

The  Judiciary  will  have  to  decide,  the  learned  Judge  in  Chambers,  on  the  basis  of 
affidavit evidence.  Should he need further clarifications, he can still send the matter to Open 
Court  where  witnesses  will  be  called.    The  Court  will  have  the  opportunity  to  assess 
testimonies of witnesses and then decide.  Should there be an order for unexplained wealth, 
the owner of the property in question can still appeal to the Court of Civil Appeal. He can 
appeal as last resort; an appeal as a matter of right to the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council.  So, ultimately, it is for the Judiciary to decide and it, in no way, offends separation 

 

20 

of powers because between the citizen and the State, the Judiciary will remain the ultimate 
arbiter.  

Coming  back  to  the  proposition  that  there  was  no  need  for  this  legislation,  we  are 
legislating in vain. Simple questions: how do we tackle the problem of persons, for instance; 
suspects, potential suspects, who have passed away, either at pre-trial or at trial stage? How 
do we tackle situations where suspects have fled or have absconded following the dissipation 
of  his  assets?  What  do  we  do?  What  do  prosecutors  or  prosecuting  authorities  do  when  a 
person has been granted immunity, that is, immunity from proceedings? What do we do in 
instances where there is insufficient evidence to mount a criminal prosecution successfully to 
reach  the  standard  of  beyond  reasonable  doubt?  What  do  we  do  in  instances  where  an 
investigation is obstructed or frustrated? What do we do in cases where a suspect is abroad, 
that  is,  requests  for  extradition  have  been  turned  down?    What  do  we  do  in  cases  where 
accused parties have been acquitted, not on the merits of the case, but on technicalities, for 
instance, on points of law for example where criminal indictments have been badly drafted? 

So, in all these situations, we do need a mechanism which in the absence of criminal 
proceedings where proceeds of criminal activities can be recovered. This is the aim of this 
legislation. 

There has been criticism that this legislation is a criminal legislation disguised in the 
nature  of  civil  proceedings.  My  friend,  hon.  François,  yesterday,  rightly  pointed  out  that 
section  3(5)  clearly  states  that  an  application  made  under  this  Act  shall  constitute  civil 
proceedings and the onus shall lie on the respondent to establish on a balance of probabilities 
that any property is not unexplained wealth. It is clear, black on white. But I must say that the 
criticism that it infringes presumption of innocence, it infringes right to silence, it amounts to 
the reversal of the burden of proof. These criticisms, these arguments, though attractive, have 
not  been  successfully  considered  by  the  European  Court  or  the  European  Commission  on 
Human Rights time and again. 

We should not forget that our Bill of Rights contained in the Constitution, the Bill of 
Rights has been interpreted by the Supreme Court as early as in the 1970s. These rights are 
inspired  from  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  when  it  comes  to 
interpretation, we do look for guidance from the decisions of the European Court of Human 
Rights. 

21 

 
We are talking today about property rights inspired from Article 1 of Protocol 1. We 
are  talking  about  presumption  of  innocence,  reversal  of  burden  of  proof,  right  to  silence. 
These are contained in section 10 of our Constitution and their equivalent would be Article 6 
of the European Convention on Human Rights. In a series of cases, these arguments that civil 
forfeiture constitutes criminal proceedings have been consistently rejected by the European 
Court of Human Rights. 

My  learned  friend,  hon.  Ramful,  has  drawn  the  attention  of  this  legislature  to  an 
article of Prof. Anthony Gray but he has failed to check the jurisprudence on civil forfeiture. 

Reference  has  also  been  made  to  the  comments  of  the  Bar  Council  on  this  issue. 
Madam  Speaker,  I  fail  to  follow  the  Bar  Council  in  its  reasoning.  The  European  Court  of 
Human Rights, there are numerous decisions on this issue whether a civil forfeiture amounts 
to criminal proceedings, whether one would be entitled to raise arguments like presumption 
of  innocence,  right  to  silence  and  reversal  of  burden  of  proof,  these  issues  have  been 
adequately dealt with. For instance, in the case of Walsh, this is a decision of the European 
Court of Human Rights dated 21 November 2006.  

I pause here to say that Article 6 of the European Constitution on Human Rights is the 

equivalent of our section 10 of the Constitution. 

The Court had this to say – 

“The essence of Article 6 in the criminal dimension is the charging of a person with a 
criminal offence for the purpose of securing a conviction with a view to exposing that 
person  to  criminal  sanction.  These  proceedings  are  obviously  and  significantly 
different from that type of application. They are not directed towards him in the sense 
that  they  seek  to  inflict  punishment  beyond  recovery  of  assets  that  do  not  lawfully 
belong to him. As such, while they will obviously have an impact on the appellant, 
these  are  predominantly  proceedings  in  rem.  They  are  designed  to  recover  the 
proceeds  of  crime,  rather  than  to  establish,  in  the  context  of  criminal  proceedings, 
guilt of specific offences. The cumulative effect of the application of the tests and the 
court  goes  on  to  cite  the  case  of  Engel  is  to  identify  that  these  are  clearly  civil 
proceedings.” 

I  won’t  burden  this  legislature  by  citing  other  decisions  of  the  European  Court  of  Human 
Rights, but suffice to say that there was decision of Phillips in 2001, there was decision of 
Arcuri  v  Italy,  there  was  the  decision  of  John  Butler,  interesting  decisions,  besides,  these 

 

22 

cases  clearly  illustrate  non-conviction  based  forfeiture  amounts  to  civil  forfeiture  and 
therefore civil proceedings. 

There is also a decision of the House of Lords R v. Ahmad in 2014. R v. Ahmad was 
a decision relating to post-conviction forfeiture and the Court in England, while stating that 
different provisions apply to civil recovery, independent of any criminal prosecution, though 
it  concerned  post-conviction  confiscation  orders,  the  Court  held  that  these  were  purely  of 
civil  nature.  The  Court  cited  a  decision  R  v.  Silcock  and  Levin,  Court  of  Appeal  and 
explained that the character of a confiscation hearing was more civil than criminal. Thus, the 
Judge  can  decide  issues  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  compel  the  defendant  to  disclose 
documents, draw adverse inferences from the absence of evidence and the Court even went 
further to say that it can rely on hearsay evidence. 

So,  this  is the  situation today.  Civil  forfeiture  constitutes  civil  proceedings  and  not 
criminal proceedings. It is very easy to find. We just have to go on the Internet, we Google 
‘civil forfeiture’ and we will come along a string of cases, be it of the House of Lords or the 
European Court of Human Rights. On this issue, I fail to understand why there is so much 
Government bashing and demagogy even by the Bar Council. I can’t understand! And I can’t 
follow the reasoning of the Bar Council. 

Coming  to  property  rights,  what  is  protected  under  the  Constitution?  We  have  two 
provisions.  The  provision  of  section  3  (c)  and  section  8,  that  is,  no  property  shall  be 
compulsorily acquired without compensation. There are the provisos for public order, public 
morality, public health and so on and so forth. And, now, we have the proviso that should it 
constitute unexplained wealth, then it won’t pass the test, it will come within the limitation. 
One does not have a right to property which constitutes unexplained wealth, property which 
has been purchased by illicit/illegal means, ‘un bien mal acquis’. Even if we look at the Civil 
Code prior to the Constitution of 1968, the Civil Code as far back as 1808 used to provide for 
property rights. Article 554 -  

«  La  propriété est  le droit  de  jouir et disposer des  choses  de  la  manière  la  plus 
absolue pourvu  qu’on  n’en  fasse  pas  un  usage  prohibé  par  les  lois  ou  les 
règlements. » 

That is, it is subject to law, it is subject to regulations. Furthermore, one has to exercise even 
his property rights -  

23 

 
“Chacun est tenu d’exercer ses droits et d’exécuter ses devoirs selon les exigences de 
la bonne foi. »   

Bonne foi meaning good faith.  Article 18 - 

« Nul  ne  peut  renoncer  à  l'exercice  de  ses  droits  civils  et  de  ses  libertés 
fondamentales dans une mesure contraire à l'ordre public et aux bonnes moeurs. » 

L’ordre public et bonnes moeurs meaning public morality. So that even the Civil Code has 
recognised that such a right is subject to bonnes moeurs et la loi. What we are saying today is 
that, it is contrary to public morality. My friend, hon. Ramful, stated that we need a survey to 
discover  to  what  extent  fraud  and  corruption  is  a  scourge.  To  what  extent  fraud  and 
corruption is a burning problem in our society.  

I must say, Madam Speaker, I most humbly beg to differ. Do we need a survey to see 
how  some  institutions,  public  officials  and  politicians,  over  the  past  years  have  been 
conducting business, the affairs of this country? We are not here to put them on trial, but I am 
here to say that this legislation is here to cure a mischief. It is here to attack the problem of 
fraud and corruption, the black economy and the social ill of using illicit and unlawful ways 
and means to get rich.  

In my life and, I am sure that other hon. Members would agree with me, we could 
have never known what is a Centurion credit card. Do we need a survey? On the occasion of 
the passing of the Asset Recovery Bill, pertinent references have been made by hon. Uteem 
and these debates that went on in this House in relation to the Asset Recovery Bill are very 
pertinent  even  for  this  legislation.  Hon.  Uteem  made  mention  that  we  should  attack  the 
problem of prête-nom. Hon. Baloomoody made reference that proceeds of crime are not like 
fruits  that  are  ripe  and  will  fall  on  the  ground.  There  should  be  the  proper  mechanism  to 
combat same. 

(Interruptions) 

The  former  Prime  Minister  on  the  occasion  of  debates  on  the  Asset  Recovery  Bill 

made mention that we should send a strong signal. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Can  we  have  some  order,  please!  I  don’t  know  whether  I  am 
becoming deaf or whether there is a problem with the microphone, but I have difficulty in 
following the arguments of the hon. Member. So, can we have less noise in the House? 

 
Mr Teeluckdharry: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

24 

(Interruptions) 

During the course of the debates on the Asset Recovery Bill, the former Prime Minister made 
mention of casting the net very wide going 10 years back, of reversal of the burden of proof 
and of sending a strong and clear signal to those who thrive on ill-gotten gains. But, I must 
point out, Madam Speaker, we are not here to pay lip service to the words that we utter and to 
our duty. We intend to suit the word to the action and the action to the word. I am being told 
that time is up, but I am going to conclude now.  This Government preaches what it does and 
it does what it preaches.   

(Interruptions) 

And I wish to conclude using the words of hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, the leader of my 
party the MSM, his intervention on debates concerning the Asset Recovery Bill, namely: 

“I stand to speak on this Bill as a man of conviction who also believes that we should, 
at  all  cost,  stage  a  war  against  all  those  who  are  engaged  in  illicit  activities  and 
constitute a danger to society.  It is unquestionable that in a society that prides itself of 
being fair and just, those who commit unlawful activities should be allowed to profit 
from their crimes. Instruments and proceeds of crimes should be forfeited and used to 
compensate victims whether it is the State or the individual.” 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(12.44 p.m.) 

Mr A. Duval (First Member for Curepipe & Midlands): As I said yesterday, the 
idea of punishing illicit enrichment is undeniably the way forward for our country. We are 
thankful to the Government for having taken the initiative. 

 Yesterday, we voted the amendment in our Constitution, which will allow now for 
the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill to pass. The idea of confiscating wealth is 
a derogation from the right to property. As I have explained yesterday, that was a necessary 
and justifiable amendment to make to our Constitution as there is evidently a fléau in our 
society, which needs to be addressed. 

Today,  we  are  voting  a  Bill  which  allows  an  Authority  to  pursue  action  seeking 
confiscation of a person’s property. When I read the Bill a few questions came in my mind, 
for example, in which circumstances would that Authority confiscate unexplained wealth and 

 

25 

which  wealth,  in  particular,  will  be  confiscated?  Are  we  strictly  talking  about  property  as 
immovable  property,  houses,  for  example,  or  property  in  general?  For  example,  shares, 
capital and other immovable properties. 

Then secondly there were the powers that will be conferred. What powers would be 
conferred on the Executive? What powers would be conferred on the Judiciary? And what 
powers  would  be  conferred  on  the  Board?  And  then  thirdly,  how  do  we  ensure  that  we 
adequately protect innocent citizens from abuses? This is to me the most important issue of 
all. But I must say that these are legitimate questions and I am happy in the way that these 
questions  are  being  answered  so  far  in  the  debate.  When  I  speak  of  innocent  citizens,  of 
course,  the  question  is  not  about  protecting  the  rights  of  the  drug  dealers  or  the  corrupt 
people,  or  the  fraudsters  or  the  criminals  at  large.  It  is  about  protecting  the  law  abiding 
citizens.  

The  issue  which  is  for myself  and  for  many  of  the  Members  here  whom  I  had  the 
chance to speak to about this Bill, from all parties, it is whether there was a scope, une marge 
de manœuvre for using that law for a wrongful purpose. I believe and I am happy now that 
this is not the case. As first, Madam Speaker, the draft has considerably changed - the draft 
law that was first read here has evolved since First Reading, many amendments were brought 
to clarify it. It appears to me that it has sufficiently evolved. But surely, Madam Speaker, it is 
history that will tell if it has sufficiently evolved or not. 

The Government has accepted to make other changes and we are thankful for that. I 
would like to take this opportunity to thank all the Government MPs, the Opposition MPs, the 
Bar Council and the others who have contributed to the debate and to the amendments. Now 
we all know what are the amendments that have been brought; the important ones. The first is 
to protect the right of silence, which I had, myself, taken up with hon. Bhadain. Today, we 
are no longer compelled to provide explanations and a failure to do so would not amount to a 
criminal offence, passible of up to one year of imprisonment. And this, Madam Speaker, is a 
major step forward in reaffirming our constitutional right of silence, where a person refuses 
to provide explanations, he will run the risk of being ordered a judgement default against his 
property. And rightly so, as we are talking about the civil procedure with civil remedies. 

Secondly, there was the issue of the nomination. Madam Speaker, I personally wanted 
to  make  sure  that  there  would  be  the  most  possible  independence  between  the  Board,  the 
Executive and the Agency. As it is not at all, I believe, the role of the Executive to confiscate 

 

26 

the property of a person. I strongly believe that the further away from politics that the Board 
and the Agency are, the better it is. I am happy with the current amendments, of course. They 
are not perfect, but I am happy. I will also like to have seen, for example, security of tenure, 
if we can give an example. That is, that the Chair and the Director of the Board be given a 
mandate  limited  by  a  term  of  service  to  guarantee  independence  and  that  the  process  of 
nomination  be  different  from  the  process  of  removal  from  office.  The  nomination  by  the 
President as amended now for both the Board and the Agency is an acceptable amendment. 
We have trust in the President, in the judgement of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the 
Opposition, to put the right person in the right place. This is an option that we had considered 
and proposed before and I am happy that it is now here. 

As rightly said before me, Madam Speaker, perception is sometimes more important 
than reality. So, giving the perception of independence is key when conferring such powers to 
an agency and again I am happy that this has been accepted and proposed to be amended. 

As  I  have  said,  Madam  Speaker,  let  us  not  forget  that  the  right  to  property  is 
fundamental.  My  home  is  my  castle.  You  cannot  come  into  my  home,  whoever  you  are, 
without  my  permission,  unless  you  have  a  duly  signed  judicial  order.  It  is  very  crucial  to 
protect my right to my home. It is the basic principle the right to property. 

Thirdly,  Madam  Speaker,  the  retrospective  aspect  of  the  Bill  was  an  issue.  I  had 
proposed myself that there be a rolling effect, that is, from the date that the law should apply 
to any property acquired not later than seven years from the date of making that order, that is 
on unexplained wealth order and this is now the case. So, if we did not roll on as compared to 
before, it would have taken effect as from 2009 and would continue to do so over the years. 
So, now this is a very important amendment that has been made and we are thankful. 

Now, there is also the duration of the inscription. There was a debate on that. I also 
had the view that there should be a defined time limit and we are thankful for the Minister to 
provide the amendment now, to limit the duration to 42 days so that the Agency can inscribe 
on a property. 

And fifth, there is the nature of the awards before the Judge. I had proposed that we 
should  not  solely  restrict  the  award  to  confiscation  and  that  we  should  see  what  is  done 
elsewhere  like  in  Australia,  for  example,  whereby  an  order  for  payment  of  the  monetary 
equivalent or whatever the unexplained wealth amount is, be made. I am now happy that this 
has been included. 

27 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  question  may  arise  as  to  how  the  Court  will  treat  the  term 
‘satisfactorily  accounted  for’.  I  am  happy  given  that  the  standard  of  proof  and  it  is  my 
understanding  that  it  is  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  therefore,  a  person  will  be  able  to 
show if his wealth is legitimate and to account for it. I am sure, in practice, this is how it will 
work in Court. 

Now, Madam Speaker, it is absolutely important for me to stress that the purpose of 
the Bill - and this is important - is not to allow the law abiding citizens to lose their castle. It 
is not meant for them. I am happy that there are judicial proceedings and that the decision 
will  rest  with  the  Judiciary  after  having  read  the  affidavits.  If  ever  the  case  has  been 
transferred  to  the  Supreme  Court,  having  given  the  opportunity  to  call  witnesses  to  tender 
evidence, to offer submissions then the Judge shall take the decision of whether the wealth is 
explained or not satisfactorily.  

I must say that I would have preferred a more explicit protection for the law-abiding 
citizen, but again this is acceptable.  We will see how it looks in practice. Madam Speaker, 
whether  you  have  more  or  less  than  Rs10  m.  is  not  the  question.  Making  money  is  not  a 
crime. Making money through a crime is a crime. This is how it should be in practice. 

To  reaffirm  what  I  have  just  said,  Madam  Speaker.  This  law  is  not  meant  for  law 
abiding citizens. We have to rely on the Judiciary, the Judge in Chambers, the Board and on 
the Agency that, whenever there is a tax issue, that is, whenever there is a case of undeclared 
wealth  which  is  legitimate,  which  can  be  shown  to  be  legitimate,  but  solely  a  case  of 
defrauding tax, tax issue, then, that case should be dealt with, in my opinion, with the MRA.  
They already have the framework to deal with it; they already have all these draconian laws 
like inscription and all this.  So, they can deal  with this. I think we should not set double 
standard cases where, first of all, if it is the MRA that catches you, then you have to pay a 
penalty of 15%, but if it is the Integrity Reporting Agency that catches you, then you may run 
the risk of losing the whole of the asset. So, there should not be this case of deux poids deux 
mesures, in my opinion. 

This having been said, the law abiding citizen should not be scared of this law. He 
should not be scared of this law and should not feel that he runs the risk, if he has acquired all 
his wealth legitimately, if he has worked, if he can show how he has acquired his wealth, of 
having, one day, an Agency knock on his door and ask him for explanations and then run the 
risk of being confiscated his wealth. So, it is important for us to stress on this - for myself! 

28 

 
Lastly, Madam Speaker, the value of the asset. We are speaking about the Rs10 m. 
value.  I  understand  the  value  as  at  date,  therefore,  the  historical  cost  of  the  property,  and 
rightly so, and I understand that the Court will treat it like this. Therefore, when we will look 
at the property of the person, we will look at the value it was quoted for and not the value that 
it is now. So, this is the question, maybe, that needs to be clarified about the valuation of the 
property.  

So, in conclusion, Madam Speaker, this law has to apply to everyone. The law is the 
law and it all depends on how it will be applied in practice. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has 
reaffirmed  recently  his  attachment  to  the  principle  of  democracy,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  the 
Constitution has been amended to insert the word ‘democratic’ in section 1 under his prime 
ministership, and I trust fully the Government to apply this law not only by the letter of the 
law, but by the spirit of the law, being that this law is meant to catch those criminals who 
have  not  been  caught  before,  who  have  always  escaped  the  system  and  who  have  always 
evaded it, that is, the corrupt people, the drug traffickers, the fraudsters and the criminals. 

I would like to end by saying, Madam Speaker, that I support this Bill and I will vote 

for it. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 12.56 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.06 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): M. le président, nous sommes en faveur d’une loi qui intensifiera la lutte contre les 
biens illicites provenant d’une activité criminelle avérée tels que la corruption, le trafic de 
drogue et le terrorisme, et tout renforcement de la loi contre la corruption et l’enrichissement 
illicite est nécessaire. Dans le fait, une loi au civil pour confisquer les biens mal acquis peut 
être justifiée dans une démocratie comme la nôtre. Cependant, il faut avant tout établir les 
bases  sur  lesquelles  on  peut  dire  que  les  biens  ont  été  acquis  à  l’origine  par  des  moyens 
illicites. 

 Ceci  dit,  par  rapport  à  cette  loi,  il  y  a  eu  beaucoup  de  discussions,  beaucoup 
d’amendements et concernant les amendements on a entendu récemment quelqu’un dire qu’il 

 

29 

est d’accord avec l’amendement, quoique l’amendement n’a pas été encore circulé. Je ne sais 
pas si vous l’avez entendu mais beaucoup de points valables ont été soumis par des membres 
de l’Opposition, de tous les partis de l’Opposition et même si le ministre va reprendre tous les 
points qui ont été dits à l’heure du summing-up, ça ne va pas changer la donne.  

Donc,  je  réitère  la  proposition  du  Leader  de  l’Opposition,  c’est  de  nous  donner  le 
temps d’étudier toutes ces propositions faites, ici-même, mais aussi les propositions faites par 
le Bar Council, et là, on entend dire depuis hier soir qu’il y aura des amendements qui vont 
venir  mais  on  attend  toujours.  On  doit  voter  une  loi  dans  quelques  heures  et  on  attend 
toujours les amendements.  

Monsieur le président, on ne peut pas travailler ainsi dans une démocratie, avec une 
loi qui touche les droits fondamentaux des citoyens mauriciens, une loi qui aura de graves 
conséquences.    On  est  en  train  de  courir  à  droite  et  à  gauche  et  on  attend  toujours  les 
amendements. Donc, je réitère la proposition du Leader de l’Opposition à l’effet que, il n’est 
pas  trop tard, on peut encore mettre la tête ensemble pour voir comment atteindre l’objectif 
de cette législation sans piétiner des principes fondamentaux de notre démocratie. Mais, as at 
now, we are not voting for the Bill.  

(Interruptions) 

Bien sûr, si on arrive à postpone le débat et on ouvre un vrai dialogue, peut-être que ça peut 
changer. Donc, on dit, as at now, on ne va pas voter la loi telle qu’elle est. Il est vrai qu’il y a 
deux pays dans le monde ayant de profondes traditions démocratiques et des lois permettant 
au  Judiciaire  de  confisquer  des  biens  dans  le  cadre  d’une  procédure  civile,  parce  que  leur 
propriétaire ne peut expliquer la source de revenus ayant permis l’acquisition de ces biens. La 
charge de la preuve est donc renversée et il n’est pas nécessaire que le  propriétaire ait été 
préalablement condamné au pénal pour qu’une telle confiscation soit ordonnée. Ce type de loi 
existe en effet en Irlande et en Australie. Mais les Unexplained Wealth Orders en Irlande et 
en Australie sont expressément justifiés par la lutte contre le crime organisé. Le Proceeds of 
Crime Act de 1996 en Irlande et le Proceeds of Crime Act de 2002 en Australie visent à priver 
des personnes suspectées de crimes de leurs propriétés lorsque ces suspects n’arrivent pas à 
prouver  que  celles  qui  ont  été  acquises  au  moyen  des  revenus  générés  par  des  activités 
illicites et qu’il y a donc lieu de présumer que ces revenus proviennent d’activités illégales. 
Vous-même vous avez dit juste avant moi, M. le président, qu’on doit faire la différence entre 
les personnes innocentes et les coupables. Mais il n’y a pas de procès en Cour de justice pour 

 

30 

dire qui est coupable, qui est innocent alors que cette loi, telle qu’elle est, on est permis sans 
procès d’attaquer aux biens des gens. Il est à noter que la loi a été passée en Irlande après 
qu’une  journaliste  d’investigation  et  un  policier  ont  été  froidement  assassinés  par  la  mafia 
locale.  

La  raison  pour  laquelle  le  projet  de  loi  du  gouvernement  mauricien  s’écarte 
radicalement des lois irlandaises et australiennes tienne à ceci : la confiscation des biens, tel 
que le prévoit le projet de loi n’a pas pour cible les criminels. Le Bill vise dans tous les cas le 
patrimoine  d’un  individu  quelconque  qui  excéderait  sa  déclaration  de  revenus.  L’individu 
visé n’est pas un criminel. Il n’est pas non plus suspecté d’en être un.  Ce qui fera que la 
propriété d’un citoyen mauricien pourra être confisquée par l’État sur uniquement au fait que 
ce citoyen ne peut prouver devant une cour de justice que son patrimoine est proportionnel à 
ses revenus déclarés. Cette nouvelle loi permet donc la saisie des biens sans les liant à aucune 
activité criminelle. Et si je ne me trompe pas, c’est unique au monde.  Comme j’ai mentionné 
au début de mon discours, que ce soit en Australie ou en Irelande ou même la Colombie, la 
saisie est liée à une activité criminelle avérée ou dans des cas de corruption, trafic de drogue 
et du terrorisme. Ici, dans cette nouvelle loi, rien n’est défini. Tout et n’importe quoi peut 
déclencher le processus, y compris une dénonciation farfelue de votre voisin.   

Le but de la loi en Irlande et en Australie est d’exproprier des criminels et des biens mal 
acquis, c’est-à-dire, acquis grâce à des activités criminelles. En termes de politique pénale, 
cela se justifie pour décourager les criminels qui ne peuvent profiter des gains qui génèrent 
leur crime.  La loi vise également à faire en sorte que ces biens mal acquis ne donnent pas les 
moyens aux criminels de poursuivre leurs activités illégales. 

À  Maurice,  le  but  du  projet  de  loi  est  d’exproprier  toute  personne  qui  n’aurait  pas 
déclaré de manière intègre des revenus, peu importe que ces revenus aient été générés par les 
activités  parfaitement  légales  et  cela  me  dérange  grandement.    C’est  pour  cela  que  j’avais 
déclaré publiquement au début qu’on est en train de mélanger torchons et serviettes. Je fais 
ici la distinction entre enrichissement illicite et la possession des biens inexpliqués.  

Le projet de loi et l’amendement constitutionnel ébranlent le droit à la propriété privée 
qui devient pour tout citoyens et à tout moment révocable dès que ce citoyen ne peut prouver 
devant une cour de justice que ses biens sont en proportion avec ses revenus.  Outre ce point 
fondamental, que je viens d’expliquer, il y a des nombreuses failles du présent projet de loi. 

 

31 

Même  si  je  considère  que  les  amendements  apportés  représentent  un  pas  positif  mais 
largement insuffisant.  

L’un  des  points  contentieux  reste  celui  de  la  nomination  du  directeur  de  l’Integrity 
Reporting Services Agency, ainsi que celle du Chairman et de ses assesseurs, qui devrait être 
faite  par  le  Président  de  la  République  après  consultations  avec  le  Premier  ministre  et  le 
leader de l’opposition parce que ‘on the advice of the Prime Minister’, cela veut dire que le 
Premier ministre qui nomme et automatiquement il y aura une connotation politique.  

L’indépendance  d’un  tel  organe  vis-à-vis  du  gouvernement  sera  par  définition  très 
limitée.  L’ICAC  a  échoué  parce  qu’elle  n’avait  aucune  indépendance  à  l’encontre  du 
gouvernement. Son directeur est nommé par le Premier ministre en toute discrétion. 

M. le président, c’est pourquoi j’insiste sur l’indépendance de l’institution en question 
parce que les membres du gouvernement ou d’un éventuel gouvernement sont en situation de 
bénéficier de la corruption. Il faut les contrôler d’où pourquoi il est nécessaire d’avoir une 
institution inébranlable.  

M. le président, il y a aussi le fait que la charge de preuve, c’est-à-dire burden of proof 
est  renversée  dans  cette  loi.    Admettons  que  vous  avez  commis  une  infraction,  c’est  la 
poursuite  de  prouver  que  vous  êtes  coupable.    La  preuve  doit  être  rapportée  beyond 
reasonable doubt.  Vous pouvez invoquer votre droit de silence, mais avec cette nouvelle loi, 
tout disparaît, même la présomption d’innocence et le citoyen risque de perdre tous ses biens.  

Dans cette loi, à la section 3, sur application of the Act, la loi serait applicable aux seuls 
citoyens mauriciens. Donc, pas aux étrangers résidant à Maurice et excluant aussi les trusts, 
autres  fondations,  sociétés  et  compagnies.  Dès  lors  les  moyens  pour  contourner  la  loi  à 
travers les montages fictifs sont manifestes.   

Et encore dans cette nouvelle loi, aucune mention n’est faite de la declaration of assets, 
donc  des  avoirs  du  directeur  de  l’IRSA ;  the  Chairman  et  ses  assesseurs  de  l’Integrity 
Reporting  Board.  Il  n’y  a  pas  lieu  pour  eux  qu’ils  fassent  de  declaration  of  assets  avant 
d’assumer leurs fonctions.  Je pense qu’il aurait dû avoir une clause, obligeant ces nominés à 
déclarer leurs avoirs avant de commencer d’assumer leurs fonctions, comme c’est dans le cas 
d’autres institutions, notamment je cite l’exemple de l’ICTA.  L’ICTA qui a été voté en 2001.  
Ils déclarent leurs avoirs.  C’est dans la loi.  Dans cette loi rien n’est prévu pourtant c’est un 
poste qui va saisir des biens.  Quand on dit ‘saisir des biens’, ils vont saisir des biens surtout 
au-delà de R 10 millions. Ils sont sujets à des tentations à la corruption. Il aurait dû avoir dans 

 

32 

cette loi, parce qu’on a entendu dire qu’ils vont venir avec un Declaration Act.  Mais cela 
quand il vient.  Pourquoi ne pas mettre dans la loi elle-même?   

Et puis dans la section 4 (6) - 

“The Agency shall employ such employees and consultants on such contractual terms 
and conditions as it may determine.” 

Donc  pour  moi,  par  rapport  à  cette  clause  which  is  fair  enough,  the  Agency  can 
discharge all its duties by employing any employee, any consultant or anyone.  Mais avec le 
paragraphe suivant - 

 “The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister, make use of the services of an 
officer of the Ministry to assist the Agency in the discharge of its functions.” 

M. le président, this will open the door for ministerial intervention.  Déjà on est en train 
de voir de ce qui se passe en termes d’ingérence ministérielle à la MBC, à la SICOM, à la 
FSC  et  là  maintenant,  on  doit  où  on  ajoute  dans  cette  loi  que  ‘The  Agency  may,  with  the 
approval of the Minister, make use of the services of an officer of the Ministry (…).” 

La  FSC  de  nos  jours  ne  fonctionne  plus.  Tout  doit  passer  par  le  ministre  et  cette 
institution qui doit être totalement indépendante, l’honorable ministre peut placer quelqu’un 
dans cette  Agency  et dès lors, comme je l’ai dit, l’ingérence ministérielle va être présente.  
Donc, moi je pense qu’on doit enlever ce paragraphe par rapport pour qu’il n’y ait pas d’abus 
d’ingérence ministérielle. 

La section 7 (1) (b) sur la nomination de Chairperson et les deux other members, les 
amendements ont été faits mais je ne comprends pas pourquoi on a enlevé – ‘on such terms 
and  conditions  as  may  be  determined’.    Donc,  sur  l’Integrity  Reporting  Board,  il  y  a  la 
nomination d’un Chairperson et two other Members to be appointed, auparavant c’était by 
the Minister, mais cela a été amendé. Mais, on continue, on dit on such terms and conditions 
as the Prime Minister may determine, mais dans le nouveau amendement: ‘on such terms and 
conditions’, cela a été totalement enlevé. Donc, on se demande qui va déterminer les terms 
and  conditions  du  Chairperson,  des  membres  du  Board.  Quels  vont  être  le  pay  deal,  le 
package, les terms and conditions? Donc, cela a été enlevé totalement de la loi. 

Maintenant, venons au fameux R 10 millions. On a mis un barème de R 10 millions. 
Mais, dans la loi, rien n’est dit par rapport à la valeur de R 10 millions, si c’est book value, si 
c’est market value, si cela évolue avec le temps, si cela va être indexé avec l’inflation. R 10 

 

33 

million  c’est  R10  million  dans  le  temps,  sept  ans  de  cela,  R  10  millions  aujourd’hui.  Si 
quelqu’un  a  des  shares,  a  des  actions  en  bourse,  c’est  très  volatile,  cela  augmente,  cela 
diminue.  Qui  va  faire  cette  valuation?  J’espère  que  ce  n’est  pas  monsieur  Bissessur  du 
Valuation Office. 

Donc, par rapport à cette clause de valuation, rien n’est prévu dans cette loi, qui va 
faire le valuation et comme je dis si cela va être au market value, book value. Donc, il y a 
beaucoup de lacunes dans cette loi. C’est pour cela que nous, on a dit qu’il faut prendre le 
temps  avant  de  voter  une  telle  loi  et  ne  pas  venir  plus  devant  avec  des  piecemeal 
amendments. 

M.  le  président,  la  radicalité  du  projet  de  loi  est  aggravée  par  son  effet  rétroactif. 
Seront susceptibles d’être  expropriés tous ceux qui auront acquis des biens durant les sept 
dernières années. Cela équivaut à punir des personnes pour des actes qui, au moment où ils 
ont été commis, ne comportaient pas de sanction d’expropriation dans la loi. Donc, je trouve 
que ce n’est pas normal, c’est very unfair qu’on puisse punir des gens pour un délit qui a été 
commis sept ans de cela et ce n’était pas dans la loi. 

Autre  élément  de  radicalité,  l’extrême  sévérité  de  la  sanction:  des  personnes 
pourraient ainsi se voir priver de leur maison et se retrouver à la rue ou de leur épargne, parce 
qu’elles n’auront pas réussi à prouver que leur patrimoine est proportionnel à leurs revenus. Il 
y a là une atteinte manifeste au principe de la proportionnalité entre les peines et les actes 
répréhensibles. 

Inutile  d’insister  sur  le  caractère  extrêmement  malsain  de  l’encouragement  et  la 
récompense de la délation : la dénonciation des criminels doit être encouragée mais non celle 
de son voisin parce qu’il a fait construire un étage de sa maison. 

Pour  résumer,  le  projet  de  loi  vise  à  appliquer  à  tous  les  citoyens  mauriciens  le 
traitement réservé en Australie, en Irlande, en Colombie aux membres du crime organisé. Le 
caractère universel démesuré et outrancier du projet de loi est précisément ce qui le voue à 
l’échec. 

M.  le  président,  maintenant  venons  au  financement  de  l’Agence,  the  Agency. 
Normalement, les contraventions, les amendes, les autres pénalités que l’Etat encaisse sont 
versées  au  Consolidated  Fund  et,  par  la  suite,  leur  affectation,  est  sujet  à  un  vote  au 
Parlement. Leur affectation dans différents ministères, dans différentes institutions, est votée 
dans le budget et affecté à ces différentes organisations. Donc, l’argent public passe par le 

 

34 

Parlement et puis c’est voté et c’est appliqué. Mais, dans cette loi, il stipule que l’Agency 
peut  utiliser  les  fonds  de  deux  façons  d’une  part  récompenser  les  dénonciateurs  –  et 
d’ailleurs,  sous  quelle  modalité,  rien  n’a  été  précisé.  Je  vous  laisse  imaginer  les  dérives 
possibles.  Rien  n’est  prévu  dans  la  loi  comment,  combien,  quel  quota,  quel  ratio,  on  va 
récompenser  un  whistle-blower.  Mais,  ce  n’est  pas  tout.  Les  fonds  pourront  également 
financer la lutte contre la pauvreté. Ce qui est large, flou et ne veut rien dire. Je vois que le 
ministre des Finances nous quitte, mais peut-être bientôt on va entendre dire que l’argent va 
financer les projets de CSR, l’argent va finir au Lovebridge et aussi on ne peut pas seulement 
financer le projet de CSR, Lovebridge sans guidelines. D’ailleurs, le ministre des Finances 
vient  de  nous  quitter.  Son  silence  sur  tel  projet  de  loi  est  éloquent.  Cela  en  dit  long  son 
silence par rapport à un tel projet de loi et d’ailleurs d’autres personnes. 

Donc, M. le président, je vais conclure pour dire que, dans la lutte contre la corruption 
et aussi afin que l’île Maurice soit  un exemple de good governance et de transparence pour 
mieux  lutter  contre  la  fraude  et  la  corruption,  il  faut  venir  de  l’avant  avec  un  Freedom  of 
Information Act, un Financing of Political Parties aussi et surtout un Declaration of Assets 
Act dans les plus brefs délais. 

Merci. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

(2.30 p.m.) 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, the main objects of this Bill are to - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

promote a culture of good governance and integrity reporting in Mauritius; 

stimulate integrity reporting in the public and private sectors; 

encourage positive reports of acts of good governance and integrity; 

disclose malpractices and recover unexplained wealth, and 

protect and reward persons making disclosures and reports. 

Most of the hon. Members here have addressed the issue of integrity reporting in the 
debates. Not much has been said as regards the culture of good governance that we have to 
promote. On one side, you can have a culture of good governance in the best interest of the 
nation, in the best interest of the people of Mauritius. Otherwise, on the other hand, you can 

 

35 

have a culture of greed, a culture based on a conviction that the country belongs to you or 
belongs to those who are close to you, a culture of exploitation of natural resources. This is 
what we are deciding today, it is coming with a new culture of good governance and when it 
comes to encourage reports of acts of good governance and integrity. We know cases. You 
can’t be growing vegetables in Carreau Laliane and then own a villa in Floreal. There are a 
number  of  things  we  have  seen  for  the  last  10  years  and  that’s  where  I  will  say  to  the 
Opposition  and  to  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition:  ‘On  est  d’accord  sur  l’essentiel  de  la 
législation’.  L’amendement  concernant  la  nomination  qui  n’a  pas  encore  été  circulé  qui 
reprend les commentaires, le souhait du Leader de l’opposition. Concernant la nomination, il 
y avait deux objections principales : le temps et la nomination. Concernant la nomination, il 
semblerait qu’il y aura l’amendement. 

(Interruptions) 

L’autre question est une question de temps. Mais nous nous sommes compris sur une chose, 
sur  l’essence  et  la  nécessité  d’une  législation  pour  justement  disclose  malpratices  and  to 
recover unexplained wealth.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in a Private Notice Question on 05 December 2006, I put a 
question to the then Prime Minister as regards the Commissioner of Police and on one case - 
there were many cases - I put a question on the Police enquiry in the transfer of the sum of 
Rs150  m.  by  Hemant  Bungalia  on  24  November  2006  in  connection  with  a  transaction  of 
State land. This question was put in Parliament here in 2006. What did the Prime Minister 
then reply, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? He said - 

“As regards part (e) of the question, my attention has been drawn to an article that 
appeared in the Hebdo from 03 to 09 December of this year which refers to an alleged 
transfer by a Mauritian national of the sum of Rs150 m. from a Swiss bank to a bank 
in  the  UK.  I  have  already  caused  the  matter  to  be  referred  to  the  ICAC  for 
investigation.” 

And we know what happened 7-8 years later! This was put as a Private Notice Question! 

I am going to take another example… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please continue! 

36 

 
Mr  Bodha:  Yes.  On  11  November  2012,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  hon. 
Bérenger, put another question on Hemant Bungalia and Nitish Ramdharry.  An issue was 
raised by hon. Jugnauth. He said - 

“The  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  just  said  that  several  authorities  have  been  making 
enquiries since years. Is he aware that Mr Bungalia has an account at the Hong Kong 
and Shanghai Bank in Singapore and he has drawn a cheque of 3.8 m. dollars?” 

And what did the then Prime Minister say? 

“Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  there  are  two  things  I  must  say.  Again  I  make  a  plea  to  the 
Opposition not to believe everything they hear. They have always heard so many false 
things that have been said.” 

Everything is false! They even said, the Press, I suppose - 

“(…) first of all, the first cheque that the hon. Member talks about, I don’t even know 
what bank it is in Singapore.” 

Do you know what happened?  Hon. Pravind Jugnauth laid a copy of the cheque. It is here on 
the Table of the National Assembly and nothing was done! 

What I am saying, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is that with this Bill, with the agency, we 
will be able to disclose malpractices and recover unexplained wealth because these people 
will have to answer. There should be accountability! 

Let us come, now, to good governance. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am going to take 
two examples of good governance of this Government. First of all, I will take the issue of 
State land. We know all the abuses and the speculations on State land. Hundreds of millions 
from Singapore to London, to Switzerland! What have we done? The Vice-Prime Minister, 
hon. Soodhun, came with a policy framework which has been approved by Cabinet and this 
policy  framework  says  that  applications  must,  without  exception,  be  addressed  to  the 
Supervising Officer of the Ministry and made in approved form which will be available on 
and  may  be  downloaded  from  the  Ministry’s  website.  All  allocation  of  State  land  will  be 
displayed  on  the  website  of  the  Ministry  and  will  also  be  published  in  the  Government 
Gazette and a letter of reservation will be given only after Cabinet’s approval. This is good 
governance, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! 

I  am  going  to  take  another  example,  the  example  of  procurement.  We  know  how 
procurement was used in the past, over the last ten years, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I am going 

 

37 

to take two examples. The G2G agreement with Singapore on the  Identity Card instead of 
paying Rs300 m. we paid Rs1.2 billion! Another G2G agreement, this time with Mangalore, 
India where we paid 2 billion dollars for petroleum products and the Betamax saga! What has 
my colleague done? He called for tender. When he called for tender, he called for tender for 
black  oil  and  white  oil  whereas  the  Red  Eagle  was  carrying  all  the  different  types  of 
petroleum  products  in  one  boat.  It  was  unique  in  the  world  with  all  the  risks  of 
contamination! What have we done? He has been able to reduce the rate of freight from 30.75 
dollars to 26 dollars and the country is saving 4 m. dollars for the period, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir. This is good governance!  

Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

What it has got to do with the Bill? Oh! You have been talking!  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions! Hon. Minister, address the Chair! 

Mr Bodha: Yes, but what I am saying is the Bill is on good governance and integrity 

reporting! Everybody is debating integrity reporting. 

(Interruptions) 

The Bill has to promote a culture of good governance which we are doing. 

(Interruptions) 

That is what I am saying. I will talk on integrity reporting later, but it is not because anybody 
has  talked  on  good  governance  that  we  should  not  because  good  governance,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, as the IMF says -  

 “A poor governance environment offers greater incentives and more opportunities for 
corruption.  Corruption  undermines  the  public’s  trust  in  its  Government.  It  also 
threatens  market 
integrity,  distorts  competition,  and  endangers  economic 
development.”   

When we talk about this Bill, it is not only about the denunciation of a certain number 
of people who have unexplained wealth. It is also the promotion of good governance and the 
promotion of integrity.  

38 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  it  comes  to  integrity  -  we  have  been  told  that  the 
MMM  may  not  be  voting  this  Bill  -  it  comes  blatantly  to  one  thing.  There  is  only  one 
Government which is committed to fight fraud, corruption and unexplained wealth and it is 
this Government, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir. 

Yes! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr Bodha: In the Financial Times, on a report on Mauritius, I had an interview with 

the journalist and I said this - 

“The  clean-up  will  continue.  Everything  was  dysfunctional;  we  never  dreamt  that 
cleaning would go so deep.” 

This is what is happening at different layers, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir and I am glad 
that the hon. Prime Minister is here - because of one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  When 
we come to integrity… 

(Interruptions) 

In the report of the Drug Commission by Sir Maurice Rault in 1986, he described Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, as a man of uncommon integrity.  We need leadership of that calibre to 
fight what we are fighting, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Let me pay tribute to that leadership.  
But at the same time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister, my colleague came with a 
Bill, which is a very complex piece of legislation because it addresses one of the fundamental 
rights, the right to property.  It addresses the issue of confiscation without compensation.  It 
addresses a number of issues, which are so close to our heart because it addresses the issue of 
what belongs to us.  I must say that there have been a number of amendments. If Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth is a man of uncommon integrity, I can say that the Minister Bhadain has been a man 
of uncommon resilience to bring this law after a month after all the debates that we have had 
so far. 

I say again, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, good governance, what have we seen in the last 
years? It is again an issue of culture.  We come from a land where our forefathers had to toil 
hard and work hard and make every effort, be they from Africa or be they from India.  We 
come from a culture of efforts, of work and there is no way for a country to prosper except 

 

39 

when you have hard work.  This is what Sir Anerood Jugnauth has always said.  That is why, 
we have to find a solution for that unexplained wealth because it is a question of two different 
cultures, one based on greed, at the expense of the nation and the other one is based on hard 
work, on effort, on discipline and on good governance.  I gave two examples as regards this 
framework  for  good  governance  for  the  allocation  of  State  land.    I  gave  another  example 
where you had a G2G agreement on petroleum products in the best interest of the country. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I said that we can have good governance and I mentioned the 
issue of procurement.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, under the name of emergency procurement, 
do you know what sort of abuse has been done?  That company, Super Builders, over four or 
five years, had no credentials and they got contract for Rs1.2 billion.  Under the emergency 
procurement now we have Rs500 m. of contracts which have been allocated.  That is why I 
am saying that this Bill goes beyond the Integrity Reporting.  It is implementing a culture of 
governance at all levels starting from the Prime Minister as a role model for what can be done 
and what should be done and what should not be done.  That is why we have been elected in 
December last year, to put an end to all these.  

This Bill is, in fact, a reflection of this commitment, a reflection of this bold move to 
clean up the country, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I have talked about unsolicited bids, Betamax 
and how we have corrected it. We talked about the abuse of the State land and how we have 
corrected it. We have to see to it that there is no emergency procurement. You cannot start as 
a tender having a road starting at Rs2 billion and you end up at Rs4 billion, the coffers of 
Government. The good governance is two-way, it is the way you spend public money and the 
way you recover unexplained wealth. It has two limbs, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

I mentioned the PNQ of 2006. Today the Agency will be able to take to task this copy 
of the cheque of USD3.8 m. which hon. Pravind Jugnauth laid on the Table of the Assembly. 
Today, all the cases of unexplained wealth could be taken up at the level of the Agency, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Now, at the Commission of Enquiry on Drugs in 1986, it helped to have the then drug 
mafia to uncover all the ramifications of the mafia. Following the Commission of Enquiry, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there were a number of police cases and most of those heads of the 
mafia, le roi du centre, le roi du nord, la tête, all these people were in jail. But what happened 
to their assets? Today, on the findings of a Commission of Enquiry, the Agency can act. So, 

 

40 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  an  instrument  to  recover  unexplained  wealth,  to  discover 
malpractices and to recover what belongs to the State. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hon. Ramful said that he was in the dark, but the country is 
in  the  red  as  regards  fraud  and  corruption  after  10  years  and  something  has  to  be  done.  I 
explained, you cannot start growing vegetables in Carreau Laliane and you end up having a 
villa in Floreal. So, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the technicality of this Bill has been debated. 
What  I  wanted  to  say,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  that  this  Bill  is  not  only  on  integrity 
reporting,  it  is  also  on  good  governance  and  the  imposing,  promoting  a  culture  of  good 
governance  at  all  levels  and  this  is  what  we  have  to  do  to  create  the  best  business 
environment, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

I will leave my hon. colleagues there, a number of issues which have been addressed 
as regards the practicability of the Bill. How the cases are going to be interpreted in Court? I 
will leave it to the hon. Minister who will be able to address these issues. 

We have talked a lot about the role of the Agency. We have talked a lot about the role 
of the board. We have also said that we have created different levels of checks and balances 
so that there is no abuse and no malicious misuse. I hope that the amendment which is due 
will  come  as  regards  the  nomination  of  the  Director  of  the  Agency  and  as  regards  the 
Chairperson and the other members of the Agency.  

I am saying to the Opposition. On est d’accord sur l’essentiel.  L’honorable Leader de 
l’Opposition a toujours souhaité que Maurice soit le pays le mieux géré au monde.  C’est 
l’occasion, M. le président. 

Merci. 

(2.52 p.m.) 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  this  Bill  has  a  fundamental  objective,  that  is,  to  confiscate  property  which 
somebody cannot explain how he acquired. It is a Bill where we are confiscating property, 
where there is no link or whatever with any criminal offence or an unlawful act. So, it is a 
very important Bill because we have had to amend the Constitution to achieve that objective. 
Our  Constitution  guarantees  certain  fundamental  rights  and  the  right  to  property  is  one  of 
them. 

41 

 
Now, the issue of unexplained wealth has been on the agenda for quite a long time. I 
am sure we are all here for the idea of confiscating wealth of those who enjoy a standard of 
living which they cannot explain. But, there should be the proper procedure. Those persons 
are normally persons in position of responsibility who soon after their appointment in public 
office  suddenly  become  rich  without  their  being  any  explanation  of  such  accumulation  of 
wealth.  Like I said, this idea has been around for quite a long time. 

In 1993, the Anti-Corruption Tribunal Act was voted and its main objective was to set 
up a tribunal to investigate into allegation of fraud. The Act went even further. Section 5(1) 
(b) also vested in the tribunal jurisdiction to investigate any allegation, and I quote – 

“(…) that the revenue or wealth of any person who holds or have held office specified 
in Schedule 1(…).” 

And Schedule 1 is namely those who have held public office. 

“(…) the status of that person and is the consequence of that person being or having 
been involved in fraud and corruption”. 

It was linked to fraud and corruption. 

In  1993,  that  tribunal  only  investigated  property  or  persons  who  had  unexplained 
wealth or wealth which was accumulated, which they could not explain, but which was linked 
to fraud and corruption. It linked not only to that person who was working in a public office, 
but also people who dealt with that person. So, their property was investigated.  And there, 
under that section, it was the Supreme Court that intervened. Whenever there is an allegation 
of  unexplained  wealth,  you  apply  to  the  Supreme  Court  through  the  Solicitor  General’s 
Office and make an application for inquiry. 

The  same  under  the  Economic  Crime  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  of  2000. 
Section 25, which dealt with the freezing of assets, again talked about the Supreme Court. It 
is the Supreme Court that has that right, and here we are talking about assets, which we say 
are tainted by criminal offence. Either he has been convicted or there is a presumption that 
these assets were acquired through illegal means, through illegal transaction, and again it is 
the Supreme Court. 

Section 25 makes it clear - 

42 

 
“Where  a  person  is  charged  and  about  to  be  charged  in  any  court  with  a  money 
laundering offence or (...) the Supreme Court may on an application by the Director of 
Public Prosecutions make an order subject to the condition as to the duration (...)”. 

That is, to freeze the assets or to have a prescription of the assets. It is the Supreme Court. 
Why  do  we  go  to  the  Supreme  Court?  Because  we  are  attacking  fundamental  rights.    We 
know the Supreme Court is an open Court, and an open Court is a fundamental principle in 
our  judicial  system,  in  a  democratic  society  where  witnesses  are  heard,  evidence  is  being 
called, witnesses are being cross-examined.  And if you can’t prove it by documents, you can 
call  witnesses  to  come  and  depone  as  to  how  these  assets  were  acquired;  you  can  cross-
examine witnesses, put them to the test of  cross-examination.  It is only  when the judge is 
satisfied  that  he  makes  an  order.  But  here  we  are  talking  about  confiscating  assets  which 
somebody  cannot  explain  after  seven  years.  There  is  no  allegation  of  criminal  activity  or 
criminal offence, and we say we are going to a Judge in Chambers for that order! I am sure 
you  are  aware  of  the  role  of  the  Judge  in  Chambers;  the  Courts  Act,  sub  paragraph  6  - 
Jurisdiction of Judge in Chambers. It is only for urgent matters, for provisional issues that 
you go to a Judge in Chambers and, before a Judge in Chambers, Rule 22 of the Supreme 
Court Rules 2000 is proceedings by way of affidavit only. There is no witness; it is done in 
Chambers  and  in  an  urgent  manner,  in  a  hasty  manner.    And  here,  for  such  an  important 
issue, when in all the laws we have had, where there is confiscation, it is before the Supreme 
Court, now we are talking of somebody who has a property who is being questioned after 
seven years. It has to be done by only two affidavits; we know that for the Judge in Chambers 
you can have the first affidavit and a counter affidavit. 

On two affidavits, you tell the Judge to confiscate a property which somebody cannot 
explain!  I think we have to review this Judge in Chambers. It should be before the Supreme 
Court, in a proper Court of law, in an open Court of law, not in Chambers where witnesses 
can be called.  If you lose my receipt, I can call somebody and come and depone and can be 
cross-examined  as  to  the  veracity.  The  Judge  will  have  an  opportunity  to  look  at  his 
demeanour, whether he is lying or not. 

Do you know how we swear an affidavit today?  As a barrister, I can say that many 
people are not even aware of the content of affidavits when they swear them.  And the rush, 
the  queue  you  have  in  the  morning  when  you  swear  affidavits!  You  have  been  to  the 
Intermediate Court; you know that, at the entrance of the Intermediate Court, there is a little 
room where you swear affidavits. There is a long queue; for two hours, they swear over 200 

 

43 

affidavits. There is no time to explain to the people swearing the content of these affidavits, 
and a Judge is going to confiscate property on these affidavits! 

Is this what we call the rule of law? There is also a question of delay. Although we are 
talking  about  civil  procedure,  the  sanction  is  criminal;  it’s  forfeiture  of  assets.  Now,  in 
criminal  cases,  the  Privy  Council  has,  in  many  cases,  said  that  two,  four,  or  five  years  of 
delay is an abuse of process. The sentence is for fine, for conviction... 

(Interruptions) 

But  now  we  are  talking  of  confiscation  of  assets,  which  has  no  link  whatsoever  to  any 
criminal activities. Seven years after, you call somebody and tell him to come and explain. Is 
that  gentleman  or  lady  going  to  have  a  fair  hearing  on  an  affidavit  before  the  Judge  in 
Chambers? This is the question we have to ask. Is that in accordance with the rule of law in a 
democratic State? I have much concern about that. 

Now,  let’s  come  to  that  privilege  which  is  attached.  There  has  apparently  been  an 
amendment and it will be 42 days.  Everybody believes that it is 42 days only.  No!  But 42 
days as from when?  Receipt of the report from the Board! L’inscription is 42 days after the 
receipt from the Board!  If the Board takes two years! There is no limit! None! And one has 
reason to be worried when we look at that section which allows somebody from the Ministry 
to work with the Agency. With the permission of the Minister, a civil servant can assist the 
Agency and it is that Agency which will put that prescription on the property, awaiting the 
report of the Board! There is question for concern here, again. Why should the Minister send 
one of his collaborators to the Agency to assist the agency? We know, in the past, how there 
have  been  ministerial  interferences  in  many  cases,  especially  in  ICAC  -  hon.  Minister  
Sinatambou knows what I am talking about - where in certain cases, letters, instructions were 
sent by the then Attorney General to ICAC to open cases which were closed, and a case has 
even been dismissed before the Intermediate Court.  

Now,  we  are  going  to  have  an  officer  from  the  Ministry  of  hon.  Bhadain  -  of  all 
people - to assist the Agency, who would put a lien on  your property  at the mercy of the 
Board.  And you know how in a society like Mauritius the stigma attached to it, to a person, 
to  a  family,  to  an  honest  businessman,  to  an  honest  professional!    I  think  we  should  look 
again at this section of allowing, by the permission of the Minister, somebody in that Agency, 
because it will not make that Agency independent and impartial; that’s for sure. Also, it is 

 

44 

officialising  political  interference,  legalising,  I  would  say,  political  interference  in  that 
Agency if we have somebody with the permission of the Minister in that Agency.  

There is also the question of liquidation which was raised by hon. Ramano. When the 
property is liquidated, we appoint a liquidator; what is the procedure that he will use? Is it 
inconsistent with the Insolvency Act? Which rank will be the bank which has had a first rank 
mortgage on that property? What is the rank of that liquidator?  When we have that suspicion 
on people for seven years, do you think that the bank will now take as guarantee a property 
which somebody has bought for four years? And if in case he has worked hard to get that 
property for four years, he goes to the bank and says that he is going to give that property as 
guarantee, as he wants to send his son or daughter for further studies, they will say no, wait 
for seven years, then the bank can give a loan on that property because, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, they will fear that this property can be confiscated and this when honest people may have 
worked hard to have that property.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will come to political issues, because there is a genuine fear 
outside that these institutions, especially when they learn that there will be somebody from 
the Ministry working with that Agency.  There is fear outside, and it is genuine fear that it 
can be used to harass people. It has been done in the past. I have mentioned the Tribunal of 
Corruption which was done by one gentleman, P.B. - not Paul Bérenger, he is P.R.B.  He was 
a friend of mine.  Hon. Vice-Prime Minister Collendavelloo knows him very well. We know 
how much political intervention there were, how much political harassment there have been 
in the past.  

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself, in this House, has said how ECO has been used 
to harass people when we voted the Prevention of Corruption Act, how ECO was being used 
as  a  political  instrument  even  to  overthrow  Government.  This  was  said  in  this  House  and 
urgently we had to vote. So, people are genuinely concerned, innocent people are genuinely 
concerned.  Even  now  with  the  ICAC,  we  have  heard  one  of  the  assessors,  a  lady,  who 
resigned, saying that  ICAC is not functioning as it should, that ICAC is not doing what it 
should do. But she was re-integrated again, after being told that ‘direction vinn dépi la haut’. 
That’s what they said in Casernes: ‘direction vinn dépi la haut’.  So, after direction has come  
dépi  la  haut,  she  was  re-integrated.  L’ordre  vinn  dépi  la  haut’,  they  said at  the  Casernes 
Centrales, the Central CID! There is some heavenly order, somebody who gives order from 
heaven!  L’ordre vinn dépi la haut!  

 

45 

So,  we  have  had  all  these  experiences  of  ECO,  of  ICAC,  of  the  Tribunal  for 
Corruption. I am sure there are some friends on the other side who know what I am saying.  
There were even in the past circumstances when the MRA was used to harass people.  

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know whether my friend is saying … 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Mr Baloomoody:  I know of cases where even the MRA was used to harass political 
opponents, people who do not believe in the policy of the Government. So, these are genuine 
concerns we have regarding this Bill. I note that the hon. Minister - when he introduced the 
Bill - has not addressed all the points raised by the Bar Council. And he has not been absent 
today - the whole day we have been debating… 

(Interruptions) 

There are many questions which have been raised by the Bar Council, pertinent questions for 
which we are still awaiting answers. 

(Interruptions) 

The amendment is coming piecemeal for such an important Act where we are amending the 
Constitution to confiscate property! 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Baloomoody: We are still waiting for amendments and the hon. Minister is not 
here! There are so many questions, legal issues which have been raised by the Law Society 
and  other  people  outside  there  have  not  been  addressed.  This  is  why,  on  this  side  of  the 
House, we say we need more time and this law does not meet the requirement laid down in 
the Constitution. It would not be a good law in a free and democratic society.  

I have done, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(3.11 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart): Thank you, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, by this time last year we were in full swing in 

 

46 

an electoral campaign, negotiating the last lap of the election and the theme of our campaign 
was mainly to clean up this country and bring back morality into our country. It was the main 
theme, and I remember hon. Soodhun was even saying that we have to clean up the gundaraj. 
And as one people and one nation, our country voted for change, voted for a Government, 
plebiscite us, gave us the mandate to go and clean up the country! 

And let me tell  you one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, insofar as the fight against 
drug barons, the fight against those who acquire money illicitly are concerned, all of us in this 
House agree that we have to put up a fight.  All of us! But, where we defer, is in relation to 
some nitty-gritty. As one people and one nation we were voted to bring peace, justice and 
liberty, and how are we going to bring peace, justice and liberty in this country if we don’t 
have a clean platform in our country to attract good moral values and good culture? How? It 
is the very basis of any society to have a clean country and to set example. I know that those 
sitting in the Opposition today, be it the MMM, be it the Mouvement Patriotique and be it on 
this side, people are not corrupt.  The hon. Leader of the Opposition is not a corrupt man.  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Alan Ganoo is not a corrupt man. Who is going to be hurt most in this country?  Who? 
It  is  not  le  Parti  Travailliste  of  Maurice  Curé,  of  Emmanuel  Anquetil  or  of  Renganaden 
Seeneevassen, not even the Parti Travailliste of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam or Sir Abdool 
Razack Mohamed, it is the Parti Travailliste of Navinchandra Ramgoolam.   

(Interruptions) 

This is where it is hurting, and today it is sad for our country.  Why it is sad for our country?  
It is because in the Labour Party today, we have got youths representing the Labour Party in 
Parliament today, and what they ought to have shown today is honour, integrity and respect. 

Mr Mohamed:  On a point of order! The hon. Member, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has 
just  pointed  his  finger  at  four  hon.  Members  here,  clearly  mentioning  us  ‘the  four  young 
Members of the Labour Party’.  I thank him for his compliment at least! 

(Interruptions) 

But what I do find objectionable is that he has said that we should have shown integrity.  We 
should have shown honour.  We should have shown honesty. In other words, he is saying we 
have shown no integrity, no honour and no honesty.   

(Interruptions) 

 

This is what the hon. Member said! 

47 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence!  Hon. Mohamed, I didn’t hear the hon. Member point 

to hon. Members, but I can listen to the recording and see to it.  Thank you.  

Please continue! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I can understand, it might hurt because the truth 
always hurts.  But I am not making direct attack or any scathing attack against my friends on 
the other side. What I am saying is that we, as hon. Members of Parliament, we should set 
examples. We should set the high moral standards.  We should set the high cultural standards 
in our politics. But unlike on the other side, I have learnt from my leader to be honest, to be a 
man of principle, a man of integrity. I am grateful that I learnt it at a very young age from my 
leader, hon. Ivan Collendavelloo.  

(Interruptions) 

And I am grateful that hon. Bodha referred earlier on to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in the 
Rault Report, a man of uncommon integrity, a man of honour, Sir Anerood Jugnauth.   

And this is what we need.   

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Soodhun!  I started by saying hon. Soodhun said to clean up the gundaraj. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please continue! 

Mr Rutnah:  I am coming to hon. Xavier Duval, step by step. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:    During  the  electoral  campaign,  hon.  Xavier  Duval  had  the  courage  to 
come  and  form  an  alliance  and  kick  the  Parti  Travailliste  of  Ramgoolam  and  to  come  on 
political arena and to fight corruption and fraud and he made it today, as one of the Deputy 
Prime Ministers in this House. 

 

48 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I heard what the hon. Leader of the Opposition said the other 
day when we were debating the constitutional amendment. He said that the MMM was an 
avant-garde against fraud, corruption and illicit enrichment.  Avant-gardiste! And set up the 
ICAC, but now after the election of 2005, the ICAC is dénaturé and the MMM has been and 
is  always  in  favour  of  an  unexplained  wealth  law  and  this  is  the  opportunity  today.    This 
Government  is  bringing  legislation  in  relation  to  unexplained  wealth.    We  have  now  this 
opportunity.  Yes, I agree there are a few nitty-gritties that need to be looked at and they have 
been looking at it and today, I am grateful and I support my very good friend, hon. Bhadain 
who brings this Bill into the House.  

When this House was locked for almost a year… 

The Deputy Speaker:  Come back to the Bill! 

Mr Rutnah: Yes, I am coming.  When this House was locked for almost a year, hon. 
Bhadain and I, as Members of the Bar, we were airing our voice against fraud, corruption and 
illicit enrichment.  Today, I am proud that he has had the audacity to bring this law into this 
House.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as I said, we have a mandate to clean up the country. What 
hon. Shakeel Mohamed said the other day?  He said that the Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting Bill is an invited guest of the Constitution. 

(Interruptions) 

No, you said it is an invited guest of the Constitution whereas others would be uninvited. But 
here,  we  are  not  dealing  with  like  the  nursery  rhyme  of  the  three  blind  mice  who  were 
running after the wife of the landlord and had their tail chopped with a carving knife. 

(Interruptions) 

We are not even dealing with the story of ‘Rintintin est un petit pantin malin’; 

(Interruptions) 

what  we  are  dealing  with  today  is  to  make  the  provision  of  the  law  that  we  are  going  to 
legislate  today  compatible  with  the  Constitution  of  our  country.    It  is  the  principle  of 
compatibility. It has nothing to do with invited or uninvited guest!  And I heard quite a lot 
about  ‘on  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister  with  the  consultation  of  the  leader  of  the 

 

49 

Opposition, etc.’.  Now, hon. Bhadain was the subject of scathing attack about the way he 
spoke and his understanding of the Constitution.  Now, let’s look at it a little bit! 

Let’s take, for example, section 77, to start with, of the Constitution which deals with 
the appointment of the Chief Justice. Now, who appoints the Chief Justice?  It is the President 
of this country who is the Head of the State, acting after consultation with the Prime Minister.  
Then, if we look at who appoints the President.  By virtue of section 28 of our Constitution, 
the President is elected by Assembly on a motion by the Prime Minister and supported by the 
votes of a majority of all the Members of the Assembly.  Now, are we going to say that - if 
we use the reasoning of my very able and learned friends: hon. Ramful, hon. Baloomoody as 
well - the President is not as Head of the State an independent person just because she has 
been elected by virtue of the principle that is enunciated in this House? No! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

No interruptions! 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: No! Let’s again look at the provision. Let’s look at, for example, section 
72 of the Constitution: the appointment of the DPP. Who appoints the DPP? The Judicial and 
Legal Service Commission! Who is the Judicial and Legal Service Commission? The Chief 
Justice,  the  Senior  Puisne  Judge  and  four  other  members  and  one  Chairman  of  the  Public 
Service  Commission.  Hon.  Ramful,  when  addressing,  stated:  why  don’t  we  leave  it  in  the 
hands of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission, an independent body to appoint those in 
the Agency. But, at the end of the day, the Chief Justice, the Chairman of the Public Service 
Commission is appointed by whom? Section 77 is the President after consultation with the 
Prime Minister and the President is appointed by the House on a motion made by the Prime 
Minister. So, where is the problem? Why suddenly we say that the JLSC is more independent 
than the President? If the President, on the advice of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister with the 
consultation  of  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  appoints  the  Agency.  Why?  So,  these  are 
matters that take us neither here nor there, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

50 

 
In relation to the point raised by my friend, hon. Baloomoody, he stated that in 1993, 
the  Tribunal  of  Fraud  and  Corruption  was  dealing  with  matters  arising  out  of  illicit 
enrichment.  He  also  referred  to  section  25  of  the  Economic  Crime  and  Anti-Money 
Laundering Act. He said, according to the Tribunal and section 25 of the Economic Crime 
and Anti-Money Laundering Act, the Supreme Court was seized. But let’s look at the Good 
Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, what is provides for. 

Firstly, there is a misunderstanding insofar as the role of the Executive is concerned in 
dealing  with  the  good  governance  aspect.  The  role  of  the  Agency  and  the  Board  is  not  to 
confiscate  any  assets.  The  role  of  the  Agency  and  the  Board  is  to  carry  out  what  we  call 
preliminary investigation: ask for explanation, if you can’t explain, it is only then that you are 
going to be referred to the Judge in Chambers. 

I understand my very able and learned friend, hon. Baloomoody, who then said why 
two Judge in Chambers with two affidavits. A Judge in Chambers sitting as Juge de référé 
has normally options when he received application by way of motion and affidavit. He can 
either grant an order on the basis of affidavit evidence or he can reject the application in toto 
or the third option that he can summon parties to show cause why an Order should not be 
made. If the Judge in Chambers feels that, on the basis of affidavit evidence, he cannot decide 
the case, he is going to send the matter to the Supreme Court. What happens in the Supreme 
Court?  In  the  Supreme  Court,  one  can  call  live  evidence,  that  is,  evidence  viva  voce  to 
explain and if you manage to explain your case at the stage where the matter is seized by the 
Juge de référé, that’s the end of the matter. Even if you do not manage to explain and you get 
an Order against you and you are not satisfied with the Order of the Judge, you can appeal 
against  that  decision  to  the  Supreme  Court.  Then,  if  still  you  are  not  satisfied  with  the 
Supreme Court, if the matter is sent by the  Juge de référé to the Supreme Court,  you can 
appeal.  Even  if  you  are  not  satisfied  with  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,  a  Court  of 
Appeal  (Civil  Division),  you  can  go  up  to  the  Judicial  Committee  of  Privy  Council.  So,  I 
don’t understand how if the matter is seized with the Juge de référé, Judge in Chambers, why 
it is so drastic that we have to make great distinction between what was happening in relation 
to section 25 of the Economic Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act. 

Insofar as affidavit evidence is concerned, I have a judgment of the European Court of 
Human Rights, a 2006 judgment in the case of Walsh against the United Kingdom. In that 
case, there was a proceeding in relation to a civil recovery proceedings and the applicant, Mr 
Walsh, challenged the process used. I will read a little bit from the Judgment to give clarity: 

 

51 

the applicant, Mr Walsh, complained that he was denied the presumption of innocence in the 
recovery  proceedings  as  the  civil  standard  of  proof  applied  and  the  proceedings  could  be 
conducted entirely by affidavit without the hearing of witness. And what the European Court 
of Human Rights held is that - 

 ‘recovery proceedings are regarded as civil, not criminal.’ 

And went on to say - 

 ‘court considered that the purpose of the proceedings was not punitive or deterrent 
but to recover assets which did not lawfully belong to the   applicant’ 

A lot has been said since the inception of this Bill about presumption of innocence, about 
burden of proof.  

Some have argued that this law is a colourable device, so to say, and it is, in effect, 
criminal rather than civil. But, no! The world is moving. The justice system is developing. 
We have to keep up with the development in the justice system to the international norms. If 
the proceeding is civil, never can the standard of proof be beyond reasonable doubt and never 
can  there  be  a  presumption  of  innocence.  These  are  basics.  It  can  only  be  on  balance  of 
probabilities. 

It is not for the first time that there is what we call the reversal burden of proof. We 
have got FIAMLA, for example. If you are deemed to have money by virtue of proceeds of 
crime, it is your duty to come and prove it under FIAMLA that these monies were not derived 
from  proceeds  of  crime.  So,  I  don’t  see  what  the  problem  is  when  in  this  law  there  is 
provision that you come and explain that the wealth that you have acquired is not wealth as a 
result of proceeds of crime, that you are not a drug baron, that you have not obtained it by 
virtue  of  corrupt  practices.  Today  is  a  day  where  we  have  to  stand  and  combat  fraud, 
corruption, illicit enrichment and money obtained by virtue of the sale of drugs, especially the 
drug barons. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a lot has also been said about the short time that was given to 
consider this Bill. It is for the first time in the political history of Mauritius that a Minister 
opened the debate months ago… 

It is for the first any Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, hon. Baloomoody!  

52 

 (Interruptions) 

No interruptions! Hon. Rutnah continue! 

(Interruptions) 

Please continue! 

Mr Rutnah: But, it is for the first time that hon. Bhadain went on TV with a team of 
lawyers,  had  consultations,  opened  the  debate  to  the  public,  went  to  the  Bar  Council  and 
everywhere and explained on the radio. Members of the Government went and defended the 
Bill, explained all the issues, all the nitty-gritty that needed to be explained. I am proud that I 
have got friends who sell dholl puri on the streets of Port Louis, I have got friends who sell 
peanuts  in  my  Constituency,  in  Rivière  du  Rempart,  I  have  friends  who  sell  cotomili  in 
Plaines des Roches in my Constituency, I have friends who are marchands ambulants. I am 
proud that they are my friends. I spoke to them and I said: “what do you think of this law”. 
Do you know what reply I got from most of them? Bizin casse le rein banne voleurs. 

This is the reply I received from them! And the majority of people in this country are 
conditioned  that  this  Government  should  act  and  should  act  very  quickly  in  order  to  curb 
criminality, in order to curb illicit enrichment. Can you imagine, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in 
2005, a young man or a teenager who was about 15 years old, in nine years of the reign of 
Navin Ramgoolam as Prime Minister, he reached the age of 24 or a man who was 18 years 
old in 2005 and grew up for nine years with the culture of the former Prime Minister, when 
he is in nine years, 27 he grew up with the culture that he should make easy money, tracer 
pou gagne la vie! Or sell cotomili to become rich! Or tousse sali to become rich! Or to join a 
nation de zougaderes!  We have given an undertaking to the people of Mauritius that we are 
going to clean up the country. Even if a Kärcher is needed, the Kärcher will be used! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, insofar as the retrospective aspect of this law is concerned, 
much has been said. But, this is not for the first time in Mauritius law is being presented so 
that it would be applied à l’effet rétroactif.  If I can refer to the Hansard of Monday, 7 July 
2014, in relation to an exchange that was going on between the then Prime Minister and the 
Leader of the Opposition who is today the Leader of the Opposition. Listen to the question of 
the then Leader of the Opposition - 

53 

 
“Mr Speaker, Sir, as we know, the Constitution has it that we cannot create criminal 
offences avec effet rétroactif. This is the Constitution; this is the law of the land. Can I 
take it from the hon. Prime Minister that the new legislation that will come to set up 
the  Serious  Fraud  Agency  and  strengthen  our  anti-corruption  arsenal  will  have  the 
power to investigate past or recent offences under the present legislation, especially 
cases of conflict of interest and trafic d’influence, that, indeed, that new Agency will 
have  –  because  these  are  offences  already  existing  –  the  power  to  look  backwards 
over the recent years and enquire anew into any allegation of an offence having been 
committed?” 

And what was the answer of the then Prime Minister? 

“In  fact,  that  is  what  we  are  proposing,  because  some  offences  are  actually  being 
investigated and we do not want to stop the investigation.  They will follow up, even 
on the recent past. We have done the same with the Asset Recovery Act.”   

We are now talking about the Asset Recovery Act of 2011 which came into force in February 
2012 and then amended again in 2012! 

“At the beginning, we had to bring an amendment, because it was not retrospective, 
but we found what the criminals were saying were - well, this was before the Act was 
followed. In fact, we were told that it should have been retroactive, but we decided 
when it came to Cabinet - maybe not - it might give the wrong signal.  But we decided 
afterwards that it was a mistake, and we corrected it. This would be the same with the 
Serious Fraud Agency.” 

Why  on  earth?  Why?  If  we  know  that  people  have  acquired  wealth  by  way  of 
proceeds of crime, why are we not going to legislate retrospectively in order to seize those 
properties by awful means? Why? Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is our duty. Today it is what we 
owe to our people, to our nation, to our children who are growing for the future tomorrow, 
that we should not live in the past. The criminals work sophisticatedly and their crime has 
taken an unprecedented level of sophistication and we have to be a step ahead of us.  

This is the duty today that we have been called upon.  To legislate, so that Mauritius 
becomes a clean country and to set up an example at international level to bring back culture 
of morality so as to make Mauritius become a platform where there will be clean investment. 
Our  people,  our  children  in  this  country  will  get  job  and  there  will  be  diversification  of 
economies and the country will progress because this is what, after all, we have been voted 

 

54 

for by the people who voted as one nation, as one people so that we can live in peace, justice 
and liberty. 

On this note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank you, all Members and the hon. Minister. 

(3.44 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  shall  start  my  intervention  by  saying  that  I  listened  with  a  lot  of 
interest to my hon. friend, Mr Rutnah.  May be he does not believe that I am saying that, but I 
did find him interesting.  I do not agree with what he said, however.  That also, I will explain 
and it will also be very interesting as to why I am not in agreement with him.   

Yesterday,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  when  I  intervened  on  the  issue  of  the 
Constitution (Amendment) Bill  - in response to my remarks and those remarks were only 
made as I had explained with the view of being constructive, with the view of coming up with 
suggestions as to how we could ensure that whatever there was in legislation, we could block 
all  the  loopholes  in  order  to  obtain  guarantees  through  our  concerted  efforts  that  such 
legislation  would  not  be  turned  down  and  cast  aside  as  being  in  violation  of  certain 
fundamental  rights  of  our  Constitution  by  Courts  of  laws,  be  it  the  Supreme  Court  or  the 
Privy Council.  That was the intention of us for speaking through me yesterday.  It is quite 
sad that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister thought that I had derailed. It seems as though, if I do not 
speak or see in the same direction as Government, the Government believes this is an event 
that  they  described  as  derailment.    There  is  no  one  path  that  leads  to  the  concept  of 
democracy.  It has never been the action of one man or the vision of one man that has led to 
truthfulness in a democratic society.  It has always been the effort of one and all, sticking our 
minds  together,  putting  our  hands  together  to  try  to  sculpt  what  becomes  a  formidable 
democratic State.  

So, forgive me, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if the Rt. hon. Prime Minister believes that if 
I view things differently, with the same objective, this is called derailment.  Let me then say, 
yes, he is right. I would then enjoy being that person who is of little mind, he said, this little 
mind that has gone topsy-turvy. I enjoy this topsy-turvy attitude because in my humble mind 
- little mind he believes -  I hope  I am only contributing and if  I  am not,  I  apologise. The 
newspapers could not even understand what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said because they 
thought he said his legal mind and they did not hear him saying little mind. I guess this was 
an honest mistake on their part. But what he said, in fact, was little mind. I am sure that he 

 

55 

does not mean wrong. I am sure he does not mean to attack me in any way personally, but it 
is a methodology of work that I have to get used to. I am convinced and I hope I am right that 
it was not meant to any way undermine the role of the Opposition or undermine the role of 
us, Members of the Labour Party, but it was the debate under the heat of exchange that this 
was said. Therefore, I shall not pay heed and take it badly. I hope that this time I shall not 
derail even though we do not see eye to eye. 

Now, this reminds me of something else that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said ‘look at 
me in the eye’. I remember he says that when I just came in as Member of Parliament when 
he was Prime Minister in January, but anyway, let bygones be bygones for now, at least. 

Let us come to what hon. Bodha said in his intervention. It is very important for us to 
cover  those  important  aspects  in  this  debate.  It  is  quite  amazing  how  people  change  their 
stance or their opinions depending on which side of the House they sit. I never expected that 
from hon. Bodha though. Because you see the first time that I went on TV- I always say that 
and you always say that to me as well, at least, for that we look eye to eye - to address a 
political  issue  was  with  the  MSM  with  hon.  Bodha  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.  It  is 
amazing how a lot of things have happened since then. Time has gone by. We have been on 
opposite sides, we have been together and now we are on opposite sides again, but does that 
mean that we have to fight it out at every single moment? I hope not. 

What  is  amazing  is  that  how  hon.  Bodha  said  that  in  2006  there  was  a  PQ  on  Mr 
Hemant Bangaleea - I have had the honour of meeting that gentleman - and he talked about 
this  issue  of  Rs200  m.  and  he  said  that  nothing  happened  ten  years  later.    But  what  did 
happen  and  how  he  takes  strong  objection  to  what  happened  in  2006  and  Mr  Hemant 
Bangaleea  and  Rs200  m.  But  four  years  later,  what  happened?    I  won’t  tell  you  what 
happened ten years later, but what I will tell you what happened, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
four years later, was an alliance between the MSM and the Labour Party.  That is forgotten.  
How come he has forgotten about that alliance when we sat together in Cabinet and never did 
I hear hon. Bodha in those days talk about this Hemant Bangaleea.  I did not hear.  What was 
amazing is that we were in alliance.  We stood together on electoral platforms.  We talked 
with one voice.  As hon. Rutnah says: one people, one nation.  It was as though we were hand 
in hand, walking together towards this path that would lead us to electoral victory in 2010. 
But at no time then, I did hear - during the campaign, after the campaign, while we were in 
Cabinet, while we were in Parliament - the MSM talk about Hemant Bangaleea!  Why is that 
when we were together, all of a sudden he went quiet? Why? 

 

56 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Minister, silence please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Member, can you come back to the Bill. 

Mr Mohamed: I am sorry, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hon. 
Bodha opened the door when he said he referred to specific situations.  He opened the debate 
and now he opened the door and I walk in. 

(Interruptions) 

Actually, I am an invited guest.  Thank you, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

And I am not leaving that soon.  I am here to stay and to ensure that I make a bit of a mess. 

Now, in 2012, he talked about something else.  He said that the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition  had  also  once  again  talked  about  Mr  Bangaleea.    He  goes  on  to  talk  about 
Betamax.   

(Interruptions) 

Let us be serious. You see I stand here before you … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  You see how they are arguing now.  I am enjoying that.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Please continue! 

Mr Mohamed:  Now, I stand here before you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Mohamed:  When he opened such a door, he never knew that I would run in this 
time.  Why do I run in?  Because I remember the good days – I still call them good days –I 
enjoyed every minute of the time that we were in alliance together.  

 

I did. 

I enjoyed it. 

57 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Mohamed:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I enjoyed. My good friend now, the Chief 
Whip,  I  only  remember  him  sitting  on  this  side,  was  it?    This  side  then.    But  we  were 
together. In those days I remember hon. Soodhun who was in Cabinet together with me and I 
remember the PNQ … 

Yes, whatever you say. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

He is the great man behind me.  So, I remember him standing and answering a question … 

(Interruptions) 

Remember the PNQ! Yes! Whatever the hon. Member says! 

(Interruptions) 

And he is the great man behind me! So, I remember him standing and answering a question 
put by the hon. Leader of the Opposition and he was just behind, the second row.  I remember 
the time when he defended everything to do with Betamax and ensured that no one could get 
away. 

(Interruptions) 

Did  he  not  say,  in  those  days,  that  everything  was  in  order?  Did  he  not  say  that  he  had 
verified and that everything was legally in order? That is what hon. Showkutally Soodhun 
said, and he is a good man. He is a good man. You know why I find this so entertaining, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir?  Because members of the public should be wondering.  Wait a minute!  
When he was in Government with the then hon. Prime Minister, Dr. N. Ramgoolam, he said 
everything was legally in order.  And in those days, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was President 
of the Republic and, in those days, the hon. Leader of the Opposition put the questions and hit 

 

58 

his head against a wall that could not let anything in, and that wall, unbreakable, was hon. 
Showkutally Soodhun. 

I am complimenting him on his strength! 

(Interruptions) 

Today, I find hon. Bodha come up with those things as though all those issues are so 
relevant  to  this  piece  of  legislation!  Let  me  say  that  hon.  Bodha  has  got  the  art  of 
communication. He is an expert in the field, but I have just discovered that he has another 
ability: of drowning the fish! Now, he has an excellent ability of drowning the fish. We say 
so  in  good  mood,  in  banter,  because  we  share  amongst  ourselves  and  we  laugh  amongst 
ourselves, but the objective is that we all want to find this common ground: how could we do 
better for the people out there? That is the whole idea of the debate because I am scared of 
saying anything wrong and I find myself arrested again. I mean that is what I am saying. So, 
let me just try put warnings there. 

(Interruptions) 

Now,… 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruption, please! 

Mr Mohamed: Let me come to hon. Rutnah! Hon. Rutnah entertained us as well. As 
I said, I found it very interesting and he referred to a judgement of 21 November 2006 of the 
European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  which  is  the  case  of  Cecil  Stephen  Walsh  versus  the 
United  Kingdom.    In  that  particular  case,  he  referred  to  this  case  for  only  one  reason.  
Because he tried to demonstrate through that case whether the issue of the right of silence 
was  infringed  or  not,  and  he  showed  that  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  that 
particular case said there was no infringement against the right of silence. But what he failed 
to inform us - and it is his habit; a very intelligent man, cunning, not to say - for the purpose 
of Hansard, at least, is that this case refers to post-conviction situations. This case refers to 
someone after he has been tried, after he has been convicted, after he has been found guilty of 
certain crimes, and the reason why, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, les éléments et la jurisprudence 
that hon. Rutnah refers to is not relevant at all to our case is because nowhere in this Good 
Governance  and  Integrity  Report  Bill  -  welcome  hon.  Minister,  you  have  been  absent,  we 
missed you -, nowhere in this piece of legislation - we have to have a good time, come on, 
let’s  be  -  do  I  find  the  word  ‘unlawful’.  Nowhere  in  this  Bill  do  I  find  the  word  ‘crime’, 
nowhere in this Bill do I find the word ‘illegal’, nowhere in this Bill do I find anything that 

 

59 

has  anything  to  do  with  suspicion,  with  crime,  illegality,  unlawfulness,  wrongdoing; 
nowhere!  That  is  the  difference  between  this  Bill  and  what  is  provided  for  in  all  other 
jurisdictions. I have heard hon. Members talk of Ireland, I have heard hon. Members talk of 
Columbia, I have heard hon. Members talk of Australia as reference to what happens in other 
jurisdictions as though saying ‘well, it is being done in other jurisdictions. Halt! Let’s wait a 
minute!’ In all the brethren of countries, how come only three are referred to?  Three! What 
about the other countries in the world? How come they are not coming up with such pieces of 
legislation and how come we are the only one in the world, right now, as we speak today, 
where nowhere, not a single place in this legislation is referenced to unlawful acts or offences 
or illegality or crime referred to? Why it is devoid of any such word? Why? Why is it that in 
Australia it is connected to crime? Why is it in Columbia it is connected to crime? Why is it 
in  Ireland  it  is  connected  to  crime?  Why  is  it  that  it  is  only  in  Mauritius  and  in  no  other 
country in the world there is no need for it to be connected to crime, only to the element of it 
being unexplained and nothing else? Because there is nothing in section 2 of the definition 
that says that whatever is unexplainable is criminal. 

Therefore, it is possible, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that you cannot explain something 
though honest, but you will have it confiscated - even though you can’t explain totally; you 
can’t.  And there, I would like to refer to what I have seen, that is, the object of this Bill. 
What  should  have  been  entered  into  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  is  something  which  I 
have heard between the lines, I have heard amongst the Members, but has not been inserted in 
the  Explanatory  Memorandum.  I  read  a  very  interesting  article  in  the  newspaper  Le 
Mauricien, and that article of 14 November 2015 talks about a congrès du Muvman Liberater. 

 (Interruptions) 

I don’t know why the hon. Member is getting worried. Don’t be scared, I am here! 
This  ‘Congrès  Muvman  Liberater’  is  the  title,  and  everyone  knows  that  if  the  legislator 
comes  to  pass  a  Bill  in  order  to  attack  itself  to  only  one  class  of  people  and  one  class  of 
citizens, this law is null and void and is a violation of the Constitution. One cannot do that; 
pass a law in order to attack oneself to a class of persons. This is precisely what this Bill is all 
about. I don’t need to go and look around and decipher any equation. I saw it in the Press. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Collendavelloo,  said  this  morning  that  he  is  not  an 
inventor. He is but a lawyer who happens to be a Minister.  And as a lawyer, when he says 
things like ‘premier ki pou gagne bezé, c’est Parti travailliste’… 

 

60 

(Interruptions) 

Here we go! If only Hansard could record what is being said to what I have just stated, the 
answer immediately from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister from a sitting position was ‘Mais oui. 
Vrai même!’ and what was said by hon. Rutnah was ‘Mais oui!’ In other words, there is no 
need for any conviction; there is no need for anything.  As we see here, what is worse, what 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister said. He said here … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruption, please! 

Mr  Mohamed:…que  la  police  avait  trouvé  des  coffres-forts  contenant  R  220 
millions ; … a refusé de donner des explications. Refuser de donner des explications is a right 
of  silence  that  is  a  sacrosanct  principle  under  our  Constitution.  Refuser  de  donner  des 
explications c’est notre droit de silence. That exists under our law. This is a matter that seems 
to have irritated the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, and he goes on to say “a refusé de donner des 
explications  quant  à  la  provenance  de  cette  somme.”  As  I  have  said,  qui  est  un  droit, 
sacrosanct principle, right of silence. 

(Interruptions) 

Aussi, est-il d’avis que ce dernier doit le faire. Doit le faire! In other words, simply because 
you cannot say that it is criminal, you cannot establish that it is unlawful, the only thing you 
can do is scream from rooftops that it is, without any evidence that it is; you cannot say that it 
is illegal, you cannot prove anything of what you scream from rooftops. But what do you do? 

How do you manage to ensure that you go around that problem? What problem, the right of 
silence under our Constitution? What problem, our legal system? How do you go around it?  
Eureka!  Let’s come up with an Integrity Bill.  Let’s come up with this piece of legislation 
where we will not call it criminal, we will call it civil; where we will change the burden of 
proof;  where  we  will  say:  “listen!  We  can’t  prove  it,  so  we  don’t  need  to  even  establish 
crime.” We don’t even have to say it is criminal.  Let’s just say it is ‘unexplained’ and we 
will manage to get our paws on those Rs220 m. Contributions to a political party? You can’t 
explain it; we will get our paws onto it - thank you very much! Because the rule of the game 
is what? That is where I believe we have to be very careful. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

Mr  Mohamed:    This  is  a  matter  that  has  already  been  placed  before  our  Supreme 
Court.  This  is  a  matter  that  has  already  started  trial  and  proceedings  before  our  Judicial 
System.  There are Courts of Law that have already assumed jurisdiction in the case of Dr. 
Navin Ramgoolam. That is a fact! And, here, I speak to you as a lawyer. 

(Interruptions) 

So, while the Courts are already dealing with the matter, the legislature comes forward 
and  decides,  Government  comes  forward  and  say:  “wait  a  minute,  you  may  have  started 
looking into the matter, the matter is sub judice.  The matter is being looked into by Courts 
and Judges, but it doesn’t matter, let’s change the rule of the game while the game is being 
played.”   

And this reminds me - and here, I refer to Basu’s Comparative Constitutional Law.  The 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  I  am  sure,  knows  this  document  very  well  because  he  is  an 
experienced lawyer, and everything I am saying, he knows, he is not basically speaking out of 
my hat, but he is just referring to what the law says. I will not invent anything, I will just refer 
to what the legal principles are and that’s it! And I will try to be legalistic and not a little 
minded. 

Now, here, I refer to what this case is all about. Mrs Gandhi - I read from this book – 

“Mrs Gandhi’s election to the House of the people was challenged before the Allahabad 
High Court by the respondent. After the High Court by its decision of June 1975 set 
aside  the  election  finding  that  Mrs  Gandhi  had  been  guilty  of  corrupt  practice,    Mrs 
Gandhi was by that time the Prime Minister; obtain from Parliament the Constitution 
(39th Amendment) Act of 1975 which came into force on the 10th August 1975.  It is 
evident that the italicised words in Article 329A, as quoted above, sought to directly 
supersede  the  finding  and  decision  of  the  High  Court  by  the  amendment  of  the 
Constitution  in  question.  The  three  Judges  in  the  majority:  Khanna,  Mathew  and 
Chandrachud agreed that Parliament has usurped a function which essentially belongs 
to the Judiciary, namely to decide particular cases upon pleadings and after hearing of 
the parties.” 

And  now,  why  do  I  refer  to  this?  It’s  because  I  have  gone  through  this  particular 
legislation.  And  when  I  said  yesterday  that  there  is  an  issue  with  regard  to  separation  of 
powers, I was very serious. Separation of powers, why?  Because this legislation permits and 
allows  this  new  Agency  that  is  being  created,  to  stop  proceedings  and  ask  all  other 

 

62 

enforcement authorities to halt proceedings, stay proceedings and take over and pull it out 
from where it is and decide to give it its own direction. This is what it is stated in the law and 
this is not something I am inventing. 

Now, it is stated here –  

“Where the Board determines that the Agency shall initiate action on a complaint, no 
further action for the confiscation of property shall be taken thereon by an enforcement 
authority”.  

‘Other enforcement authorities’ defined in section 2 of this law.  Other institutions!   

Donc, il est nécessaire, M. le président, de comprendre ce qui se passe.  Ce qui se passe 
c’est qu’il y a une instance judiciaire, précisément la Cour Suprême de notre île, et devant 
cette Cour Suprême, l’affaire de l’ancien Premier ministre s’y trouve.  Le juge de cette Cour 
Suprême  has  assumed  jurisdiction.  But  this  legislation,  cette  proposition  de  l’honorable 
ministre,  et  le  contenu  de  ce  qui  est  proposé  ici,  vient  mettre  en  péril  la  séparation  de 
pouvoir ; et je m’explique, parce que de par la clause 8(4) et de par la clause 8(4) (c), c’est 
permis, et ce sera totalement légale pour que l’autorité, et l’agence concernée, demandent à 
prendre contrôle de cette affaire et à diriger les opérations parce que cela aussi concerne une 
affaire of confiscation of property, which is Rs220 m.  

Therefore, under this law, there is a direct attempt and violation of the separation of 
powers.    It  is  possible  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  other  Ministers  of  this 
Government did not realise that it could go as far as that and I believe that they did not realise 
it. But this is what happens! I would like to hear from the hon. Minister - and come and tell 
us, if this is not the case, amend the law to say that you cannot change the course of the game 
when  proceedings  are  already  starting  before  Court  of  laws.    Because  if  it  does  not  say  it 
here,  this  means,  even  though  a  case  has  already  started  before  a  Court  of  law,  you  can 
intervene and interfere and take control.  This is what it means. If this is not as was explained 
in  Basu,  as  had  Mrs  Gandhi,  then  Prime  Minister  tried  to  do,  as  condemned  and  found  a 
violation of the separation of powers by three Judges of Allahabad, this is what?  

Therefore, it is very important to say: “Yes, fight corruption. Yes, unexplained wealth”. 
But  I  fail to understand, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, why is it that we happen to be the only 
jurisdiction to have a few pages, where not a single line there talks of crime and unlawful or 
illegal.  En d’autres mots, il n’est pas nécessaire pour que l'agence vienne dire que quelque 
chose est illégale.  Il ne sera plus nécessaire pour que l’agence ou le conseil d’administration 

 

63 

vienne  établir  quoi  que  ce  soit  d’illégal  ou  un  délit  quelconque.    Il  sera  suffisant,  M.  le 
président, pour que l’agence, ou même le conseil d’administration de cette instance vienne 
devant une Cour, un juge, et vient dire: “Voilà, on vous demande un ordre pour unexplained 
wealth.  And we don’t have to tell you anything else! And why I believe this also to be wrong 
is for the following reasons.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is something else that happened in Australia and I will 
read here a document from Lund University, written by Helén Örnemark in 2012, and it is 
‘Sweden’s Forfeiture Regime in a Time of Change.’ It is a comparative study of Swedish and 
Australian  law  regarding  forfeiture  of  unexplained  wealth.    And,  in  Australia,  this  is  what 
happens and this is precisely what will not happen in Mauritius. In this piece of legislation 
proposed by the hon. Minister, when we start out, we see – parce qu’il est nécessaire que 
tous ceux présents à cette Chambre puissent comprendre how it works  Parce que tout ce 
temps-là, vous avez écouté qu’un seul son de cloche.  Now, let’s listen to the other one!  And 
what you are voting for, don’t just vote blindly!  Know what you are voting for!  Because 
what starts, here, is this – 

“An application made under this Act shall constitute civil proceedings.” 

  Ça, ce n’est pas un problème.  Il n’y a rien de nouveau dans cela that it will be civil, as we 
have heard.  In other laws, we have civil process.  No problem! But where it hurts, là où le 
bât blesse, c’est que -  

“The onus shall lie on the respondent to establish on a balance of probabilities that any 
property is not unexplained wealth.” 

From the word ‘go’, the burden, la responsabilité de la preuve, ça incombe à ce citoyen qui 
doit venir s’expliquer comment he has purchased and acquired his property.  

I read from this document - 

“The crucial issue for the deponent is therefore to specify the reasons, source, basis 
for the suspicion.” 

Therefore, in Australia the authorised officer which is the Agency or the Board that 
goes to the Judge in Chambers and says I want an Unexplained Wealth Order, in Australia, he 
does it by affidavit, as is proposed here and the affidavit - there are reasonable suspicions. He 
has to say in it that I have reasonable suspicion. Mais il n’est pas suffisant qu’il dise au juge 
“I  have  reasonable  suspicions”.  But,  he  has  to  say  that  the  value  of  the  person’s  wealth 

 

64 

exceeds  the  value  of  person’s  wealth  that  was  lawfully  acquired.  His  affidavit  must  also 
include the grounds on which the officer holds the suspicion. If this is done, the Court must 
be satisfied that the authorised officer has reasonable grounds to support his/her suspicion. 

Alors,  M.  le  président  et  les  honorables  membres,  ce  que  j’aimerais  vous  faire 
comprendre c’est qu’en Australie il est nécessaire, mandatory for you to go and tell the Judge 
that  I  have  reasonable  suspicion.  Therefore,  case  law  indicates  in  the  case  of  International 
Finance  Trust  Company  v  New  South  Wales.  The  Judge  stated  that  the  authorised  officer 
must explain why the suspicion is held by specifying the reasons, sources and basis for the 
suspicion.  Ce  n’est  pas  suffisant  pour  qu’il  vienne  simplement  dire :  ‘Donnez-moi  le 
Unexplained Wealth Order’. Ce n’est pas suffisant de venir dire au Juge ‘Donnez-moi ça  et 
c’est à lui de venir s’expliquer.’ Non! 

En  Australie,  il  est  nécessaire  pour  que  cet  officier  de  l’Agence  ou  de  l’instance 
concernée vienne démontrer au juge that he has reasonable suspicion, not simply say it but 
demonstrate it, in what way. And this is what the Judge in the Courts of Australia says –  

“The deponent must state why he or she has the suspicion that the person in question 
has engaged in serious criminal activity. The important thing is to find relevant proof 
to base the suspicion on. Not until grounds for this are clearly set out.  The Court can 
move on to ascertain whether the deponent’s suspicion is reasonable or not.”  

And this is provided for by the Prevention of Crime Act in Australia section 179 (b) (ii) and 
(b) (i). The law provides that it is not simply for the asking that you get, it is to protect abuse 
from  authorities  that  they  have  to  go  before  the  Judge  and  explain  what  is  reasonable 
suspicion, why do they want the Unexplained Wealth Order. 

Then  it  says  here,  it  is  from  that  moment  –  C’est  de  là  une  fois  que  l’officier  en 
question, M. le président, est allé voir le Juge, a expliqué le Juge, voilà les soupçons que j’ai 
et ces soupçons sont basés sur les éléments qu’il définit comme raisonnable et seulement là , 
à partir de ce moment preçis que la preuve, the burden and the onus moves to the other party 
where the other party now will have to say : “ Okay, you have established the foundation to 
the Judge, now I come and tell you if the burden is on me.” 

With  that,  I  would  have  no  problems.  But  what  this  legislation  says  –  there  is  no 
obligation  on  the  proposal  of  hon.  Bhadain.  Il  n’y  a  pas  d’obligation  pour  que  l’Agence 
démontre  quoique  ce  soit  au  Juge.  Il  n’y  a  pas  d’obligation  pour  que  l’Agence  explique 
quoique  ce  soit  au  Juge.  La  loi  a  dit  simplement  que  cette  agence  et  ce  conseil 

 

65 

d’administration  doit  simplement  venir  dire  au  Juge :  « donnez-moi  ce  que  je  veux »  et  le 
Juge doit simplement dire : « Okay, il s’agit de demander qu’est-ce que vous avez à dire ». 
Immédiatement, sans que le fondement ait été préparé, la fondation, la base ait été préparée 
ou expliquée devant le Juge, c’est le citoyen qui doit venir s’expliquer. C’est un système qui 
n’existe même pas en Australie. C’est un système qui n’existe même pas en Irlande. C’est un 
système qui n’existe même pas en Colombie. Unique ! Et ces pays-là n’ont même pas une 
Constitution écrite et nous on l’a et en sus de cela on a l’impression qu’on oublie simplement 
les éléments de notre Constitution écrite. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir - and this is where it is quite amazing – clause 16 of this Bill 

–  

“Where the Agency makes an application for an Unexplained Wealth Order and the 
Judge in Chambers is satisfied that the respondent has unexplained wealth, he shall 
make an Unexplained Wealth Order.” 

En Australie, ce n’est pas comme ça. En Australie, it is where the Agency makes an 
application  for  Unexplained  Wealth,  the  Agency  must  explain  to  the  Judge  what  is  the 
reasonable suspicion and what are the elements upon which they base themselves to say that 
there  is  reasonable  suspicion  and  it  is  provided  for  in  the  law  in  Australia  by  section  179 
(b)(1)(ii).  But in Mauritius, there is no need to provide for reasonable suspicion and that is 
the  danger  because  –  and  I  say  here  to  hon.  Rutnah  who  always  tells  me  that  he  is  also 
someone who qualified at the New York Bar. He always tells me that he practised law in the 
States,  and  therefore,  he  will  understand  what  I  say  when  I  talk  of  civil  liberties.  Civil 
liberties are not limited to matters of criminal law. Civil liberties are also in matters of civil 
rights.  Civil  liberties  are  also  with  regard  to  civil  remedies.  The  right  of  the  citizen  is  not 
limited only when you have got human rights only when it comes to criminal matters but not 
civil law? This is a new concept altogether! Civil liberties are what we are talking about.  

Civil liberties, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, are we to go and give a new definition to it? 
What I am talking about here is that finally, even to go to the Judge in Chambers what the 
legislator  is  saying,  what  is  proposed  in  this  Bill  is  a  violation  of  separation  of  powers 
because  we  are  not  giving  this  person  any  discretion.  Are  we  giving  the  discretion  to  the 
Judge? Are we telling him: “Listen, we have to convince you first; we have to give you the 
foundation first; we have to explain to you what we are basing ourselves upon; what is our 
reasonable  suspicion,  we  cannot  just  knock  at  your  door  and  simply  say  well,  because  we 

 

66 

don’t like the political party he belongs to or we don’t like his opinion or we don’t like the 
speeches he makes or he attacks us too much or he speaks against us that much! Just because 
of that we come and ask you for an Unexplained Wealth Order!” Is that what the framers of 
our Constitution wanted or is this what they wanted to avoid? Civil liberties! When you talk 
in the name of liberty and One People and One Nation, that does not mean that we forget les 
éléments  principaux  de  notre  Constitution.  Civil  liberties!  In  the  name  of  civil  liberty,  we 
can’t forget and we should not forget, we cannot curtail and we should not curtail those civil 
liberties.  

Why is it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I read here –  

“Even though the reverse onus has been justified by Judges around the world, it has 
been questioned in doctrine.” 

And I am not questioning the reverse onus. In actual fact, I have done enough reading to say: 
“Why  should  I  question  the  reverse  onus?”  I  believe  it  is  totally  acceptable,  in  my  view, 
provided that the onus starts with the applicant for the Order. The applicant for the Order, the 
Agency,  must  ask  and  explain  why  they  wanted  and  this  must  be  provided  for  in  the 
legislation. Is this too much what I am asking, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? Is this too much to 
simply add here that the Agency must establish what the reasonable suspicion is in order to 
come and ask for the Unexplained Wealth Order under clause 16? Is that so unfair? Because 
what we are saying here is that you simply ask for it.  

Why is it that the Australian legislators thought it was important to put it in their law? 
Why is it that our legislators don’t think it is important to have it in our law? Why? What 
makes us so special? Why do we have to be so different? If the intention is not to harm, if the 
hon. Prime Minister says outright that he wants to go with honour, I have no reason to doubt 
what he says not an iota of a second.  I have no reason to doubt the words of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister. But I’ll join him on one thing, it is not a question of speaking only, it is a 
question of acting. This does not apply to me only, but applies to him as well. If we have to 
do it and I have no reason to doubt your words, I have no reason to doubt your resolve, I have 
no reason to doubt your commitment, but here, the only thing I am asking for is let us not 
violate the separation of powers. Let us make it at equal arms. Let us create a situation where 
there is not une situation de dominé et de dominant. Let us make a situation where you want 
to go back in seven years, go back in seven years, but let us go before a Court of law at equal 
arms  where  no  one  can  simply  go  and  tell  the  Judge:  “Give.”  And  I  don’t  even  have  to 

 

67 

convince the Judge for anything else: “Les Australiens sont tombés sur la tête ou le ciel leur 
est tombé sur la tête.” Je ne sais pas pourquoi eux, ils demandent qu’ils doivent convaincre un 
juge  des  éléments  élémentaires  –  the  foundation.  Pourquoi  eux  ils  doivent  le  faire,  down 
under? Maybe they just got a bad dream and are doing it there. They are wrong! They have 
started it long ago. We keep on talking about Australia, but we don’t do what they do. We 
follow exactly what they don’t do and then we talk ourselves what novateur, modern State! 
We want to fight corruption. 

You cannot fight corruption with a hand that harms the innocent. You cannot fight 
corruption if your own legislation does not talk of corruption. This Bill does not even talk of 
corruption. It does not talk about crime. It does not talk about unlawful elements. 

Exactly! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Now, allow me to say simply something here. I would like to address… 

(Interruptions) 

I am happy that my words are provoking this exchange because that’s the whole point. 

I would like to address a very important part of this whole issue. We started out as the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition said: “On a commencé il y a très longtemps.” Even though it 
has  been  only  maybe  a  couple  of  days  or  months  less,  but  it  seems  that  we  have  been 
discussing for years. Why it does not feel that it has been going on for a long time is because 
we have been going round and round. Let’s not cry over spilt milk. I would have preferred 
the hon. Minister to start consultations before the First Reading. He has decided otherwise. I 
have no reason to doubt that it was for any other reason maybe. This happened to be the case. 
So much the better! We have had this discussion yesterday; legal research has been carried 
out on both sides. 

We still have not seen the proposed amendment circulated with regard to the method 
of nomination, be it of the Director or the Head of the Board. When I read section 64 of our 
Constitution and when we talk about the powers of the President and I had exchanges with 
friends from the other side where, with a view of finding a solution, I have explained to some 
friends who will recognise themselves, but  I don’t want to  embarrass them by mentioning 
them by name. I have suggested something and I believe this is the case. 

68 

 
Some hon. Members of Parliament who are all friends of mine, it is important - well, 
all of them are friends really, sometimes less than others, but then we are friends again after a 
few hours of discussion, it is like that.  All of us have to understand one thing.  There is  a 
difference  between  consultation  and  advice.  It  is  not  innocent  that,  in  the  second  draft 
proposed by hon. Bhadain, there is a difference between who is consulted and who is giving 
him advice. 

My personal point of view and my reading of the Constitution says if the President is 
under  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister,  she  has  to  follow  that  advice.  Her  Excellency,  the 
President of the Republic, when taking advice from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister must follow 
that advice, but, after consultation, there is no obligation for Her Excellency to follow that 
view of the hon. Prime Minister because it is consultation. This is what is provided for under 
sections 61(1), 64(1) and 64(4). That’s different. There is a difference in other words between 
consultation and advice because I heard certain hon. Members saying :  c’est la même chose, 
mais  ce  n’est  pas  la  même  chose.  Consultation  and  advice  are  different  and  provided  for 
under two different subsections of section 64. 

However, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that he wants to go out with honour and it 
is not at this age that he is, in any way, going to bafouer la démocratie. He also added and I 
said  it  just  now  and  I  repeat  it  that  one  cannot  just  talk  about  things,  but  one  must  act.  I 
humbly request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to act here. I believe that my request is not unfair. 
It is very fair. 

(Interruptions) 

I have not seen it. So, please, if I am just filling space and talking. Maybe if I had seen it I 
would have not said, but what I am suggesting is the following, there are views… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruption, please! 

Mr Mohamed: My hunch says that I totally agree with views expressed by various 
Members of this House where they say that democracy is evolved. True it is that once upon a 
time a lot of the powers were in the hands of the Prime Minister, but the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition was right and I learn from his experience, and I have to bow to the knowledge he 
has. We all learn at all ages, that things evolved and gradually, as in other countries of the 
world, but through the political parties with their own ideologies at the time, they thought it 
was necessary to give more powers to the President and this is precisely what has kept on 

 

69 

happening over the  years. This is a good direction that this country has taken whereby we 
remove  decisions  from  members  of  the  Executive,  not  because  the  Executive  would 
necessarily make wrong decisions, but precisely because we want to give the perception that 
it is correct. We may have whatever views about the President, but the fact remains is we 
have all respect for the presidency. That is a fact! 

So, what I say and what I believe we should do is continue in that same lignée and 
ensure that whatever proposal is made and I am sure my hunch says it’s not there that the 
specific  words  in  her  own  deliberate  judgment  should  be  in  that  amendment.  Why  do  I 
humbly  suggest  that  it  should  read  ‘in  her  own  deliberate  judgment’  is  precisely  because 
those  are  the  words  in  our  Constitution.    What  is  quite  sad  is  that  the  framers  of  our 
Constitution section 64(1) already provided for that. Why? Because they thought that there 
are certain instances where on doit donner une indépendence totale à madame la Présidente 
ou la Présidence. On doit non seulement le donner dans les actes, comme le Premier ministre 
a dit qu’il faut qu’on le fasse non seulement parler mais il faut aussi envoyer un message fort 
aux membres du public  que ce n’est pas dans nos mots. There is an ambiguity  as to what 
exactly would be the power. There is a fear. It is here in the Constitution and the thing is, in 
my humble view, when I read section 64(1) and (4), it is clear that if it is in this Bill, it is 
provided here, there is no need to amend the Constitution. It is simply to use the same words 
in  her  own  deliberate  judgment.  Section  64  says  where  the  President  is  directed  by  this 
Constitution to exercise any function after consultation with any person or authority, he shall 
not be obliged to exercise that function according to the advice of that person. So, here, the 
authority would be also in a piece of legislation where the words of the Constitution would be 
imported and placed there in order to ensure there is no ambiguity. Believe me, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, that this would send a very a strong and very good signal to the members of the 
public out there. This is a humble suggestion that I had to make.  

Now, I would like to taper off on this particular issue. I have talked about separation 

of powers. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I know.  I am happy that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister listens and remembers.  He is one 
of the few who does listen actually. 

Whenever I spoke, he does! 

(Interruptions) 

70 

 
With regard to the disclosure order, the Deputy Speaker, hon. Duval, said that he was 
happy that there is a change in the law.  Mais est-ce qu’il y a vraiment eu un changement 
dans la loi?  Oui, il y a eu un changement que maintenant le refus de quelqu’un de jurer un 
affidavit et de venir de l’avant avec une explication quelconque does not put him in a position 
where he will be prosecuted for that. However, when he is ordered by a Judge in Chambers to 
come  and  give  his  explanations  and  he  does  not  follow  that  order  -  I  see  hon.  Rutnah 
acknowledging - it is contempt.  

(Interruptions) 

When there is an order for you to come and give it, it is contempt.   

There is another element. I have gone through all the research. In a roundabout way, 
all research that I have gone through clearly says - and I say it again – it is not because you 
call a civil that it is civil.  Hon. Gayan said that you are restituting whatever you are taking to 
the  rightful  owner,  that  is,  Government.    It’s  wrong!    If  it  was  a  civil  remedy,  he  would 
restitute it to the person who had been prejudiced. It is not the State that suffered prejudice. 
The person the money belongs to originalement, that is the person whom the money must be 
returned to. Then it would be civil.  

(Interruptions) 

It  is  not  civil.  So,  the  whole  issue  is  what  exactly  will  be  the  stands  before  the  Judge  in 
Chambers.  You  are  obliged,  therefore,  to  come  and  put  in  an  affidavit  and  this  legislation 
says there can be  exchange of information between agencies, not only can they stop other 
agencies  from  investigating.  The  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
section 58, talks of seizure of movable properties. Do you know because of this legislation 
the hon. Minister, through his officers that he sends to work at the Agency, has the right to 
order the Director-General of ICAC - if this becomes law - to stop proceedings that concern 
confiscation. He has the right to stop proceedings that concern confiscation because this is 
what the law says.  

It says exactly that! 

Come on! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

71 

 
“Notwithstanding  any  other  enactment,  the  Board  shall  in  case  of  concurrent 
jurisdictions,  with  an  Enforcement  Authority  -  that  includes  ICAC  -  prevailed  in 
relation to any action relating to the confiscation of property.” 

So,  this  is  the  organisation  that  shall  prevail  in  relation  to  confiscation,  and  seizure  is 
confiscation. 

 Oh, I am sorry with your retire! 

(Interruptions) 

 “(…)  may  request  from  an  Enforcement  Authority  any  information  it  considers 
relevant for the purpose of discharging the duties (…).” 

And we go on - 

“When  an  Enforcement  Authority  has  already  instituted  any  proceedings  in 
connection with confiscation, the Board may,  after consultation with the Authority, 
request the Enforcement Authority to take action.” 

Let us analyse the supremacy.  Which of those institutions do the Enforcement Authorities - 
ICAC and all the others - will now have supremacy over everyone else? It is this institution 
because this is what we are asked to vote. So, it is important, M. le président, que chaque 
Membre de l’Assemblée nationale sache exactement what are they going to vote. They are 
voting powers to a new agency that will have the right, after speaking to them, to ask the 
other agencies. Which are the other agencies? I will tell you. Section 2 clearly talks about the 
other agencies. The other agencies, you will have the right to tell them to stay action. Did you 
all know that this was not going to happen? This is what is in the law. Because this is not 
what the hon. Minister said when he came to the Bar Council. This is not a subject of debate 
because this has tranquillement passé inaperçu. I am not the only one who says that. Hon 
Ramano was the first one who drew my attention to it because I, myself, did not realise it. I 
admit I did not even realise it. Yesterday, he made an excellent intervention in this august 
Assembly. I sat there and listened to him and I realised that I should go to each and every 
clause of this Bill to find out what exactly we are asked to vote and what exactly I would 
refuse to vote.  

When I see here the Enforcement Authority - section 2 - means that the Enforcement 
Authority under the Asset Recovery Act, the Mauritius Revenue Authority, the Independent 
Commission Against Corruption, the Financial Intelligence Unit and such other Body as may 

 

72 

be prescribed.  Alors toutes ces autorités, cette nouvelle instance aura le droit de venir dire 
en ce qui concerne la confiscation des propriétés. Stay, I will take control!  Stop, I will take 
over! What is quite funny about it is that the Prevention of Corruption Act gives security of 
tenure.  It  is  a  constitutional  appointment  to  the  Director-General.  But  now,  this  Director-
General where the law says - the Prevention of Corruption Act - that he should not be under 
anyone’s control, he shall be independent, we will have to listen to this Agency. I am sure 
and I hope that this was not the original intention of Government. 

Let me finish on a lighter note. I hope I can only pray that each and every Member of 
Parliament,  now  that  you  have  listened  to  what  exactly  this  Bill  contains,  it  is  not  simply 
about  fighting  corruption.    It  is  the  formidable  powers  that  are  going  to  be  given  to  an 
institution, the formidable powers that are given to an institution whereby it can even violate, 
in the whole process, the separation of powers. This maybe was not the original intention, but 
maybe, through drafting this has happened. But I do not believe it is through drafting because 
I have a lot of respect for drafters. 

(Interruptions) 

Alright, we will look at section 8 (5) (b), we will give you another chance – 

“Where  the  Board  determines  that  the  report  submitted  by  the  Agency  discloses 
reliable  evidence  of  underlying  criminal  activity  -  this  is  what  -  it  shall  refer  to 
another Agency (…).” 

But then, when it comes to confiscation, that other Agencies can do? It shall take over. It can 
direct the other Agencies. So, it shall stay there as a control tower looking at all the other 
Agencies down there and say: now, I decide. And it shall share information. 

(Interruptions) 

So, please! But anyway, honestly, I don’t expect the hon. Minister to see what I am seeing. It 
does not matter. But then, again I do not believe that he is in any way invested with wrong 
intent or otherwise. Not at all! But I look at it differently and I am only sharing.  

Let me say it on a different note. As lawyers, I think, I have to laugh about something. 
Let me say it on a lighter note. As lawyers, I said to myself since Government decided that 
this law shall not apply to foreigners, non-citizens, even though  you  got a residency, even 
though you got a PR, it shall not apply to you. I understand. Fair enough! You want to ensure 
that investors do not run anyway. Fair enough! As a lawyer, I think that I have got a loophole 

 

73 

now.  If  you  have  a  wife  who  is  a  foreigner,  get  everything  on  her  name;  and  if  you  are 
Muslim,  you are  even luckier,  you  can marry  four. Others would think discriminately that 
you do not have that chance, but there is a loophole. This law is so ridiculous that basically 
the loopholes themselves are getting funny. 

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.42 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.25 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr E. Sinatambou): Madam Speaker, may I first start by commending the hon. Minister of 
Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  for  this  radical  piece  of 
legislation. Radical, not in an adverse sense, but radical because of the origin of the word. 
Radical because this word stems from the Latin “radix” which means the root and this law is 
radical because it goes to the roots of the fight against the scourge of unexplained wealth and 
ill-gotten gains. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to highlight at the very outset that I listened, I won’t say  I 
heard, I listened because hearing means it comes into your ears, but it can go out. I listened 
because  I  wanted  to  ascertain  with  interest  the  contributions  which  my  friend,  the  hon. 
Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East  had  to  say  about  this  law. 
Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, even if he is a very good friend of mine, I must say that I 
have  been  disappointed.  I  have  been  disappointed  because  for  nearly  an  hour  I  listened 
carefully  to  what  is,  to  my  mind,  with  all  due  respect,  a  very  theatrical  and  histrionic 
performance. I am now getting used to… 

(Interruptions) 

No, histrionic. Historic is the law, historic is the opportunity which is being given to 
the other side of the House to participate in an unprecedented moment for this country, the 
fight against the scourge of unexplained wealth and ill-gotten means and why am I, with all 
due respect, aiming particularly to my good friend is because he is one of the four Members 
on the other side of the House who failed, in my view, lamentably yesterday to vote in favour 
of  the  Constitutional  Amendment  which  forms  the  basis,  which  forms  the  cornerstone  of 

 

74 

today’s  Bill  and  I  am  here,  I  will  not  take  much  of  the  time  of  this  House,  but  I  need  to 
highlight some of the reasons for which I am not satisfied with what I have heard.  

Let me start, first of all, Madam Speaker, with this constant harping I have heard for 
an hour from the hon. Member, but who was, to a large extent, repeating some of the qualms 
I  heard  earlier  from  the  hon.  Member  Baloomoody  about  this  alleged  failure  to  allow  the 
separation of powers to prevail in this piece of legislation. I must confess that I am surprised 
because  hon.  Baloomoody  is  a  very  seasoned  lawyer  and  his  reference  to  the  Judge  in 
Chambers alone is, to say the least, misleading because this Bill does provide that if the Judge 
in Chambers is not satisfied, on the basis of the affidavits provided before him, he shall refer 
the matter to the Supreme Court.  

Now, I see that my good friend is looking for his copy of the Bill. That is to be found 
-  if  my  memory  is  right  -  in  clause  14  where  we  see  that  the  Judge  in  Chambers  has  the 
powers I have stated under clause 14 (1) and under clause 16 (2). I repeat it, it is stated there, 
I quote - 

“Where  the  Judge  in  Chambers  considers  that  an  application  for  an  Unexplained 
Wealth Order cannot be granted on the basis of affidavit evidence, he shall refer the 
matter to the Supreme Court.”  

So,  at  all  times,  judicial  intervention  is  possible  and  this  was  unfortunately  not 
mentioned  when  he  was  addressing  the  floor  today.    And  the  same  thing  applies  to  -  by 
ricochet  -  my  good  friend  hon.  Mohamed  who  felt  that,  compared  to  the  Australian 
jurisdiction,  there  was  nothing  in  this  Bill  about  the  reasonableness  of  referral  for 
confiscation orders.  Yet, Madam Speaker, the Bill is quite clear. At page 10 of the Bill, that 
is at clause 14 (1), it is stated very clearly, I quote - 

“Where the  Board has reasonable  grounds to believe that a person has unexplained 
wealth, it shall (…).” 

Then, and only then - 

“(…) direct the Agency to apply to a Judge in Chambers for an Unexplained Wealth 
Order (…).”  

So,  I  have  heard  for  an  hour  here  and  for  quite  some  time  there  that:  “oh,  what  a 
breach, what a violation of the fundamental rights of the citizens of this country because our 
Courts of law were not being able to look into the matter, because it was going to be a closed 
shop with the Judge in Chambers listening to only affidavits, because there was never any 

 

75 

possibility of having the power to question the reasonableness of the referral.” Yet, it is all 
there.  

(Interruptions) 

I just gave the page, the clause, the sub clause, I would appreciate… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please, do not interrupt! Allow him to make his 

point. You had the opportunity of making your point. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Yes.  Now,  what  is  even  worse,  apart  from  his  constant  breach, 
every time I am speaking, of Standing Order 39, which I keep mentioning, I gave the page, I 
gave the clause, I gave the sub clause and I read it, and he will still say it is not there.  

(Interruptions) 

Now, I was going to spare him one comment which, unfortunately, I will have to make.  I can 
now realise why the Rt. hon. Prime Minister says that he derailed.  I mean, if every time the 
obvious is being shown to him, everything is being given to him on a plate, he will still not 
accept what is obvious. Now, if it is the case… 

(Interruptions) 

… Madam Speaker, that my good friend, hon. Mohamed is doing that because he is misled or 
because he is tired, I can appreciate, I will not say anything. But if he is doing it consciously, 
then I will agree even more with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister when he said “He is a little man, 
not a legal man”.  So, let us agree to disagree, and I am sure the debates will have the right 
level. 

Let me now say something else, Madam Speaker, which bothered me, which I believe 
is also very important. So, the first two important things we have found is that, first of all, 
even  if  the  onus,  the  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the  person  who  is  suspected  of  having 
unexplained wealth, there is a due process to the extent that there can only be referral upon 
reasonable grounds of the existence of such unexplained wealth. Upon referral, there is then 
the possibility of challenging those grounds for referral by way of affidavit; written evidence. 
And if the affidavits are convincing enough, the matter will go to open court.  So, the scene is 
set for the right judicial approach. The scene is set for the proper respect for the separation of 
powers, as envisaged in our Constitution. 

This  side  of  the  House  is  standing  by  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizen.  What, 
however,  is  happening,  is  that  this  country  is  faced,  unfortunately,  and  tragically  with  a 

 

76 

scourge.  This  scourge  which  we  have  named  is  called  ‘unexplained  wealth’,  ‘ill-gotten 
means’.  You  have  many  or  far  too  many  people  today  who,  apparently,  have  been 
accumulating unexplained wealth and this cannot - and other jurisdictions have shown it - be 
fought.  This battle, this war cannot be won by traditional means where the burden remains 
on  those  who  assert.    This  fight  can  only  be  won  by  transferring  the  problem  into  a  civil 
situation. That is why, as my good friend, the Minister of Health, said yesterday, the format 
which has been adopted is a situation of civil confiscation.  That is why everything I have 
heard on the other side of the House is misconceived, if not misleading. 

Speaking  of  the  burden  of  proof,  speaking  of  a  criminal  offence,  speaking  of 
everything  that  actually  comes  under  criminal  law  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  current  Bill 
before  the  House  today.  And  this  is  why  I  would  respectfully  suggest  that  all  those  who 
address the House later on stop saying the same things, knowing that they are either being 
misled themselves or they are misleading others. People outside have trust in us, even if they 
voted for only a few of them on the other side.  Some people still trust them and, therefore, 
they ought not to be misleading the people. 

Why  my  address  is  much  more  to  the  four  hon.  Members  who  didn’t  vote  for  the 
constitutional amendment yesterday, is because when I look at the way they were behaving, it 
reminded me, Madam Speaker, of a comment I was asked to make, about more than 30 years 
ago,  when  I  was  sitting  for  the  Oxbridge  entrance  exams  and  was  given  a  citation  from 
William Wordsworth to comment upon.  It was in three words and three dots: words, words, 
words and an ellipsis.  Indeed, when I look at what I heard yesterday and today from the side 
of those who did not vote for the constitutional provision, I realise something very important. 
The hon. Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East was saying “we are all for the 
fight against corruption”, and that all four of them have nothing to fear.  All they allegedly 
want is to rough out the edges to reach consensus and win over the scourge of corruption, and 
they  said  they  are  assuming  their  responsibility.    But  how  can  they  be  assuming  their 
responsibility if, when we look closer at what they are saying in their speeches, we find out 
that these are so many inaccuracies, if not fallacies? 

Madam  Speaker,  what  is  damning  about  this  is  the  fact  that  we  are  here  in  a 
momentous event. The event is about taking one of the most courageous decisions which a 
Government can take. Every single person of this country, henceforth, has to make sure that 
he can explain where his wealth comes from, and what also bothers me is that at one stage 

 

77 

my  good  friend,  hon.  Mohamed,  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  said  that  this  was  a  law 
which was actually targeting one class of people and that, therefore, it is unlawful. 

Yes, correct! 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I believe that this side of the House will make no apology for actually targeting… 

(Interruptions) 

Bizin aret volere coquin! Bizin aret volere coquin! This is what this law is about. Every time I 
was  asked,  in  the  course  of  the  last  four  weeks  -  because  some  people  outside  were 
flourishing  on  the  idea  that  our  side  of  the  House  could  be  divided  on  some  issues  in  the 
legislation. So, they would not miss an opportunity to ask us, including myself, “what do you 
think of this law?  Every time I said, “Bé pé aret volere coquin! Mwa mo d’accord!” 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  so  happy  that  today  it  looks  very  probable  that  it  will  win  the  day,  that  the 
attempt will become successful. And I think we have to be proud of that. I think we have to 
congratulate the hon. Minister for that.  We have to congratulate not only the Minister, but 
the very able leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister without whom all this could not have 
become possible. 

Let me also add something, Madam Speaker, which I believe I should add, because 
hon. Mohamed is a former Minister. He has been in Parliament before, but his three other 
colleagues are newcomers like we were once.  I wanted to take this opportunity to share with 
them  the  view  that  we ought  not  to  allow  ourselves  to  be  intoxicated by  things  which  are 
irrelevant.  If I say that, Madam Speaker, it is because I was very impressed by the start of 
hon. Jhuboo’s address to the floor.  He explained : « nous sommes en faveur de la lutte contre 
la  corruption.    La  Bonne  Gouvernance  ne  devrait  pas  avoir  de  seuil. »    He  was  even  in 
favour  of  not  having  a  threshold  of  Rs10  m.    He  did  say:  « ne  sombrons  pas  dans  la 
démagogie purement politicienne. »  Yet, after hearing the three Members on their side who 
addressed us it seems to me that whatever piece of legislation that would have been brought 
here to fight that scourge against unexplained wealth and ill-gotten means, they would not 
have voted. That is the impression that I am left with.  When having heard what they have 
said, I could see how inaccurate, imprecise or false the things that were being put across.   I 
heard one of the Members on this side of the House say - he was very brief, but so concise – 

 

78 

“I have reservations, but I will vote this Bill because I cannot miss the opportunity of voting 
this major piece of legislation, whose aim is to fight against corruption and create a culture of 
good  governance, and which constitutes a courageous move against the powerful  group of 
fraudsters and corrupters rotting our country.”  I cannot see him here today, but that is what 
one of the Members on this side of the House - having reservations - said. Because this is 
exactly what this law is about.  

I was paying homage to the hon. Member.  

(Interruptions) 

That  is  exactly  what  we  have  to  do  and  what  we  are  doing.  We  have  to  stop  this 

powerful group of fraudsters and corrupters who are or have been rotting our country.  

Madam Speaker, I must also say that I was surprised when I got the impression that 
the  other  side  of  the  House  was  telling  us  that  anyone  could  now  be  the  subject  of  this 
confiscation order; but that is not true. I do not understand!  Do they read the Bills before 
they  address  the  House?  It  is  so  clear  that  every  single  person  has  the  right  to  give  an 
explanation. It is quite clear that, if an Agency receives a report, or by its own initiative sends 
a document to someone, asking: “You know, you have this asset, can you explain where it 
comes  from.  You  know  whatever  you  did,  if  you  can  say  what  you  did  to  purchase  the 
property you have explained your wealth.” I cannot understand why this insistence. There is 
here something very disturbing. 

They are disturbed as usual. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 Something  sinister,  yes,  something  so  sinister  in  the  motives  of  Government!  There  is 
nothing! You see, there is another citation in French which says:   “Il n'y a pire sourd que 
celui qui ne veut entendre”.  So, we might speak - not only these two days - for weeks here.  I 
believe    that  il  n’y  aura  pire  sourd  que  celui/ceux  qui  ne  veut/veulent  entendre.    What 
however I can say is that, certainly, as was said by a previous orator, les gens honnêtes de ce 
pays peuvent dormir tranquille; les gens honnêtes n’ont rien à craindre !  I do not think there 
is more to say about all this.  I cannot understand, Madam Speaker, - I must tell you with all 
my heart – how, with such a law to stop ill-gotten gains, to stop unexplained wealth, there can 
still be opposition to voting it. 

79 

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  would  end  here  because  I  do  not  want  to  take  the  time  of  the 
House.  I would like to finish on something which I believe is very revealing because it is 
something which, I think, no one has mentioned up to now and it concerns the Prevention of 
Terrorism Act.   I would like to go back nearly a decade ago.  I recall that these were my first 
years in politics and I had a live debate with the now Minister of Health, hon. Gayan, and we 
were in a similar situation like here. The Government of the day was in favour of passing a 
severe  piece  of  legislation  after  the  9/11  catastrophe  and  the  then  Opposition,  to  which  I 
belonged, felt that this law was too extreme in its severity.   Government was adamant that 
the  extreme  measures  were  necessary  for  the  prevention  of  terrorism  in  Mauritius  and  I, 
together  with  others  in  the  Opposition,  we  felt  that  this  was  unacceptable  in  a  democratic 
society.  I will explain this a bit more, but what I would like to highlight is that the measures 
prescribed  in  the  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act  are  more  extreme  than  any  measures  that  I 
have found in the current Bill before this House.   

The measures that I was really objecting to were that the parent Minister could allow 
an intrusion into any one’s privacy, whether it be by tapping their phones, probing into their 
emails or opening their letters  - and this, for everyone in this country - just on the Minister’s 
suspicion that this person may be dealing in any act which involves an aggression on a person 
- because terrorism had been very widely defined -  and that involving an attack against a 
person was an act of terrorism just as an act of carrying a weapon was an act of terrorism. So, 
on  that  basis,  the  parent  Minister  could  allow  anyone  to  probe  into  our  e-mails,  our 
telephones and our letters.   

Now, when there was a change of Government in 2005 - the law was passed in 2002 - 
and until 2014, the very Government which was the then Opposition and which was against 
this alleged abusive intrusion against the privacy of our citizens did not change one comma in 
that law. That is why I am saying, especially to the four Members who did not vote in favour 
of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill yesterday - especially the three younger ones compared 
to hon. Shakeel Mohamed - please, do not be intoxicated by whatever may have prompted 
you to object to this law. I am of the view that this piece of legislation, Madam Speaker, is 
one of the boldest and one of the most far-reaching pieces of legislation which has ever been 
proposed in this country for cleaning up the mess, the dirt and the rottenness of corruption 
and for stopping all those who are corrupting it.  

I thank you, Madam. 

 

80 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(5.53 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you,  Madam 
Speaker, for allowing me to make a few comments on this very important piece of legislation. 

Madam Speaker, I can understand why we are in a dialogue de sourds because to me 
the issue before this House today is such a complex issue. Terms have been bended around 
from the Government benches and from the Opposition benches against each other dans le 
souçi de comprendre the other side and there are complex terms. Illicit, anti-illicit enrichment 
statutes or laws which have existed in the world for many years now, 40 years perhaps, back 
in the 60s. But, from this anti-illicit enrichment laws or statutes, other varieties of legislations 
have branched off or branched out, Madam Speaker. Conviction based asset recovery, non-
conviction based asset recovery, actions in personam, actions in rem.  

So, it is a bit normal that we are today trying to find our way although I agree that all 
of us in this House have the same objectives of curbing illicit enrichment, unjust enrichment, 
ill-gotten gains. The objective of the Bill is laudable, no doubt about it and we are all bent on 
continuing  this  process  of  fighting  against  corruption  in  this  House.  But  then,  on  the  one 
hand, there is this will, this desire to curb corruption, to thwart corruption but, on the other 
hand, there is this issue of guarding against the trampling of civil liberties and human rights. 
This is the right balance that we should find and strike between these two fundamental issues. 
So, needless to say, Madam Speaker, in all other countries where such type of laws have been 
presented, have been proposed, there has been a lot of debates, a lot of controversies, a lot of 
fury, a lot of levée de boucliers, as we say in French.  

This issue, as  I just said, Madam Speaker, has been with the  world for long  years, 
since  1964,  Argentina  and  India  enacted  the  first  anti-illicit  enrichment  statutes.  Because 
there came a time in the world when opinion leaders, when experts have found out, in fact, 
that embarking on combating serious organised crimes and other transnational offences, be it 
corruption, economic crime and drug trafficking, the way to do that more effectively was to 
deprive those - prevent the fraudsters, the drug barons, the Mafiosi from benefiting from their 
acts  of  criminality,  from  benefiting  from  the  financial  rewards  they  would  have  otherwise 
derived.  Thus,  came  this  process  of  seizure  of  instrumentalities  to  commit  crimes.  And,  it 
started by seizing the articles in fact in the first stage, seizing the drugs, seizing the weapons, 

 

81 

seizing the ships and so on. But they could still enjoy the fruits of their offences even after 
they had served their sentences. 

So,  the  philosophy  of  the  criminal  justice  sectorised  came  to  the  stage  that  they 
decided to hit the true aim of criminality, that is, the wealth and the ill-gotten gains. Then, we 
started  to  hear  from  the  international  instruments,  the  1988  Vienna  Convention,  the  UN 
Convention of Transnational and Organised Crime (UNTOC) and then in 2003 the famous 
UNCAC. Then came the Council of Europe with all the framework for the restrained seizure 
and confiscation of illicitly obtained assets. 

But civil forfeiture, Madam Speaker, which is a wide term encompassing many larger 
concepts, has been operative in a number of States today all around the world. It has been 
used as an effective tool to combat organised crime, drug trafficking and other crimes. It has 
gained  popularity,  Madam  Speaker,  in  many  countries,  much  more  than  three  countries 
because I am talking of civil forfeiture. I am not coming to Unexplained Wealth Order as the 
Government  is  proposing  today  to  the  House.  Civil  forfeiture  dans  le  sens  large  du  mot, 
based  on  convictions,  in  personam  actions,  that  is,  against  the  individual,  became  very 
popular  and  penetrated  in  many  countries  including  common  laws  and  civil  laws 
jurisdictions. 

Today, before this House, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill is being 
debated,  Madam  Speaker.  It  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  debate  in  recent  weeks  and 
although  we  have  in  our  country  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  which  was  introduced  in  2011, 
amended  in  2012.  The  Asset  Recovery  Act,  Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  in  the  Explanatory 
Memorandum talks of conviction and non-conviction based asset recovery. Therefore, we do 
have in our legislation already this concept of asset recovery, be it conviction based or non-
conviction  based  to  be  found  in  this  Asset  Recovery  Act,  introduced  by  the  previous 
Government. 

But, today, to Government this legislation is a way forward towards the fight against 
unjust acquisition of wealth. This Bill has awakened interest and controversy in the country 
and a lot has been said about its desirability as well as its undesirability. Some other quarters, 
Madam  Speaker,  although  they  agree  in  principle  that  a  fight  against  illicit  enrichment  is 
necessary, have expressed concerns as to what they perceive as anti-democratic features in 
the legislation. 

82 

 
 Some have gone as far as questioning the real motive behind this Bill and expressed 
concerns on the fairness of the mechanism that will set up its implementation. We have seen 
how  among  those  who  have  participated  in  the  debates  regarding  the  implications  of  this 
proposed legislation, the Bar Council especially expressed its concerns over some aspects of 
the Bill namely, the power given to the Agency to pursue criminal activities in a civil arena. 
So  much  controversy  has  been  fuelled  and  so  much  outcry,  as  I  just  said,  around  this 
legislation. 

The Unexplained Wealth Order, Madam Speaker, which is the central feature of this 
legislation, which can be issued by the Judiciary although there is no nexus, no link between 
the suspected wealth and any act of criminality, is without doubt the most recent development 
in confiscation and forfeiture jurisprudence. 

The Unexplainded Wealth Order (UWO) to which some countries already have recourse and, 
to my understanding,  there are more than three countries. This UWO is, in fact, at the heart 
of  today’s  legislation  and,  as  I  said,  it  is  a  recent  development  in  forfeiture  laws  and 
jurisprudence.  It  differs  from  traditional  forfeiture  laws,  Madam  Speaker,  in  many  aspects 
with respect to other accompanying features, for example, the shifting of the burden of proof 
to  the  owner  of  an  ill-gotten  property  and  the  other  points  that  have  been  raised  by  hon. 
colleages on the benches of the Opposition. 

Although, as we all know, already in our legislation, the Asset Recovery Act of 2011, 
as amended by 2012, has already introduced in our law this concept of reversal of the onus of 
proof. The retroactivity of legislation in the the Asset Recovery Act - the law was passed, in 
fact, to be retroactive as from 10 years. The onus of burden of proof was already introduced 
in this legislation, Madam Speaker. 

As hon. Sinatambou has said, if I understand him properly, in fact, today, this new 
legislation is precisely not concerned with the fundamental principles and safeguards what 
obtain  in  criminal  law  because  what  this  law  is  proposing  is  precisely  the  confiscation  of 
wealth not related to any criminal activity. I will refrain to go into the debates of whether it is 
a criminal process or civil process. I think many before me have already addressed this issue. 

There is also with this regard  a lot of jurisprudence, especially, from the European 
Court of Human Rights. I will not go into the debate. We must know, Madam Speaker, that 
several countries have reflected upon the possibility of introducing the UWO into their legal 
system, but, after a lot of debates, they decided to maintain traditional confiscation regime in 

 

83 

personam following conviction and in rem proceedings targetting property. This is because 
there  has  been  widespread  concern  that  recourse  to  civil  process  would  allow  the  State  to 
circumvent procedural protections inherent in criminal proceedings such as the presumption 
of innocence and the right to silence. 

Other  countries,  Madam  Speaker,  who  have  ventured  into  the  UWO  like  we  are 
doing,  some  of  these  countries  have  faced  constiutional  and  legal  challenges  in  their 
jurisdiction. But, on the other hand, there are some countries who have  adopted only part, 
somes aspects of the Unexplained Wealth Order: in South Africa, in New Zealand.  France, 
for example, has, under the imbrella of the UN Convention against Corruption, enacted illicit 
enrichment offences, targetting the proceeds of corruption where the reverse burden of proof 
is part of the offence, but it only applies to public officers and to political officials. 

Finally, a few countries, Columbia Island and Australia have adopted the UWO with 
all its drastic features such as non-confiscation and restraint order. But I must say, Madam 
Speaker, it is a question of policy, it is a political decision, in fact. In the light of the variety 
of legal mechanism which exists to curb illicit enrichment when Government of Mauritius 
today  is,  in  fact,  opting  for  the  most  lethal  weapon  to  fight  agaist  illicit  wealth  and  has 
preferred to align itself on the other countries which have adopted this model.  I must say, 
right at the start, that the success of such a measure does not depend solely on the power of 
the weaponry, but the expertise behind the handling of such weapon. The objective should be 
clear  and  there  must  be  a  careful  selection  of  targets,  Madam  Speaker.  It  would  be  in  the 
interest of our country that such a powerful weapon is not placed in the hands of a unskilled 
team without a clear objective and guidelines. 

Among the countries, Madam Speaker, which have carried out the effectiveness of the 
Unexplained  Wealth  Order  comes  out  Ireland,  to  a  lesser  degree  Australia;  two  countries 
which have a strong reputation for the protection of rights. In the case of Australia, we note 
that the results have not been totally positive because what has worked for one country does 
not necessarily work for another country. 

Research has shown that what matters most in achieving such success with the UWO 
is  not  the  letter  of  the  law  itself,  but  the  mechanism  that  has  been  put  in  place  for  the 
implementation of the law. Ireland’s success, for example, Madam Speaker, has been mainly 
attributed  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  Irish  Criminal  Asset  Bureau  which  is  the  body 
responsible for the implementation of the law, namely the Proceeds of Crime Act 1996 which 

 

84 

has just been referred to by an hon. Member. This Criminal Asset Bureau (CAB) is a body 
composed  of  an  elite  well  resource  unit  with  staff,  not  only  from  the  Police  and  the 
Prosecutors, but also from Tax and Social Welfare Agency and the secret of its efficiency lies 
in the combination of resources, skills and experience of various stakeholders in this Agency 
where each player compliments each other rather than works in rivalry with each other. The 
judicial  system  in  Ireland  has  been  adapted  to  handle  this  aspect  of  the law  with  the  Irish 
High Court appointing a Special Judge to work solely on forfeiture cases. 

Another important aspect that has contributed, Madam Speaker, to the success of the 
Irish  case  is  that  the  Criminal  Asset  Bureau  has  been  selective  as  regards  the  cases  it  has 
decided to pursue choosing those cases which garnered public support. As for Australia, we 
cannot say the same thing. There have been relatively fewer forfeiture  cases and there  are 
several factors into which I would prefer not to go into which have been responsible for the 
low rate of success in Australia. 

Madam Speaker, this shows that the mechanism for the implementation of the law is 

important and the success of the law can only be guaranteed by this efficient mechanism. 

Let me now come to the Bill before this House: the Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting Bill. I say it again, the issue is not how good the law is -  I will come to the law in 
a few minutes – but how strong, credible and efficient is the mechanism provided by this very 
law. We must draw lessons from the Irish practice and experience to ensure that the chances 
of success will be on our side. 

Madam Speaker, the party to which I belong, the Mouvement Patriotique is, I think, 
the  only  political  party  to  have  submitted  a  written  document  listing  several  proposed 
amendments  to  different  clauses  of  the  Bill.  Not  now  but  some  one  month  ago,  Madam 
Speaker, we cirulated that document to the Press, we sent it to the Attorney General, we sent 
it to Minister Bhadain.  This is a copy of the document, our proposals in five pages.  We went 
through all the clauses of this Bill which we thought should be amended to make this Bill a 
better piece of legislation. The Bill has been constructed as it is and for such a Bill to garner 
public  support  it  should  contain  safeguards  and  we  very  humbly  try  to  add  up  certain 
additional safeguards in this Bill and that was the purpose of us circulating this document, 
Madam Speaker. 

We are comforted that some of our proposals have been taken on board and we thank 
the hon. Minister for having done that. For example, as far as I remember, the hon. Minister, 

 

85 

dans un premier temps, came with three proposals and we had drawn his attention to these 
three proposals. The question of the appointment although we were not satisfied with these 
counterproposals because we proposed that the President should appoint the Director of the 
Agency or the Chairman and the other Members of the Board after consultation with the hon. 
Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition. We will come to that in a few minutes. 
The  hon.  Minister  made  a  counterproposal  which  is  still,  unfortunately,  I  think  the 
amendment proposed as at now and the hon. Minister also proposed something regarding the 
time frame and the inscription of privilege and the hon. Minister came with the third proposal 
about the Rs10 m. which we did not propose. Then, came our document, some two weeks 
ago. I was just looking at the Press conference that we gave which reproduced more or less 
faithfully  what  we  had  proposed  to  the  hon.  Minister  in  the  Press  conferences.  Madam 
Speaker, after having placed on record our appreciation for the hon. Minister for showing his 
openness  and  fairness  by  taking  on  board  some  of  our  proposals,  but  also  engaging  in 
dialogue  with  different  public  stakeholders  including  the  Bar  Council,  I  will  make  a  few 
comments on the clauses of this Bill. And not to take a lot of the time of the House, I will go 
very briefly. 

Madam Speaker, the first proposal we made was about the question of property. What 
is  the  meaning  of  property?  It  should  have  been  defined  perhaps  in  the  law,  but  we  have 
jurisprudence also in our country. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the case of 
Hawoldar v the State, in fact, has defined what property means. This is section 2 of the Bill. 
Then, section 3 of this Bill - 

“This Act shall apply to citizens of Mauritius.” 

We made the point which has been made by some other colleagues in the House as to 
why should the Act apply only to Mauritian citizens? We gave the reasons. We highlighted 
the  issue  about  property  acquired  at  any  time  not  more  than  seven  years  before  the 
commencement of this Act. The actual wording suggests that at any given time an enquiry 
can be carried out into property acquired seven years before the commencement of this Act. 
The  words  “before  the  commencement  of  this  Act”  must  be  replaced  by  “before  the 
commencement of any enquiry or investigation by the Agency”. I thank the hon. Minister for 
taking this on board. Section 4 - the issue of nomination, we proposed that the appointment of 
the Director must be made by the President of the Republic in consultation with the Prime 
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. Section 4 (7) –  

 

86 

“The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister, make use of the services of an 
officer of the Ministry to assist the Agency (…).”  

The Mouvement Patriotique also took this point. This section opened the door to perception 
of suspicion of political interference. We came to section 5 - Powers of Agency.  This is very 
important, if the hon. Minister can give me his ear. The law says - 

“The Agency shall, on its own initiative or where a report has been made in respect of 
a  person  under  section  9  (1)  or  (2),  require,  in  writing,  any  person  to  explain  the 
source of any funds which the person owns, possesses, has custody (…).”  

At that time, the amendment was not yet proposed, the question of affidavit. But at that time 
we said and we still maintain that. We will ask the hon. Minister to give some attention to this 
proposal.  We  said:  we  propose  that  given  that  it  is  a  person’s  wealth  that  is  at  stake,  any 
person under an investigation must be given the opportunity to be heard in person or to be 
accompanied by his Counsel of his choice or his accountant when the Agency calls him. Not 
only that he should give explanation right back or now by way of affidavit, but we suggested 
that he could have been given the choice of coming in person, of explaining to the Director 
viva voce about any queries the Director of the Agency might require.  

Section 5 (8) is the  famous section, and we are  happy  and proud that  we drew the 
Minister’s attention to that. This is the question of any person who contravenes subsection (1) 
(b), that is, to whom a request has been made, shall comply with the request within 21 days of 
the date or any longer period the Director might determine and if the person contravenes this 
section, he will commit an offence liable to a fine of Rs50,000 and an imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding one year. This is what we said. We said why should the Bill provide for a 
fine and a term of imprisonment and the Government keeps insisting that this is a legislation 
in a civil matter and the action is in rem and not in personam.  Our proposal was that this 
subsection must be deleted as it has been done by the hon. Minister and I suppose with the 
advice  of  the  Attorney  General.  We  said  in  the  absence  of  any  explanation  from  a  person 
there, the Agency can still proceed with its enquiry and report the matter to the Board.  

The hon. Minister has come up with the proposal that a Disclosure Order will now be 
applied for when that person who has been asked to  give information  and so on.   We are 
happy that we had proposed that this section imposing the fine and one year imprisonment 
should be ‘caré caré’ deleted and this has been done. 

(Interruptions) 

 

This has been taken on board, Madam Speaker.  

87 

Section 7 - the Board, the Chairman and the other Members concerning this issue of 
nomination,  we  made  the  same  proposal.  The  other  fundamental  proposal  which  we  made 
and  which  has  just  been  raised  by  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  he  said  that  this  point  clicked 
when he heard hon. Ramano talking yesterday was about this section of the supremacy of the 
Board  over  other  enforcement  authorities.  This  question  of  primauté,  this  question  of  why 
should the Board, in the present legislation, be allowed to supersede, to prevail - this is the 
word  used  in  the  legislation,  “prevail”  -  over  other  enforcement  authorities,  and  we  say 
prevalence  over  other  enforcement  authorities,  might  create  confusion,  conflict  among  the 
different enforcement authorities will bring an air of uncertainty, will act as a demotivating 
factor  for  the  enforcement  authorities,  a  waste  of  public  funds,  render  other  authorities 
insignificant,  the  element  of  unfairness  to  the  person  under  investigation  whose  case  will 
move from a criminal to civil jurisdiction, thus losing all his safeguards, create suspicion of 
interference, and so on. We raised that matter.  

We  raised  that  matter  not  to  do  politics,  Madam  Speaker,  but  I  just  gave  you  the 
example of what obtains in Ireland. There is a centralised body, the Criminal Asset Bureau, I 
think, the CAB as I just alluded to a few minutes ago, and this was the point of drawing the 
hon. Minister’s attention to section 8 (2) about the supremacy of the board, the prevalence of 
the board.   

We, also Madam Speaker, came to the point that - there is another clause which I drew 

the hon. Minister’s attention to - the Board in this Bill, Madam Speaker, 8(2) (c) – 

“Notwithstanding any other enactment, the Board – 

(c)  may  call  from  any  person  for  the  communication  or  production  of  any  relevant 
record or article” 

So, we thought that this power was far-reaching – 8(2) (c) –  

“(…) the Board – 

(c)  may  call  from  any  person  for  the  communication  or  production  of  any  relevant 
record or article” 

That is the Board can call somebody and ask him to produce his bank statement or his title 
deed or any document to be produced and any relevant record, any document or any article. 

 

88 

We had proposed that this can be done, but should be done by going through the proper 
channel by applying for a Judge’s Order. This was not the Agency, but the Board’s power to 
do that. We drew the Minister’s attention to that also, Madam Speaker.  

The  question  of  inscription  which  has  been  amended  about  the  42  days,  but  we  still 
have  un  désaccord,  a  difference,  a  disagreement  with  what  has  been  proposed,  Madam 
Speaker and I would appeal to Government, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, to hon. Minister 
of Justice, to the hon. Minister Bhadain.  These 42 days cannot be made to become operative 
after the Board as it is proposed in the legislation, that is, now the inscription will lapse 42 
days from the date of receipt of the report by the Board. This point has been made before me, 
but I will repeat it, Madam Speaker, to highlight how unfair this measure can be because if 
this  enquiry  takes  six  months,  eight  months,  one  year,  the  inscription  of  the  privilege  will 
work,  will  be  operating  through  this  long  period  and  it  will  lapse  only  42  days  when  the 
Board will receive the report from the Agency. To us it defeats the whole purpose and for all 
the reasons given by hon. Ramano and hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I think we should review this. 
We still have time to review this, Madam Speaker. 

As  we  know,  in  the  Assets  Recovery  Act,  there  is  no  inscription  there,  but  there  is  a 
Restraining Order in section 9 of the Assets Recovery Act. And what the hon. Minister is 
proposing today, even through the amendment, the inscription by the State over a person’s 
property has far-reaching consequences, especially if the property was already mortgaged in 
favour of other  creditors, for example, financial  institutions. Hon. Ramano made the point 
very  clearly  yesterday  and  we  appeal  to  Government  to  review  it  because  it  will  work  so 
many injustices to people who have been called for enquiry or for investigation. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  last  point  we  made  in  our  document  was  the  question  of  time 
frame and also the question of compensation. We also raise the issue of declaration of assets 
by the Director or the Chairman.  This is a very simple issue, Madam Speaker. I think I told 
that  to  the  Minister.    The  FIAMLA  legislation  imposes  upon  the  Director  of  the  FIU  to 
declare his assets. Now, we know that recently the Assets Recovery Act has been amended in 
this  very  House.  This  was  the  first  piece  of  legislation.  We  have  debated  the  second  one 
yesterday and the third one today. In the FIAMLA law, the Director of the FIU is made to 
declare his assets. And we know now that the FIU has taken over the Assets Recovery Unit, 
so, why is it that the Director of FIU, by law, is bound to declare his assets and since we are 
setting  up  such  an  important  body  today  as  the  Agency  and  also  the  board,  I  think  there 
should  have  been  a  specific  provision  requiring  the  Director  of  the  Agency?  This  is  our 

 

89 

proposal, the Chairman of the Board and high-ranking officials to declare their assets prior to 
assuming their functions. 

In fact, I am sure when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will come with a new Declaration 
of Assets Act, as he has pledged to the House, will also - as we know - legislate so that high-
ranking public officials  are  also made to declare their assets  and we know that in specific 
pieces of legislation, different Acts compel the different incumbents responsible, the CEOs 
and the Chairman of the board to declare their assets in many Acts.  This is the case.  I just 
gave the example of the FIAMLA legislation. So, we propose also that this present Bill also 
imposes on the Director of the Agency and the Chairman of the Board that they are made to 
declare their assets.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, about this question of compensation, I will come to that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, section 60 of the Assets Recovery Act talks of Compensation Order.  The 
Court may make a Compensation Order where, in its opinion, it would be in the interest of 
justice to do so and the applicant suffered a loss as a result of the operation of the Restriction 
Order.  The  Court  may  make  a  Compensation  Order  on  application  by  a  person  where  an 
application  for  a  Confiscation  Order  was  not  granted  or  was  withdrawn,  the  order  was 
revoked  or  an  application  for  such  an  order  was  never  made  because  in  that  case  the 
defendant  was  acquitted.  There  was  a  serious  default  consisting  of  gross  negligence  or 
intentional misconduct on the part of the person involved in an investigation or prosecution 
and the investigation would not have continued or the proceedings would not have started or 
continued  had  the  default  not  occurred  and  the  person  suffered  a  loss  as  a  result  of  the 
operation.  In our case, it should be the inscription of the privilege and in that case it is the 
Restraining Order. 

We  can  imagine,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  privilege  is  inscribed  on  the  property  of 
somebody.  The  enquiry  or  investigation  takes  –  let’s  say  –  six  months.    The  enquiry  is 
referred to the Board.  After 42 days, the inscription will lapse, but during that time of six 
months and then it comes out that the suspect has discharged the onus of proof that rests on 
him,  that  is,  there  is  no  case  against  him.  For  six  months,  eight  months,  one  year  the 
inscription has been there and he has been trying to sell that property.  He found the buyer 
and  he  could  not  sell  it because  there  was  an  inscription,  especially  in  a  period  where  we 
know the situation in terms of property, Madam Speaker. So, this person has clearly suffered 

 

90 

prejudice.  I  think  that,  in  the  law,  the  issue  of  compensation  should  have  been  addressed. 
Although  it  should  not  have  been  elaborated  as  it  is  in  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  I  think 
mention  should  have  been  made  that  compensation  would  be  due  to  somebody  if  he  has 
undergone the circumstances I have just listed, elborated upon. 

Madam  Speaker,  these  were  the  points  we  made  constructively.  We  are  not  the 
official Opposition, but we thought that this was an important piece of legislation which will, 
in fact, arouse a lot of interest and a lot of outcry in the country. We tried, in our humble 
ways, to better it and we came with these proposals. Some of the proposals have been taken 
on board but, of course, we are not satisfied with many clauses of this Bill. 

We  appeal  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  Bhadain.  I  know  that 
amendments  have  just  been  circulated.  I  did  not  have  so  much  time  to  look  at  the  new 
proposals  in  the  amendments  which  have  been  circulated,  but  we  still  have  time  until  the 
Minister will sum up the debates. We appeal to him to reflect upon the proposals that have 
been made in this House, not all of them, but to take on board some of the most fundamental 
proposals. 

This brings me to the question, Madam Speaker. We proposed a Select  Committee 
when  this  Bill  was  circulated;  not  to  mettre  les  bâtons  dans  les  roues.  This  Bill  has  been 
circulated some six weeks ago, I think now, eight weeks perhaps. We have suggested that it 
be  a  Select  Committee  with  a  defined  time  frame,  one  month  -  let  everybody  come.  The 
Minister or some other Minister or the Attorney General could have presided over that Select 
Committee, made up of Members of the Opposition, of course, and everybody could have 
come and made their suggestions. I am sure we would have been in presence of a better piece 
of legislation. The Select Committee was not agreeable to Government, but I hope one day, 
Madam Speaker, under your speakership, our Standing Orders will be amended to provide for 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committees,  so  that  important  pieces  of  legislation  like  we  are 
having today be dealt with in Committees of the House, not in plenary sessions, as we are 
doing today. 

As you know, most Parliaments in the world, including the Commonwealth countries, 
have  evolved  and  they  have  a  system  of  Parliamentary  Committees.  This  system  of 
Parliamentary  Committees  helps,  especially  in  case  of  legislation,  when  we  have  complex 
legislation,  as  we  have  today.  This,  I  am  sure  also  would  have  done  a  lot  of  good  to  the 
debate today, so that in a Parliamentary Committee, we would have, all of us, braimstormed 

 

91 

and  listened  to  other  experts  for  the  good  of  the  country  and  Government,  improved  this 
legislation  and  prevented  the  risk  of  this  legislation  being  challenged  before  the  Supreme 
Court.  Although it will be voted by a three-quarter majority, complying with the provisions 
of the Constitution, we don’t know whether somebody will, in the near future, go before the 
Supreme  Court  and  challenge  this  piece  of  legislation,  despite  the  provisions  in  our 
Constitution. 

This brings me to another suggestion, Madam Speaker, which at one time, I think the 
MMM/MSM  Government  or  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  made  it,  that  we  should 
perhaps  inspire  ourselves  from  India,  South  Africa,  Ireland,  from  other  countries,  from 
France with its constitutional code, where the President of the Republic has the power to refer 
a controversial piece of legislation before it is adopted by the House to the Supreme Court. 
They call it the President referal, I think, in india. For years now, this proposal has been made 
in  the  country.    In  the  case  of  Ireland,  France,  the  Republic  of  India,  South  Africa,  the 
President  has  the  power  to  refer  a  controversial  piece  of  legislation,  a  complex  piece  of 
legislation  which  impinges  on  human  rights,  civil  liberties  and  which  is  proposing  an 
innovative measure like the Bill is proposing today. So, sereinement, the Supreme Court, in 
its serenity, in its sovereignty, can decide whether that piece of legislation meets the tests of 
constitutionality, is compliant with the provisions of our Constitution and the debate will be 
over and the Government can come, once we receive the advice of the Supreme Court, the 
ruling of the Supreme Court, with the Bill before this House. 

I end up, Madam Speaker, by asking another question to the hon. Minister - it is good 
he  is  back.  There  is  one  question  which  has  been  left  unsanwered  in  this  Bill.  Can 
Unexplained  Wealth  Order  be  issued  on  illicit  property,  unexplained  wealth  abroad,  for 
example. If there is evidence that there is a mansion in London, England, Italy or anywhere in 
the  world  and  there  is  clear  evidence  that  this  is  unexplained  wealth  and  the  Agency  has 
undeniable evidence of this illicit property, what happens? Why no provision has been made 
for the recovery of such an asset, Madam Speaker? 

Unfortunately, I am a bit lost in my papers. I have two Acts to which I will refer. This 
is section 64 in our PoCA. The hon. Minister came lastly with the monetary equivalent, but 
this is already in our PoCA which, we, MMM/MSM Government adopted in 2002: Payment 
in lieu of forfeiture. So, under the PoCA legislation, section 64 is addressing the case when 
the Supreme Court is satisfied that the order for the forfeiture should be made, but it cannot 
be enforced because the property has been transferred to a third party, etc, or the property is 

 

92 

located  outside  Mauritius.  So,  at  that  time,  in  2002,  I  remember  the  Prime  Minister,  the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon.  Collendavelloo  were  all  engaged  in  the  drafting  of  this 
legislation  but,  as  visionaire,  in  fact,  this  law  did  think  about  property  locating  outside 
Mauritius.  In  the  PoCA,  the  Supreme  Court  may,  instead  of  ordering  the  property  to  be 
forfeited,  order  the  person  to  pay  an  amount  equal  to  the  value  of  the  property,  part  or 
interest. This is what was proposed in the PoCA. 

There is another section in the Asset Recovery Act, Madam Speaker, which talks also 
about  property  situated  outside  Mauritius,  extraterritorial.    In  this  case,  the  Board  or  the 
Court, the Judge in Chambers could be asked to make an Order, of course, in consultation 
with the authorities in the UK or Italy for the seizure of that property outside our jurisdiction. 
Section 61 states – 

“The  Attorney-General  may  initiate  legal  proceedings  in  a  court  of  a  foreign  State 
(…)  in  order  to  establish  title  to,  or  ownership  of,  property  acquired  through  the 
commission of an offence which is also an offence in accordance with Part III of the 
UN Convention against Corruption 2003, and to seek recovery of that property.” 

So, the Attorney Genral, under the Asset Recovery Act, by section 61, may initiate 
legal proceedings and seek recovery of the mansion which is to be found in the UK, Italy or 
France  or  wherever  if  the  Board  has  evidence.  In  the  case  of  this  legislation,  this  is  an 
unexplained wealth, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  you  can  see,  we  have  expressed  a  lot  of  reservation  about  this 
Bill; we endorse the laudable objective of this Bill which tantamounts to an extension of the 
fight against organised crime, against corruption, against money laundering. The fight against 
fraud and corruption is indeed complex, tedious, protracted and perpetual, Madam Speaker. 
We have chosen to be part of this war against the accumulation of illicit wealth. The choice 
for us was whether we should allow the proceeds of criminal activities to be enjoyed by the 
malefactors  and  criminals  or  to  support  a  new  framework  and  innovative  platform  which 
would  permit  the  deprivation  of  ill-gotten  gains  to  those  who  have  been  selfish  and  anti-
patriotic in their conduct. But I think we should issue also a word of caution to the present 
Government by opting for this most radical version of forfeiture law as I have just explained 
earlier.  The  Mauritian  Government,  the  Executive  has  taken  upon  itself  a  very  daunting 
challenge, Madam Speaker. A very daunting challenge because this legislation can cut both 
ways. It could give credibility to this Government in terms of its declared intention to wage 

 

93 

war against unjust enrichment but it could also open the way to frustration if the mechanism 
is  not  implemented  with  fairness  and  effectiveness  and  the  appropriate  safeguards  do  not 
operate as expected.  

Madam Speaker, the entire notion of controlling crime by taking away ill-gotten gains 
and by taking away these illicit assets is very appealing in terms of motivation, but in practice 
the exercise must work without posing any threat to civil liberties. This proposed legislation, 
if adopted, will put this Government under heavy scrutiny on the national and international 
level  in  terms  of  how  this  new  legislation  will  be  used  and  I  think,  Madam  Speaker,  the 
Minister must today when he sums up take a pledge before the House that no investigation or 
enquiry will be triggered by base political motives.  

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I would wish good look to the hon. Minister and this 
ambitious  piece  of  legislation.  We  will  wait  for  the  reaction  of  Government  on  the 
amendments we have proposed, especially on this issue of the 42 days, Madam Speaker, and 
in the light of how Government will react to our proposal. In fact, we appeal to Government 
to review this question of the nomination, the question of the appointment of the Director and 
the Chairman and also this issue about the inscription of the privilege for the 42 days.  And to 
conclude therefore, the onus of proof is now on the Government to prove how Mauritius can 
succeed on the path where many countries have chickened out and have not dared to tread.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(6.47 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, this is a new Bill to entrench in our law something which 
did not exist before, a new concept, a new context. It is therefore not surprising that so many 
points  have  been  made  all  around  within  Government,  outside  of  Government,  in  the 
Opposition and in civil society. That is not surprising at all.  

Some of the points were fanciful, that is not surprising as well! Some of the points 
were serious. No law is perfect, let alone a law which introduces a new concept. How many 
times have we had to amend our Constitution to change, to adapt it to the changing of times? 
So many laws need amendment as we progress but I am not in a Court of Law. I’ve heard 
very learned legal arguments sometimes coming from non-lawyers and being of importance 
based on solid research, going to cases before the European Court of Human Rights such as 

 

94 

my very good friend, hon. Boissézon on the Moroccan Castle in Lourdes and there was no 
case on any Croatian castle, but we have heard cases cited by hon. Mohamed.  

This is as if we are hearing the submissions before the Supreme Court whenever there 
will be a case. I don’t know whether I will have the chance to be in that panel of lawyers who 
will  argue  these  cases.  As  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  said,  there  are  going  to  be 
challenges  to  these  laws.  Ordinary  laws  have  been  challenged  in  the  Supreme  Court.  In 
Khoyratty, it went up to the Privy Council.  So, it would not be surprising, but that is not to 
stop us from doing what we feel we have to do.  

The question is fundamental.  What happens if somebody has got wealth? I well say 
wealth  not  a  certain  amount  of  money,  not  a  bicycle,  a  van  nor  whatever  as  has  been 
suggested, but wealth which after representations have been capped at Rs10 m. I was of the 
opinion that it should have been left to the Judge to decide whether this amounted to wealth 
or not because wealth is also a relative concept but never mind, it is now Rs10 m., above 
Rs10 m. you are wealthy, below Rs10 m. you are not wealthy.  That does not mean you are 
poor! That is how it is and I will, of course, have to agree with this.  

People say: ‘How can it be that I will have to explain my fortune or my way of life, 
etc.?’ Let me say one thing! Every day in Mauritius, in civil cases, people have to explain 
their way of living. In all alimony cases, the husband is cross-examined and he is asked how 
much money he earns and how come he can buy a motorcycle to run and how come he pays 
an air ticket, etc. Ordinary factor graph, of course, is not a property, not confiscated because 
of this, but he is ordered to pay money as a consequence of his inability to explain his way of 
life and that is how it should be. Let us not forget apart from civil cases, you have cases like 
donation déguisée. People pretend that the land is theirs.  So, the question is: ‘How come you 
had money to pay the land? Every day in our Courts to prove one point only, that Judges of 
the Supreme Court are well equipped to assess the explanation of persons with regard to their 
wealth. It is not as if it is a demon that is coming over Mauritius. If we go back at the time of 
the Commission on drugs chaired by Sir Maurice Rault - Sir Maurice Rault had adopted what 
at that time was a very new principle. He would call people and he would tell people: ‘Please 
explain how you got this, how so much money in your bank account?’  And he irrationally 
said: ‘You can’t explain your money, therefore you are a drug trafficker.’  

Of course, that was quashed in the Supreme Court because the fact that you are unable 
to  explain  the  source  of  your  wealth  may  mean  that  you  are  in,  I  don’t  know,  all  sorts  of 

 

95 

traffic,  that  you  are  part  of  another  mafia,  but  not  dealing  in  drugs.  So,  that  was  quashed 
because there was no legal basis and, at that time, Government was in agreement with the 
Supreme Court, that we could not just hold people before a Commission of Enquiry and come 
to  the  rash  conclusion  that  he  was  a  drug  trafficker  just  because  he  could  not  explain  his 
wealth. 

Time went by, then, in the year 2000 as today, the Government was elected with a 
mandate to do something about fraud and corruption - I am using words which would be as 
neutral  as  possible  in  order  not  to  offend  anyone.  A  Select  Committee  -  which  I  had  the 
honour to chair - was set up. I seem to recall hon. Baloomoody, I know hon. Dulloo was there 
because  he  was  very  vociferous,  and  hon.  Bodha.  We  had  a  long  discussion  about  many 
things, but then, there was one thing, possession of unexplained wealth. 

People  talked  of  Australia,  New  Zealand  etc.  We  took  two  cases,  Hong  Kong  and 
Botswana, where, if you are in possession of unexplained wealth, if you are a civil servant, a 
public  official  -  which  is  the  difference  with  today’s  law  -  and  you  are  in  possession  of 
unexplained wealth or goods or property, not only is your property confiscated, you go to jail. 
Hong  Kong  and  Botswana!    That  is  the  state  of  the  law  there.    And  in Hong  Kong,  three 
months ago, the No. 2 of Government - and there we are talking of very, very high official - 
was trapped and they found out that through a mechanism of trusts he had amassed a fortune. 
They suspected that this fortune came from leaking Cabinet secrets to businessmen, say, there 
was going to be a development, so they would buy land and their fortune would increase and 
they would take a cut. They were not able to prove that thing about the cut, but they were 
able to prove that he was in possession of wealth and that he could not explain it. He was 
defended by a counsel  - whom  I  know -  and he went to jail. He was jailed, he was made 
bankrupt  so  that  neither  he  nor  his  family,  nor  his  descendants  would  profit  from  these 
crimes.  And what was his crime? He was unable to explain where he got that money. 

Here, we are not sending people to jail; here, we are saying, for seven years ago you 
were, as we call it in Mauritius, a ‘lapo touni’, now, you have a yacht, you have horses which 
you carry to the stables,  you gamble huge amounts of cash,  your house  is a mansion,  you 
travel by first class and you have no lawful income to explain it. In the state of our law, there 
is nothing we can do and we shall come back to this case with the new law to see what will 
happen. 

96 

 
The  Select  Committee  discussed  about  it,  but  we  found  that  would  have  been 
dangerous  at  that  time.  Soon  after  that,  the  United  Nations  Convention  against  Corruption 
their work was progressing and, after the Colombian Chairman died, I was given the honour 
of chairing this Ad Hoc Committee of the United Nations, and there surfaced that question of 
possession of unexplained wealth. To my surprise, what I thought was something so foreign 
to my  culture, burden of proof, reversal of burden of proof, right of silence etc.,  I saw all 
countries saying yes without any problem, without any discussion and, today, it is part of the 
Convention that we have to criminalise possession of unexplained wealth. It is, therefore, an 
international  obligation;  we  are  not  criminalising,  we  are  bringing  about  confiscation 
proceedings.  All  right,  there  is  a  fair  point  made  by  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  that  this  is  a 
disguised criminal case. Judges will have to decide all this, but we have to take the law as it is 
now. One day perhaps, we shall follow American judges. I think that he dealt with American 
judges - seemingly good judgements. I don’t know whether he read the judgement the way he 
read the law, because the way he read our law was not the way it is written; that is another 
matter. 

But, forget about all these points. The point is that, today, the world over, possession 
of unexplained wealth is a problem. But forget about the world! In Mauritius, all of us MPs, 
we know,  we  go to our  Constituencies. And what do people tell us about those who have 
suddenly enriched themselves? People say: ‘Send the Police on them; we don’t know how 
they  have  enriched  themselves’.  To  clean  up  society,  this  is  the  only  way!  Because  then, 
people  will  stop  enriching  themselves  from  criminal  activities.  Now,  after  the  Select 
Committee, the PoCA came and the compromise solution was that although it would not be 
made an offence, it could be used as evidence to support a case of corruption. It has never 
been  used;  ICAC  never  even  tried  to  make  enquiries  on  property,  they  stopped  at  bank 
statements etc., and we don’t know how it would have been used. It is a section which has 
fallen  in  désuétude  completely  with  a  Prevention  of  the  Corruption  Act  (POCA)  which 
admittedly needs to be overhauled and this is the Parliamentary Committee which will have 
to do it. I take the opportunity of throwing this in now. 

After that, we had the Assets Recovery Act. Ah! That was a step forward because, for 
the first time in our law, it was not necessary to prove a conviction before confiscating assets. 
That was a giant step but, nevertheless, the enforcement authority could have a Restriction 
Order  if  it  showed  that  the  property  is  proceeds  or  an  instrumentality  or  terrorist  property 
without having to show that the property was derived directly or indirectly from a particular 

 

97 

offence  or  that  any  person  has  been  charged  in  relation  to  such  an  offence.  This  could 
probably  answer  the  point  made  by  hon.  Ameer  Meea  because  he  was  of  the  view  -  very 
retrograde,  I  think  -  that  you  had  to  prove  a  criminal  activity  before  you  triggered  on  the 
Confiscation  Order.  That  was  a  giant  step  backwards  from  what  we  heard  from  other 
Members of the MMM and we shall come to these points later. He seems to be joining the 
bandwagon  of  hon.  Mohamed,  but  he  was  a  lonely  voice  in  the  MMM’s  point  of  view. 
Certainly, this is not what we heard from hon. Baloomoody, for instance. 

The amendment to the Asset Recovery Act was passed in 2012, and that allows me to 
deal with the point of hon. Mohamed about the seven years. What we are doing is that, at the 
time that the Agency makes an order, say we are in 2018, the Agency asks for an explanation, 
it can go back seven years, that is, it goes back to 2011. Under the Asset Recovery Act, it was 
10 years prior to the commencement of the Asset Recovery Act. In other words, even now 
you go back to 2002; even in 2020, you go back to 2002. So, what is all the fuss about? When 
this came out in the Asset Recovery Act of 2012, I did not hear the Bar Council saying ‘oh! 
Our  civil  liberties,  our  human  rights  are  being  attacked;  going  back  in  time,  retrospective 
legislation!’ I did not hear all that. On the contrary, Ministers like hon. Mohamed gleefully 
voted for the Bill. So, today, we hear retrospective! Then, burden of proof.  Let me read an 
extract from the speech of hon. Varma, the then Attorney General - 

“Indeed,  Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  under  our  law,  as  it  presently  stands,  it  is  for  the 
Enforcement Authority to satisfy the Court that property or benefit was not derived 
from  an  unlawful  activity,  which  is  in  sharp  contrast  not  only  with  the  practice  in 
other jurisdictions, but also with other pieces of our own legislation dealing with asset 
recovery  like  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act,  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Act  and  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  which  all  provide  for  the 
reversal of the burden of proof. This does not, however, mean that the Enforcement 
Authority does not have to prove anything because it will still be for the Enforcement 
Authority to satisfy the Court that a Confiscation Order is justified on a balance of 
probabilities.” 

We have walked just one step further, and see what hon. Varma had to say in 2012! 
The burden of proof was reversed, the Enforcement Authority did not have to show much, 
but it had to show a few things. What is going to happen in our law? I mean, it is an easy 
piece of law to read! The Agency  asked  for somebody to  give  an  explanation and, at that 
same time, it can put an inscription.  About the inscription, I personally agree that it is a very 

 

98 

fair point made by hon. Ramano.  The 42 days should, in my humble opinion, run as from the 
date  that  the  Agency  starts  the  proceedings.  I  don’t  know  what  the  hon.  Minister  will  do 
about it; I am not going to create a fuss with this as well neither.  Then, it sends it to the 
Board. The Board is a Judge, a retired Judge, but somebody must appoint him! I shall ask 
hon. Mohamed to appoint the Judge? 

And then, I can say he is independent! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Of  course,  the  hon.  Member  would  not  mind!  Let  me  say  that  for  PoCA  we  had  an 
Appointments  Committee.  Don’t  we  remember  how  the  then  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
boycotted sittings which had been called by the President and the Prime Minister at that time 
and it paralysed the Appointments Committee? Well, let us have something. 

A lot has been said about the method of appointment. I am all for finding a method.  
But, up to now in Mauritius, what do we have? We have powers of the Prime Minister and 
we have powers of the President. True it is that there has been an evolution whereby we have 
tried to give increased powers to the President, but when we come to the present law, I have 
looked at section 64 which is: Exercise of President’s functions - 

“In the exercise of his functions under this Constitution or any other law, (…).” 

And that is the general rule whenever the President exercises functions under a law - 

 “(…)  the  President  shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Cabinet  or  of  a 
Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet (…).” 

That is the rule. He must follow what Cabinet says. 

“(…) except (…)”. 

And since there are exceptions, to my mind, exceptions are to be interpreted strictly and do 
not allow for any other extension. 

“(…)  except  in  cases  where  he  (…)”,  the  President,  “(…)  is  required  by  this 
Constitution to act in accordance with the advice of, or after consultation with, any 
person or authority other than the Cabinet (…).” 

Therefore, that is the first exception where the Constitution says the President must 

act on the advice of that person or whatever, or where the Constitution says - 

 

“(…) in his own deliberate judgement.” 

99 

I  have  always  had  doubts  about  the  constitutionality  of  simple  Acts  of  Parliament 
which stated that the President shall appoint the Ombudsperson, for instance - forget what 
there is in that Act - in her own deliberate judgement or in consultation with, etc. This is why 
I have taken it myself and I have tried to convince the Minister - which is not an easy thing to 
do  -  that  these  provisions,  with  these  new  attempts  to  try  and  make  way  for  what  the 
Opposition  was  saying,  could  open  the  door  to  a  challenge.    And  then,  we  would  have 
appointed somebody in that Agency, the Agency or the Board has taken steps and people go 
and challenge and say they were wrongly appointed. Are we prepared to take the risk now? 
That is the point that I am making. I am sure hon. Uteem will have things to say about it. 

My colleague, hon. Baloomoody, seems to have no problem about the fundamentals 

of the law - seems! - except insofar as concerns the procedure. 

He  found  fault  in  the  fact  that  the  law  is  going  to  give  added  jurisdiction  to  the  Judge  in 
Chambers.  I  have lots of respect  and friendship, of course, to hon.  Baloomoody, but  I am 
afraid  I  cannot  agree  with  what  he  said.    It  is  perfectly  within  our  powers  to  confer 
jurisdiction on the Judge in Chambers.  

Why do we go to the Judge in Chambers?  For precisely the reason that was invoked on 
the  inscription;  in  order  to  preserve  confidentiality.  Because  if  we  would  go  direct  to  the 
Supreme Court, then what would happen? Everybody would know that somebody’s property 
is being under investigation . The first step is you go to the Judge in Chambers. Now, the 
Judge in Chambers - political tool, again! He has two versions before him either the Director 
or the Board has put up sufficient grounds to show that it is unexplained property and when 
he looks at the affidavit of the other party, without hearing witnesses, he finds the case so 
clear that he makes a Confiscation Order.  But that happens every day!  Judge in Chambers 
do that every day. They look at two affidavits and they take a decision, but if they find that 
there  is  a  difficulty,  that  the  case  is  not  clear,  then  the  Judge  in  Chambers  goes  to  the 
Supreme Court. And when he goes to the Supreme Court, when he makes that order, then he 
can  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Judge  in  Chambers.  So,  what  political  tool?    What 
political vendetta?   

The Labour Party talks that politicians are going to be attacked.  So what?  Politicians 
are immuned from the law?  There has been a tendency now: so and so is above the law, he 
cannot be arrested.  So and so, why are we going to attack him?  They are raising a hue and 

 

100 

cry about political vendetta. It is not political vendetta.  It is self-defence in words.  That is 
what is happening. I have no problem.  What political vendetta?  It will stop at the Judge.  
They will come and say: “this is a political vendetta”. And then if the Judge thinks that it is 
so, the Judge will say: “Go to Court, be cross-examined, let a full Court decide”.  And the 
Judge will decide whether it is political vendetta or whether it is really unexplained wealth 
that he has by millions and millions and millions. And then because he would have looked for 
it, the hearing will be public and the public will know what is happening. As hon. Rutnah 
said, we all know, I mean we are not talking of MSM, PMSD, let alone Muvment Liberater, 
we  are  not  talking  of  MMM  or  Mouvement  Patriotique.    We  only  want  –  not  the  present 
Members, I concede that – the party to which all eyes are looking at.  It’s Labour Party. Why 
do we have to be shy about it.  Saying that at a Congrès I have said: “the Labour Party is the 
one to be scared of that law”.  Of course! The evidence is before us. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  the  evidence  is  before  us.    We  all  know,  I  know  my  friends  from  Mouvement 
Patriotique, they may have made their money.  People in the MMM, they are professionals, 
they made their money with their work and I don’t know anyone who is so wealthy and all 
that.  Hon. Rutnah, I don’t see him as a very wealthy guy.   

(Interruptions) 

I  am sorry, hon. Rutnah!  Let us face the  reality!  There has been a problem in Mauritius.  
Some people were taken in. The MMM was taken in last year by a sort of, called by the then 
Prime  Minister.  I  don’t  know  what  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  day  told  them  or  whatever 
happened! But almost they became the innocent shields of the corrupt activities of the Labour 
Party. God helped us and helped Mauritius to have the results that we had. But then, it is not 
only this. Today, we are facing a specific situation and everyone has got to decide where to 
vote. The four young Members of the Labour Party have already committed political suicide 
yesterday when they decided to vote ‘No’ for the Constitution (Amendment) Bill.   I think 
they are dead again today, again tomorrow, they are dead!  I am sorry, they listened to their 
leader.  They had, at least, the chance of abstaining.  No!  Their leader publicly said:  “don’t 
vote for this law”.  Well, they took their responsibility and they will have to explain for years 
and years to come why they did not vote a constitutional amendment. Voting against the law, 
that law perhaps you can put reasons forward.  But why you did not vote for a constitutional 

 

101 

amendment which would allow Parliament to pass laws?  I would not like to be in their place 
at any debate or any Constituency?  

Today, with this law, we have to decide now.  Do we want to be the objective ally of 
corruption, of traffickers by voting ‘No’ for that Bill? With all its imperfections, I grant it?  
But  are  we  going  to  go  out  and  say:  “we  don’t  agree  on  Unexplained  Wealth  Orders”.  
Alright! Try it, then, don’t cry! The issues are simple.  There are certain matters which hon. 
Rutnah called nitty-gritties. 

I almost forgot this; there was an interview of Raymond D'Unienville, QC in BIZweek 

No. 71. I urge each and every one of us to try and read this interview. 

«L’idée  d’arrêter  l’enrichissement  de  certains  par  des  moyens  illégaux  et  même 
criminels  est  excellente.  On  ne  peut  pas  continuer  à  vivre  avec  d’autres  Mauriciens 
autour de nous dont la fortune a une source illégale, voire criminelle comme je disais. 
Il faut absolument prendre le taureau par les cornes et faire quelque chose »  

This comes from one of the most conservative lawyers  I have ever met  in Mauritius.  And 
then - 

 « Il faut voir de quoi il en retourne. Si ce qu’ils ont l’intention - that is Government - 
de  faire  est  de  saisir  des  biens,  selon  les  apparences  qui  sont  des  biens  mal  acquis. 
C’est  un  sujet  extrêmement  délicat  parce  que  d’un  côté  vous  avez  la  protection  de 
l’article 8 et de l’autre part vous avez cette nécessité d’arrêter absolument cette vague 
d’enrichissement de certaines personnes, principalement par la drogue. C’est plus que 
scandaleux ;  cela  va  en  sens  contraire  de  tout  ce  que  nous  avons  cru  et  préconisé 
jusqu’à présent. Toute cette civilisation anglaise avec ses respects des droits dans la 
procédure  dans  la  tenue  des  cours  de  justice  que  nous  avons  héritée  des  Anglais. 
Aujourd’hui,  tout  ça  paraît  impuissant  devant  ce  scandale  permanent  de  gens  qui 
s’enrichissent en secret par des moyens illégaux. »  

Be  careful!    We  want  to  show  and  prove  criminal  activity.    Try  it!  How  do  you  prove 
corruption?  How do you prove drugs?  But you can prove wealth.  This is visible. You can 
prove  standard  of  life.  You  can  prove  signes  extérieurs  de  richesse.  This  is  possible!  Mr 
d’Unienville went on to say on the question of appointment – 

« Si on nomme des personnes qui vont se mettre à tort et à travers à saisir des biens 
sans aller au fond des choses, sans s’assurer au moins d’une apparence d’illégalité, 
ce serait dramatique. Je suis tenté de vous dire que vous aurez une révolution sous les 

102 

 
bras, mais il n’y a aucune raison de penser que ce soit comme ça. Que voulez-vous ? 
C’est un chapître nouveau, mais nécessaire. A partir du moment qu’on est satisfait de 
cela, c’est-à-dire, que c’est une initiative indispensable dans les circonstances, il faut 
bien  laisser  ceux  qui  ont  la  responsabilité  du  gouvernement  faire.  On  ne  peut  pas 
passer son temps à les arrêter quand ils se lancent dans des initiatives pareilles. Il 
faut les laisser faire, puis on va voir comment ça marche en pratique. » 

This is common sense ! Therefore, let us not stop at puny obstacles. Let us inspire ourselves 
from one of the great Mauritians of this country, who, unfortunately, has not been well read 
because it is an online magazine to which I am abonné. 

The Opposition has, finally, three choices. The first choice is to vote for the Bill, that 
if  they  want  to  decide  and  then  with  all  the  reservations,  but  that  will  be  a  sign  that  the 
Opposition, each and every one of them, is not an objective alike of traffickers, whatever you 
call it, corrupt people, etc. or to vote against. The Labour Party, at least, is frank about it. 
They are ready to face the consequences. From then, you have the other, I don’t think, I hope 
the Opposition will not use these tactics, such as walking out or finding a pretext, etc. so as 
not to be present at the time of the vote. The die is cast. In 15 minutes, we will need to show 
our hands. And if our hands are clean, what are you scared of? That is the point! And my 
prayer is that we get a unanimous vote. To my friends of the Labour Party, I urge you, think 
well! You have a future of 40 years ahead of you. Let it not be said that young people like 
you, committed political suicide, in order to protect the corrupt of this country. Thank you, 
Madam Speaker 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(7.27 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker,  ever  since  this  Bill  was  circulated,  it  has  come  under  attack.This  Bill  has  come 
under attack, not only from the Opposition, but from the Government ranks themselves. 

The Bill has been attacked by ordinary citizens, law abiding citizens, honest citizens. 
The Bill has been attacked by the Bar Council, by people who are not defending any corrupt 
persons, who are not defending any criminals, but who have at heart, the rule of law, justice 
and the Constitution. There is no disagreement in this House. We all are in favour of hitting 
the criminals, the corrupt people by seizing their wealth, but there needs to be safeguards. 

103 

 
The proof that we were right is that the Government started by coming forward with 
three amendments. Three amendments, we commented on them. We told the Government it 
was not enough, we wanted further amendments. Then, on Saturday, Government circulated a 
new  series  of  amendments  to  the  Bill.  We  held  a  Press  Conference.  We  applauded  the 
Government for its effort in accepting our amendment on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 
and  this  is  why  yesterday  we  voted  in  favour  of  that  Bill.  We  welcome  the  proposed 
amendments  made  by  the  Government  on  Saturday,  but  we  also  stated  that  we  have  one 
serious  reservation  when  it  comes  to  the  appointment  of  the  Director  of  the  Integrity 
Reporting  Services  Agency  and  the  Integrity  Reporting  Board.  Why?  Because  as  the  hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  just  reminded  the  House,  it  is  the  first  time  we  are  having  this 
legislation. It is the first time we are going to confiscate wealth, money, property, without 
proving a crime, without any averment of crime, without any allegation that this is derived 
from a criminal activity, criminal proceeds of crime.  First time. 

The  Agency  will  be  given  huge  powers  to  make  investigation,  investigate  in  your 
personal affairs and then come to a conclusion that you have unexplained wealth, then give it 
to the Board. The Board will look at all the evidence and then the Board, if it has reasonable 
suspicion, will tell the Agency: “Go to the Court and get whatever Order you need.” So, we 
are  giving  tremendous  power  to  this  Agency  and  to  this  Board.  As  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister said: new powers. Something that has never happened before. So, legitimately, we 
wanted to ensure that this person, the Director, that Board would not be a political appointee, 
but also be seen to be independent from any political interference. This is why we proposed 
that  the  power  be  given  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  to  appoint  the  Director  and  the 
Chairperson and members of the Board after consultation with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
and the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

When  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, hon. Bhadain, moved at Second Reading, he clearly showed that in his mind the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister is all powerful and the President has to do whatever the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister wants. So, for him, whether it is consultation, whether it is advice, it does not matter, 
the President has to act upon whatever the Rt. hon. Prime Minister suggests, recommends, 
names for appointment. 

The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  correctly  set  the  record  straight  and  read  the 
Constiution and explained to the hon. Minister that he was wrong. He was wrong. There is a 
distinction  between  provisions  of  the  Constitution  which  provide,  for  example,  that  the 

 

104 

President  may  act  in  her/his  own  deliberate  judgment,  but  she  does  not  have  to  take  into 
consideration anyone’s views. If the provision of the Constitution mentions that the President 
has to act on the advice of, she/he does not have any say in the matter, she/he must act in 
accordance with that advice. But there is also a third scenario where the Constituion provides 
that  the  President  would  act  after  consultation  with  such  and  such  person.  Article  64 
subsection 4 of the Constitution makes it clear that in such circumstances, the President is not 
bound to follow the recommendation, the advice given that these people with whom she/he 
holds  consultation.  So,  that  is  why  for  us,  on  the  MMM  side,  it  was  very  important  to 
determine the power of the President in relation to the appointment.  It would have made all 
the difference in the world if the appointment was made by the President after consultation 
with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. 

After  the  intervention  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  the  hon.  Minister, 
together with the Chief Whip, went to see the Leader of the Opposition, took on board his 
comments  and  said:  “Yes,  we  are  going  to  come  with  amendments.”  In  fact,  last  night, 
Government even sent a fax to the hon. Leader of the Opposition with the suggested wording 
of  the  amendment,  which  would  provide  that  the  President  would  appoint  the  Board,  the 
members, after consultation with the Prime Minister and after consultation with the Leader of 
the Opposition. This morning, the hon. Minister asked me: “What are you going to do? Are 
you going to vote?” And I said: “We are still concerting”. We concerted among ourselves and 
we  found  out  that  there  was  one  provision  of  the  Constitution,  which  is  Article  8  (4A) 
subsection  (a).  What 
that 
notwithstanding any other provision of the Constitution, if a law, which is passed and which 
has the effect of compulsory acquisition, any law under section 8 of the Constitution, if that is 
passed by a majority of three-quarters in the House, that law will not be called in question 
before the Courts. 

the  Constitution  effectively  said, 

this  provision  of 

is 

So, we sat and collectively thought. We know that there are a lot of shortcomings in 
this  law.  We  know  that  tomorrow  the  Supreme  Court  will  have  to  determine  on  the 
constitutionality of retrospective application, on the constitutionality of the burden of proof, 
on the constitutionality  of confiscation without guilt. We know there are a lot of elements 
which, undoubtedly - as rightly pointed out by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, we all know 
that this law will probably end up before the Supreme Court and before the Privy Council. 
So, we, as the Opposition, what do we do? Do we give three-quarter majority, so that there is 
a bar to any right-minded citizen who feels aggrieved by any provision of the law to  

 

105 

challenge that law? Or do we say: “okay, we don’t have to vote, you have the majority, you 
pass  the  Bill.  You  don’t  need  our  vote  to  pass  the  Bill.  So,  you  have  the  majority  of  the 
House, you pass the Bill, and then if anyone is aggrieved let that person go before the Court 
and let the Court decide.” But we don’t want to oust the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. 
We don’t want to have to put any constitutional hurdle before any aggrieved party. 

As rightly pointed out by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, this Article 8 (4A) (a) 
was  introduced  in  1983  for  a  very  specific  purpose.  That  was  done  at  a  time  when 
nationalisation  was  à  la  mode  and  the  Government  of  the  day  wanted  to  ensure  that  they 
could pay compensation in tranches over a certain period of time and, therefore, in order not 
to each time having to come to Parliament and amend the Constitution, there was this all-
encompassing  Article  8(4A),  whose  constitutionality  has  never  been  tested  before  the 
Supreme Court. 

So, we informed the hon. Minister that we are not going to vote in favour of this Bill 
so as not to bar any aggrieved party from seeking redress before the Supreme Court, and we 
held  a  Press  conference  so  that  no  one  be  taken  by  surprise.  We  held  a  Press  conference 
during lunchtime and made our position clear on why we are taking that position. What is the 
reaction  of  the  Government?  The  Government  circulates  an  amendment,  and  now  for  the 
appointment  of  the  Director,  for  the  appointment  of  the  Board,  it  will  be  done  by  the 
President  on  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister.    Out  you  go,  Leader  of  the  Opposition! 
Government themselves on Saturday circulated an amendment stating that the President shall 
appoint on the advice of the Prime Minister, after consultation with the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition. Now, this Government shows we don’t… 

(Interruptions) 

…on  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister,  after  consultation  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition.  That was the first amendment that they circulated on Saturday. 

So, when they themselves circulated this amendment, they had put ‘after consultation 
with the hon. Leader of the Opposition’, and now, today, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister wants 
us to believe that, when he sat in Cabinet, when they decided to have this amendment, he was 
sleeping  and  he  did  not  say  anything!  Or  he  raised  his  voice  and  said:  “No,  that’s  anti-
constitutional!”  And  everybody  else  told  him:  “No,  sit  down,  we  have  decided  that  the 
President can appoint after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition”! Today, the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister tells us in this House “Oh! I have had reservations all this time about all 

 

106 

these laws which allow the President to appoint someone after consultation with the Leader 
of the Opposition”! 

When he was a member of the MMM, he knows that before every Bill was debated, 

we, in the MMM, being a most democratic party, every week… 

(Interruptions) 

…we  discussed  the  Bill.  At  no  point  in  time,  has  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  ever  even 
hinted that it could be unconstitutional for the President to appoint someone after consultation 
with  the  Prime  Minister  after  consultation  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  Never! 
And he is saying it today… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, at no point did he ever raise any objection to any provisions of our law which allows the 
President to appoint anyone after consultation with the Prime Minister and after consultation 
with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Never! 

But we all see today that the only reason that the Government is going back on their 
own amendment is because we, the MMM, want to give the chance to every aggrieved citizen 
who feels aggrieved by this law to be able to challenge this law before the Supreme Court! 
And that is what history will remember! That is what history will remember, today, in this 
House, there is absolutely no iota of doubt.  The Director who will be appointed to head this 
Agency,  the  Board,  the  Chairman,  the  members  of  the  Board  will  be  political  appointees! 
They would be… 

(Interruptions) 

… appointed by the President acting on the advice of the Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

That is the case! 

And to add insult to injury, for the first time, at the eleventh hour, they had the nerves 
to come with another amendment in clause 8(A) to entrench this political appointment. This 
political appointee, this Director, these members of the Board will not be able to be removed 
even for gross negligence, even for incompetence.  We will now have to go through a Judge 
for their removal. So, today, there is no doubt, this Body that is going to be appointed will be 
a political Body! 

107 

 
Worse,  this  Body,  this  Director,  the  members  of  the  Board  will  have  protection 
against criminal and civil prosecution. This is part of the law. They are not accountable for 
anything that they do in the exercise of their function. Hon. Ameer Meea pointed out, hon. 
Baloomoody  said  so,  hon.  Ganoo  mentioned  how,  without  going  through  Court,  without 
going through the Board, this Director can make an inscription. Without the Court protection, 
without the Board protection, the Director can go and make an inscription.  

Here also they came and said that it is a temporary measure only for 42 days. But we 
are trained to read the small prints and when we read the small prints, we found out that it is 
not 42 days. It is 42 days after the Agency informs the Board that there is sufficient evidence 
for an unexplained wealth. The Agency can take years and months before they finish their 
enquiry and give that report to the Board. In the meantime, this property is subject to a lien. 
There is stigma. Everybody knows because it goes on the public record, in the register kept 
by the Conservator of mortgages where anyone can see. You are suspected of unexplained 
wealth, therefore, you are a criminal and we have put a seizure on your property.  

This  is  how  dangerous  this  law  is  and  now  we  are  putting  this  into  the  hands  of 
political appointees. Why do we need this agency, Madam Speaker? We already have under 
the Prevention of Corruption Act, ICAC, which investigates corruption offences. We already 
have  under  the  Income  Tax  Act,  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  to  investigate  people 
whose standard of living is not commensurate with their declared income. Under the Income 
Tax Act, the MRA can go and make an inscription. The MRA can go and seize your property 
to satisfy any tax that is not paid for. Under the Assets Recovery Act, which we voted a few 
weeks ago, the Financial Intelligence Unit under the Assets Recovery Investigation Unit also 
has the power - whether it is confiscation based on criminal conviction or civil asset recovery 
- to seize proceeds of crime.  

So, we already have so many agencies doing more or less the same thing. There is 
bound to be inconsistencies. There is bound to be overlapping. For example, if a person has 
accumulated wealth by not paying tax, who should sue that person? Should it be the MRA? 
Should it be the Integrity Reporting Services Agency? According to the law, it will be this 
Agency because it has overriding powers. But is the people at that Agency better trained that 
MRA to go after fraudsters, after people who did not pay their tax?  

Same thing if there is unexplained wealth which are proceeds of a crime, who is better 
equipped? Is it the Agency who is better equipped or is it this Financial Intelligence Unit and 

 

108 

Assets Recovery Investigative Unit? And if both are competent why duplicate expenses? If 
the unexplained wealth is also a corruption offence, should it be ICAC which investigates or 
should it be the Agency? So, there was absolutely no need to create new Bodies except if you 
want to have political appointees to dance to your tune. 

Now, when it comes to recovery of the fund, what do you do after you have recovered 
the funds? If it is done by the MRA, it goes to the Consolidated Fund. If it is done by the FIU, 
80% goes to the Consolidated Fund and the rest you can use to pay victims of the crimes. But 
under this law, the money is used either to pay reward or payment to alleviate poverty. So, 
when  you recover this money, are  you going to pay it to the Consolidated Fund? Are  you 
going to pay it to victims or are you going to use it to alleviate poverty?  So, there is so much 
of overlapping. Here on this side of the House, we believe that  you need everything to be 
under  one  control,  under  one  roof.  Maybe  when  we  come  to  the  Financial  Crime 
Commission, there would be some new organisations because you cannot have overlapping, 
you cannot have so much duplication of cost, you cannot have so much inconsistency in law 
enforcement agencies. 

Madam Speaker, when I intervened yesterday and this is a point that has been taken 
again by other hon. Members. Our problem with the definition of unexplained wealth is that 
there  is  no  concept  of  unlawfulness.  Instead  we  have  in  the  definition  that  confiscation  is 
permitted where  you cannot satisfactorily account for the wealth or the property  you have. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  ‘satisfactorily  account’?  Is  it  sufficient  that  you  prove  that  the 
property was acquired by lawful means? If you are able to show that it is lawfully gain, is that 
sufficient? What if it is a politician who has received political donation? Over the years he 
has accumulated political donation. Is that satisfactorily accounted for? If he can show that I 
am  the  leader  of  a  political  party  and  I  have  accumulated  all  these  money  from  donation, 
from  members  of  the  public  or  whoever  who  gives  me,  there  is  nothing  unlawful  about 
receiving  political  donation.  Will  that  be  sufficient  accountability?  If  I  have  received  a 
property by way of donation or inheritance, is that satisfactory account or do I have to go and 
prove that the person who donated me that property or that inheritance, has himself lawfully 
acquired that property? If I won at the casino, if I won at the horseracing and I did not keep 
my betting receipt, then I just go and say that I have got all this money through gambling. Is 
that a satisfactory account? Or do I have to show the receipt? If I do not have the receipt will 
it be sufficient if I just come and bring evidence that I am a compulsive gambler? So, these 

 

109 

are all real issues that are likely to crop up when we do not have a clear definition of what 
this unexplained wealth is.   

Hon. Ramano did a very good speech and explained the dangers that are linked with 
co-ownership.  This  is  the  reality,  Madam  Speaker,  that  very  often  you  will  have  someone 
who, when he acquired a house, he would put part of his money in that house and he will take 
a loan and the loan would be secured on the house.  

Now, if it is established that the source of his income did not justify the amount he 
used to buy this house, then under the law, the Judge can order confiscation of that property. 
Now, what happened to the property?  Is it sold? If it is sold who  gets  paid first? Is it the 
Government who takes the money or is it the bank who takes the money?  

Similarly,  if  you  have  co-owners,  joint  ventures,  two  companies,  two  people  came 
together  and  brought  a  property.  One  used  unexplained  wealth  and  one  used  legitimate 
money. But the person who has unexplained wealth does not have the money to pay for the 
order made by the Court, what do you do? Do you sell the property? Does the Government 
realise  what  this  means  in  terms  of  foreign  investors  who  are  coming  to  Mauritius? 
Previously, whenever a foreign investor comes and invests in Mauritius, he has to ensure that 
the wealth that his counterpart has is not derived from any crime. That was easy to check. 
You go and see if this person has been convicted of any criminal offence, has been involved 
in any offence and there is public record for that. There is no evidence of illegal activities 
and, therefore, you give a clean opinion that he can invest. But now how are you going to 
give  an  opinion  that  the  money  which  the  Mauritian  counterpart  is  coming  with  is  clean 
money, is money that can be justifiable? It is not unexplained wealth. How can you establish 
that? What is the means that investors have to be able to ascertain that his co-investor, his 
Mauritian partner, the money that he is putting is not unexplained wealth? 

I would also like to raise another point about this definition of unexplained wealth and 
that  is  the  third  leg.  The  third  leg  is  where  a  person  holds  property  on  behalf  of  another 
person, he must ensure that that property also is not unexplained wealth. Now, I understand 
fully the logic behind this. It will be too easy for someone to use a prête-nom and hide all his 
properties, all his assets behind this prêt-nom, behind this nominee. 

I  totally  agree  with  that.  But  have  we  thought  about  the  consequence  of  this 
legislation  on  our  offshore  sector.  Our  offshore  sector  deals  with  foreigners  but  once  the 
foreigners have transferred the property onto  a trust in Mauritius, once they  have invested 

 

110 

their  money  onto  a  global  business  company  that  property  belongs  to  the  Mauritian  trust, 
which  is  property  of  a  citizen  in  Mauritius.  That  money  belongs  to  the  global  business 
company which is again property of a citizen of Mauritius.  

So, it is not good to just have a line in this Bill saying that this Bill will apply only to 
the  property  of  a  citizen.  The  reality  is  we  have  an  offshore  sector  which  deals  in  wealth 
management. What is wealth management? What we do in offshore? Very rich individuals, 
high-net-worth people, high-net-worth families transfer their assets to be held in a Mauritian 
trust either for estate purposes or for tax purposes. Now, the Mauritian trustee will have to 
enquire from all these investors, from all these clients: ‘Where did you get your money?  Can 
you explain your wealth?’ Can you imagine asking clients to come and justify where you got 
all  your  money?  Do  we  realise  that  we  are  killing  the  offshore  industry,  the  wealth 
management sector of Mauritius?  

Madam Speaker, I could not help but have a sense of déjà vu when I heard several 
hon. Members intervening on this Bill. A sense of déjà vu because the very same arguments 
that I heard today, were extensively rehashed and debated three years ago when this House 
voted  the  Asset  Recovery  (Amendment)  Bill;  issues  about  constitutionality,  issues  about 
retrospective  application  of  the  law,  issues  about  presumption  of  innocence,  issues  about 
reversal of burden of proof. They were all discussed in this House and we, in the Opposition, 
criticised the Bill. We stated that there are genuine concerns about the constitutionality of this 
Bill. The then Government at that point also came with the same arguments which we heard 
today  that:  ‘No,  we  are  dealing  with  civil  proceedings,  constitutional  matters  are  not 
relevant’.  We  heard  the  same  arguments:  ‘No,  we  are  dealing  with  right  in  rem  not  in 
personam’. Right in rem! But all the hon. Members who intervened keep saying that they are 
bringing this law to target certain people. Is that right in rem? It suffices that anyone before 
the Supreme Court goes and cites what has been said today in the ‘Travaux Préparatoires’ 
for the Judges to have a clear idea that this law is nothing about right in rem, it is about right 
in personam, it is about right against criminal ill-gotten wealth, to go after the people who 
have benefited and can’t justify their earnings, it is right in personam not right in rem. 

The hon. Vice-Prime Minister cited the former Attorney General, Mr Varma. I think it 
is  fair  that  I  should  cite  what  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  Leader  of  the  MSM  stated  when  he 
intervened on that Bill. On the issue of constitutionality of the retrospective application, this 
is what he said, and I quote - 

111 

the 

 
“So, again,  I will join my colleagues, my friends who have spoken on  the issue of 
constitutionality.  I  also  have  doubts  whether 
test  of 
constitutionality. In trying to combat people involved in such a criminal and unlawful 
activity,  I hope we are  not going to  end up with a situation, hon.  Baloomoody has 
clearly  described  where  there  would  be  a  standstill  because  I  can  bet  that  amongst 
probably the first few cases that will arise, we will have a case before the Supreme 
Court  and  probably  that  will  go  up  to  the  Privy  Council  where  the  issue  of 
constitutionality will be questioned”. 

this  will  stand 

So, that is what hon. Pravind Jugnauth said. He has doubt about the constitutionality 
of going back retrospectively. Then, when he talked about the definition of unlawful activity, 
this is what he said -  

“Therefore, widening that definition to such an extent might lead to abuse.” 

I am not saying it, he said it.  

“Be that as it may, this all-embracing definition will certainly infringe the principle of 
proportionality enshrined in section 7 of our Constitution. It is trite law that there is no 
need to use a sledgehammer to crack a nut and such a definition will, according to me, 
not be justified because the impact on the individual is so severe.” 

I could not use better words, Madam Speaker, to describe exactly what I feel about 
this definition of unexplained wealth. We are using a sledgehammer to  crack  a nut and in 
doing  so,  we  are  putting  a  lot  of  honest,  ordinary  citizens  at  risk.  This  is  totally 
disproportionate to what is being sought to be achieved.  

So,  it  is  funny,  Madam  Speaker,  how  the  language  of  hon.  Members  change 
depending  on  which  side  of  this  House  they  sit.  When  they  are  in  the  Opposition 
retrospectivity 
the 
constitutionality. He also raised questions about section 8, but, today, he did not say anything; 
today, he did not say anything about the constitutionality, about the same principles: standard 
of proof, burden of proof, presumption of innocence. 

is  anti-constitutional,  and  even  hon.  Bodha  also  challenged 

Today no! We are presenting the Bill, we are in a Government, everything is fine! 
When  we  are  in  the  Opposition,  everything  is  bad,  but,  at  least,  I  am  clear  with  my  own 
conscience because when I was in the Opposition, I raised doubt about the constitutionality of 
the Asset Recovery Act and today, I am raising the same doubts about the constitutionality of 
this Bill. Why am I raising this issue, Madam Speaker? 

 

112 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, order please! 

Mr Uteem: Because, and that is what I have stated - 

“Although  there  were  authorities  in  European  Courts  to  the  effect  that 
retrospective  legislation  will  not  infringe  European  Convention  on  human 
rights (...).” 

I added – 

“But  will  that  carry  the  day  in  Court  in  Mauritius?    Unfortunately,  Mr 
Speaker, Sir, nothing can be less certain.” 

And  then  I  went  on  to  cite  the  case  of  International  Financial  Services  Ltd  v/s 
Mauritius Revenue Authority where the Mauritian Supreme Court, in its wisdom, held that a 
particular section of the Income Tax Act to the extent that they purported to impose a tax on 
the  applicant’s  income  with  retrospective  effect  was  violating  sections  3  and  8  of  the 
Constitution. There was already a case where the Supreme Court had stated that a provision 
of the Income Tax Act which had retrospective effect, taxing effect, confiscating effect, was 
in breach of sections 3 and 8 of the Constitution. 

Today also I maintain, Madam Speaker, that the retrospective law applicable to asset 
acquired seven years before the commencement of this Bill is not constitutional. The more so 
that yesterday when we voted the amendment to the Constitution, we did not provide for any 
retrospective application of that law in that provision of the Constitution we voted yesterday.  

On the issue of reversal of burden, Madam Speaker,  I stated that it will depend on 
proportionality. It must be a proportionate response to the social problem being addressed. 
The  long  and  the  short  of  it,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  piece  of 
legislation,  this  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  will  end  up  before  the 
Supreme Court and possibly before the Privy Council. This is why it was very important for 
the MMM to take the decision that we took this morning, that we will not vote this Bill to 
give it three-quarter majority which would be a bar, a constitutional hurdle for any aggrieved 
party who tries to seize the Supreme Court for redress. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Prime Minister! 

 
(8.03 p.m.) 

113 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am afraid that hon. Uteem is mistaken when 
he  says  that  after  their  request  the  hon.  Minister  Bhadain  proposed  an  amendment  to  the 
effect  that  the  appointment  should  be  made  by  the  President  on  the  advice  of  the  Prime 
Minister and in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. This is completely wrong. It 
was not this. In fact, in that original amendment it was stated that the President would appoint 
in consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. 

Well, this is what I have been told. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: But in any case, we came to the conclusion that under section 
64  (1)  of  the  Constitution  which  provides  an  umbrella  provision  to  the  effect  that  in  the 
exercise of his functions, the President shall act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet 
or of a Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet. This is why we are going 
for an amendment which provides that the appointment would be made by the President on 
the advice of the Prime Minister in accordance with the provisions of that section.  

But in any case, we wanted to please the MMM at all cost, but even then the MMM 
had already decided that they are not going to vote for this Bill. So, it was useless for us to try 
and please them. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  presentation  of  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting 
Bill indeed marks a milestone in the history of this country in terms of the efforts made to 
promote transparency and good governance.  

In  our  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  we  have  pledged  for  a  more  just  and 
equitable society, based on the principles of fairness and transparency. It should be recalled 
that we made this pledge in the wake of the last general elections and mainly in the light of 
the numerous cases of malpractice recorded during the mandate of the previous Government. 

We promised to clean up the country and restore the rule of law. During the last ten 

months, no effort has been spared in that regard.  

 

114 

This is ongoing and will certainly be pursued for quite some time in view of the scale 
of the malpractices and other illegal acts committed by the previous regime and their cronies. 

Madam Speaker, the House is today in presence of unprecedented proposals to uphold 
the image of Mauritius as a clean jurisdiction, guided by the principles of transparency and 
fairness.  For  too  long  now  we  have  been  witness  of  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  laws, 
procedures and institutions set up to address the corruption and financial crimes. 

At the recent Conference of State Parties on the UN Convention against Corruption 
held at St. Petersburg, one of the issues raised by SIDS which are party to the Convention, is 
the  ineffectiveness  of  the  provisions  of  the  Convention  which  have  been  transposed  in 
domestic legislation. All the SIDS and other states are unanimous on the urgent need for a 
change in strategy to tackle corruption and financial crimes. 

Madam Speaker, in Mauritius, the situation is not so different.  

Intelligence  Unit, 

the  Independent  Commission  against  Corruption, 

In  our  arsenal  to  combat  illicit  enrichment  or  unexplained  wealth,  we  have  the 
the 
Financial 
Enforcement  Agency  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  the  Drugs  Commissioner  under  the 
Dangerous Drugs Act (insofar as pending investigations under section 45 of the Dangerous 
Drugs Act are concerned), the Mauritius Revenue Authority and the Mauritius Police Force. 
Can  we,  in  2015,  be  satisfied  that  what  has  been  done  and  achieved  so  far  to  tackle 
unexplained wealth and restore the faith of our population on the merits of hard work has 
been enough? I very much doubt so, Madam Speaker.  

And let me be clear, when I say so, it is not meant to be a criticism of the institution 
concerned but it is rather a reflection on the missing piece of the puzzle in our legal jigsaw to 
combat unexplained wealth. This is what precisely this Bill purports to do.    

This Bill will be a game-changer as, if it goes through, people holding unexplained 
wealth  will  have  to  provide  explanations  and  the  signal  will  be  sent  to  our  citizens  that 
Government will not allow dishonest citizens to prosper. 

We are duty bound to come with such a legislation as it would be criminal on our part 
to allow those who have illegally enriched themselves and their cronies at the expense of the 
taxpayers to go free with impunity.  

 This is simply unacceptable. It would be the worst example that we could show to the 

young generation. 

 

115 

Madam  Speaker,  we  cannot  continue  to  live  in  a  society  where  the  standard  of 
accountability and governance varies from one person to another. We keep insisting on the 
need of a level playing field without really being determined to do so.  

This was the state of things in the past which we propose to change as from now on. 

Madam Speaker, the mere mention of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Bill has, over the last few days, sent waves of shock in the obscure quarters of those who 
used  power  for  their  own  greedy  interests.  Many  have  started  finding  the  arguments  to 
demonstrate  that  this  legislation  has  sinister  motives  and,  according  to  them,  have  been 
designed to target opponents of the present regime and to protect those in power today.  

Quite a lot has been said on the potential of this legislation as a political tool against 

opponents.  

All  these  are  mere  rubbish  and  nothing  has  been  stated  to  ascertain  what  has  been 

adduced. 

I have listened attentively to the Leader of the Opposition but he has not actually set 

out what are the dangerous aspects of this Bill.  

Madam Speaker, the Bill has the merit to vest the power to issue Unexplained Wealth 

Orders in the hands of the Judge. The agency does not have any coercive powers. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  reassure  that  the  Bill  presented  today  on  behalf  of  this 
Government has very clear objectives. There is nothing sinister and more importantly there is 
no targeted approach as some would want people to believe. 

It is not a surprise that unexplained wealth is not a matter of concern for the Labour 
Party which is the prime force to resist this legislation. I need not mention the crimes that 
they committed on the back of the Nation and the number of coffers they have filled with 
even unused and brand new dollars.  

The population is well aware of what had happened under the reign of the Labour tsar 
and  his  cronies.  If  these  same  people  fear  the  proposed  legislation,  I  believe  they  have 
reasons  to  try  to  save  their  skin.  However,  I  want  one  thing  to  be  clear:  we  are  targeting 
unexplained wealth and ill-gotten gains, not individuals. 

Madam Speaker, if the MMM does not vote the Bill, the proof will be made that they 
are simply not serious and they want the state of affairs as regards unexplained wealth and ill-
gotten gains to remain like it is now.  

 

116 

That the Labour Party would not vote the Bill does not really come as a surprise to us.  

Corruption is in their culture… 

(Interruptions) 

…. or I should say, now, in their DNA.  For them, any lame excuse is enough not to 
vote the Bill.  But when it comes to the MMM, I just can’t believe it.  The MMM is refusing 
to vote an anti-corruption legislation!  And this, in spite of amendments made, following their 
own suggestions.   

Where  are  the  lofty  ideals  which  this  Party  stood  for?    On  ground  of  which  high-
minded principles are they refusing to vote?  Their persistent reluctance only smacks of bad 
faith and petty politics.  One is entitled to ask where were those grand principles when they 
gave their approval to the Machiavellic plan for a second-Republic, concocted by two persons 
in a bid to secure personal power and immunity. 

Madam Speaker:  Mind your language, hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  suggested 
that  this  Bill  be  deferred  for  further  examination.    I  too,  I  believe  in  dialogue  and 
consultations.  But I think we have had enough of talking and discussing.  What we need now 
is concrete action, and not “koz  kozé”  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  is  indeed  a 

landmark for the country.  

For the first time in our history, we are coming up with a legislation that would make 
all those who have, through illicit means enriched themselves, account for their deeds and 
misdeeds. 

As I explained yesterday during my speech on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, what 
we  intend  to  do  is  simply  to  request  those  who  have  acquired  property  which  is 
disproportionate  to  their  income  and  emoluments  to  explain  the  source  of  funds  used  to 
acquire such property. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  mentioned  earlier  the  standard  of  accountability  and 

transparency that has to be upheld at all times irrespective of party politics and affiliation.  

 

117 

No  one  should  be  allowed  to  act  with  impunity  and  there  should  not  even  be  any 

whisper of impunity. This is the golden rule which we should all embrace. 

The public has, at all times, been the proponent of accountability and has a legitimate 

locus to demand full disclosure and transparency. 

Madam Speaker, it was generally believed that in order to defeat organised crime it was 
necessary  to  adopt  a  repressive  approach  which  envisaged  prison  sentences  up  to  life 
imprisonment. Such a strategy had the advantage of reassuring the population and creating a 
consensus  regarding  action  taken  by  the  executive  which  preferred  tough  actions  against 
criminals. 

The downside of this approach was that beyond arrests and convictions, the problem 

was far from being resolved. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  time  it  became  clear  that  money  and  the  rapid  creation  of 

enormous wealth were common objectives of any kind of criminal activities worldwide.  

It equally became clear that any imprisoned criminal having illicit wealth is able to 
rule from jail, to have the economic  capacity to corrupt and  recruit people to carry on his 
illicit business. 

Confiscation of unexplained wealth through civil recovery procedures has changed the 
landscape and is today a more lethal threat for the criminals as opposed to a prison sentence.  

It is a new vista to our endeavor to promote a fair and just society. 

Madam Speaker, the assets originating from crimes affect the economy and society as a 
whole  and  constitute  a  threat  to  democracy  as  they  alter  the  basic  rules  and  impose  non-
democratic behaviour. Compared to the past, today’s criminals present different features and 
they  are  increasingly  white  collared,  businessmen  as  well  as  public  and  private  sector 
individuals. 

Madam Speaker, unexplained wealth has distorted our values and created a culture of 

immorality, indecency, irresponsibility, defiance, injustice, impunity and dishonesty. 

The conventional way to progress through hard work and honest means has been set 
aside by some as the bad example was coming  from the top. A new  convention had been 
established where the rule of law, morality, ethical conduct and accountability were no longer 
the guiding principles. 

 

118 

Madam Speaker, the rustling of dollars, Euros or other currencies is not as noisy as a 

gunshot. It is discreet, silent, devious and sneaky. So is unexplained wealth.  

It does not create the glamour of an armed robbery, and it does not bother to the same 

degree as the discovery of large amounts of drugs or arms.  

However, the social risk they represent should not be underestimated.  

Madam Speaker, I am determined, more than ever before, to address these issues in a 
resolute and effective manner and restore our national values and nothing will stop me in this 
endeavour.   

When it comes to fighting fraud and corruption, my motto is “no retreat no surrender”, 

especially when the superior interests of the country are at stake.   

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(8.23 p.m.) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, we have come to the end of a long process.  Throughout 
this process we have been opened to debates and many suggestions have been made.  Until 
the  very  last  minute,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  welcomed  consultations,  views  and 
suggestions.  Unlike other legislation, I believe that this is the first time that a Bill has been 
opened for public consultation for more than six weeks after First Reading.   

Stakeholders  in  civil  society  and  members  of  the  Bar  have  also  had  an  opportunity  of 
expressing  their  views  and  suggestions.  And  I  am  grateful,  Madam  Speaker,  for  their 
contribution which has added value to this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, as the mover of the Bill, I have not spared any effort to encourage a 
participative approach and to respond to all requests for clarifications on the provisions of 
this Bill. I wish to, personally, thank in particular two persons, the Deputy Prime Minister, 
hon. Xavier Duval and also, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, for their valuable contribution 
and advice throughout this process. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  Bill  meant  to  track  down  the  dishonest  few  and  not  the 
honest majority of hard working citizens of our society. Nevertheless, a perception of climate 
of  fear  and  confusion  has  been  engineered  to  defeat  the  true  purpose  of  this  law  which  is 
meant to create a level playing field for all Mauritians. 

119 

 
Madam  Speaker,  unexplained  wealth  has  been  discussed  before  this  House  and  the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition rightly put the question in July last year when the Declaration 
of  Assets  Act  was  subject  to  his  PNQ  which  was  put  to  the  then  Prime  Minister.  And  he 
actually asked the question as to whether assets being held through nominees or prête-noms 
would be part of the legislation that was then being proposed. And the answer by the then 
Prime Minister was – 

“It is so easy today to just use somebody else’s name and then acquire assets and all 
these. This will definitely be in the law when we bring it.” 

The  whole  concept  of  prête-nom  has  been  enshrined  in  our  Constitution  now  because  the 
Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  has  been  voted  yesterday  and  it  is  also  in  the  Good 
Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill in relation to unexplained wealth. Another question 
which is rightly again put by the hon. Leader of the Opposition as regards unexplained wealth 
states - 

“Another issue that has been raised is the issue of holding somebody holding assets 
disproportionate to known income.” 

This  is  actually  the  definition  which  is  in  the  Constitution  disproportionate  with  known 
income. 

“Elsewhere, it has been called signe extérieur de richesse shown by either Members 
of Parliament or anybody, including Civil Servants. Will that aspect be covered in the 
new legislation to come?” 

And the then Prime Minister answered and I quote - 

“That will definitely be the case, Mr Speaker, Sir. We have nothing against people 
being rich, but they have to explain how they became rich.” 

That was in July last year, Madam Speaker. 

In all humility and due respect, Madam Speaker, we have listened to the suggestions 
which  have  been  made  from  various  quarters  and  we  have  brought  amendments  to  the 
proposed Bill. The new system with those amendments will work as follows – 

An  Agency  is  set  up  with  a  Director  which  receives  reports  and  those  reports  are 
processed  and  at  the  end  of  that  administrative  review  which  is  done  by  verification  with 
other  institutions  like  Registrar,  Mortgages,  companies  and  public  data  basis,  then,  it  is 
established as to whether somebody is in possession of unexplained wealth or not and a letter 

 

120 

is sent to that person for him to reply within 21 days. All such number of days depending on a 
case to case basis if there are some reasons as to why, maybe, the person is not in the country, 
for instance. The person now has to reply by way of affidavit and if he so chooses he can also 
not put in an affidavit and in that particular case then the Agency will apply for a Disclosure 
Order from the Judge in Chambers. That is what the Agency does. If there is nothing which 
merits any further review, then it is discontinued. On the other hand, if there is a case of an 
unexplained wealth which is detected, then the Agency may come up with an inscription on 
that property. 

We  have  circulated  an  amendment.  That  was  the  last  amendment  which  was 
circulated this afternoon at the suggestion of hon. Ramano. And I very much believe he had a 
point there because the law as it was stated that when the Agency reports to the Board, then 
there are 42 days from that moment where the inscription would lapse. The point which was 
raised was what if the Agency takes whatever number of weeks before actually sending the 
report to the Board, then it would defeat the 42 days. So, we’ve changed that. It will be from 
the moment that the inscription has been made 42 days later, it will lapse and the Conservator 
of Mortgages will do the needful. So, this is the only thing that the Agency can do, reporting 
to  the  Board  finally,  and  then  the  Board  which  is  chaired  by  an  ex-retired  Judge  or  a 
Commonwealth Judge with two persons of substantial experience and the whole professional 
people – because it is described in the law as to what their qualifications should be – have to 
make a decision. 

Before  they  make  that  decision,  they  can  exchange  information  with  other 
organisations in Mauritius and then they can also call for production of  documents. When 
they  get  the  information  they  need,  then  they  make  a  decision  as  a  Board  with  the 
Commonwealth Judge and the other two persons sitting as to whether this case should go to 
Court or not. If it does not need to go to Court it stops there. That’s the second safeguard in 
the system. Then, it is referred to the Court. When it is referred to the Court, to the Judge in 
Chambers,  it  is  done  on  notice.  The  person  knows  that  it  is  being  sent  to  the  Judge  in 
Chambers, it is inter partes, it is not ex parte, like for instance, the ICAC does when they go 
and apply for Attachment Orders or Disclosure Orders or even Freezing Orders. So, once the 
Judge  in  Chambers  has  got  the  affidavit,  then  the  other  party  would  also  come  with  his 
affidavits and a decision is made. Now that decision can be three-fold, either to reject the 
application if it is not meritus or he can make the order if he believes that there is a clear-cut 
case before him and that is done by the Judiciary. 

121 

 
That’s why at the beginning, in my speech at the Second Reading, I actually said that 
it is only the Judiciary which can confiscate an asset, the Executive cannot. The Executive is 
just running an administrative process as to whether a case should go to Court or not and then 
the Judge decides. Now if the Judge decides that the affidavit evidence is not sufficient for 
him to take a decision, then of course, he can send it to the competent Court which is the 
Supreme  Court  and  then  there  is  a  proper  hearing,  witnesses  are  called,  examined,  cross-
examined  and  then  the  Court  decides.  It  is  the  Supreme  Court  which  decides  whether  a 
Confiscation Order must be made or not and an Unexplained Wealth Order. 

Another thing we have introduced in relation to what the Judge in Chambers of the 
Court  can  make  as  an  order,  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  monetary  equivalent  when  it  is 
established that you cannot seize a property because it is not completely generated from an 
unexplained wealth. So, if a property, for instance, a plot of land belongs to somebody and 
then there is a mansion which has been built on it, the mansion is an explained wealth, but the 
land is not, then it gives the Judge that liberty to decide. 

The other thing which is interesting, and again, it is a point raised by hon. Ramano, is 
in terms of what happens when the property has changed hands and it is in the name of a 
bona  fide  purchaser,  somewhere  down  the  line.  He  referred  to  that  as  le  droit  de  suite,  I 
believe. This is exactly why we have brought that amendment, Madam Speaker, the monetary 
equivalent, so that the Judge can decide. The Judge being a Judge of the Supreme Court - and 
we all vow to the Judiciary, we know how diligent they are when they do their work - they 
will actually decide what is the best order to give in whatever circumstances. This is not in 
the hands of the Executive at all. 

Now, in terms of other issues which have been raised, Madam Speaker, hon. Ganoo 
mentioned  about  declaration  of  assets  and  whether  those  four  persons,  who  are  appointed, 
will  have  to  declare  their  assets.  We  have  taken  good  note  of  that,  Madam  Speaker.  Of 
course, there will be discussions with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, but I personally see no 
reason as to why when we will include public officials and other senior people in society why 
we are not going to include those four people. I believe it should be there in the Declaration 
of Assets Act which is going to be amended very soon. I also wish to make a clear statement, 
Madam Speaker, having heard my friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, and also hon. Ganoo, as to 
whether we are going to use this structure as a political tool. During my speech at Second 
Reading, I stated that it cannot be used as a political tool and I explained why; because the 
process itself prevents it. 

122 

 
At the end of the day, there is no power in the Executive hands, and when you look at 
writing a letter to ask somebody to file an affidavit or an inscription which is going to lapse in 
42 days or a Board deciding whether to send a case to Court, I can’t see how this can be used 
as  a  political  tool  to  cause  harm  or  undue  prejudice  to  any  citizen,  let  alone  political 
opponents, but any citizen. Madam Speaker.  Hon. Ganoo asked me to make a statement to 
that effect.  So, I am making that statement. This law, this structure is not going to be used by 
anybody on this side of this House for political motives. It will not. And now it is in Hansard. 

Now,  Madam  Speaker,  in  relation  to  other  points  which  have  been  made  by  my 
friend, hon. Ramful, I join the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, when he basically 
says that the four young representatives of the Labour Party are going to be here for many 
years probably.  I very much believe that especially people from our generation should see 
that what is being done for Mauritius, for our country today is creating a level playing field, 
so  that  people  who  have  unexplained  wealth  would  not  distort  the  economic  dynamics  of 
Mauritius going forward. All the economic development which is going to be brought by this 
Government  and  probably  other  Governments  should  go  to  people  who  believe  in  certain 
principles, certain values, people who are working hard in society and not people who are 
abusing the system. 

So  much  has  been  said  about  criminals  and  the  law  requiring  some  kind  of 
criminality. But, again, this is the new concept. This is how the world is evolving, and the 
whole concept of civil orders is being established worldwide because you have problems with 
criminal systems and you cannot recover assets through those systems. I explained during the 
debates on asset recovery what happened in the UK and what happened in Mauritius. But it is 
not  only  Mauritius  and  the  UK!    There  are  also  many  other  countries  where  the  system 
basically does not work. 

My friend, hon. Uteem, referred to Hansard and the speech of hon. Pravind Jugnauth 
and also of hon. Bodha with relation to retrospective law. But I must state that his view was 
not totally what he has stated to Parliament. He also stated, when the debates were going on 
on the asset recovery law that this aspect of the constitutionality of retrospective legislation 
has been considered in several jurisdictions, including England, which has a similar provision 
for their Proceeds of Crime Act, and it has been held by the Court of Appeal in England that 
retrospective application of the law does not offend the notice of retrospectivity prescribed by 
Article 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which states – 

123 

 
“No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission 
which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international law at the 
time when it was committed.” 

And  the  rationale,  my  friend,  hon.  Uteem,  says,  for  them  holding  that  is  not  against  the 
Convention, is that we are dealing not with a criminal offence but with a civil proceeding. I 
am sure he understood it then; he must still understand the concept now. Then, he goes on to 
say - 

 “So  long  it  is  civil  proceeding,  there  are  authorities  in  the  European  Courts  to  the 
effect that it will not infringe the European Convention on Human Rights.” 

Then, with regard to the criminality aspect, Madam Speaker, again, when they were 

talking about unexplained wealth at that time, my friend, hon. Uteem, had this to say - 

“Why limit this to unjust enrichment, illicit enrichment, unexplained wealth (…)” 

The words are there! 

“(…) to only a civil proceeding to recover assets? Why not criminalise it?” 

And  then  he  explained  the  ‘Gro  Derek’  saga  and  said  that  he  was  enjoying  a  standard  of 
living which was not commensurate with his declared income. This is exactly the definition 
that we have brought into the Constitution: ‘disproportionate with income and emoluments’! 

But  the  view  at  that  time  was  to  make  it  a  criminal  offence,  and  if  somebody  has 
unexplained wealth, then it is not the system here, which is the Agency and the Board and the 
civil proceedings before a Judge in Chambers.  The proposal then was to send the person to 
jail because he has done a criminal offence by having unexplained wealth. That was then in 
2012! 

What we are doing, whether it is what the  Labour Party was proposing in 2014 or 
what hon. Uteem was saying should happen in 2012, in fact, the system that we have brought 
is not only a simple system, but it is also an effective system where rights are protected. We 
have worked very hard to basically make it happen in that particular manner. 

In  terms  of  the  apprehensions  which  are  there,  I  can  understand  that  there  are 
apprehensions. But we cannot legislate for every situation, Madam Speaker. We just can’t! 
We will have to let the law, when it is enacted, work! We will have to set up the Agency, we 
will have to set up the Board, and then we will have to let them work. If there are issues, then 

 

124 

we will have to deal with those issues, as a responsible Government, and if there is a need to 
come and make amendments to the law, then we will certainly have to do that. 

But  all  this  prophecy  of  doom  and  gloom  that  the  law  is  going  to  fail  before  the 
Supreme Court would be entering the realm of speculation at this stage, I very much believe. 
I don’t think that after all this careful consideration that we have given - and the officers of 
the State Law Office have also been working very hard, and I must thank them for their input, 
also  the  Solicitor  General  himself,  Sir  Victor  Glover  also  as  consultant  and,  of  course,  so 
many lawyers in Cabinet, Senior Counsels, we have looked at it as well and we can’t all be 
wrong, Madam Speaker. We can’t all be wrong! 

I do understand that there are issues which probably can be looked at in two different 
ways. Fair  enough! We accept that. But that is not a reason for not voting this law today, 
especially when we look at how we are going to change Mauritian society; when we look at 
how we are going to tell this mother who is basically telling the kid to study and he will get a 
good job and then he will buy a property and form a family, whereas next door  you have 
people who are abusing the system, fraud, corruption, drug trafficking or simply not paying 
taxes, cheating by doing other things and then going and investing in even more property, 
creating even more wealth out of the unexplained wealth already there. If we were to accept a 
situation  like  that,  then  we  would  not  be  a  responsible  Government.  Then,  we  would  be 
letting things happen the way they have always been and we would just carry on with our 
normal day-to-day activity. 

So, we decided that we were going to lead by example. We were going to come and 
change. We want Mauritius to show to the world what kind of law we can bring, how can we 
change  society,  and  we  had  the  support  internationally  on  that.  The  Commonwealth 
Secretariat has decided to make Mauritius a case study on good governance only after one 
year of us being here and this new Ministry on good governance being created. The United 
Nations has decided to make Mauritius the platform for anti-corruption reforms for all Small 
Islands  Developing  States.  A  resolution  has  been  voted  in  the  United  Nations  Convention 
against Corruption to that effect, and these are all international support that we are getting 
from high-calibre organisations like the UN and the Commonwealth Secretariat. We must be 
doing  something  right,  I  very  much  believe.  If  we  were  going  to  go  and  target  political 
opponents, come with all these vendetta scenarios, then I don’t think we would get that kind 
of support.  In  fact,  I believe that those organisations would then blame  us for doing these 
things, and this is certainly not the intention when we are bringing this Bill to the House. 

125 

 
With regard to everything which has been said on burden of proof, on retroactivity - 
we have already talked about - but also in terms of right to silence, presumption of innocence 
and all that, we have to be honest with ourselves, Madam Speaker. The Asset Recovery Act 
has gone through this House three times with all these things in there and it has always been 
voted; 2011, 2012 and only a few weeks back and none of these issues were raised. But in 
this Bill, those issues are being made.  Well, for reasons I do not believe, excuses probably, 
for not voting today.  But we are changing society, Madam Speaker; we want Mauritius to be 
different.  We are taking all the right steps to go in the right direction and we need support for 
that, even from the Opposition and even from my friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed. 

I have to be very honest, Madam Speaker, so much has been said about the previous 
Prime Minister.  The previous Prime Minister whatever he has done, is done.  He is not on 
our agenda.  It is not our priority to go and legislate it before this House today to go and harm 
the previous Prime Minister.  That is not our goal.  That is not our objective.  We have got 
bigger and better things to do.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No interruptions, please! 

Mr  Bhadain:    Well,  I  can  assure  the  House  that  all  discussions  which  have  taken 
place,  whether  it  is  in  Cabinet  or  with  my  good  friend,  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon. 
Xavier-Luc Duval or with the Vice-Prime Minister, leader of the ML, hon. Collendavelloo, or 
with  my  leader,  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  -  I  mean,  never  ever  have  we  even  mentioned  or 
thought about Dr. Navin Ramgoolam in relation to this law.  Why would we do that?   

(Interruptions) 

Maybe, Madam Speaker, … 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Maybe,  sitting  in  his  house,  he  is  thinking  about  us  a  lot!    That 
probably would be true, but we have work to do.  We are going to our office every day and 
we are doing a lot of work.  And at the end of the day, Madam Speaker, when I mentioned 
economic development, probably it has been taken lightly, but when I mentioned the Smart 
Cities that the Minister of Finance, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, has announced in the Budget and 
how  we  want  to  go  and  develop  these  projects,  we  do  not  want  people  with  unexplained 
wealth to come and benefit from that kind of development, certainly not, because then, we 

 

126 

would be working for the wrong people.  By creating these opportunities, we would then be 
putting  those  opportunities  into  the  hands  of  people  who  can  avail  themselves  of  those 
opportunities with unexplained wealth; we do not want to do that.   

Madam Speaker, there are other issues which have been raised.  I am not going to go 
into great detail on all the different aspects but, I think, our intentions are clear. I think, even 
the hon. Members of the Opposition do realise that our intentions are good.  We want to do 
good to society.  In fact, I have been working very hard for the last ten months to show to 
Mauritius - and everybody - that we are going in that direction. 

Madam Speaker, the last issue that I want to mention before I stop is in relation to the 
nomination of those four persons: the Director of the Agency, the Chairman of the Board and 
the two other members of the Board.  Yesterday, after having listened to the speech of the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition, I took it upon myself to speak to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
to the Deputy Prime Minister and the Vice-Prime Minister, and also to the leader of the MSM 
to see whether we could accommodate the suggestions of the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  

In fact, the hon. Leader of the Opposition had asked for the Chairperson of the Board 
to be appointed by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the 
Opposition.  I actually proposed for all four to be appointed in the same manner and we all 
agreed.  I personally went to see the hon. Leader of the Opposition together with the Chief 
Whip to propose that.  He accepted.  I thought it was great because we could unite both sides 
of the House, in terms of a transparent process of appointment, even though we know that we 
do not have any motive to go and appoint any person politically who is going to do the job 
badly, but for perception sake, we said ok, if we can have this consensus that would be great 
for our country - not for us.  I personally asked my staff to fax those amendments to the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition.  I think, it was done probably at one o’clock in the morning.  He 
must have received it early morning.   

However, when I came back here today, I was told by the State Law Office that we 
have  an  issue  in  relation  to  section  64  (1)  of  the  Constitution,  I  am  entitled  to  make  one 
mistake, Madam Speaker.  So, 64(1) of the Constitution basically says - 

“When it comes to a law – not the Constitution – which is empowering the 
President  to  appoint,  it  is  basically  in  terms  of  Cabinet’s  decision  and  the 
President shall follow that advice of Cabinet or a Minister who is acting under 
the authority of Cabinet.” 

 

127 

Now, that section 64 (1) applies to this law, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Bill.  When we look at the other sections of the Constitution, it starts by saying: ‘When the 
President is directed by this Constitution’; then you can do what was suggested and what was 
agreed  between  us,  in  terms  of  the  consultation  process  being  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. 

So, the State Law Office had this to say - 

“This Office has been requested by the Ministry to amend clauses 4, 5 and 7 
(1)(a) and (b) of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill to provide 
that the Director of the  Agency and the members of the  Integrity Reporting 
Board  will  be  appointed  by  the  President  after  consultation  with  the  Prime 
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition.   

You  may  wish  to  note  that  section  64  (1)  of  the  Constitution  contains  an 
umbrella  provision  to  the  effect  that  in  the  exercise  of  his  function,  the 
President  shall  (and  it  is  underlined)  act  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of 
Cabinet or of a Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet.   

Further pursuant to section 64 (1) it is only where the Constitution requires the 
President to act in accordance with the advice of or after consultation with any 
person or authority other than Cabinet or in his own deliberate judgement that 
the  President  may  do  so.    Accordingly,  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity 
Reporting Bill being an ordinary law, its provision cannot overwrite section 64 
(1) of the Constitution which is the supreme law of Mauritius.   

You may wish to refer to the earlier advice tended by this Office regarding the 
interpretation of section 64 (1) of the Constitution, the judgment of Dayal v/s 
His  Excellency  the  President  and  others  1998  SCG  21,  at  page  3,  and  the 
judgment  of  the  Singapore  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Yong  Vui  Kong,  the 
Attorney General 2010 SGHC235.”   

So, in light of that, Madam Speaker, we could not knowingly go ahead with a section 
of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, which was going to fall foul of that 
provision of a Constitution.  And I personally apologise to the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
for that, because I thought we could do it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

128 

There was no bad intent.  We honestly, genuinely wanted this to work and it has to work. 

Madam Speaker, I will just finish by saying the following. I believe that we all should 
unite in our mission to prevent the core principles of honesty and integrity be outshone by 
selfishness and greed.  It is high time for the blood, sweat, tears of our hardworking citizens 
to be given their true value.  They are worth it and they deserve it. 

Madam Speaker, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill will create a new 
way of democratic life and also a fair Mauritian life.  I would like to express my thanks to the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc 
Duval, and the Vice-Prime Minister and leader of the ML, hon. I. Collendavelloo and last, but 
not least, my thanks to a remarkable person, my friend, my leader, hon. P. Jugnauth. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INTEGRITY REPORTING BILL 

(NO. XXX OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 and 2 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 3 (Application of Act) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 3 

–                                                                                                           

“(i) 

(ii) 

in sub clause (2), by inserting, after the words “apply to”, the words 
“property of”; 

by deleting sub clause (6) and replacing it by the following sub clause 
– 

 (6) 

This Act shall not apply to – 
(a) 

any property acquired or having come in the 
possession or under the custody or control of a 

 

129 

person more than 7 years before the 
commencement of this Act; 
unexplained wealth of less than 10 million 
rupees. 

(b) 

(iii)  by inserting, after sub clause (6), the following new sub clause – 

 (7)  No application for an Unexplained Wealth Order shall 
be  made  under  section  14  in  relation  to  any  property  acquired  or 
having  come  in  the  possession  or  under  the  custody  or  control  of  a 
person more than 7 years before the date on which the application is 
made.” 
Amendments agreed to. 
Clause 3, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clause 4 (Integrity Reporting Services Agency) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 

4(5) – 

“By  deleting  the  words  “,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Prime  Minister,  by  the 
Minister on such contractual terms and conditions as he may determine” and replacing 
them by the words “by the President, on the advice of the Prime Minister, for a period 
of 3 years and on such terms and conditions as the President may determine”;” 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Chairperson, I was going to speak when we reach clause 7, 

but, I think, I better do it under clause 4, if I have the floor. 

The Chairperson: Yes. 
Mr Bérenger: Of course, it is on this issue of the appointment this afternoon a fourth 
version  of  how  the  Chairperson  and  Members  of  the  Board  and  the  Director  will  be 
appointed. So, I think, I am entitled to go back why we have reached a stage where there has 
been a fourth and a back-pedalling from Government on this section which relates to how the 
Chairperson and Members of the Board and the Director of the Agency will be appointed. 

 If you will allow me, Madam Chairperson, to go backwards, we voted yesterday for 
the  amendment  to  the  Constitution  because  for  that  Bill  presented  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  to  go  through,  there  was  need  for  a  three-quarter  majority.  We  voted  with 
Government and we obtained a three-quarter majority for two reasons, as I have said – if you 

 

130 

will allow me to repeat – firstly, we have always been in favour of the law to combat illicit 
enrichment,  and  secondly,  we  obtained  the  safeguard  that  whatever  we  do,  after  we  have 
amended the Constitution, must be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.  That was 
yesterday. Now, on the Bhadain law, he has been... 

(Interruptions) 

He said he is pleased when we call it the Bhadain law, I am pleasing him.  

There  have  been  very  important  amendments.    J’ai  salué  cela,  but  we  are  still  not 
fully satisfied in the Opposition.  Not at all, Madam Chairperson! But in the case of this law, 
today’s Bill, there is no need for the three-quarter majority for this Bill to go through. This 
Bill goes through with the simple majority. Therefore, our vote for this Bill to go through, is 
not required and we have never said that we are going to vote against.  We have never said 
that! We have never said we will vote against, but what has cropped up is this paragraph, 
section (4A) (a) of the Constitution going back to 1983, allow me to read – 

“Notwithstanding  subsection  (1)  (c),  section  17  or  any  other  provision  of  the 
Constitution, no law relating to the compulsory acquisition or taking of possession of 
any property shall be called in question in any court if it has been supported at the 
final  voting  in  the  Assembly  by  the  votes  of  not  less  than  three  quarters  of  all  the 
members of the Assembly”. 
I repeat, for this Bill to go through, there is no need for a three-quarter majority, a 
simple  majority  and  we  have  never  said  that  we  will  vote  against.  Now,  as  I  said,  this 
paragraph (4A) (a), Madam Chairperson, brings us back to 1983. This section was put to the 
Constitution with one purpose only – to allow for nationalisation with compensation spread 
in time. It was voted for that purpose only, by both sides then. The context today is totally 
different.  We are not talking about compensation spread in time. The context is completely 
different, Madam Chairperson. 

Therefore, when this idea of we must vote ‘yes’, it can only be to use that section of 
the Constitution and we are not prepared; we are not voting against the Bill, but we are not 
prepared to give our vote to take out the Judiciary in this context. This is the l’effet de what is 
going  to  happen.  If  we  vote  and  there  is  a  three-quarter  majority,  the  Judiciary  is  out.  I 
consider that it is a mere contempt of court. If we vote, the Judiciary is out, using a piece of 
legislation which amended the Constitution in 1983, which has nothing to do with what we 
are  discussing  and  doing  today.  We  will  not  vote  to  have  the  Judiciary  out  of  the  whole 
debate, but, at the same time, we never said that we will vote against the Bill.  

131 

 
Madam Chairperson, if you will allow me, there have been four versions, the fourth 
one  this  afternoon,  on  how  the  Board  and  the  Agency  are  appointed.  First  version,  the 
Agency is appointed by the Minister and the Chairperson of the Board by the Prime Minister.  
We said ‘no’.  

So, there was  a second  version that they  will be appointed by the President on the 
advice of the Prime Minister, which means by the Prime Minister, under our constitutional 
arrangements, our Constitution and so on. So, that was the second. We said ‘no’ again and we 
proposed that they be appointed by the President after consultation of the President with both 
the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition. This was agreed upon, as the hon. Minister 
himself  has  said.    The  Minister  and  the  Chief  Whip  asked  to  see  me,  we  discussed,  they 
stayed there and in the middle of the night, a fax came putting that into the law. So, that was 
the third version. 

And today, a fourth version, this time worst.  Now, it is appointed by the President on 
the advice of the Prime Minister, full stop. What I have heard that it is because of the State 
Law and so on, it is a pretext, it is an excuse.  

Madam Chairperson, can I make reference to the dozens of pieces of legislations that 
we have voted over the past years? Never have the State Law Officers of those days told us 
this can’t be done under the Constitution. This is une nouvelle découverte. This is an excuse, 
Madam  Chairperson.  This  is  an  excuse.  I  repeat,  we  have  voted  dozens  of  pieces  of 
legislation.  This  has  never  been  taken  up  by  either  the  State  Law  Office  or  by  hon.  Ivan 
Collendavelloo. Never!  We have dozens of precedence, Madam Chairperson. 

So, again, we are not voting against the Bill. We are not satisfied with the Bill in spite 
of all the amendments. We are not voting against the Bill, but we will not give our vote for 
the Judiciary to be thrown out of the whole process, of the whole issue that we are discussing. 
I appealed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister yesterday, and from his body language, I thought 
we were on the same wavelength.  When I appealed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I said: 
don’t ask for a Division. Because there is no need for the Bill to go through if a Division is 
asked, the only purpose is to throw the Judiciary out of the picture. I appealed and, if tonight  
a Division is requested, the only reason is to get the Judiciary out of the picture, out of the 
way. We are not voting against the Bill, but we will not, if a Division is asked, give our vote 
to get the Judiciary out of the picture.  And if a Division is requested, those who give their 
vote for Government to have under that section that throws out the Judiciary, approve, they 
will take their responsibility. We are not prepared…  

 

132 

(Interruptions) 

We  are  not  prepared  to  give  our  vote  to  get  the  Judiciary  out  of  the  picture.  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister, do you want to reply? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Chairperson. Madam Chairperson, there is no way in the 
whole world that section 8 (4) (a) of the Constitution will throw the Judiciary out. There is no 
way. The reason for that is because when the hon. Leader of the Opposition himself proposed 
an  amendment  initially  to  the  constitutional  amendment  to  say  ‘except  insofar  as  it  is 
justifiable in a democratic society’, those particular words were in section 8 (4) (a) but not to 
be found in the original Constitutional Amendment Bill which was circulated. Because we 
introduced 8 (4) (aa) after section 8 (4) (a) but we took on board the suggestion of the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition by inserting those words after the definition of unexplained wealth 
and when we amended that Constitution (Amendment) Bill, it starts by saying that: “or the 
provisions of Part II of the Constitution”. Part II of the Constitution is in relation to sections 3 
to 16, not Article 1 of the Constitution. So, we put that as suggested by the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition,  ‘except  insofar  as  it  is  justifiable  in  a  democratic  society’,  because  we  were 
aware that section 8 (4) (a) could, if we were not to do that, prevent somebody from going to 
Court. Anybody can go to Court, anybody can seize the Judiciary if he so wishes to contest 
this  legislation  as  being  not  justifiable  in  a  democratic  society.    On  top  of  that,  Madam 
Chairperson, Article 1 of the Constitution cannot be derogated from because Article 1 of the 
Constitution  is  the  Constitution  itself.  Mauritius  is  a  sovereign  democratic  State;  any  law 
which is passed in this House which fails that particular provision of Article 1 can always be 
challenged  in  the  Judiciary.  So,  it  is  certainly  not  correct  to  say  that  we  are  ousting  the 
jurisdiction of the Judiciary. The Parliament cannot do that! 

The Chairperson: So, can I ask the question? 

Mr Ganoo: Can I just intervene on the same clause? 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Ganoo,  the  hon.  Minister  has  already  replied.  You  should 

have made your point. You are referring to clause 4? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ganoo:  It is to put  a question to the hon.  Minister on clause 4  (5) before it is 

approved. 

 

133 

The Chairperson: Well, I allow you to do that, but you should… 

Mr Bérenger: On a point of order.  We have a number of cases by all the Speakers 
before  you took the Chair, which says that, at Committee Stage, a rigid rule of everybody 
speaks, the Minister sums up, does not hold. Sometimes, one hon. Member speaks, the hon. 
Minister replies, another hon. Member speaks, the hon. Minister replies and, at other times, 
the Speaker asks everybody whether and then, the hon. Minister replies, but there has always 
been that flexibility under all the other Speakers. 

The Chairperson: This is so. I allow the hon. Member to do so, but he should have 

done it before the hon. Minister’s reply. Go ahead! 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, you will understand why I am intervening now after 
having allowed the hon. Minister to reply to the hon. Leader of the Opposition, because my 
point is not on the same point as raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. My point is as 
follows, the amendment now being proposed is - 

“by the President, on the advice of the Prime Minister, for a period of 3 years and on 
such terms and conditions as the President may determine.”  

As far as I know, this is the first time that a law is being presented before this House 
where the President is being asked to determine the salary, the conditions, in that case the 
Director of the Agency. Section 28 of the Constitution defines the functions of the President.  
There shall be a President - what is the role of the President? So, I am just asking the hon. 
Minister to check with the Attorney General or with his officers from the State Law Office 
whether  it  should  have  been  the  President  or  the  Prime  Minister  rather  or  the  Minister 
himself, but it is not up to the President to decide, to determine the conditions, the salaries, 
the wages of the Director of the Agency. This is another point. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I very much thank the hon. Member for pointing 
this out. In fact, I missed it out during my Summing-up. When we decided that section 64 (1) 
as  per  the  State  Law  Office  advice  stated  as  it  is  stated,  we  wanted  to  introduce  new 
safeguards, we wanted to make it transparent as far as possible. So, we thought that when the 
terms  and  conditions  are  determined  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  that  might  give  the 
perception  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  determining  how  much  this  person  who  is 
going to be appointed will be paid and also all the different things. 

(Interruptions) 

 

134 

Yes, I will. I am tabling a copy of the advice of the State Law Office, Madam Chairperson.  

So, in trying to bring in this level of transparency, we wanted it to be clear that the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister has no control on the terms and conditions of appointment and, in fact, 
Madam  Chairperson,  I  must  thank  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  for  that,  he  basically 
stated:  ‘No,  what  we  have  to  do  also  is  to  put  a  security  of  tenure  into  that  appointment 
process and then we introduce that term of three years. So, there is security of… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Hon. Members, allow the hon. Minister to make his point. Don’t 

disturb him, please.  

Mr  Bhadain:  There  is  security;  so  that  we  could  add  additional  safeguards  and  to 
eliminate that perception of lack of transparency only because we could not go ahead with the 
‘President consulting the Prime Minister and then consulting the Leader of the Opposition’. 
That is why those two safeguards have been introduced. 

The Chairperson: Yes, the hon. Member has a point as well? 

Mr Mohamed: Well, I would like to just thank hon. Ganoo for the excellent point 
that he has raised. Hon. Ganoo raised a very important point and, just to simplify - I mean, I 
understand the hon. Minister’s explanation, to ensure that there was this transparency, this 
independence  and  what  not,  but,  unfortunately,  in  spite  of  all  good  intentions,  it  is  quite 
simple:  the  President  of  the  Republic  is  not  the  employer  in  this  particular  instance  and, 
therefore,  legally  cannot  be  the  one  to  dictate  and  determine  the  terms  and  conditions,  
because  the  President  does  not  have  the  legal  authority  to  employ  and,  therefore,  cannot 
determine the terms and conditions.  

That is outside the parameters legally allowable for the President of Republic. That is 

a fact in spite of all good intentions and this, therefore, cannot be proceeded with. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Chairperson,  of  course,  the  State  Law  Office  was  there  when 
they drafted it for us when we said we wanted additional safeguards. There has been no legal 
issue raised whether in the Constitution or otherwise to say that the President of the Republic 
cannot  determine  the  terms  and  conditions,  and  in  any  case  the  point  of  my  friend,  hon. 

 

135 

Shakeel Mohamed, is that the employer becomes the President.  I don’t think the employer 
becomes the President when she determines terms and conditions. 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 4, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5 (Powers of Agency) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 

5 –  

“(i)  in subclause (1) – 

 (A) 

in paragraph (a), by deleting the words “The Agency shall, on 
its own initiative or where a report has been made in respect of 
a  person  under  section  9(1)  or  (2),  require,  in  writing,  any 
person to explain” and replacing them by the words “On receipt 
of a report under section 9(1) or (2), or on its own initiative, the 
Agency may, in writing, request any person to explain, by way 
of affidavit within 21 working days or any such longer period 
which the Director may determine,”; 

(B) 

by  deleting  paragraph  (b)  and  replacing  it  by  the  following 
paragraph – 

 (b)  Where  the  Agency  does  not  receive  a 
reply within the period specified in paragraph (a), it shall apply 
for a disclosure order under section 13. 

(i) 

by deleting subclause (8);” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 5, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 6 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7 (Integrity Reporting Board) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 7 - 

 

“in clause 7(1) – 

136 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

in paragraph (a), by deleting the words “Prime Minister” and replacing 
them by the words “President, on the advice of the Prime Minister”; 

in paragraph (b), by deleting the word “Minister” and replacing it by 
the words “President, on the advice of the Prime Minister”; 

by  deleting  the  words  “on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  Prime 
Minister  may  determine”  and  replacing  them  by  the  words  “for  a 
period  of  3  years  and  on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  President 
may determine”;” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 7, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 8 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

New Clause 8A 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Chairperson, I move that a new clause 8A be added as follows - 

“8A.  Termination of appointment 

(1) 

The  appointment  of  the  Director  or  any  member  may  be 
terminated  by  the  President  for  inability  to  discharge  the  functions  of  his 
office,  whether  arising  from  infirmity  of  body  or  mind  or  from  any  other 
cause, or for misconduct, and shall not be so terminated except in accordance 
with subsection (2). 

 (2)    The  appointment  of  the  Director  or  any  member  shall  not  be 
terminated except where the question of terminating his appointment has been 
referred to a Judge, to be appointed by the President, and the Judge has, after 
giving a hearing to the Director or member, advised that the appointment of 
the Director or member ought to be terminated for inability or misconduct, as 
the case may be.” 

The Chairperson:  The question is that new clause 8A be read a second time. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

137 

New Clause 8A ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 9 to 11 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 12 (Privilege) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment in clause 12 - 

 

“in  clause  12(5),  in  paragraph  (a),  by  deleting  the  words  “be  erased  by  the 
Conservator of Mortgages at the request of the Agency” and replacing them by 
the words “lapse 42 days from the date of the deposit of the memoranda at the 
Office of the Conservator of Mortgages and shall accordingly be erased”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 12, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 13 (Disclosure Order) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment in clause 13 - 

 

“In paragraph (b), by inserting, after the word “acquire”, the words “, possess 
or control";” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 13, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 14 (Application for Unexplained Wealth Order) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 14 

- 

 

“By adding the following new subclause – 

(3)  Where an application is made under subsection (1), the Agency 
may  apply for an order  prohibiting the transfer,  pledging or disposal of  any 
property.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 14, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 

138 

Clause 15 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 16 (Unexplained Wealth Order) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 16 

- 

“in clause 16 – 

(i) 

(ii) 

in subclause (1), by adding the words “or an order for the payment of 
its monetary equivalent”; 

in subclause (2), by deleting the words “Unexplained Wealth Order” 
and replacing them by the words “order under subsection (1)”.” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 16, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 17 to 24 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to.  

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. 

XXX of 2015) was read a third time. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for a division of votes. 
Madam Speaker: I allow the division of votes. 

(Division Bells were rung) 

On question put, the House divided. 

AYES 

Hon. K. Teeluckdharry 

Hon. K. Tarolah 

Hon. Dr. M. R. Sorefan 

139 

 

Hon. Ms M. Sewocksingh 

Hon. D. Sesungkur 

Hon. Mrs M. D. Selvon 

Hon. S. Rughoobur 

Hon. K. Ramano 

Hon. G. Oree 

Hon. Mrs M. C. J. Monty 

Hon. G. P. Lesjongard 

Hon. J. C. G. Lepoigneur 

Hon. J. B. Leopold 

Hon. P. Jugnauth 

Hon. A. B. Jahangeer 

Hon. M. Gobin 

Hon. A. Ganoo 

Hon. S. Fowdar 

Hon. J. C. Barbier 

Hon. P. K. Armance 

Hon. J. N. A. Aliphon 

Hon. R. Rampertab 

Hon. S. Ramkaun 

Hon. T. Benydin 

Hon. Mrs D. Boygah 

Hon. M. S. Abbas-Mamode 

Hon. J. C. S. Toussaint 

Hon. Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus 

Hon. J. F. François 

140 

 

Hon. M. C. E. Boissézon 

Hon. J. H. T. Henry 

Hon. S. Rutnah 

Hon. S. Hurreeram 

Hon. P. Jhugroo 

Hon. A. C. Duval 

Hon. S. Callichurn 

Hon. M. R. A. Wong Yen Cheong 

Hon. J. R. Dayal 

Hon. P. Koonjoo 

Hon. Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. S. Bholah 

Hon. S. Bhadain 

Hon. Mrs M. A. M. J. Perraud 

Hon. A. K. Gungah 

Hon. S. Baboo 

Hon. M. Seeruttun 

Hon. M. J. N. E. Sinatambou 

Hon. P. Roopun 

Dr. the hon. A. Husnoo 

Hon. A. Gayan 

Hon. Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun 

Hon. N. Bodha 

Hon Y. Sawmynaden 

Hon. S. Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Hon. I. Collendavelloo 

141 

 

Hon. S. Soodhun 

Hon. Xavier-Luc Duval 

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister 

NOES 

Hon. D. Ramful 

Hon. S. A. Y. A. R. Mohamed 

Hon. M. O. C. Mahomed 

Hon. E. S. Jhuboo 

ABSTENTION 

Hon. M. R. C. Uteem 

Hon. J. P. F. Quirin 

Dr. the Hon. Z. H. I. Joomaye 

Hon. V. V. Baloomoody 

Hon. S. M. A. Ameer Meea 

Hon. R. Bhagwan 

Hon. P. R. Bérenger 

Ayes: 58 

Noes: 4 

Abstention: 7 

Madam Speaker: The Ayes have it. 

The Bill was read a third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Friday 11 December 2015 at 3.00 p.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 9.28 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 11 December 2015 

at 3.00 p.m. 

