 

 

1 

 

 

No. 14 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 31 MARCH 2015 

 

 

2 

 

                              CONTENTS 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

 

 

 

 

            BILLS (Public)   

 

 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

 Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 14 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 31 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

 
 

                                                       PAPERS LAID 
 

      The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

 

 
A.  Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 

Scientific Research – 
The Annual Report 2012 of the Private Secondary Schools Authority. 
Attorney General’s Office – 
The Annual Report 2014 of the Enforcement Authority. 

 
B. 
 
C.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 
 

(a)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and 
(Amendment  No.3)  Regulations  2015 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No. 34 of 2015). 

 

(b)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and 
(Amendment  No.4)  Regulations  2015 

Non-Taxable  Goods) 
(Government Notice No. 35 of 2015). 

D.  Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 

- 
The  Annual  Report  of 
(In Original) 

the  Probation  and  Aftercare  Service  2013.  

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

AGALÉGA – MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Agreement  for  the  development  of 
Agaléga which was recently signed between the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of 
India, he will - 

(a)  

give details thereof, indicating if it includes - 
(i) 
any form of a Lease Agreement and;  

(ii) the  setting  up  of  a  Coastal  Surveillance  Radar  Station  on  Agaléga  and 
entails Mauritius joining India’s Regional Radar Network or (joining) the 
trilateral India-Sri Lanka-Maldives Regional Security Cooperation set-up, 
and  

(b)  

lay copy thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer Islands (Mr P. Koonjoo): Madam Speaker, with your permission I shall reply to the 
PNQ addressed to the hon. Prime Minister.  

As the House is aware, Agaléga has for too long been neglected in matter of socio-

economic development, particularly regarding infrastructural development. 

The existing jetty which is only 60m long was constructed in 1985.  The jetty is in a 
very bad condition and it is most imperative that a proper quay be constructed.  It is to be 
noted  that  repairs  were  effected  to  the  jetty  in  1992,  2003  and  2013  after  the  passage  of 
cyclone Dumile. 

This is the only facility available for loading and unloading of cargo and embarking 
and disembarking of passengers.  M/V ‘Mauritius Trochetia’ lays in anchor at some 400m 
away from the jetty at the St. James anchorage, located at the reef-free area, where the depth 
is  only  60m.    However,  during  certain  past  voyages,    M/V  ‘Mauritius  Pride’  and  M/V 
‘Mauritius Trochetia’ could not anchor and had to be kept on the drive for both disembarking 
and embarking of goods and passengers in the high seas due to bad weather conditions. 

Another  major  shortcoming  in  Agaléga  relates  to  the  airstrip  which  badly  needs 

upgrading.  Presently, only small aircrafts like the Dornier can land in Agaléga. 

 

9 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  comforting  to  note  that  in  line  with  the  longstanding  Indo-
Mauritius  relations,  the  Republic  of  India  has  graciously  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  with  Mauritius  during  the  recent  visit  of    H.E.  Shri  Narendra  Modi,  Prime 
Minister of the Republic of India.  The MoU precisely addresses the infrastructural problems 
faced by Agaleans.  The components of the MoU are - 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 
(d) 

(e) 

construction of a jetty for berthing of ships; 
rehabilitation  and  repaving  of  the  runway  over  a  maximum  length  of  4,000 
feet, an apron for two aircrafts of size (ATR 42 type) and a taxiway; 
installation of a power generation facility of approximately 300 KW; 
setting up of a water desalination plant of capacity of approximately 60 tonnes 
a day; 
construction of a National Coast Guard Post, including basic repair facilities, 
and 
any other facility related to the project. 

(f) 
Under  the  MoU,  the  Government  of  India  shall  finance  the  projects  to  the  tune  of 
USD  18  m.  in  the  form  of  financial  grant  and  will  also  provide  suitable  personnel  with 
necessary expertise and experience to assist in the implementation of the projects. 

Madam Speaker,  with regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I would like to point out 
that the  MoU  between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Government of 
the Republic of India  does not include any Lease Agreement in whatsoever form. 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, the reply is in the negative. 
Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  in  line  with  Government 
policy of  transparency and good governance, I am laying a copy of the MoU on the Table of 
the National Assembly. 

Mr Bérenger: Before I put some questions, of course, my PNQ was addressed to the 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  but,  at  least,  the  situation  is  clear  as  far  as  any  lease  agreement  is 
concerned.  There has been a lot of talk, at least, that is clear. But is there any reason why the 
Minister has avoided replying to part (a) (ii), that is, whether the agreement between India 
and Mauritius includes the setting up of a Coastal Surveillance Radar Station on Agaléga and 
entails Mauritius joining  India’s Regional Radar Network or the trilateral  India-Sri  Lanka-
Maldives Regional Security Cooperation set-up? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to the separate agreement, Article 3 of the 
MoU  provides  the  possibility  of  drawing  up  and  entering  into  other  supplementary 
arrangements as may be required for the fulfilment of the pursuance of obligations of both 

 

10 

parties. In this respect, India did suggest a separate agreement; first, use of facilities being 
developed and to prevent use of facilities by party with interest initiated to the party. I must, 
here,  point  out  in  no  uncertain  terms  that  any  agreement  to  be  considered  would  have 
necessarily to satisfy the following conditions - 

• 
• 

it is of mutual benefits, and  
it will be in strict compliance with the principles of sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, if I heard the hon. Minister correctly, he said that the Indian side 
-  we  have  very  good  friends  -  has  suggested  a  separate  agreement.    Is  there  a  separate 
agreement?  Has there been any other agreement signed or circulated? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  I  know,  I  don’t  think  I  have  seen  any 

agreement of that sort in the MoU. 

Mr Bérenger: I don’t want to think about things like that! My question was addressed 
to the hon. Prime Minister.  Has, at least, the hon. Minister - because he has chosen to reply; 
the hon. Prime Minister has asked him to reply - seen with the hon. Prime Minister whether 
there is this radar system dimension or even more because I’ll quote from what both Prime 
Minister  Modi  and  the  Foreign  Minister  of  India  have  stated  recently  which  entails  also 
suggestions  that  we  should  join  this  security  arrangement  for  that  tripartite  Sri  Lanka-
Maldives-Seychelles already in existence? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I repeat again, the answer is no. 
Mr Bérenger: The whole point - of course, Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Prime 
Minister can understand that - is to clear the air completely. We have excellent relations with 
India and there has been a lot of rumours, a lot of procès d’intention, a lot of talk of loss of 
sovereignty  and  so  on.  So,  the  whole  point  was  to  give  the  opportunity  to  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister to clear the air completely and say where we stand exactly. So, can I ask again the 
hon. Prime Minister, is there going… 

Madam  Speaker:  Not  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  you  should  ask  the  Minister  who 

replied the question. 

Mr Bérenger: Unfortunately! 

 

Or fortunately for the country!  

(Interruptions) 

 

11 

Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  to  be  more  precise?    Has  the  Indian  side 
suggested a separate agreement that would bear on such matters: radar systems and security 
matters? 

Mr Koonjoo: There is no request for that, Madam Speaker, as far as I know. 
Mr Bérenger: As far as he knows! Has he talked to the hon. Prime Minister before 
taking  the  responsibility  of  replying  to  a  PNQ  that  deals  also  with  radar  installations  and 
security issues? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, so far as security issues are concerned, I believe the 

Prime Minister’s Office… 

Mr Bérenger: That’s why the question was addressed to him. 
Mr Koonjoo: They are aware about that; I am not aware about that. 
Mr Bérenger: I find that very sad. This was an opportunity to clear the air completely 
and to strengthen still further our excellent relations with India and we are missing it, Madam 
Speaker. I put the question clearly: Is there in the agreement or in the proposed agreement, 
the setting-up of a radar system in Agaléga? 

Madam Speaker: You have the reply, hon. Minister? 
Mr Koonjoo: I said, Madam Speaker, that, as far as I know, I don’t know whether 

there is a radar system. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know. 

Mr Bérenger: I don’t think it is worth… 

(Interruptions) 

It’s an awful shame! 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I said that there is no radar. I don’t know. If the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition has got any information, would he tell the House? 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  do  you  have  any  other 

(Interruptions) 

questions?  

Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  I  understand  that  you  don’t  have  any  further 

(Interruptions) 

question. 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am addressing you. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, 

I understand you don’t have any other supplementary questions? 

(Interruptions) 

 

12 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  sorry,  can  you  please  stand  up  and  tell  me  whether  you  have  any  other 

supplementary questions or you don’t have?  

Mr Bérenger: I have already said that there is no use according to me to pursue the 
matter further and that, therefore, I am not going to put any question, wasting the time of this 
House with the Minister who does not know anything about the matter raised in my question. 
Madam Speaker: Now I understand because from a sitting position, I can’t take your 

statement. Thank you.  

So, on Prime Minister’s Question Time, hon. Members, the Table has been advised 
that  Parliamentary  Questions  No.  B/219  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  B/239  and  B/240  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development will now be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time 
permitting.  Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

COIGNET, ROSE HILL - POLICE STATION 

(No.  B/200)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Station situated at 
Coignet, in Rose Hill, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 
Police,  information  as  to  if  he  has  effected  a  site  visit  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  if 
consideration will be given for an upgrading of the working conditions of the Police Officers 
attached thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  there  is  no  Police  Station  at  Coignet,  Rose Hill.  However,  an  old  Government-owned 
building made of wood and iron sheets existing thereat was used as Police Quarters. After the 
Quarters were vacated by the occupiers in 2013, the building was left in an abandoned state.  
I am also informed by the Commissioner of Police that during the course of last year, 
the Western Divisional Support Unit and Divisional Traffic Police at Rose Hill Police Station 
were  reinforced  with  some  125  additional  Police  Officers.  In  this  context,  the  building  at 
Coignet, Rose Hill was identified to offer additional office accommodation to these Officers 
from where they would operate on a shift system. 

The building was accordingly refurbished and the compound rehabilitated to provide a 
safe and healthy working environment. Consequently, the officers of the Western Divisional 
Support Unit and the Divisional Traffic Police moved therein for operational convenience. 

 

13 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  he  has 
personally effected a site visit at the Coignet building following reports from the Divisional 
Commander  for  the  western  region  forwarded  to  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Police 
responsible for infrastructure regarding structural defects in the building.  In view of the poor 
state of the building, he has taken the following measures with immediate effect - 

(a) 

(b) 

the  personnel  occupying  the  building  have  been  shifted  to  Rose  Hill  Police 
Headquarters Complex, and 
a  technical  survey  will  be  carried  out  at  the  earliest  to  assess  the  structural 
state  of  the  building  and  determine  whether  any  renovation  works  to  the 
building would be cost effective. 

In the event the survey reveals that the building is beyond economical repairs, it will 
be pulled down and a new building will be constructed thereat for eventual use by the Police. 
Mr Rutnah:  I am grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for indicating the measures 
that have been taken, but would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister state to the House whether there 
are  other  Police  Posts  and  Police  Stations  round  the  island  which  are  housed  in  derelict 
buildings, which are not in conformity with health and safety issues and are not consonant 
with good governance and protection of the welfare of Police officers; whether in relation to 
all other Police Posts, the Commissioner of Police would carry out similar exercise in order to 
upgrade those buildings? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I have to draw your attention - I don’t know whether 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will reply - to the fact that your question relates to the situation at 
Coignet.  So, you should restrict your question to that. 

The Prime Minister: Anyway, a survey will have to be carried out. 
Mr  Bhagwan:  I  heard  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  stating  that  the  Commissioner  of 
Police has effected a site visit and that the Police officers will be redeployed to the Rose Hill 
Police station.  Can I draw the attention of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to the fact that the 
compound is in a very bad state? I would encourage hon. Minister Dayal to have a site visit 
and send his Environment Police there. There are wastes everywhere in the compound. It is 
dirty and it is causing a nuisance to the inhabitants of the region who have repeatedly sent 
requests  to  the  ACP  of  Rose  Hill  Police  Station  to  have  matters  redressed  and  at  least  to 
upgrade the yard and to prevent further nuisances. 

The Prime Minister: The Commissioner of Police will take note of this. 
Madam Speaker: Next question!  

 

 

14 

ARMS TRADE – ALLEGED CASES 

(No. B/201) Mr M. Hurreeram (First Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  Hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the alleged cases of arms 
trade  as  revealed  by  Mrs  K.  A.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to whether it is proposed to call Mrs K. A. to provide 
further statements in support of the said allegations. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that, as at 27 March 2015, no case of arms trafficking involving foreign nationals has been 
detected or reported to the Police for enquiry. 

I am further informed that, upon the suggestion of the Director of Public Prosecutions, 
on 20 February 2014, Mrs K. A. wrote to the then Commissioner of Police about a possible 
criminal activity that she believed warranted an investigation without giving any detail on the 
criminal activity.  She was also prepared to provide the Police with additional information 
required in connection therewith. 

On  03  and  27  March  2014,  the  Police  contacted  Mrs  K.  A.  through  e-mail  to  know 
whether she intended to travel to Mauritius to give a detailed statement on the matter.  But no 
reply has been received from Mrs K.A in this regard so far.  

Mr Hurreeram: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
his  reply.    Will  the  Government  consider  giving  a  safe  passage  to  Mrs  Austin  for  further 
enquiry? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the lady is free to come here if she has any information that 

can help to reopen the enquiry. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jhugroo:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the 

House whether the DPP has decided for no further action and if so, can we know when? 

Madam Speaker: I have to draw the attention of the hon. Member again.  According to 
Section 72 of the Constitution, the DPP is not answerable to any decision taken by him. So, 
please refrain from asking this sort of questions.  

The Prime Minister: I can say that the DPP has taken a decision that there should be 

no further investigation or action. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jhugroo:  Madam Speaker, if Mrs A. K. was to provide fresh and new compelling 

evidence, would this case be reinvestigated by the new ICAC? 

 

15 

The Prime Minister:  Well, she is welcome. If there is a new element, if there is new 

evidence that will warrant an investigation, certainly ICAC will proceed with an enquiry. 

Mr Rutnah:  Now that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has answered the question and the 
can of worm is open that no further action is to be taken, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
probably tell us if he has this information as to the date on which this decision was taken? 

The Prime Minister: Insofar as I am concerned, I do not know on what basis the DPP 
has taken the decision, but I suppose the DPP must have found that there was no substance, 
there was no  evidence to proceed further  and he decided that the matter be not proceeded 
further. 

Mr Rutnah:  Madam Speaker, the question is on which date did the DPP inform that 

there should be no further action? 

The Prime Minister: As far as I am aware,  I know, but I don’t have the exact date 

right now.  It is on 12 December 2014. 

(Interruptions) 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

  TROU FANFARON - POLICE STATION - RELOCATION 

(No. B/202) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Trou Fanfaron Police 
Station,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information  as  to  if  he  is  aware  of  the  derelict  state  thereof  and  of  unhygienic  conditions 
prevailing thereat and, if so, indicate if urgent remedial measures will be taken in relation 
thereto, indicating if the relocation thereof is being contemplated and if so, where to. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  Trou  Fanfaron  Police  Station  is  an  old  building  which  continuously  requires  proper 
repairs  and  maintenance  in  order  to  render  the  environment  conducive  for  work.    In  this 
respect,  necessary  repairs  and  maintenance  works  have  been  regularly  carried  out  by  the 
Technical Team of the Special Support Unit since 2011.   

In reply to PQ B/415 in June 2013, the House was informed about the proposal of the 
Police  to  construct  a  new  building  in  the  vicinity  of  Quay  D  to  house  the  Police  Station.  
However,  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport stated that the site was inappropriate for the project due to 
problems of access and potential hazards for the public.  Thereafter, Police came up with the 
proposal to construct the new Police Station adjacent to the existing building on the plot of 

 

16 

land which is currently used as parking space.  Arrangements are being made for the vesting 
of the land in the Police Department in order to start the project. 

The new Police Station will also cater for additional facilities such as cells for detainees 

and safekeeping of exhibits which are not available presently. 

Madam Speaker, in the meantime, Police has initiated procedures for the relocation of 
the Police Station in a rented building near the Immigration Square, Port Louis with effect 
from 15 April 2015 once necessary infrastructural works are completed thereat. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, this question has been long debated in the House. 
As the hon. Prime Minister is aware, the state of the building is not good so that the Police 
can carry on with the work there. But now that the decision has been taken to construct a new 
Police Station, can I ask the hon. Prime Minister to state clearly where is the site that has 
been  identified?    Just  behind  the  Police  Station,  there  is  a  place  which  was  identified  for 
hawkers, not a Hawkers’ Palace, but it was identified to place all the hawkers of Immigration 
behind the Police Station. Is this parking that is being identified for the new Police Station? 

The Prime Minister: Well, all that I can say is what I have just stated in the answer.  

It is the parking that is near the building that already exists right now. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

COMMISSION FOR THE DEMOCRATISATION OF THE ECONOMY – 

COMPOSITION 

(No. B/203) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Commission  for  the 
Democratisation of the Economy set up by the previous Government, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain information as to, since 2009 to 2014 - 

(a) 

(b) 

the composition thereof; 

the  total  remuneration  paid  to  the  Chairperson  thereof,  including  fringe 
benefits, and 

(c) 

if it has submitted any report. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  composition  of  the 

Commission for the Democratisation of the Economy… 

(Interruptions) 

 

17 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry, hon. Prime Minister, but I think hon. Ameer Meea is 

questioning the Chair.  Is the hon. Member questioning the Chair? 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  I  ask  for  another  supplementary  question.  I  have  put  only  one 
supplementary question and I ask again for another supplementary question.  Where is the 
problem? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  you  cannot  question  the  Chair.  It  is  to  the 

discretion of the Chair to allow your question or not!  

(Interruptions) 

Excuse me, but I will not allow any other Member to make comments on the Chair. 

Hon. Ameer Meea, are you insisting and are you making remarks on the Chair? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: You have to sit down when I am on my feet. 

(Interruptions) 

You have to sit down when I am on my feet. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  you  have  to  sit  down!   When  I  am  on  my  feet  you  have  to  sit 

down. Do not provoke me otherwise I will have to take action! 

The hon. Member is also making remarks on the Chair. I have told you… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, you sit down when I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

You know the procedure, but you cannot question the Chair. I am being fair and I do 

not want any comments on the Chair. I will not allow this! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, on a point of order! Is this the practice now that a 

Member cannot put a second supplementary question? 

 

18 

Madam  Speaker:  It  is  up  to  the  Chair  to  decide  whether  you  can  put  a  second 
question or not. I am being very democratic in my approach and you cannot question or make 
remarks on the Chair. 

(Interruptions) 

Allow me to tell you this!  Whether be it on a sitting position or whether you stand 

up!  And if you continue, hon. Ameer Meea, I will have to order you out. 

I will have to order you out! 

Order, I said! 

Order, I said! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Order! I said order! Do not provoke me to take action! Yes, hon. Prime Minister! 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  composition  of  the 

Commission… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry, hon. Prime Minister, I will have to interrupt you again. 

I have heard remarks from hon. Bhagwan. Does he maintain these remarks? 

Mr Bhagwan: I am making my remarks. When you were a backbencher, you were 

allowed to ask hundreds of supplementary questions. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, since you have said that and you are not allowed 

to, according to the Standing Orders, I order you out! 

At this stage, the MMM and the Labour Party Opposition Members left the Chamber. 

(Interruptions) 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Who is saying shame on me? 

19 

(Interruptions) 

Out! 

Hon. Prime Minister, please proceed! 

The Prime Minister: I am informed that the composition of the Commission for the 

Democratisation of the Economy, until 05 August 2011, was as follows - 

 

 

Chairperson 

Vice-Chairperson 

: 

: 

Mr Cader Sayed Hossen 

Ms Nita Deerpalsing 

On  19  August  2011,  Ms  Deerpalsing  was  appointed  as  Chairperson  of  the 
Commission in replacement of Mr Cader Sayed Hossen.  The position of Vice-Chairperson 
was left vacant thereafter. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the total remuneration paid to Mr Cader Sayed 
Hossen as Chairperson of the Commission for the period 01 January 2009 to 05 August 2011 
was  Rs1,166,967,  including  a  sum  of  Rs232,129  paid  to  him  as  driver’s  allowances.  Mr 
Cader Sayed Hossen was also provided with an official car from the Police car pool. 

Ms Deerpalsing was paid a total sum of Rs1,733,875 as Chairperson for the period 19 
August 2011 to 09 December 2014.  This sum includes an amount of Rs332,973 paid to her 
as driver’s allowance. 

Ms Deerpalsing was also eligible for an official car from the pool and a cellular phone 

plus free calls up to a ceiling of Rs2,000. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, there is no record in my office of any report 
submitted by the Commission.  I note that in his reply to PQ B/711 on 18 December 2012, the 
former Prime Minister stated that it was not the practice for the Commission to submit formal 
reports and that the Commissioners only used to have discussions with him. 

Madam Speaker, this perfectly illustrates the culture of the previous Government to 
pay generous allowances and fringe benefits without any well-defined deliverables and time 
frames. 

 

 

 

20 

CANAL DAYOT & SABLE NOIR - WATER DRAINAGE PROJECT  

(No.  B/206)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Water Drainage Project 
in  respect  of  the  region  of  Canal  Dayot  and  of  Sable  Noir,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the National Development Unit, information as to where matters stand as 
to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

proposal for additional works to be carried out in relation thereto, and 

expected start and completion dates thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  NDU  that  the  water 
drainage  project  at  Canal  Dayot,  has  been  completed  except  for  a  part  of  the  canal  which 
could not be enlarged due to one of the owners having obtained a Court Stop Order for the 
enlargement of the canal over a stretch of about 75 metres. 

This non-enlargement of the canal is preventing the free flow of water during heavy 
rainfall and causing flooding.  NDU can take remedial action only when the Court case is 
disposed of. 

Another aspect of the additional work is the extension of the existing bridge along the 
main road, and this is under the purview of the Road Development Authority.  The Authority 
will be called upon to take appropriate measures. 

As regards Sable Noir, I am informed by the NDU that the water drainage project has 
been completed and, moreover, the zonal contractor (Super Builders Ltd) is presently erecting 
a bridge to connect the existing road to Sable Noir Beach. 

The works are due to be completed by end of June 2015. 
I am also informed that NDU is presently seeking the necessary clearances from the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands for the construction of a new road from the new bridge to 
Sable Noir Beach.  Works would start upon all clearances being obtained. 

NOUVELLE FRANCE - INCIDENT - INQUIRY 

(No. B/208) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the incident which occurred, 
on or about Wednesday 12 November 2014, at Nouvelle France, in which tear gas was used, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as 

 

21 

to where matters stand as to the inquiry carried out thereinto, indicating if any arrest has been 
effected in connection therewith. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that,  on  12  November  2014,  one  candidate  of  L’Alliance  Lepep  reported  at  the  Nouvelle 
France  Police  Station  that  while  he  was  presiding  a  private  meeting  on  the  premises  of  a 
supporter at Savanne Road, Nouvelle France, an object was flung from the roadside into the 
tent where the meeting was being held.  The object discharged fire sparks and smoke inside 
the tent.  The meeting  was disrupted and those present were panic-stricken.  Out of them, 
three persons complained of suffocation resulting from the smoke and they were conveyed to 
Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital. 

Police  Officers  of  the  Nouvelle  France  Police  Station,  the  Emergency  Response 
Service, the Special Mobile Force and the Divisional Supporting Unit attended to the case 
and identified the object as a hand grenade.  Same was secured by the Police and photographs 
taken. 

In its report dated 26 November 2014, the Forensic Science Laboratory highlighted 

the presence of active noxious substance and chemical agent in the grenade. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed that nine persons have been interviewed and 

two of them have been arrested.  The enquiry is still ongoing. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House for what reason there 

has been a delay to carry out the arrest? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have the reason in the file. But we can draw our 
own conclusion that, had there been the same Government, there would have been no further 
inquiry, I am sure. 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that the Police Officer who was in 
charge of this inquiry had been transferred in the past and, if so, would he consider to ask the 
acting Commissioner of Police to bring back the same officer to carry on again this inquiry? 

The Prime Minister: The Police Officer who was in charge of the inquiry at a certain 
time was removed, and I suppose that the way he was proceeding did not please the superiors 
in those days.  I will certainly ask the acting Commissioner of Police to see whether he can be 
brought back to continue the inquiry into this case. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  tear  gas  or  the  hand 
grenade just mentioned by him, which had been used by the accused, belonged to the SMF, 
and, if so, will he consider to ask the acting Commissioner of Police to investigate into this 
matter? 

 

22 

The Prime Minister: I don’t know whether it belongs to the SMF, but I know for 
certainty that it belongs to the Police, and I will certainly ask the Commissioner of Police to 
inquire into it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Tarolah! 

BEL AIR RIVIÈRE SÈCHE – LARCENY CASES 

(No.  B/209)  Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  larceny,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number 
of cases thereof reported at the Bel Air Rivière Sèche Police Station, since January 2015 to 
date, indicating the preventive measures, if any, taken in relation thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that, since January 2015 to date, 62 cases of larceny have been reported to Bel Air Rivière 
Sèche Police Station.  The number of such cases for the corresponding period last year was 
88. 
 
I am further informed that a series of measures have been taken by the Police to tackle 
the  problem  of  larceny  not  only  in  the  region  covered  by  Bel  Air  Rivière  Sèche,  but  also 
island wide. These include - 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

intensification of strategic and concerted mobile patrol by different units of the 
Force; 
targeted stop and search operations; 
supervision of Habitual Criminals and close monitoring of prisoners released 
from jail; 
offenders profiling and strategies to prevent re-offending, and 
use of portrait robot to identify offenders. 

(iv) 
(v) 
 
Madam Speaker, focus is also being laid on enhancing the partnership between the 
Police and the public in the fight against crime through Community Policing and setting up of 
Neighbourhood Watch Schemes.  For instance, in the region of Bel Air Rivière Sèche, two 
Neighbourhood Watch Schemes have been set up at Morcellement VRS and Morcellement St 
Michel with the participation of the inhabitants of the areas. 
 
Targeted  awareness  campaigns  and  field  counselling  are  carried  out  by  the  Crime 
Prevention Unit.   These campaigns cover such topics as Personal  and Property Protection.  
The  objective  is  to  avail  the  community  at  large  with  relevant  information,  especially  the 
elimination of factors which may favour the occurrence of crime.  In this regard, since the 

 

23 

beginning of the year, seven meetings have been held with the members of the community of 
the Bel Air Rivière Sèche region. 

Madam Speaker: Any supplementary? 
Mr Tarolah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform 
the House whether there will be an increase in the number of Police Officers as during the 
night shifts there are only eight Police Officers operating, whereas in the vicinity, according 
to my information, there are about 80 HCs found there? 

The Prime Minister: I will ask the Commissioner of Police to look into it. 
Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question No. B/234 addressed to the hon. Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine 
Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Deputy 
Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications. Parliamentary Question 
No. B/227, addressed to the hon. Minister of Local Government, will now be replied by the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities. The Table has also been 
advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/218 has been withdrawn.  Hon. Jhugroo! 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY LIMITED – CAR - 

PURCHASE 

(No. B/211) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the purchase 
of cars by the State Land Development Company Limited, since 2006 to date, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Company, the list thereof, indicating in each case, the  - 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 

make and model thereof; 
date of purchase thereof; 
cost thereof; 
purpose therefor, and  
registration  number 
if  personalized  numbers  were 
purchased from the National Transport Authority and, if so, indicate in each 
case, the – 
 (i) 
(ii) 

reasons therefor, and  
amount of money paid therefor. 

thereof, 

indicating 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Independent 
Commission against Corruption is already investigating into the alleged malpractices at the 
SLDC, including in relation to acquisition of motor vehicles. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

24 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – NEW TERMINAL - CONTRACT 

(No. B/212) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in 
regard to the new terminal of the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from Airport Terminal Operations Ltd., information as to 
–  

(a) 

if it is a design and built project contract and, if so, indicate the time taken for 
the execution of the design thereof; 
if galvanized metal frames were used; 
the thickness of the metal roofing; 
the type of curtain wall glass fixed; 
the amount of variation costs claimed and paid, and  
table copy of the contract in relation thereto and, if not, why not. 

(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I 
am informed by the Chief Executive Officer of  Airport Terminal  Operations  Ltd. (ATOL) 
that Aéroports de Paris Group was appointed as the Airport Design Consultant for the new 
passenger  terminal.  The  consultant  advised  ATOL  to  have  recourse  to  an  Engineering 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract as per FIDIC rules and principles. 

In  such  type  of  contract,  the  selected  bidder  carries  out  the  Detailed  Design, 

Procurement, Construction Activity and Testing and Commissioning. 

The  contract  was  awarded  on  30  December  2009  to  China  State  Construction 
Engineer  Corporation  Ltd.  (CSCEC).  The  Contractor  started  the  Detailed  Design  as  from 
June  2010,  and  in  such  EPC  contract  the  detailed  design  runs  concurrently  with  the 
construction progress on site to meet the tight schedule. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the structure above ground 

of the building is made of steel.  

In regard to part (c) of the question, the thickness of the metal roofing is composed 
of an external smooth, joint-free aluminium profiled sheets of 1.0 mm thickness finished with 
special coating systems. 

In regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed that the curtain wall is of type 
Stick System.  The typical thickness of the insulated glazed panel of the curtain wall is 48 
mm, comprising four layers of tempered laminated glass. 

In regard to part (e) of the question, I am informed that as at to date, variations to the 
tune of US$ 9.9 m. have been issued to the EPC Contractor. A contingency sum of US$ 8.9 

 

25 

m.  was  already  provided  in  the  contract.    Therefore,  the  additional  amount  of  US$  1  m. 
represents a net increase of 0.34% of the contract price. 
            I am tabling a copy of the EPC contract between ATOL and CSCEC. 

Madam  Speaker,  at  my  request,  Louis  Berger  Group,  the  Engineer  responsible  for 
design review and supervision of the structure and viaduct of the new terminal at the SSR 
International  Airport,  has  submitted  a  report  on  26  February  2015,  certifying  that  the 
foundation,  structure  and  viaduct  installations  and  curtain  wall  are  constructed  as  per 
approved design and are functioning well.   

The roof of the new building was successfully tested according to British Standards and 

Centre for Window and Cladding Technology Standards prior to handing over. 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister the contract value 
and, as per contract whether variation has been entertained – like he said, to the tune of US$ 1 
m. – and whether this is not contrary to sections 4(1) and 5(a) of the contract? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the contract value was US$ 306 m. I 
am  tabling  a  copy  of  the  contract  for  the  House  and  the  hon.  Member  will  ascertain  for 
himself whether it is or not and come back, if necessary. 

Dr. Sorefan: I have a copy of part of the contract which is contrary, because variation 
is  not  allowed;  it  is  section  5.8,  the  design.    If  you  will  allow  me,  I  can  read  it,  Madam 
Speaker. I quote without prejudice to the requirement of Article 5.2 – 

“If errors, omissions, ambiguities, inconstancies, inadequacies or other defects are 
found  in  the  contract  document,  they  and  the  works  shall  be  corrected  at  the 
contractor’s cost, notwithstanding any consent or approval under this Article 5”.  
What it means is that no variation is entertained in a fully design and effectuation of 

the work. No variation should be allowed. Will the hon. Deputy Prime Minister look into it? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Yes,  certainly.  Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  the 
variations  are  also  for  additional  works  and  changes.  So,  I  will  ask  ATOL  and  its  Legal 
Adviser to look at it with pleasure. No problem! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you have a question? 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  of  whether  any  defects  have 

been reported, so far, with regard to the structure? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am going to table the report of the 
independent engineer at the same time so that the House can have a look at it. According to 
them,  the  structures,  etc.  are  fine.  There  are  some  defects  to  do  with  some  leaking  in  the 
basement, etc. but they are not major defects. 

 

26 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister regarding the metal 
structure, since in his answer he said it is of steel, but the contract talks about galvanised steel 
work and, to my information, the contractor has supplied steel with painted zinc…. 

(Interruptions) 

Whatever you call it, a variation just to minimise the cost. Will the hon. Deputy Prime 

 
Minister look into it, because galvanised steel give a longer lifespan to the airport structure? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I will look into it. 
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr  Jhugroo:  With  regard  to  what  have  been  mentioned  by  my  hon.  friend,  Dr. 
Sorefan,  is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  that  there  exists  much  corrosion  with 
regard to all these frames which have been used? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am told that there are some corrosion on some of the 
railings over there. This will be changed before the end of the contractual liability period. 
This is what I have. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I will allow the hon. Member a last question! 
Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister regarding the wind 
speed - this is very important in Mauritius, because of the cyclonic issue - whether the design 
has been according to the wind speed that has been maximally registered in Mauritius, and 
whether the lifespan is 50 years or 100 years for this terminal? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I will have to take a quick crash course in engineering! 
Madam Speaker, I will pass on these remarks to the necessary authority and I will come back 
to the hon. Member concerning that. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – CONSTRUCTION – AUDIT TRAIL 

(No. B/213) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in 
regard to the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, he will state if his Ministry 
will  consider  probing  into  the  ACONEX  website  with  the  permission  of  the  Officer-in-
Charge  of  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International  Airport  for  an  audit  trail  and 
follow-up of the documents filed in relation to the construction thereof and table copy thereof 
with a view to throwing light on the opacity or transparency of the project. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed by ATOL that ACONEX is a web-based 
project  management  tool  which  has  been  purchased  by  the  main  contractor,  China  State 

 

27 

Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd, and for which the cost was already included in the 
construction contract for the project management of the new airport terminal construction at 
SSR International Airport. 

ACONEX was operational as from May 2010 for the whole duration of the construction 
at the new airport terminal. I understand from ATOL that all documentary information with 
respect  to  the  construction,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  a  new  airport  terminal  has  been 
stored on ACONEX and includes not less than some 100,000 project-related documentation, 
including correspondences and approvals at every stage of the project. 

I also understand, Madam Speaker, that the ACONEX system provides an audit trail of 

all relevant construction contract-related documentation that has been uploaded. 

In the event that an investigative review is warranted and my Ministry is vested with 
this task, all project-related information stored on ACONEX will be used amongst others to 
establish an audit trail and follow-ups made accordingly. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - RUNWAY - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/214) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications    whether,  in 
regard  to  the  construction  of  the  second  runway  of  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam 
International  Airport,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Airport  Terminal 
Operations Ltd., information as to the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

name of the contractor therefor;  
cost of the project thereof, and  
variation costs thereof, if any  
if works have been executed in compliance with the terms and conditions of 
the contract, and  
who certified the recommendations for payment in relation thereto. 

(e) 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Officer-in-
Charge  of  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd  (AML)  that  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam 
International Airport has only one runway. The Airport Master Plan 2004 makes provision 
for  a  second  runway  and  this  will  be  implemented  whenever  the  need  arises.    AML  has 
decided to construct a parallel taxiway which can also be used as a Runway in emergency 
situations and which required less land acquisition.  The taxiway has also been designed to 
accommodate A380 types of Aircraft. 

 

28 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Member must be referring to this parallel taxiway. 
 
In regard to parts (a), (b) and (c) of the question, the contract for the construction of 
the  parallel  taxiway  at  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International  Airport  was  awarded  to 
Joint Venture of Colas and Rehm Grinaker on 17 June 2011 for an amount of Rs1.943 billion 
inclusive of VAT.  The variation costs amount to Rs105.26 m. inclusive of VAT, i.e. 5.4% of 
the contract value.   

I am also informed that 

the  works  have  been  executed  as  per  an  alternative 
design proposed by the contractor for the base course for the airfield pavement which was 
endorsed by AML’s Consultant, Jacobs-Gibb. 

The Consultant certified all the recommendations for payment. 
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister 

whether there was a tender and who were those listed, who quoted for? 

Mr Duval: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I don’t have this information. I’ll check that 

information. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, being given that the Deputy Prime Minister and I are 
both not engineers, can I know what is the difference between the parallel taxiway and the 
runway? 

Mr Duval: It is not for taxis at the airport.  The hon. Member must not worry about 

this.  

(Interruptions) 

A parallel runway is an additional runway.  A taxiway is used by planes to move to 

the airport terminal. But this taxiway can also be used as an emergency runway. 

STATE COUNSELS – APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/217)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Attorney-General  whether,  in  regard  to  his  Office,  the  Office  of  the  Solicitor 
General and that of the Director of Public Prosecutions respectively, he will, for the period 
2005 to date, state and obtain the list of State Counsels attached thereto and who –  

(a) 
(b) 

sit on the Board of parastatal bodies, and  
act as legal advisers of parastatal bodies, indicating in each case the -  

(i) 
(ii) 

date of appointment, and  
remuneration drawn. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker, in regard to paragraph (a) of the question – 

 

29 

(1) Hon. Members will be aware that law officers and State Attorneys are appointed 
as members of statutory bodies either as ex officio members or as representatives 
of the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General’s Office, the Solicitor-General or 
the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  as  the  case  may  be,  or,  in  a  few  cases, 
following appointment by a Minister in the officer’s personal capacity in view of 
his experience in a certain field. 

(2) Fees  of  Board  members,  whether  the  members  are  from  my  office  or  other 
Ministries,  are  either  determined  by  the  respective  Minister  responsible  for  the 
parastatal body concerned or its Board, in line with fees paid to other senior public 
officers  on  the  Board  and  in  conformity  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Pay 
Research Bureau. 

In regard to paragraph (b) of the question – 
(1) Law  officers  and  State  Attorneys  may,  pursuant  to  section  17(1)  of  the  Law 
Officers Act, be authorised in writing by the President of the Republic to practise 
as barrister or attorney, as the case may be, on behalf of a private party, that is, a 
party other than the State.  This provision was to be found mutatis mutandis in the 
Law Officers Ordinance when it was passed in 1957. 

(2) In  1982,  the  then  Government  decided  that  parastatal  bodies  may  continue  to 
entrust their legal drafting and advisory work to law officers provided that the fees 
payable shall accrue to all law officers collectively, and, on the advice of the then 
Attorney-General, the then Governor-General gave his authorisation in writing for 
the law officers and Crown Attorneys to undertake the legal drafting and advisory 
work of parastatal bodies generally. 

(3) In January 1995, on the advice of the then Prime Minister and Attorney-General - 
our current Rt. hon. Prime Minister - authorisation was granted to the Solicitor-
General  “and  any  State  Law  officer  or  Attorney  to  whom  he  may  delegate  the 
duties”  to  undertake  legal  advisory  work  for  drafting  for  companies  where  the 
State has an interest and to appear in Court or before any other quasi-judicial body 
or  Tribunal  for  parastatal  bodies  and  such  institutions  or  companies  where 
Government has an interest.  Reference is made in the request for authorisation to 
the agreed Government policy to ask the State Law Office to act as legal adviser 
to parastatal bodies in view of the confidentiality of certain matters. 

 

30 

(4) I  am  of  the  view  that  once  a  law  officer  has  been  authorised  to  provide  legal 
services  to  parastatal  bodies  in  his  capacity  as  lawyer  and  not  in  his  official 
capacity, it would be against professional ethics for me to enquire from him as to 
the  quantum  of  fees  he  receives  from  those  bodies.  I  note,  however,  that  such 
work  is  normally  done  at  the  cost  of  several  hours  daily,  usually  after  working 
hours, so that it does not impede on the work load at the Office. 

(5) It is the Board and management of such parastatal bodies which determine legal 
advisors’ remuneration, and I am not accountable for the acts of those Boards.  It 
is,  of  course,  for  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  (MRA)  and  the  officers 
themselves to ensure that fiscal obligations are abided by. 

(6) The Office of the DPP has informed my Office that as at 30 March 2015, only one 
law officer advises the Board of Investment against payment for legal fees. The 
Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  or  his  representative,  the  Deputy  Director  of 
Public Prosecutions, sits as ex-officio member on the following statutory bodies – 

Law Reform Commission; 
Institute of Judicial and Legal Studies Board, and 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Council for Vocational and Legal Education. 

(7)  As far as my Office is concerned, I am tabling the list of parastatal bodies and 

other statutory bodies, 33 in total, which law officers and State attorneys advise. 

Mr  Rutnah:  I  am  grateful  for  the  answer  provided  by  my  very  good  friend,  the 
Attorney-General.  However,  I  would  like  the  Attorney-General  to  state  whether  he  has 
information as to the number of hours that law officers of the State Law Office have worked 
and the remuneration because there is obviously fiscal implication and ethical implication in 
this matter. So, perhaps if my very good friend can ascertain … 
Madam Speaker: Your question is clear, hon. Member! 
Mr Yerrigadoo: I can answer as far as my Office is concerned. I have made it a point 
with  the  Solicitor  General  that  no  such  work  impedes  on  the  current  work  of  the  Office 
during office hours. So, I can assure the hon. Member that, at least, since December last year 
no such work is being done to impede current Government business or advice and all such 
work  is  done  on  week-ends  and  after  working  hours.  I  will  find  out  the  details  as  far  as 
remuneration is concerned and I can table this. I cannot answer as far as the Office of the 
DPP is concerned. 

 

31 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Attorney General inform the House who 
are the State Counsels who sit on the SICOM Board and what amount of money has been 
paid to each of them as remuneration since their appointment? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  I would have loved to reply  to the hon. Member.   Unfortunately, 
SICOM does not fall under my aegis. I believe the question should be addressed to my friend, 
the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms. 

Mr Rutnah: Am I correct to understand that the Director of Public Prosecutions has 
refused  to  answer  the  question  in  relation  to  or  has  refused  to  cooperate  to  provide 
information in relation to the remuneration of those officers attached to his Office? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I don’t think it is in order for you to question the 
prerogatives  of  the  DPP.    According  to  the  Standing  Orders,  it  is  not  in  order.  So,  please 
refrain from asking these questions! 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  what  I  can  answer  to  the  hon.  Member  is  the 
information I have been provided from the Office of the DPP as what I have stated, is as at 
date, I do not have any further details I am afraid. 

ITALY - CONSUL OF MAURITIUS – OFFICE HOLDERS 

(No.  B/218)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the office of Consul of Mauritius in Italy, he will state the names of the office 
holders thereof over the period 2005 to date, indicating in each case, the - 

(a) terms and conditions of appointment thereof, and  
(b) town of residence thereof during the tenure of office. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I said at the beginning that PQ No. B/219 which was 
addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  was  to  be 
answered by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. So, this is not in order now.  So, 
that is why I am coming to PQ No. B/220. 

PLAINES WILHEMS SEWERAGE PROJECT - CONTRACT 

 (No.  B/220)  Mr  A.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Plaines Wilhems Sewerage Project awarded to the Joint Venture C. F. Thymian 
Holding GbR and Sotravic, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the - 

(a) 
(b) 

original contract price for Lot 1A;  
revised contract value thereof, and  

 

32 

(c) 

amount  of  money  paid,  if  any,  for  the  delay  in  the  implementation  thereof, 
indicating the amount of the penalty fee paid, if any. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority 
that the contract was awarded on 19 October 2009 to Joint Venture C.F. Thymian Holding, 
GbR/Sotravic  Ltd.  for  the  price  of  Rs2.8  billion  more  specially,  Rs2,842,498,362.59 
(including VAT with a completion date fixed for 31 May 2014.   

I am further informed that in October 2014, the Wastewater Management Authority 
Board approved that the contract value be revised to Rs3.9 billion, that is, one extra billion 
rupees  more  specially,  Rs3,920,360,438.42  including  VAT  and  to  extend  the  project 
completion date… 

to November 2017. 

(Interruptions) 

No penalty fee has been paid up to now.  The House may be aware that the Director of 

Audit made adverse comments on this project in 2012. 

I have to inform the House that, on Friday 27 March 2015, Government took note of 

this high cost overrun in this project and has decided that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  should  close  the  project  in  2016  by 
completing  works  started  in  the  northern  part  of  the  region  covered  by  the 
project, and 
a full technical and management audit of all wastewater management projects 
be carried out with  a view to improving project monitoring  and supervision 
and most importantly, to avoid excessive cost overruns. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jahangeer! 
Mr  Jahangeer:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
explain to the House why such variation has been approved being given that, according to 
PPA, not more than 25% of the contract value for work variation is possible? Right now, we 
are  having  Rs1.1  billion  which  amounts  to  around  38%.  So,  how  could  they  bypass  the 
Central Procurement Board at that time?  

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, I cannot explain and I think it is beyond any logical 
explanation. So, they play with billions as if you know, you are playing with Rs1,000. That is 
how it was done, that is the method of Government which was adopted in those days. I am 
afraid I am unable to provide a satisfactory answer to the hon. Member on this. I hope that the 

 

33 

Management Audit, which we will set up, will be able to provide the answers and satisfy the 
hon. Member on that score.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 
Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe by now the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister  would  have  been  made  aware  that  most  of  the  contracts  undertaken  by  the 
Wastewater Management Authority has exceeded the cost price by more than 35% and, as it 
is  under  our  legislation,  that  is  the  Central  Procurement  Act,  whenever  a  contract  value 
exceeds 35% of the total cost of the contract, we have to go for a fresh tender exercise. There 
was an enquiry …  

Madam Speaker: Put your question, please. 
Mr  Lesjongard:  I  am  going  to  put  the  question.  There  was  an  enquiry  and  the 
General Manager, at that time, was transferred to the National Transport Corporation, don’t 
you think that it is time - with all the contracts that have been allocated by the Wastewater 
Management Authority - that Government should set a Commission of Enquiry to enquire 
into all those contracts that have been awarded by that Authority? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Following  the  Technical  and  Management  Audit,  perhaps  the 
question of a Commission of Enquiry may become relevant, but, for the moment, I think it is 
premature to envisage any such Commission. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether any legal action can be 

taken in light of what we have heard today? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  All  these  matters  obtained  the  clearance  of  the  Board.  This  is 

magic.  

(Interruptions) 

There were magicians all over. So, they were able to do this. I am not a lawyer now 
so I would not be able to give legal advice on this. If appropriate, we shall seek legal advice. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  aware  that  several 
defects have been reported to the Wastewater Management Unit and, if so, can we know what 
action has been taken?  

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Yes,  there  have  been  defects.  There  have  been  complaints  of 
houses being cracked. There have been complaints with regard to seepage and all that sort of 
thing, but those are technical matters much more than matters regarding the Ministry. I am 

 

34 

sure the Authority will take steps to look into this matter.  If they do not, we will direct them 
accordingly. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, you have got a question, hon. Member! 
Mr Rughoobur: Yes. We have been talking about laws, Procurement Act, but also, it 
is a question of who are those people responsible to look into this whole issue of management 
of these contracts. Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister equally ensure that, in an institution like 
the Wastewater Management Authority where you have got millions and billions which are 
being invested in projects, it is adequately staffed; that the technical people who are in charge 
of  these  types  of  projects  do  their  work;  that  they  have  the  capacity  to  do  those  projects 
whether it is at a level of design, monitoring and, of course, afterwards carrying audit trails 
etc.? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I will certainly try to do this. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

PLAINE SOPHIE WIND FARM PROJECT - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/221)  Mr  A.  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Plaine Sophie Wind Farm Project estimated to produce some 30 MW electricity, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as 
to - 

(a)  
(b)  
(c)  

(d)  

the name of the contractor therefor;  
the date of award of the contract ; 
the contractual completion date thereof, indicating if there is any delay in the 
implementation thereof and, if so, indicate the - 
(i)  
(ii)  
if  the  Independent  Power  producer  has  satisfactorily  submitted  proof  of  his 
financial capability. 

penalty fee applicable, and 
expected completion date thereof, and  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board as follows 
- 

(a) 

(b) 

the  Contractor  for  the  Wind  Farm  at  Plaine  Sophie  is  Consortium  Suzlon-
Padgreen Co. Ltd 
the  contract  was  awarded  on  03  August  2012  following  an  open  tender 
exercise for 20-30 MW plant using wind energy; 

 

35 

(c) 
According 

the contractual completion date of the project was 03 August 2014. 

to 

information  from 

the  CEB, 

there  have  been  delays 

in 

the 

implementation of the project due to - 

• 

• 

• 

delay  in  obtaining  the  EIA  licence  and  the  execution  of  the  Land  Lease 
Agreement on account of some reservations by relevant departments; 
a  Stop  Order  issued  on  19  May  2014  by  the  Municipal  Council  of 
Vacoas/Phoenix  as  clearance  of  the  Forestry  Department  had  not  been 
obtained for felling of trees.  The Stop Order was set aside on 18 November 
2014, and 
delay in the obtention of the planning clearance from the Ministry of Housing 
and Lands. 

No penalty has been applied because the delays were considered by the CEB to be 
beyond the control of the promoter.  In accordance with the provisions of the contract, the 
contractor  has  declared  “Force  Majeure”  regarding  the  planning  clearance,  which  is  still 
pending at the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

In  case  the  Building  and  Land  Use  permit  is  issued,  the  project  is  expected  to  be 

completed in 2016. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed by the CEB that the contractor 
has met all the financial criteria as outlined in the contract and has achieved financial closure 
on 02 May 2014. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 
Mr  Jahangeer:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
inform  the  House  the  site  area  that  has  so  far  undergone  heavy  deforestation  and  if 
geophysical studies have been carried out regarding the water reserves under this area? 

Mr Collendavelloo: How on earth will I be able to answer that question offhand. I do 

not know. I have to look into it, of course. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/222, 

B/223 and B/224 have been withdrawn. Hon. Tarolah! 

MAURITIUS SPORTS COUNCIL - HANDYMEN 

(No.  B/222)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Mauritius Sports Council, he 

 

36 

will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  the  number  of 
handymen attached thereto, indicating the conditions of employment thereof. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND SPORTS - ADVISERS/PRESS ATTACHÉS  
(No. B/223) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Advisers/Press  Attachés 
appointed by his Ministry, he will give a list thereof indicating, in each case, the - 

(a)  
(b)  

qualifications held, and  
terms and conditions of appointment thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

PREVOCATIONAL SECTOR - DUAL MODE SYSTEM 

(No.  B/224)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  prevocational  sector,  she  will  state  if  the  Dual  Mode 
System  is  being  implemented  for  academic  year  2015  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  modalities 
attached thereto and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

NEF - CIS HOUSING UNITS 

(No. B/225) Mr K. Tarolah (Third Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
National Empowerment Foundation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the number of request/application received thereat, since 2010 to date for – 

(a) 
(b) 

Corrugated Iron Sheet housing units, and  
Corrugated Cum Iron Sheet housing units, indicating the  
(i) 
(ii) 

number of request entertained, and  
name of the supplier thereof in each case. 

Mr Roopun:  Madam Speaker, with respect to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am 
informed by the National Empowerment Foundation that the information is being compiled 
and will be tabled. With regard to the name of the suppliers for CIS and CCIS, I am tabling 
the list as provided by the foundation. 

 

37 

Mr Lesjongard:   Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware of 
certain housing units that have been delivered to families without amenities like toilets and 
bathrooms? 

Mr Roopun:  Yes, in fact, Madam Speaker, I am aware that at a first stage a house is 
constructed  without  toilet  and  thereafter  toilet  is  being  provided  once  the  septic  pit  is 
provided.  

Mr Lesjongard : May I ask the hon. Minister whether consideration could be given so 
that  when  the  housing  unit  is  delivered,  it  is  delivered  with  the  toilets  and  the  bathrooms 
because those families getting into those housing units will need toilets and bathrooms? 

Mr Roopun:  Yes.  In fact, this is being looked into, Madam Speaker.  
Mr  Jhugroo:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  the  corrugated  iron 
sheets that have been purchased are according to the specifications because we have visited 
several houses where we found that the thickness is not according to the specifications and 
many of these iron sheets have got corrosion? 

Mr  Roopun:    The  manufacturing  of  CIS  is  being  phased  out  and  there  are  certain 

instances where the quality of the iron sheets is not to the standard.  

Mr Lesjongard:  Madam Speaker, I have one last question with regard to the suppliers.  
Can I know from the hon. Minister whether we go through tendering procedures whenever 
we purchase those materials?  

Mr Roopun:  In fact, I am told that quotations are requested from five suppliers and 
selection from these suppliers is made region-wise.   In fact, I should add that I am personally 
not satisfied with this procedure and this will be reviewed.  

Mr  Barbier:  Concerning  the  criteria  laid  down  for  people  who  will  be  eligible  to 
obtain such facilities -  I think it is not clear for one and all - may  I  ask the hon. Minister 
whether he will be agreeable to the idea of tabling a list of criteria for those who are eligible 
for such services? 

Mr  Roopun:    Certainly,  Madam  Speaker,  this  will  be  done.  I  may  add  that  I  am 
working in conjunction with the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 
and we are coming with a new scheme, with new designs and everything will, of course, be 
communicated to the members of the public.  

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House about the method being used to 
verify that the building materials which are delivered on site are according to specifications? 

Mr Roopun:  This is done by the employees of the NEF. 
Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Tarolah! 

 

 

38 

MBC - URDU PRODUCER – POST  

(No. B/226) Mr K. Tarolah (Third Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the post of 
Urdu  Producer  at  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Corporation, information as to (a) if the vacancy which arose after the 
demise of late H. P has been filled and, if so, indicate – 

(i) 
(ii) 

when and  
if  the  post  was  advertised  and,  if  not,  why  not,  indicating  who  is  presently 
responsible for the Urdu programmes. 

Mr  P.  Jugnauth:    Madam  Speaker,  with  respect  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Mauritius broadcasting Corporation that following the demise of H. P. on 13 
July 2004, responsibility for Urdu programmes on radio and TV were taken over by the other 
staff of the Urdu section, namely, Mr Swabir Goodur, Farooq Husnoo and late Abdool Salam 
Ahmadi.  Subsequently,  Mr  Azad  Hossenee,  Chief  Technical  Producer,  was  assigned  the 
duties to coordinate and ensure the running of Urdu programmes on radio and TV.  

Madam Speaker, as from 04 February 2013, the services of Mr Swabir Goodur, who 
was  a  freelancer,  was  retained  on  a  fulltime  contractual  basis  as  coordinator  of  Urdu 
programmes.  Mr Azad Hossenee continued to ensure the running of Urdu programmes on 
radio  and  TV  in  collaboration  with  Mr  Goodur  until  January  2015.  Mr  Goodur’s  contract 
expired on 03 January 2015 and was not renewed. Since then alternative arrangements have 
been made to ensure the running of the Urdu programmes by  retaining the services of Mr 
Anwar Dusmohamed and Mr Farooq Husnoo who are both freelancers and Ms Yasmin Bode 
who serves as producer/ programme presenter on a contractual basis.  

Madam Speaker:   Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

SMALL PLANTERS - 2014 CANE HARVEST SEASON - COMPENSATION 
(No.  B/228)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the 2014 Cane 
Harvest Season, he will state if – 

(a) there has been - 

(i)  a fall in sugar production, and  
(ii) delay in the harvesting of the sugar cane fields, in particular, those of the 

small planters, and  

(b) some sugar cane fields have remained un-harvested and, if so, indicate the - 

 

39 

(i) 
(ii) 

extent of the sugar cane fields concerned therewith, and  
quantum  of  compensation,  if  any,  being  contemplated  for  the  small 
planters who have been prejudiced as a result thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed  that,  according  to  provisional  figures,  sugar  production  for  the  2014  crop  is 
estimated at 403,603 tonnes and is short of around 21,000 tonnes since about 119,200 tonnes 
of cane were left un-harvested in the fields as at 02 February 2015. 

Regarding part (a) (ii), I am advised that there were 17 cases where small planters have 

reported delays in harvesting. 

As regards part (b), 5.7 hectares of sugar cane fields belonging to small planters and 
1,424 hectares belonging to the corporate sector have remained un-harvested.  I am informed 
that  no  compensation  is  payable  for  un-harvested  fields  as  the  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  Act 
makes no provision for same. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Minister consider a compensation at the 
level of the Ministry, is it a normal situation to have such huge area of cultivation of cane not 
harvested and what action the Ministry is taking to avoid this kind of situation in the future? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  is  probably  aware  that  last  year 
there was an industrial dispute between the JNP and the Mauritius Sugar Planters Association 
and that resulted in the stoppage of the milling activities.  That lasted for about 10 days and 
because of that the crop season had to be extended up to the end of February.  But given the 
fact that we had very bad weather conditions in the first few weeks of January, we could not 
carry  out  with  the  harvesting  and  these  are  the  two  reasons  that  explained  the  fact  that  so 
much surface areas of cane cultivation were not harvested. 

Mr Lesjongard:  Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister if he has information 
with regard to the decrease in sugar production over the past three years and what is expected 
as decrease over the coming years? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Well,  it  is  a  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  that  over  the  last  five  years  the 
surface area under cane cultivation has been going down.  In 2009, the amount of surface area 
that was under cane cultivation was about 60,380 hectares and for the crop year 2014, it has 
gone down to 50,693.  So, it is something that is happening and based on that, obviously, the 
production of sugar is going downward.  But we, at the Ministry, are doing our best to curtail 
that downward trend to encourage people to continue with the sugar production.  But as we 
may be aware, the price is no more attractive given that we have no more the preferential 

 

40 

price  with  the  European  Union  and  with  the  effect  of  the  Euro  going  down  as  well,  the 
planters are not too keen to keep on with sugar production.   

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, being  given that the small planters  have suffered 
severe prejudice with this kind of situation, is there any way for the Ministry, for Government 
or any other institution to compensate those small planters who are suffering a lot from bad 
financial situation, and what measures is the hon. Minister contemplating? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, if we go through the Budget 
Speech, the Ministry of  Finance has announced  that cash compensation  will be paid to all 
sugar  producers  and  a  special  effort  is  being  made  for  small  planters  producing  up  to  60 
tonnes of sugar.  Cash compensation of Rs3,400 is being paid to small planters per tonne of 
sugar produced. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  further  been  advised 

that 

the  following 

Parliamentary Questions have been withdrawn: PQ B/233, PQ B/243 and PQ B/245. 

I now suspend the sitting for one and a half hour for lunch. 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

EX-PALMAR LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION UNIT - LAND - LEASE 

(No. B/229) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the plot of land, 
including the infrastructure therefor, devoted to the ex-paddock at Palmar, he will state – 

(a) 

if same has been leased to a private company or companies and, if so, indicate 
the  

(i) 

(ii) 

extent thereof; 

period thereof, and 

(iii) 

rent payable therefor, and 

(b) 

how his Ministry proposes to optimize the use thereof, giving details thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  ex-Palmar  Livestock 
Production Unit was closed down in April 2008, and 304 out of the 310 arpents were vested 

 

41 

in the Ministry of Housing and Lands for eventual allocation to promoters for implementation 
of tourism related projects. 

The  remaining  six  arpents  was  leased  in  April  2012  to  Aksaye  Enterprises  Ltd, 
represented by Mr Doomeswarsing Gooljaury, for vegetables cultivation. The lease is valid 
for a term of 20 years, and the rental payable is Rs1,000 per arpent annually. 

I am further informed that the lessee has not been paying the rental since 2013, and 

action has been initiated for the cancellation of the lease and the retrieval of the land. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! Hon. Barbier is not there. Yes, hon. Lesjongard. 

TRUTH AND JUSTICE COMMISSION – IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/237)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission,  he  will  state  whether  the  main 
recommendations  contained  in  the  report  thereof  have  been  implemented  and,  if  so,  give 
details thereof and, if not, indicate the reasons therefor. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission 
submitted its report on 25 November 2011.  The then Government set up in December 2011 a 
High-Powered  Committee  comprising  11  Ministers  to  look  into  the  implementation  of  the 
recommendations of the Commission. I was then appointed as Chairperson of the Committee. 

The  report  contained  21  main  recommendations  concerning  mainland  Mauritius, 
Rodrigues  and  Agaléga.  The  details  of  each  action  that  should  be  implemented  were  also 
spelt out in the report. Since the implementation of the Truth and Justice Commission would 
require  an  enormous  budget,  the  committee  focused  on  those  recommendations  that  could 
generate quick wins. 

In the first instance, 19 recommendations were retained and were to be implemented 

by different Ministries. 

As most of the recommendations cut across a number of Ministries and thus require 
close consultations, the previous Cabinet had, at its meeting of 22 February 2013, decided to 
set  up  a  four  member  coordination  team  which  was  mandated  to  closely  coordinate  and 
monitor  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  and  report  on  a  regular  basis  to  the 
High-Powered Committee. The coordination team has met on 32 occasions and had regular 
meetings  with  officials  from  relevant  Ministries,  statutory  bodies  as  well  as  persons  who 

 

42 

would  contribute  in  the  effective  implementation  of  the  project.  The  last  meeting  of  the 
coordination team was in May 2014. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  a  paper  on  the  progress  of  the  19  recommendations. 
This  Government  has  on  02  February  appointed  a  new  Ministerial  Committee  which  I  am 
again  chairing  and  comprising  four  other  Ministries  to  reconsider  the  recommendations 
contained in the report of the Truth and Justice Commission. The Ministerial Committee has 
already had its first meeting. 

Mr  Lesjongard:    Madam  Speaker,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  to 
inform  the  House  out  of  the  19  recommendations  that  were  identified,  how  many 
recommendations have been fully implemented until now? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, let me submit the document and the 

hon. Member can have a full feedback on what has been done. 

Mr Lesjongard: One of the recommendations was the setting up of a Land Research 

and Mediation Commission.  May we know where matters are as at today? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  This  is  something  that  the  new  committee  will  look 
into but, it was considered to be a priority area because of the number of disputes regarding 
land  issues  and  the  difficulty  for  individuals,  especially  poor  individuals,  to  access 
information and to get the proper legal advice. This will be a priority of the new Committee. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Since  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  himself  was  chairing  that 
High-Powered Committee when it was set up at that time, can we know from him how many 
cases of dispossession of land have been solved until now? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am not aware, Madam Speaker, but what I can say is 
that decision was taken, funds were provided for the recruitment of, I think, three persons; 
one  surveyor,  one  lawyer  and  another  person.  There  were  some  problems  at  the  start  to 
identify  the  correct  candidates.  The  candidates  were  obtained  and  then  I  had  already  left 
Government. So, I am not able to say anything further to the hon. Member. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  dispossession  of  land,  one  of  the 
main  problems  that  those  concerned  had  to  face  was  availability  of  funds  for  research 
purposes. May we know whether in the actual Budget certain amount has been earmarked for 
that Commission? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am not aware, Madam Speaker. But, as I mentioned, 
the new Committee has met once and the matter has been discussed and this is an important 
area and we will look at it. As I mentioned, it is an expensive and time-consuming process 

 

43 

which is probably beyond the means of most people who are poor and that was the reason 
why we could consider Government giving additional help. 

Madam Speaker: I come back to the question of hon. Barbier! 
Mr Barbier: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am sorry to be late. Thank you for giving 

me the opportunity to come back to my question B/234. 

BELLE MARE – FRENCH TOURISTS – DEATH 

(No.  B/233)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  death  of  two  French  tourists  at  sea  in  the  region  of  Belle 
Mare, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

the outcome of the inquiry, if any, carried out thereinto by his Ministry and the 
actions taken in relation thereto, if any, and 
if his Ministry proposes to introduce new policies in relation to the nautical 
sports activities within our lagoons. 

(Withdrawn) 

PORT LOUIS HARBOUR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT – FISHERS – 

ACCOMPANYING MEASURES 

(No.  B/234)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the ongoing Port Louis Harbour Development Project, he will 
state the accompanying measures being taken, if any, to help the fishers of – 

(a) Bain des Dames; 
(b) Les Salines; 
(c) Grand River North West; 
(d) Sable Noir ; 
(e) Pointe aux Sables; 
 (f) Roche Bois, and  
(g) Tombeau Bay. 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Director 
General of the Mauritius Ports Authority (MPA) that it is enhancing its infrastructure in line 
with  its  objective  to  transform  the  port  into  a  regional  hub  and  to  respond  to  the  growing 
needs of the shipping lines and other stakeholders. 

 

44 

It is currently implementing a project for the extension of the quay by 240 metres and 
strengthening of the existing quay of 560 metres at the Mauritius Container Terminal at Mer 
Rouge to enable larger container vessels to call at Port Louis Harbour and to accommodate 
the increase in cargo traffic. This project which involves construction of bunds, marine and 
civil works and dredging works is expected to be completed by end of 2016. 

In regard to parts (a) to (g) of the question, I am further informed that there are 278 

registered fishers under the six landing stations within the port limits, namely – 

(i) 

 Bain des Dames / Fort William; 

(ii) 

Grande Rivière Nord Ouest 

(iii) 

Pointe aux Sables I; 

(iv) 

Pointe aux Sables II; 

(v) 

Roche Bois, and  

(vi) 

Tombeau Bay. 

At the start of the project, these persons have claimed compensation from the MPA. 
They are stating that the decrease in amount of fish catch due to affected water quality, is 
forcing them to move further away to obtain the same catch they were getting prior to works 
being carried out. 

The  MPA  in  a  spirit  of  goodwill  opened  negotiations  with  the  fishers  and  it  was 
agreed to move for a mediation process, in the first instance, as a means to resolve the dispute 
between the two parties. A Mediator/Arbitrator was appointed with the concurrence of all the 
parties and a Mediation/Arbitration Agreement was signed on 07 July 2014 to examine and 
determine  whether  the  works  have  caused  or  are  likely  to  cause  an  impact  on  the  fishing 
activities  of  the  registered  fishers,  determine  the  compensation,  if  any,  and  the  terms  of 
relocation  of  the  15  fishers  operating  temporarily  at  Fort  William.  Several  proposals  have 
been  examined  and  I  am  informed  that  no  agreement  has  been  reached  between  the  two 
parties and the dispute will now be resolved in arbitration proceedings. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  that,  following  the  start  of  the  works,  the 
Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands has 
provided  baits  to  the  fishers  in  2013.  It  has  also  extended  the  fishing  areas  for  live  baits 
beyond  the  district  of  Port  Louis,  namely  to  Black  River,  Pamplemousses  and  Rivière  du 

 

45 

Rempart on a thrice weekly basis and limited to 5 fishers per day. Normally, bait year license 
is restricted to a particular district only. 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, as the hon. Deputy Prime Minister just stated, it is now 
maybe for more than one  year that negotiation has started on a mediation basis where the 
fishers today are at Court level with the preceding to establish what is the impact that it will 
have on the fishers’ activities. There is a feeling, Madam Speaker, that they  are not being 
considered in all this development that is going on in the Port Louis Harbour area. 

Madam Speaker: What is the hon. Member’s question? 
Mr Barbier: May I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether he will make it a 
duty for him as Minister responsible for port development to see to it that all fishers from the 
region of Grande Rivière to Tombeau Bay, including all the other fish landing stations, be 
given due consideration while we are considering developing the ports area. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I must say that the MPA has taken 
this quite seriously and, in fact, no less a person than the ex-Chief Justice was appointed as 
mediator,  and  now,  as  arbitrator  on  this  issue.  So,  it  has  been  given  the  importance  it 
deserves. Nevertheless,  I take the point of the hon. Member concerning  current and  future 
developments and how this will affect the livelihood of everyone, especially when we talk 
about the prospective substantial port development. Certainly, we will look at some sort of 
mechanism so that dialogue can take place. But, also, Madam Speaker, there is a need for 
everyone  to  be  reasonable  and  for  everyone  to  understand  that  things  have  got  to  happen 
within reasonable parameters. 

Mr Barbier: May I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister just to insist on a time frame 
so that the fishers may not feel as if they have been abandoned while we are developing the 
port area? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I understand now that we are going to 
arbitration and that the ex-Chief Justice wishes the works to stop so that he can fully assess 
that has been the loss incurred by the fishermen. I think it will be towards the end of the year 
that this will happen. As far as the future works are concerned, let me look into it and I will 
come back. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Barbier! 

PAILLES - FOOTBALL PITCH 

(No.  B/235)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the football pitch situated near 

 

46 

the Pailles Police Station, he will state if he will use his good offices to facilitate the handing 
over thereof to the Municipal Council of Port Louis and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I made to 
the  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/80  on  this  issue  and  wherein  I  informed  that  necessary 
arrangement was being made by my Ministry for the handing over of the playing field of the 
City Council of Port Louis for maintenance. 

I wish to inform the House that a request has already been made by my Ministry to 
the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for  the  vesting  of  the  plot  of  land  in  question  in  my 
Ministry and as soon as the procedures will be completed, the land will be vested in the City 
Council of Port Louis for the maintenance of the football pitch standing thereon. 

ROCHE BOIS - THIRD LANE 

(No. B/236) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the opening of 
a third lane at Roche Bois and Abattoir Road to traffic coming from the North, he will state 
the  additional  measures  that  have  been  taken  to  protect  the  inhabitants  of  Roches  Bois, 
particularly in the region of the Abattoir and St Martin Streets. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, following the closure of the Terre Rouge/Verdun road as 
a result of the embankment failure on part of that road, there was an urgent need to alleviate 
the traffic congestion problem at the entrance from the North into Port Louis. Decision has 
thus been taken to open a third lane from Riche Terre roundabout enabling traffic to enter the 
city centre through Abattoir Road. This decision has been accompanied by a series of road 
safety measures to protect the inhabitants of that region as follows - 

Apart from the setting-up of a pedestrian crossing along the Abattoir Road to enable 
pedestrians to have access to the bus stop along the motorway M2, the speed limit in that 
region has been reduced to 40 km per hour and handrails have also been fixed along Abattoir 
Road  to  channel  pedestrians.  A  stretch  of  land  has  also  been  cleared  just  after  Cocoterie 
roundabout  to  allow  safe  movement  of  the  pedestrians  outside  the  road.    In  addition, 
appropriate traffic signs have been fixed. Access from motorway M2 onto the Abattoir Road 
has been restricted to morning peak hours only and arrangements have been made for Police 
to be present all the time in that region from 07 00 hours to 10 00 hours on weekdays. 

As regards the St Martin Street, it is essentially a residential road of about 700 metres 
and varying in width between 4.7 and 5 metres and traffic from the North using the third lane 
at Roche Bois and the Abattoir Road to reach the city centre does not pass through St Martin 
Road  and  as  such  does  not  have  an  impact  on  that  road  during  the  morning  peak  hours.  

 

47 

However, the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit will consider setting up the speed 
limit to only 40 km along St Martin Road as an additional safety measure. 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, I know that the traffic does not pass through St. Martin, 
but there are other traffic coming from St. Martin that cross the Abattoir road.  This Abattoir 
road has not been operating for traffic for years now. This does not only concern the traffic 
and  vehicles,  but  pedestrians  also.  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  see  to  it  that  adequate 
measures are taken concerning pedestrians of the region of St. Martin so that necessary care 
for the security of the pedestrians in this region is taken? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  look  into  the  matter  and  I  believe  that  with  the 
opening of the diversion at Terre Rouge/Verdun next week, we will have lesser traffic taking 
that lane, but I will look into the matter as regards the security of the pedestrians.  

FASHION STYLE - STATE LAND  

(No.  B/238)    Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the State 
land situated in the vicinity of the  Belle Mare  Police Station, he will state if Mr D. G. of 
Fashion Style is the lessee of two portions thereof and, if so, indicate – 

 (a)  if  the  lease  was  converted  from  residential  to  industrial  land  and,  if  so,  indicate 

when, and  

(b) the amount of rent payable - 

 (i) now, and  
(ii) at the end of the lease.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, since April 2009, Mr D. G. holds a 60-year industrial site lease over a plot 
of State land of an extent of nine perches (380m²) being Lots 133/1 and 133/2 of State Land 
Belle Mare Village for the running of a commercial/guest house. In fact, Mr D. G. acquired, 
through two Notarial Deeds, the buildings together with the leasehold rights of both plots of 
land from the Nuttoo brothers who held residential cum commercial site leases over the two 
sites. The approval of the Ministry of Housing and Lands was sought and obtained prior to 
effecting  the  acquisition  and  transfer.  Thereafter,  upon  the  request  of  Mr  D.  G.,  a 
consolidated “industrial  site lease” over both plots of land  was drawn in 2009. The site is 
presently built up with a G+4 building being used for commercial activities. 

In  respect  of  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  rental  payable  for  the  lease  is                

Rs63,391.31  for  period  01  July  2014  to  30  June  2015.  As  per  Article  6  of  the  Lease 
Agreement, the rental for the succeeding years shall be computed from the rental payable for 

 

48 

the  preceding  year  adjusted  by  reference  to  the  cumulative  inflation  rate  based  on  the 
Consumer Price Index during every 3-year period which shall not exceed 15.7 per cent in any 
case. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the lessee has not settled the rent for 

the lease since July 2012 despite having been sent several reminders.  

Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to confirm whether those two 
plots, that is, 133/1 and 133/2 were lots that were regularised to those persons who at that 
time  were  squatting  that  plot  of land  upon  a  decision  of  the  then  Government,  that  is,  the 
Government  between  2000  and  2005  to  regularise  cases  of  those  families  who  have  been 
squatting land for quite some time? 

Mr Soodhun: Yes, Madam Speaker. 
Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he finds it normal 
that  in  the  case  where  Government  has  regularised  cases  of  those  poor  families  that  his 
Ministry gives the authorisation for converting those two residential leases into industrial and 
commercial leases? 

Mr Soodhun: The case was referred to Court and there has been a judgment contrary to 
what has been done in the past. Mr D. G. was fined for the illegal procedure which has been 
taken up. 

Mr Lesjongard: From what I understand from the hon. Minister, the rent for that lease 
has not been paid since 2012 and he has also mentioned that the rent is Rs60,000 per year. 
Does  he  find  it  normal  that  for  an  industrial  lease  where  there  is  a  building  of  about  four 
storeys that the rent is Rs2,125 per lot, that is, for the two lots some Rs5,250? 

Mr Soodhun: This has been the practice by the former Government as we know very 
well. They have already done what they used to do. But, in fact, we are going to implement 
the law as it is. 

Mr Lesjongard: Since the hon. Minister is putting order in the Ministry there, I want a 
confirmation from him as to whether those two lots were used, if I may use that word, for 
pledging of rights for a bank. 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I do not have this information. 
Mr  Lesjongard:  One  last  question.  If  he  is  looking  into  that,  may  he  also  verify 
whether that pledging of rights was on the name of that person, that is, on the name of Mr D. 
G. or on the name of the company, Fashion Style? 

Mr Soodhun: On the name of Mr D. G. 

 

49 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  Nos.  B/241  and  B/242  have 

been withdrawn.  Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

VILLE NOIRE - HEALTH CENTRE  

(No.  B/241)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  policy  of  his 
Ministry to bring health services to the doorsteps of the people, he will state if consideration 
will be given for the advisability of setting up a community health centre/area health centre 
and/or mediclinic in the village of Ville Noire, situated in Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg 
and Plaine Magnien. 

(Withdrawn) 

SPECIAL EDUCATION NEEDS SCHOOLS - TEACHERS 

(No.  B/242)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  long  serving  Teachers/Senior  Teachers  for  General 
Purpose  and  Oriental  Languages  respectively  who  are  presently  seconded  for  duty  in  the 
Special Education Needs schools, she will state the number thereof in each case, indicating 
where matters stand as to their appointment to the permanent post of Educator for Special 
Education Needs. 

(Withdrawn) 

MBC – TELEVISION CHANNELS - PRIVATISATION 

(No.  B/243)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
two television channels of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Corporation, information as to if the privatisation thereof is being 
contemplated and, if so, indicate if – 

(a)  

(b)  

a  prior  study  has  been  carried  out  in  relation  thereto  and,  if  so,  give  details 
thereof, and  
any time frame for the implementation thereof has been fixed. 

(Withdrawn) 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – AIRLINES SERVICING - CATERING 

SERVICES 

(No. B/244) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  catering  services  for  the  airlines  servicing  the  Sir  Seewoosagur 

 

50 

Ramgoolam International Airport, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as 
to the company which has obtained the contract therefor, indicating the - 

contract value thereof;  
terms and conditions of the contract, and  
names of the directors of the company. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  procurement 
allocation  of  contract  for  inflight  catering  services  is  carried  out  by  the  respective  airlines 
under their own commercial arrangements.  

I am, therefore, not in a position to respond to this particular question. 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  aware  that  there  had  been  several 
complaints with regard to the quality of food supplied by the Company and served on board 
of the different air flights. 

Mr  Duval:  That  is  a  very  general  question,  Madam  Speaker.  There  have  been 
obviously  complaints  in  particular  relating  to  food  on  Air  Mauritius,  but  I  know  that  our 
national airline is taking remedial action. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister inform the House whether tender 
procedures have been followed before allocation of this contract for catering services to this 
company? 

Mr Duval: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of this particular issue, but if the hon. 

Member has any information that he would like to submit, with pleasure we will look at it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question hon. Oree.  

NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR THE CO-OPERATIVE ENTERPRISE 

COMMITTEE – CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/245) Mr R.  Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Co-operatives  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
appointment  of  Mr  V.  M.  as  Chairperson  of  the  National  Institute  for  the  Co-operative 
Enterprise  Committee,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Committee, 
information as to his - 

(a) qualifications;  
(b) address, and  
(c) terms and conditions of appointment. 
(Withdrawn) 

 
 

 

51 

CHITRAKOOT - LANDSLIDE 

(No.  B/247)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the landslide problems at Chitrakoot, he will state the measures that are being taken by 
Government in relation thereto, indicating if his Ministry has considered a re-lodging plan for 
the aggrieved households whose houses have been severely damaged as a result thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I am informed that, following the landslide which occurred at Chitrakoot in 
February  2005,  the  services  of  GIBB  (Mauritius)  Ltd  were  retained  by  the  National 
Development  Unit  (NDU)  for  a  structural  assessment  of  the  60  houses  affected  in  the 
landslide area. The consultant, after assessment, informed that, out of the 60 housing units, 
only  14  were  found  to  be  structurally  unsafe  where  damages  were  beyond  repairs  and 
recommended the relocation of the owners/occupiers.  

Further, the NDU through the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
sought  the  technical  assistance  of  the  Japan  International  Cooperation  Agency  (JICA)  to 
mitigate  disasters  in  the  landslide  proned  areas.  Consequently,  that  Ministry  requested  for 
land to be acquired for the construction of drains, as landslide counter measures. 

In 2006, a plot of State land was identified at Le Hochet for the relocation of 13 out of 
14 cases and at Bois Marchand for the remaining 1. The families were consulted and they 
consented  to  their  relocation  to  the  new  sites  proposed  to  them.  Building  site  leases  were 
granted on 28 March 2006 to each of the 13 families who were to be relocated at Le Hochet; 
and on 13 November 2008 the remaining one family was allocated a plot of State land at Bois 
Marchand.  

In  January  2015,  Government  set  up  an  Inter-Ministerial  Committee  under  my 
Chairmanship to monitor and address the problem of Chitrakoot. The situation to date is as 
follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 

in 4 cases, the families concerned have already vacated their houses which are 
now unoccupied;  
in  2  cases,  the  families  are  still  occupying  the  damaged  houses  whilst  their 
new houses at Le Hochet are under construction;  
in 2 cases, they have moved out but their houses are being used as stores;  
in  1  case,  the  family  has  moved  out  but  the  house  is  now  occupied  by  the 
victim’s brother;  

 

(v) 
(vi) 

(vii) 

52 

in 1 case, the family has moved out but the victim has rented the house;   
in  1  case  where  the  victim  was  relocated  at  Bois  Marchand,  he  is  still 
occupying the house at Chitrakoot and has requested for his relocation at Terre 
Rouge but no State land is available to accede to his request,  and  
in  the  last  3  remaining  cases,  the  persons  concerned  are  old-age  pensioners 
who are still occupying their houses at Chitrakoot. Given that these persons do 
not have the financial means to construct their houses on the sites allocated to 
them,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  has 
arranged  for  their  registration  under  the  Social  Register  to  determine  their 
eligibility  to  receive  housing  support  under  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation (NEF) housing scheme.  

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From what I understand the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister has stated that there are cases where people were relocated, they were given 
land,  they  were  supposed  to  move  there,  but  they  have  built  the  houses,  they  have  stayed 
where the landslide occurred but they are renting the house at the place where they have been 
relocated.  Does  he  find  it  normal  that  people,  who  at  that  time  should  have  moved  from 
Chitrakoot, have stayed there and they are renting for years now those houses that they have 
built at Terre Rouge? 

Mr Soodhun: I hope the hon. Member is not thinking to return back to Constituency 
No. 4.  I agree with my good friend, but concerning land, according to my information, it is a 
private land, it is not a State land. This remains a problem it is not a State land. 

Madam Speaker: No question! Okay. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  all  the  business  on  today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 
 
 (3.09 p.m.) 

STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER 

HORSE RACING - COMMISSION OF INQUIRY  

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Government  has  taken  a  strong 
commitment  towards  the  Nation  to  tackle  the  problematic  issue  of  “nation  zougadère”, 

 

53 

especially as it relates to addressing illegal activities and the serious and widespread concerns 
of corruption linked to horse racing in Mauritius.  

The Commission of Inquiry on “Horse Racing in Mauritius” that was set up under the 
Chairmanship of Mr Richard Parry and his assessors Messrs Dennis Gunn and Paul Scotney, 
in the wake of allegations of corruption in horse racing in Mauritius, has submitted its Report 
to the President of the Republic. 

The Terms of Reference of the Commission of Inquiry were wide-encompassing and, 
in  the  discharge  of  its  duties,  the  inquiry  team  met  with  all  the  stakeholders  in  the 
organisation,  management  and  administration  of  horse  racing  in  Mauritius.  Meetings  were 
held  with  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club,  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  the  Police  Force,  the 
Mauritius Revenue Authority, the Financial Intelligence Unit, the Independent Commission 
against  Corruption,  horse  owners/trainers  and  jockeys.  The  Team  also  took  evidence,  both 
written  and  oral,  from  a  wide  spectrum  of  interests  and  also  scrutinized  documents  and 
materials that were relevant for the purposes of the Commission.   

The Inquiry Team has carried out a comprehensive and detailed examination of all the 
evidence placed before it. In its Report, the Team has made no less than 23 recommendations 
in  order  to  combat  the  scourge  of  illegal  betting,  corruption  in  horse  racing  and  the 
proliferation of betting in Mauritius.   

The  Commission  has  been  damning  in  its  criticisms  towards  those  Institutions/ 

Authorities/Regulators which have been put in place to regulate and monitor this sector. 

Let  me  start  with  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority.  The  Commission  has 
particularly noted the so far inefficient performance of the Gambling Regulatory Authority 
despite  the  fact  that  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Act  2007  provides  an  excellent  statutory 
backing for the authority to discharge its duties for the regulation of gambling activities in 
Mauritius.  The  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  requires  a  strong  leadership  and  proper 
resourcing and I have already taken action to that end by bringing the Gambling Regulatory 
Authority under the aegis of my office and by appointing the right persons at the level of the 
Board. 

As regards, the Police des Jeux whose role is to monitor betting activities and prevent 
and detect illegal betting, the Commission noted that the unit is under-resourced and lacks 
expertise 
in  betting  and  financial  matters.  The  Commission  feels,  amongst  other 
recommendations, that there is an urgent need to step up the resources of the Police des Jeux 

 

54 

with the appropriate knowhow and skills in addressing the issues of betting and sports-related 
crime.  

I  can  inform  the  House  that  even  before  the  submission  of  the  report  of  the 
Commission  of  Inquiry,  actions  were  being  taken  at  the  level  of  the  Police  to  remedy  the 
situation and make of the Police des Jeux a powerful, uncompromising and efficient squad. 

As regards the Mauritius Revenue Authority, the Commission noted the measures it is 
taking  to  improve  its  tax  collection  responsibilities  in  respect  of  horse  racing  and  betting.  
The Commission recommends that a Memorandum of Understanding be drawn up between 
the Gambling Regulatory Authority, the Mauritius Revenue Authority, the Police and others 
involved with the regulation and governance of horse racing in Mauritius to improve inter-
agency working against tax evasion, money laundering and other corrupt activities connected 
with horse racing and betting. 

As for the Mauritius Turf Club, the Commission noted, with significant concern, the 
serious  problems  in  the  management  of  the  Club  itself  and  found  that  it  is  a  “fractured 
organisation” where there is maladministration bordering on “institutional corruption”.  The 
Commission has concluded that the Mauritius Turf Club requires fundamental change in its 
organisation, management and administration. It recommends that a ‘separation of powers’, 
including  a  system  of  checks  and  balances  within  racing  is  necessary.  The  Mauritius  Turf 
Club should divest itself of its regulatory and governance roles, so that it can concentrate on 
the  organisation  and  management  of  race  planning  and  the  operation  of  race-days  but 
withdraws from its current responsibilities of regulating and governance. 

The Commission further lays stress on the abolition of the role of ‘Stable Manager’ 
which  it  qualifies  as  an  “anachronism”  and  hits  hard  on  instances  of  conflicts  of  interest 
within  horse  racing  which  it  says  is  the  root  cause  of  many  of  the  evils  in  the  gambling 
industry. 

Madam  Speaker,  taking  into  account  the  findings  and  recommendations  of  the 
Commission  of  Inquiry  and  Government’s  own  assessment  of  the  situation  prevailing  in 
horse  racing  and  the  gambling  industry  at  large  in  Mauritius,  bold  measures  have  been 
announced in the 2015 Budget to do away with the ‘nation zougadère’ culture and to bring 
back the notion of responsible gambling in the true sense of the word. 

Government  is  determined  to  combat  the  mafia  in  the  gambling  industry  that  has 
brought so much suffering to punters and the public at large.  We are committed to do away 
with all the evils that have destroyed the good name of horse racing in Mauritius and to bring 
back absolute sports integrity into the industry. 

 

55 

Further to the budget announcements, the Gambling Regulatory Authority will issue 
guidelines  and  ancillary  good  practice  directives  to  effectively  implement  the  measures 
enunciated.  

I  am  personally  fully  committed  in  the  battle  to  eradicate  the  gambling  mafia.  No 
stone will be left unturned to achieve our objectives.  In line with the budget announcements 
with regard to the non issue of new licenses, I wish to inform the House that in implementing 
this  measure  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  will  put  into  place  a  mechanism  to 
autocorrect embedded injustices in the system with a view to establishing a level playing field 
wherever needed.  

In the spirit of transparency that has always guided my actions and principles, I am 

tabling a copy of the Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in Mauritius. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(3.18 p.m.) 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

 

Question again proposed. 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, the population was waiting impatiently for this Budget, expectations were high. For 
the first time since 2000, we have a Government with a three-quarter majority. It was the time 
to take bold decisions; decisions which would tackle head-on the problems of unemployment 
especially  among  the  youth  and  women,  decisions  that  would  reduce  costs  of  living, 
decisions that would improve standard of living.  

 

56 

Expectations  were  high,  Madam  Speaker,  because  the  duo  was  back  –  Rt.  hon.  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister and hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo as his Minister of Finance. 
During the electoral campaign, creating the second miracle was a major theme. Expectations 
were high also because days after coming into Office, the Government lived up to its promise 
of increasing old age pension and gave a salary compensation increase across the board of 
Rs600. This was followed by the adoption of the Government Programme 2015-2019 with 
which we did not have any major qualms.  

With this Budget, now was the time to turn words into action; now was the time for 
Government to deliver on its promises. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, this Budget has not 
lived up to expectations and I am not saying that it is a bad Budget. There are many good 
measures,  popular  measures.  In  classic  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  style,  he  ensured  that  after 
listening  to  the  Budget  everybody  will  go  home  feeling  happy  that,  at  least,  there  is  one 
positive measure which would impact on his life. Series of small measures with little or no 
impact on Budget, but which generate a feel good factor. Some were relieved, for example, 
that there is no increase in tax on cigarettes and alcohol. SMS users welcome the decision to 
remove the tax on SMS which was levied by hon. Xavier-Luc Duval when he was Minister of 
Finance. Although now, with free applications like WhatsApp, Viber, most smart users had 
stopped  using  paid  SMS  anyway.  Some  were  happy  to  get  6  cubic  metres  of  water  free.  
Many of them did not realise that, in fact, all of us pay only Rs45 for  10 cubic metres of 
water. So, now we will get 6 cubic metres for free, we will pay only Rs45 on the remaining 4 
cubic metres. Rs45 is not big money, but still, everybody likes to have something for free. It’s 
a feel good factor and people were left feeling that: yes, the Government is giving us free 
water.  It is a feel good factor.  People left feeling that, yes, the Government is giving us free 
water. 

Environment-conscious citizens applauded the decision to ban plastic bags; a measure 
which was announced by the previous Government, but never really implemented because of 
the lobbies from the manufacturing sector.  

The business community was also happy to learn that 70 permits and licenses would be 
abolished.  The hon. Minister, of course, did not mention what permits will be abolished and 
how many businesses will be concerned by this measure.  But, still, it was applauded as a 
landmark measure to facilitate business.  Little do they know, this business community, that 
the hon. Minister of Finance has actually budgeted for an increase in the amount of licence 
fees to be collected in the coming eight months.   

 

57 

The  3,000  gradués  chômeurs  were  also  expected  to  feel  happy  that  the  Government 
will now pay the fees of up to Rs80,000 per student, per year, for them to follow a course that 
would apparently, and I quote – 

“(…)improve their chances of getting a job.” 

An  expenditure,  Madam  Speaker,  which  could  have  easily  been  avoided  if  the 
Government had taken the bold measure of introducing career guidance services to students 
right  from  secondary  school,  because  it  serves  little  purpose  to  a  graduate  in  History,  for 
example, to be told that now he has to do a course in Accountancy or in Biochemistry to find 
a  job,  when  he  stopped  studying  sciences  at  Form  III  level  and  never  actually  did  any 
accountancy work.  Of course, still for parents who spend their time looking at their children 
sitting  at  home,  doing  nothing,  writing  hundreds  of  CVs,  attending  interviews,  it  was  a 
positive  feel  good  factor  because  they  felt  that,  maybe,  now,  with  the  reconversion,  their 
children will be able to get a job. Whether this turns out into reality, is a different matter, but, 
at  least,  for  statistics  purposes,  the  fact  that  the  unemployed  are  now  going  to  follow  a 
conversion  course  would  ultimately  result  in  a  reduction  in  the  unemployment  statistics 
because a student on full-time employment is not a chômeur. 

Madam Speaker, the Budget is full of these little measures, popular measures; measures 
for public opinion management.  But when we sit down and ponder on this Budget, when we 
analyse the Estimates and the Public Sector Investment Programme, the inevitable conclusion 
is that this Budget is not bold enough; this Budget is not ambitious enough; this Budget is not 
innovative enough. 

Pour moi, c’est une occasion ratée. Une occasion ratée, Madame la présidente, parce 
que tous les ingrédients étaient réunis pour un budget de relance, un budget qui aurait pu et 
qui aurait dû… 

(Interruptions) 

…  poser  les  jalons  pour  la  croissance,  pour  le  développement,  pour  la  création 
d’emplois.    Pourtant,  l’honorable  ministre,  le  grand  argentier,  avait  une  certaine  marge  de 
manœuvre.  Avec  l’effondrement  du  prix  du  pétrole  sur  le  marché  international,  l’inflation 
était contenue. Les résultats des entreprises dans les divers secteurs d’activités, tant dans le 
secteur  manufacturier  que  dans  le  secteur  du  tourisme,  montraient  une  certaine  reprise.  Et 
puis, Madame la présidente, il ne faut pas oublier les fameux special funds tant décriés par 
l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  au  temps  où  il  était  le  président  de  la  Commission 
économique du MMM.   

(Interruptions) 

 

58 

Selon les chiffres dans les Estimates… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 
Mr Uteem: Selon les chiffres dans les Estimates, on nous apprend qu’au 31 décembre 
2014, il y avait plus de R 8 milliards de réserves dans ces special funds.  R 8 milliards ! Et la 
taxe  additionnelle  sur  les  produits  pétroliers  pour  les  18  mois,  jusqu’au  30  juin  2016, 
apportera  un  montant  additionnel  de  R  3.7  milliards.    R  3.7  milliards,  sans  compter  le 
windfall  gain  de  R  1.4  milliards  de  la  State  Trading  Corporation.    Donc,  Madame  la 
présidente, les caisses n’étaient pas vides. 

(Interruptions) 

Et  une  fois  n’est  pas  coutume !  L’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  s’est  bien 
contenté de ne pas critiquer la gestion de l’économie par ses prédécesseurs, pour des raisons 
évidentes ! Ses prédécesseurs étant aujourd’hui ses collègues dans le Cabinet. 

(Interruptions) 

Oui,  les  ministres  des  Finances  étaient  l’honorable  Xavier  Duval  et  l’honorable 

Pravind Jugnauth ces cinq dernières années ! 

Ces cinq dernières années ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr  Uteem :  Les  caisses  n’étaient  pas  vides.  La  conjoncture  économique  n’était  pas 
défavorable. On pouvait légitimement s’attendre à mieux, Madame la présidente. On savait 
que  l’augmentation  de  la  pension  de  vieillesse  allait  nous  coûter  au  moins  R  4  milliards 
additionnelles chaque année, mais on s’attendait à une gestion plus saine, plus efficace des 
dépenses publiques, avec une dose de mesures fiscales pour contenir le déficit budgétaire et 
la  dette  publique.  Mais  à  notre  grande  déception,  le  grand  argentier  a  préféré  la  facilité  à 
l’audacité, et a sacrifié le budget de développement, le Capital Budget. 

Madame  Speaker,  we  are  particularly  disappointed  when  it  comes  to  the  Capital 
Budget.    According  to  the  statement  of  Government’s  operations  found  in  the  Estimates 
2015-2016,  Capital  Expenditure  for  the  six  months  ending  June  2015  will  only  be  Rs4.8 
billion.    Capital  Expenditure  for  2015-2016  will  only  be  Rs12.5  billion.    By  way  of 
comparison, the actual Capital Expenditure for 2013 was Rs15.2 billion.  If we look only at 
figures for acquisition of non-financial assets, it is even worse.  For 2015/2016, it will be only 

 

59 

Rs8.7 billion compared to Rs11.1 billion in 2013.  In other words, a reduction of more than 
22%.  More than 22%! 

What does that mean, Madam Speaker?  Simply, the Government will not be spending 
as much as it should have on capital projects, on public infrastructure projects.  For the next 
18  months,  the  Government  will  reduce  its  spending  on  certain  projects.    It  will  spend 
nothing on other projects, and still on some projects, it will delay the spending for later years.   
If  we  look  closely  at  the  Public  Sector  Investment  Programme,  we  get  a  better 
indication of the projects that will not be carried out in the next 18 months.  At page 4 of the 
PSIP, there is a list of projects for which financing is  yet to be secured,  meaning a list of 
projects  that  is  not  going  to  go  ahead  in  the  coming  18  months.  And  surprise,  surprise, 
Madam Speaker!  Highlands City!  Yes, one of the smart cities on which the hon. Minister of 
Finance is relying as the investment rocket to generate growth and employment will not go 
ahead in the next 18 months!  The construction of Ring Road, Phases II and III, will not go 
ahead.  There  is  no  financing,  and  yet  people  in  my  constituency,  Vallée  Pitot,  are  being 
harassed  that  they  will  have  to  evacuate  their  land  because  the  Ring  Road  is  coming. 
Construction of the bridge linking A1 Road at Coromandel to M1 Motorway-Sorèze; this was 
one of the measure phare announced in the Budget to reduce traffic congestion.  But, again, 
in the PISP, we are told that we have no funds to carry it out.  So, that will not happen in the 
next 18 months. 

(Interruptions) 

Same  thing  for  the  extension  of  the  airport  of  Rodrigues;  creation  of  the  100 
Megawatt  power  generation  project;  remedial  measure  to  address  landslide  in  higher  risk 
zones, etc, etc.  The list is long, Madam Speaker. The list is long about projects which could 
have been going ahead, which should have gone ahead, but which will not be going ahead.  
So much for infrastructure projects for which financing is yet to be secured. 

Now, let us take a look at the few projects for which there is funding, but not for the 
next 18 months.  MPs from the South; hon. Maneesh Gobin will be happy to learn that no 
provision is made for the actual construction of Rivière des Anguilles Dam until after 2016.  I 
am sure he will have a lot of fun explaining to his constituents why they are having water 
shortage problems. 

Exactly! How they have water shortage problem when there is so much abundance 

(Interruptions) 

of rainfall. 

 

60 

Why? Because this Government has chosen not to go ahead with the construction of 
the  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Dam  in  the  south!  Same  thing  for  the  upgrading  of  dams  at  la 
Ferme! The bulk of the work will be carried out only as from 2016/2017, which makes me 
wonder  if  it  is  because  there  are  no  MPs  from  the  Government  that  this  project  is  being 
penalised. 

I was not in Government for 10 years! 

(Interruptions) 

For wastewater projects, out of the Rs7.4 billion worth of works identified only Rs1.4 
billion  will  be  covered  in  this  Budget,  whereas  in  my  constituency,  No.  2,  nothing  for 
sewerage  works!  We  will  have  to  wait  until  2016  to  get  sewerage  pipes  being  laid  in 
Tranquebar area. 

For public infrastructure projects, including road maintenance, Rs5.3 billion worth of 
project have been identified, but provisions have been made only for a third of that amount to 
be spent in the next 18 months. 

Constructions and extensions of primary schools and secondary schools are also being 
sacrificed.  For example, only 20% - and I hope the hon. Minister of Education is listening - 
of the project value  for  primary schools is being spent and the bulk of the expenditure on 
secondary schools such as constructions of various gymnasiums in various SSS will only take 
place after 2016/2017. 

For pipe replacement programme, again, the project value announced in the Budget is 
about Rs19.5 billion to replace our damaged pipeline, and how much will be spent in the next 
18 months? Only Rs1.1 billion! And this is substantially less than the Rs2.3 billion which 
Government  will  collect  on  the  tax  on  petroleum  products,  otherwise  known  as  Build 
Mauritius Fund.  And we all know that this additional Rs2.3 billion tax was seen by the hon. 
Minister of Finance as being money put aside for replacement of damaged pipes. So, Rs2.3 
billion out of our pocket, but only Rs1 billion will be spent on pipes. I can go on and on, and I 
am sure at Committee Stage hon. Members will have the chance to see for themselves the 
projects that have been sacrificed. I am sure that they will have a good time explaining to 
their  electorates  why  these  projects,  which  have  been  promised  during  the  electoral 
campaign, will not be implemented anytime soon! 

But the point I am making is that the hon. Minister of Finance is deliberately under-
spending on Capital Budget. And yet, the hon. Minister of Finance is anticipating growth of 

 

61 

5.3%  this  year  and  of  5.7%  next  year.  And  I  really  hope,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  will 
achieve  that  rate  of  growth,  because  if  we  do  not  achieve  this,  there  would  not  be  any 
significant increase in job creation. But, Madam Speaker, I am sceptical. And God knows that 
I am not a pessimistic person. The truth of the matter is that growth does not come out of a 
stroke of a magic wand. 

In a working paper published by the International Monetary Fund last year, entitled 
“Mauritius:  the  Drivers  of  Growth  -  Can  the  Past  be  Extended?”  The  experts  considered 
various base line scenarios and said, and I quote: 

“The results of the growth accounting exercise suggest that a target growth of 6 per 
cent is likely too ambitious and that, even to raise growth closer to 5 per cent, strong pro-
active policies are needed, including – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

improving investment and savings rates; 
labour market reforms; 
investment in education and education reform, and 
further reforms to reduce bottlenecks and increase productivity.” 

According to the report, Madam, Speaker -  

“Improving the investment rates would need to be accomplished through – 

(i) 

(ii) 

acceleration  in  the  implementation  of  current  investment  projects  –  that  is 
what I termed Capital Expenditure - and  
further measures to encourage FDI and domestic savings”. 

We  are  told  that  we  need  to  upgrade  and  expand  the  country’s  infrastructure  to 
achieve  growth  of  5%,  Madam  Speaker,  and  today  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  doing 
exactly the opposite! 

We are told that we need to take measures to encourage domestic savings, and yet, not 
a single word in the Budget to encourage domestic savings! In 2014, gross domestic savings 
stood only at 11.7 per cent of GDP, which is well below the 25% rate which is required to 
match the investment necessary to achieve a 5% growth rate! 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  should  have  introduced  fiscal  measures  to  encourage 
savings.  Two  years  ago,  the  then  Government  introduced  new  Private  Pensions  Scheme 
legislations to encourage workers to invest in private pensions. The hon. Minister of Finance 

 

62 

could, for example, have announced that any contribution to these private pension schemes 
could be deductible from taxable income of taxpayers. 

We all know, Madam Speaker, that we have an ageing population. As time goes by, 
there will be unbearable pressure on the working population to sustain the universal pension. 
We have to encourage workers to save not only for the rainy days but also for their retirement 
days. And we are very disappointed that the hon. Minister of Finance has not announced a 
single measure in this Budget to encourage workers to save. 

So,  if  we  are  slashing  the  capital  budget,  the  public  expenditure  on  infrastructure 
projects, if we are not taking any measures to encourage savings, then where will the growth 
come  from?  It  will  be  from  investment  by  the  private  sector  and  from  Foreign  Direct 
Investment. But unlike in the 1980s when growth was fuelled by Foreign direct Investment in 
the  textile  sector  mainly  by  the  people  from  Hong  Kong  investment  in  productive  assets, 
today, the hon. Minister of Finance is banking on Foreign Direct Investment in Real Estate 
project.  Real  estate  projects  are  non-productive  assets  and  this  is  a  big  gamble,  Madam 
Speaker. It is a big gamble, because we know how volatile investment in real estate can be. A 
number of IRS and RES projects licensed by the Board of Investment did not go through in 
the end. 

And if any proof is required as to how ill-advised it is to bank growth, principally on 
real estate projects, one  just has to look at Centrepoint in Trianon, at the towers of Meritt 
Ellipsis a few metres away, now both in receivership! This is the problem with banking on 
real estates. 

And yet, the hon. Minister of Finance is relying on 13 Mega projects spread across the 
country. We are told that 8 of the projects will be designed as ‘Smart Cities”. The concept is 
attractive.  It has been tried elsewhere, in Korea, in Spain. 

Shortly  after  taking  his  office,  Madam  Speaker,  in  India  the  Prime  Minister,  Mr 
Narendra Modi also announced that he will build 100 "Smart Cities" - cities outfitted with 
high-tech communication capabilities - across India. He said, and I quote: 

"Cities in the past were built on riverbanks. They are now built on highways. 
But  in  the  future,  they  will  be  built  based  on  availability  of  optical  fiber 
networks and next-generation infrastructure.” 

Very well said, Madam, Speaker! 

 

63 

The problem, Madam Speaker, is that one year after Mr Modi's announcement, India 
still has not set up any smart city. Not a single penny has been used from the Rs7,060 crores 
allocated in the Union Budget last year to provide the necessary focus on smart cities.  

This just goes to show, Madam Speaker, how difficult it is to set up Smart Cities. But 
let us come back to the 13 megaprojects announced last week. We are told that six of the 
projects are from the private sector. We are told that they are ready to go. But we are talking 
about private sector. If the projects are not profitable they will simply be shelved. If there is 
no demand, the projects will simply be shelved and if the projects actually do go ahead, it 
will be years before they can be completed. 

The two other Smart Cities are Highlands City and Riche Terre Project. I have already 
indicated previously, Madam Speaker, that there is no funding available for Highlands City. 
So,  even  though  it  has  been  announced  as  a  megaproject,  we  do  not  have  the  money  to 
finance it. So, we are left with Riche Terre Project in the vicinity of Port Louis. Riche Terre 
Project!  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  ashamed  of  using  the  word  Tianli  and  JinFei! 
Because that is what it is! That is what it is. 

Riche Terre Project is… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Riche  Terre  Project  is  Tianli,  JinFei!  We  are  told  that  thousands  of  jobs  will  be 

created. 

But, that is exactly… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

… that is exactly what Dr. Sithanen said! That is exactly what Dr. Sithanen told this 

august Assembly when he launched Tianli project and Neotown! 

(Interruptions) 

Where is Neotown? Where is Tianli? 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! And today it is the very same project that this Government is proposing! 

Riche Terre! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

64 

Millions  of  rupees  of  funds  invested,  hi-tech,  latest  state-of-the-art  roads,  24/7 
lighting, for what? For goats to graze? That was Tianli, JinFei! And today that is the project 
you have proposed again! 

(Interruptions) 

So, Madam Speaker, how can we take this Government seriously? How can we bet 

on Riche Terre to create more jobs? 

The  five  remaining  megaprojects  concern  five  technopoles.  They  are  hardly  Smart 
Cities, technopoles! At best we are talking about ITC parks. The hon. Minister for ICT in a 
press conference has announced the creation of 20,000 jobs! 20,000 jobs! What type of jobs? 
Jobs for whom? Do we have 20,000 technicians in this country? Do we have 20,000 software 
and hardware engineers in this country? Do we have 20,000 children and students willing to 
work in call centres late at night? And yet, it was announced the five technopoles will create 
20,000 jobs! 

(Interruptions) 

20,000  jobs!  Of  course,  Madam  Speaker,  there  will  be  short-term  jobs  for  the 
construction  industry.  But,  I  remain  skeptical  about  whether  we  will  be  able  to  solve  our 
unemployment  problems,  especially  the  problem  of  joblessness  among  gradués  chômeurs 
with these 13 megaprojects. Of course, I really hope that I am proven wrong. I really hope 
that  these  megaprojects  will  prove  right  but  I  am  skeptical.  And  there  is  a  track  record  in 
JinFei  and  Tianli  to  support  what  I  am  saying.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  was  more 
cautious than his colleague, he did not advance the figure of 20,000. He did not say 20,000 
jobs. He only stated that he expected the unemployment rate to decline. He did not specify 
any figure.  

Talking about employment, where are the fiscal measures which were promised in the 
Government  Programme  to  be  given  to  the  private  sector  to  actively  participate  in 
Government’s  unemployment  alleviation  mission?  Where  are  the  fiscal  incentives  to  the 
private sector to encourage them to recruit unemployed people on a full-time basis? We just 
voted that Programme a few weeks ago! That was one of the mesure phare – ‘we are going to 
give  fiscal  incentives  to  encourage  private  sector  to  recruit  people.’  And  after  the  Budget, 
nothing! No longer a priority? Pas presser! But there are a lot of people sitting there at home 
jobless! There are a lot of distressed parents looking at their children jobless… 

(Interruptions) 

… and this Government is saying… 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order!  
Mr Uteem: …pas presser! 

65 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  
Mr Uteem: Pas presser! This Government is saying pas presser?  

(Interruptions) 

And, may I ask if this Government is still thinking of creating 15,000 jobs this year 
as promised in the Government Programme? If the Government is relying on growth to create 
these  15,000  jobs,  then  allow  me  to  ask  them  again  how  are  we  going  to  generate  5.3% 
growth this year? We are already in the month of April. How are we going to generate 5.7% 
growth  rate  for  next  year?    With  no  measures  to  increase  national  savings,  with  limited 
resource to encourage private investment and FDI, where will the growth come from? The 
bunkering hub will take the time that it will take. The ocean economy will develop at its own 
pace. But, these are long-term projects which will not solve our unemployment problem at 
least in the short term. 

The duty-free island, a project so dear to the Minister of Technology, Communication 
and Innovation, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, seems to have been abandoned for the time being. So, 
where will the short term growth come from? The SME sector probably, I hope so. Making 
the SME sector the backbone of the economy has been described as the most ambitious goal 
of this Government, and so it should be, Madam Speaker. To this end, the Government is 
setting  up  an  SME  bank  to  provide  seed  capital  to  entrepreneurs  without  any  need  for 
personal  guarantee.  An  amount  of  Rs10  billion  has  been  earmarked,  this  is  a  welcome 
initiative and appeared in our electoral manifesto as well. But, we are yet to see how this new 
SME bank will operate in practice. Will it be another DBM? Will it end up like the Mauritius 
Post and Cooperative Bank? A bank for petits copains? 

(Interruptions) 

A bank for copines? A bank where non-performing loans… 

(Interruptions) 

A bank where non-performing loans are perpetually rescheduled? What will happen 
to the DBM? When I asked the hon. Minister of Finance this question a few weeks ago, he 
was very evasive and he told this House that he will wait for the new board of DBM to be 
constituted and then they will decide what to do. The new board has been constituted and the 
Chairman is the father of hon. Minister Bhadain - a well-respected professional I have to add. 
But, up to now, the DBM Board has not announced what will happen to the bank and this is 

 

66 

creating a lot of confusion in the mind of the employees. Will the new SME bank take over 
DBM? Will it take over the staffing? Will it take over the portfolio of loans?  

To add to the confusion, Madam Speaker, yesterday in a press article it was reported 
that  the  Minister  for  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives,  hon.  Bholah,  responsible  for 
SME, stated that DBM will subsist. What will be the role of DBM if we have an SME bank? 
Will  it  continue  to  finance  development  projects?  What  will  happen  to  its  staff?  Will  the 
Government go back to the decision taken by the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc 
Duval when he was then Minister of Finance to look for a new strategic investor? We know 
the new hon. Minister of Finance said that they are not going ahead with this but will the new 
board consider injection of fresh capital from a new strategic partner? These are things that I 
hope hon. Minister Bholah will have to enlighten us when he intervenes on this matter. 

Coming  back  to  the  SME  bank,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  told  that  it  will  be  loan 
without personal guarantee. Fair enough! But will it ask for other collateral? Will it advance 
funds only to entrepreneurs who have repayment capabilities? Will it advance funds to only 
those projects which it considers to be viable or will it be ready to take the risk and bank on 
the enthusiasm of young entrepreneurs? Will this SME bank believe in the youth of today and 
give  them  their  chance?  Will  there  be  a  credit  limit  per  project?  Will  the  SME  bank  be 
subject  to  the  same  concentration  limit  as  imposed  on  commercial  banks  by  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius? 

Will there  be  a  credit  limit  per  project?    Will the  SME  bank  be  subject  to  the  same 

concentration limits as imposed on commercial banks by the Bank of Mauritius?   

We  are  told  that  SMEDA  will  act  as  one-stop  shop  and  accompany  the  young 
entrepreneurs at all stages. This is music to our ears. But does SMEDA have the manpower 
and expertise to fulfil this mission? 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  be  blunt.  As  a  lawyer,  I  have  assisted  a  number  of  young 
entrepreneurs  to  set  up  their  own  business  and  I  must  confess  that  SMEDA,  in  my 
experience, has been far from helpful. How many times have I seen entrepreneurs leave my 
office with a solid business plan full of hope only to come back a few days later with their 
dream shattered after meeting officers from SMEDA because the latter painted a picture of 
gloom and doom? 

So, the Government should first start by training the staff of SMEDA. Then it should 
recruit mentors. I know of many retired entrepreneurs and civil servants who will gladly put 
the expertise and experience to help young entrepreneurs. We should encourage them. Many 
are even prepared to do so for free on a part-time basis. It is their way to give back to society.  

 

67 

Then SMEDA needs to identify the projects, the sectors, the market segments where 
there is a shortage of supply. They must work closely with Ministries and agencies such as 
the Board of Investment and Enterprise Mauritius to share information, identify opportunities 
and monitor progress and implementation. 

Madam  Speaker,  banking  only  on  the  SME  sector  and  especially  on  young 
entrepreneurs to generate growth is a risky challenge, the more so when we know the rate of 
failure in new business ventures.  This being the case, Madam Speaker, then why has the hon. 
Minister of Finance decided to slash the capital budget which would have catalysed growth?  
Why has he slashed down capital expenditure? I am not sure, Madam Speaker. I have through 
the  past  week  been  trying  to  think  why?  Why  will  a  Government  at  the  beginning  of  its 
mandate  -  a  strong  Government  -  decide  to  sacrifice  popular  investment  in  infrastructure 
projects?  

Madam Speaker, is it the obsession of the hon. Minister of Finance to present a ‘no-tax’ 
budget? Madam Speaker, in my speech on the Government Programme a few weeks ago, I 
had  alluded  to  how  back  in  the    eighties,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  would  prepare  the 
population psychologically to the inevitable taxes only to declare a no tax budget during the 
Budget speech. Zorro is here!  

It  would  appear  that  twenty-five  years  later,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  not 

changed an iota. 

Madam Speaker, a few days before the Budget, on 18 March 2015, after meeting with 

the trade unionists, the hon. Minister of Finance reportedly stated and I quote – 

“L’augmentation  de  la  pension  de  vieillesse,  des  veuves  et  des  orphelins 
coûtera R 4.7 milliards à l’État. Absorber une telle dépense dans le budget 
sera bien difficile. Il est nécessaire, avec une telle dépense, d’augmenter les 
taxes.» 

Again, the same psychology – 

«Il est nécessaire, avec une telle dépense, d’augmenter les taxes » 
And  then  on  Budget  day,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  proudly  stated  “the  first 
Budget  of  this  Government  is  a  no  tax  Budget”.  And  everybody  applauded.  The  magician 
was back, except that this time his trick does not work. He has been uncovered. He has been 
unmasked. Because, Madam Speaker, this is far from being a no tax Budget.  It is a hidden 
tax Budget. A hidden tax Budget! That is the hard truth. Over the next 18 months, the hon. 
Minister of Finance intends to collect Rs2.3 billion in additional tax from petroleum products 
under the guise of Build Mauritius Fund thereby depriving road users of the benefit of the 

 

68 

drastic  fall  in  the  price  of  petroleum  products  on  the  world  market.  Had  he  instead  of 
imposing  this  additional  tax  passed  on  the  benefit  of  the  reduction  in  price  of  petroleum 
products on the world market to consumers there would have probably been a reduction in 
the price of bus fare? There would have been a reduction in the cost of production. There 
would have been a reduction in the production of goods and services. Our products would 
have  been  more  competitive.  It  would  have  been  a  real  boost  to  our  export  sector.  But, 
instead he chose to tax. He chose to fleece the consumers. 

Madam  Speaker,  notwithstanding  what  the  Members  on  the  other  side  are  saying,  I 
maintain  it  is  a  hidden  tax  Budget.  It  is  a  hidden  tax  Budget  because  when  we  looked  at 
revenue  estimates - and  figures don’t lie Madam Speaker  - and when we compare the 12-
month period June 2015/2016 with that of 2014, we will see that hon. Minister of Finance 
intends to collect Rs8 billion more in taxes than was collected in 2014. Rs8 billion more from 
the taxpayers pocket and he dares call it a no tax Budget. That is a magician saying no tax 
and  then  taking  Rs8  billion  from  people’s  pocket.  This  is  what  he  referred  to  as  fiscalité 
légère.  We are taxed and we don’t know it.   

The hon. Minister is expecting to collect Rs2 billion in additional VAT. Yes, Madam 
Speaker,  Rs2  billion  in  additional  VAT.  Revenue  from  VAT  will  be  Rs28  billion  for 
2015/2016 compare to Rs26 billion in 2014. 

Pourtant, Madame la présidente, at paragraph 18 of the Government Programme it was 

clearly stated and I quote – 

“To further alleviate people’s financial burden, Government will eliminate 
VAT on a number of food products.” 
The manifest electoral was even more specific:  

‘Abolition de la TVA sur les produits alimentaires comprenant les jus de 
fruits sans sucre ajouté, les céréales, les produits végétariens ainsi que les 
couches de bébés.’ 

 Promesses non-tenues, Madame la présidente. Where are the reductions in VAT on 

 
foodstuffs? 

Madam Speaker, I spoke of hidden tax because there appears to be a deliberate policy 
of this Government to allow our rupee to depreciate against major currencies. The exchange 
rate today  for one dollar is about Rs37.  By way of comparison in December 2014  around 
election times, according to the Bank of Mauritius website, the exchange rate for one dollar 
was  about  Rs32.  Rs32  in  December;  Rs37  in  April!  In  the  space  of  four  months,  a 

 

69 

depreciation of 16%.  If we did not have a floating rate that is what we would have called 
dévaluation de notre roupie.  16%! 

The  STC  is  no  longer  purchasing  its  foreign  currency  requirement  from  the  Central 
Bank, Madam Speaker, thus creating a shortage in available foreign currency on the market 
which is pushing up the price of foreign currencies even further.  Unlike in the past, the Bank 
of  Mauritius  does  not  seem  to  have  intervened  in  the  market  to  support  and  stabilise  the 
rupee, which leads me to believe that this Government is deliberately allowing the rupee to 
depreciate.   

Being given that most of our imports are paid in dollars, a depreciation of our rupee 
effectively means that our imports in rupee terms will be higher.  Higher cost of import will 
result in higher revenue for the Government in terms of custom duties, excise and VAT. But 
the  weak  rupee,  Madam  Speaker,  means  more  expenditure  for  families  who  have  children 
studying abroad. And  with a weak rupee, the price of the very  basic  commodities that we 
import will go up.   

In an article published only yesterday, one of the biggest importers and distributors of 
foodstuff has already warned that, in the weeks to come, there will be an average increase of 
between 5% to 10% on foodstuff.  Already the prices of pulses have increased dramatically 
and  so  have  prices  of  biscuits  and  staple  food.    I  know  what  I  am  talking  about,  Madam 
Speaker, because only during the weekend I did my groceries. I know that prices are already 
up. 

One of the greatest disappointment of this Budget, Madam Speaker, is that it fails to 
adequately tackle the issue of increase in the costs of living. The hon. Minister of Finance 
expects inflation to remain “subdued”, this is the word he used. This may be true at the macro 
level when we know the weight of petroleum products in the basket of commodities used to 
determine  inflation  rate.    Even  then,  it  is  a  risky  bet  because  how  long  will  the  price  of 
petroleum products remain stable. Experts are already projecting an increase in the price of 
petroleum products due to the instability in the Middle East. That is inflation at the national 
level.  But when it comes to the household basket, it is a different ball game. The weakening 
of the rupee will inevitably impact on the disposable income of household and yet this budget 
fails to tackle the issue of erosion of purchasing power. 

In its electoral manifesto, it has promised to abolish VAT on foodstuffs and it has not 
done so. It has promised to introduce a minimum wage policy, another broken promise. The 
only  measure  which  seems  to  have  been  announced  in  the  Budget  which  may  impact  on 
purchasing power is the reduction of the maximum interest rate on hire purchase from 19% to 

 

70 

12%  and  penalty  rate  from  5%    to  2%.  Of  course,  Madam  Speaker,  we  welcome  this 
initiative, but it is not sufficient.  

First  of  all,  this  measure  is  unlikely  to  apply  to  existing  goods  that  have  been 
purchased  on  hire  purchase.  I  have  not  heard  the  hon.  Minister  speaking  of  retrospective 
application  of  this  measure.  From  a  legal  standpoint,  I  doubt  if  he  can  make  this  measure 
retrospective anyway. So, this measure is unlikely to apply to existing goods that have been 
purchased on hire purchase. Then, this measure is unlikely to have the full desired effect if 
the  merchants  do  not  play  the  game.  With  a  reduced  profit  margin,  the  merchants  and 
financiers  may  be  more  selective  in  granting  credit  facilities  and  granting  them  only  to 
consumers  who  have  repayment  capabilities.  Proper  legislation  therefore,  Madam  Speaker, 
should  be  introduced  to  ensure  that  hidden  costs  are  not  passed  on  to  the  consumers  by 
unscrupulous profitminded merchants and financiers.  

This measure, however welcome, Madam Speaker, may not be sufficient to solve the 
problem  of  surendettement  du  consommateur.  The  Government  will  also  have  to  review 
existing legislation relating to the Protection of Borrowers. The threshold for eligility of the 
loans should be reviewed upwards. More powers should be given to the Commissioner for 
the protection of borrowers to better protect borrowers from abuse by lenders and to deal with 
hardship cases. 

the  decision 

to  establish  the  office  of 

Madam  Speaker,  we  welcome 

the 
Ombudsperson for Financial Services. This was the subject of a PQ that I asked earlier this 
month. We also hope that the Bank of Mauritius will use its powers vested under section 6 of 
the Bank of Mauritius Act to impose limitation on the quantum of fees and charges imposed 
by financial institutions. The law was amended as far back as in 2012 and the task force has 
already published its recommendations since June 2014. So, we are more than 9 months later 
and I hope these measures will be implemented soon because the hon. Minister of Finance 
did make a sortie en règle against banks and financial institutions.  

The hon. Minister of Finance also announced that a special committee has been set up 
to examine the report of the Commission of Enquiry on sales by levy. Again that was the 
subject of a Parliamentary Question which I addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister earlier 
this month and I was shocked to learn that the Commision had, in fact, submitted its report as 
far back as August 2014, but it is only after I asked the question that it was discovered that 
the report was missing from the Prime Minister’s Office and a new copy was then asked from 
the President. 

 

71 

Now,  I  understand  that  a  special  committee  has  been  set  up.  I  am  really  looking 
forward to the recommendation of that special committee and I hope that they are diligent 
because every week dozens of households are still losing their homes at the bar.  

In the Government Programme, it was announced that to protect financially distressed 
people, legislation will be enhanced to prohibit, for a period of two years, the sale by levy of 
the only house of a worker who has been made redundant on economic grounds. I hope that 
this  would  be  one  of  the  measures  which  the  Committee  will  recommend.  I  think  that  we 
should go further and recommend that matrimonial home should be insaisissable except in 
cases where the house is given as a security for a housing loan because it is not fair for a 
person to save all his life, build a home, then take a loan and if the business goes bust, he 
loses his matrimonial home.  

The hon. Minister of Finance did not say anything about the Sale by Levy Solidarity 
Fund  which  was  supposed  to  help  victims  of  sale  by  levy.  Will  this  fund  be  revived?  He 
spoke about sharing.  Maybe this is one of the cases where those who benefit from the lacuna 
of the present system could be made to contribute a percentage of the acquisition price that 
they pay when they acquire a property through sale by levy at the bar and this money can be 
put in a special fund to then compensate the victims of the system.  

As we are on the topic of housing, we, of course, welcome the decision to increase the 
grant for casting of roof slabs and the eligibility criteria for household to benefit from the 
scheme. However, Madam Speaker, when  we take into account the increase in the cost of 
construction  materials  and  labour  cost,  this  Rs10,000  increase  is  in  real  terms  quite 
negligible.  But we are very disappointed, Madam Speaker, that only 1000 low-cost housing 
will  be  constructed  and  only  700  housing  units  will  be  constructed  under  the  National 
Empowerment Foundation and this over two years.  

(Interruptions)  

This is what is announced in the Budget. 
You will have the time to contradict the hon. Minister of Finance … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt the hon. Member! You will have the opportunity to 

… 

Mr Uteem:  You will have the opportunity to contracdict. This is one of the direct 

consequences of the slashing of the capital budget by the hon. Minister of Finance.  

Madam  Speaker,  answering  a  Parliamentary  Question  from  hon.  Ganoo  earlier  this 
month, the hon. Minister of Housing and Lands stated that there are 39,573 households who 

 

72 

have registered themselves at NHDC for a housing unit. If we build only 1000 to 1500 houses 
every year, how will Government live up to its promise of constructing 10,000 social housing 
units as announced in the Government Programme?  

The Government could have come with a scheme as it exists in other countries where 
the  more  vulnerable  members  of  societies,  those  at  the  lower  end  of  the  ladder,  are  given 
rental  vouchers  to  cover  the  whole  or  part  of  their  rent.  There  is  much  more  that  the 
Government  could  have  and  should  have  done  to  alleviate  the  housing  problems  of  poor 
people, squatters, refugees and those who live in precarious habitat, very often in subhuman 
conditions with no amenities and in appalling hygienic conditions.  

We are also disappointed that no measures have been announced, Madam Speaker, to 
cater  for  the  construction  of  houses  for  this  5000  or  so  households  with  monthly  income 
exceeding  Rs15,000  which  has  been  registered  with  the  NHDC.  The  Government  has 
announced the creation of smart cities, but the ordinary Mauritians will not be able to afford 
the  housing  units  in  those  smart  cities.  The  Government  could  have  set  up  a  scheme  to 
encourage  private  builders  to  cater  for  this  market  segment  for  those  who  earn  more  than 
15000.  I  am  talking  about  those  thousands  of  young  couples  who  cannot  afford  a  decent 
house or an appartment. 

The  Government  could  have  introduced  measures  to  boost  the  rental  market.  The 
Government could have given fiscal incentives to private builders to construct housing units 
which are decent and affordable.  

Madam Speaker, the Government has announed a Marshall Plan against poverty. The 
Marshall Plan was named after the US Secretary of State George Marshall, and this was an 
American  initiative  to  provide  economic  support  to  European  countries  after  the  Second 
World  War.  Marshall  Plan  inevitably  involved  injection  of  funds.    But  as  I  have 
demonstrated, the Government is actually slashing its Capital Budget.  The Government is 
not spending more than it is already spending to alleviate poverty.  So, how can we talk about 
a Marshall Plan? 

The Marshall Plan which the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is 
proposing is nothing more, Madam Speaker, than an appeal to the private sector to shoulder 
their corporate responsibility.  The hon. Minister is appealing to their generosity to alleviate 
poverty,  and it is only after the Budget, we are told, that he will start meeting with major 
companies to participate in this national initiative. 

This is not serious, Madam Speaker. We are privatising alleviation of poverty.  C’est 
ni  plus  ni  moins  qu’une  démission  du  gouvernement  face  à  ses  responsabilités.    Indeed, 

 

73 

instead of increasing the budget for alleviation of poverty, the Government is simply passing 
the  bucket  onto  the  private  sector.    And  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has identified 38 poches de pauvreté.  What a joke!  38 poches de pauvreté! 

In 2011, the National Empowerment Foundation identified 229 poches de pauvreté.  
Now, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will have us believe that, out 
of the 229 poches de pauvreté, there are only 38 poches de pauvreté left!  Now, by a magic 
wand, this number has  been reduced to 38!  Real magician!   When questioned about this, 
hon. Roopun who is the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment simply 
stated, and I quote - 

 « Je ne sais quels paramètres ont été utilisés pour identifier cette liste. » 
Le ministre de tutelle ne sait même pas comment l’honorable ministre des Finances 
est arrivé au chiffre de 38. C’est ça le sérieux de ce gouvernement ! C’est ça leur façon de 
combattre la pauvreté! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the next component of this so-called Marshall Plan will 
be  to  remove  all  restrictions  on  how  a  company  would  spend  its  2%  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility Fund.  I will readily concede, Madam Speaker, that the existing guidelines for 
the CSR system are too restrictive and approval system too cumbersome with the inevitable 
result that several laudable projects by NGOs never received the necessary funding. 

But  should  we  because  of  its  current  shortcomings  do  away  completely  with  the 
guidelines?    Is  not  this  going  to  open  doors  to  all  kinds  of  abuses?   What  would  prevent, 
Madam Speaker, a company henceforth to spend its 2% CSR on private projects to benefit a 
privileged few?  What will prevent them to spend all the funds on projects which have no 
significant public benefit?  This will no doubt, Madam Speaker, be a severe blow to NGOs 
who  rely  on  CSR  fund  for  their  day-to-day  activities,  and  there  is  no  transition  period.  
Project beneficial to society may have to be abandoned overnight for lack of funding.  It is 
not for want of trying.  We all know that if companies are not compelled to spend on social 
projects, many will not do so.  Therefore, I will humbly ask the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  to  freeze  this  decision  until  he  has  received  all  the  necessary 
assurance  that  there  will  be  no  abuse,  and  that  the  CSR  fund  will  indeed  be  used  for 
charitable purposes. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  come  to  the  “nation  zougadère”.  We  fully  support  the 
measures  taken  by  the  Government  to  discourage  gaming  and  betting.    Increasing  gaming 

 

74 

licence fees and taxes, banning gambling advertisement, banning scratch cards, freezing all 
new gaming and betting licences, relocating gaming houses are all very good initiatives.  But 
will these measures have the desired effect?  I am not convinced. 

When  we  look  at  estimates,  Madam  Speaker,  the  revenue  from  taxes  on  national 
lottery,  betting  taxes,  gaming  taxes  will  actually  increase;  not  reduce.    It  would  actually 
increase.  This  in  itself  is  an  aveu  that  the  measures  announced  will  not  deter  people  from 
gambling,  from  betting.    I  heard  someone  the  other  day  on  radio,  Madam  Speaker, 
congratulating the hon. Minister of Finance for foregoing, for sacrificing betting revenues on 
moral grounds.  This is certainly not true.  Despite the measures announced, there would be 
little or no impact on the“nation zougadère”. 

Let us face the truth, Madam Speaker. The gambling industry is a flourishing industry 
where  billions  of  rupees  are  involved.      We  all  know  the  proximity  which  certain  major 
players in the gaming industry have with certain politicians.  It will be no surprise if those 
major players actually financed the electoral campaigns of various MPs.  So, we should not 
underestimate the lobbies at work. 

Let’s  take  Lottotech.    In  February,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  called  a  press 
conference  to  discuss  the  issue  of  Lottotech.    Then,  not  a  word  on  Lottotech  in  the 
conference.  When queried by journalists, the hon. Minister of Finance is reported to have 
answered, and I quote - 

« Trop boner pou koz sa. Nous ankor en diskisyon.” 
Discussions  with  whom?    Discussions  about  what?    We  have  in  this  House  people 
who  have  horses!    We  have  people  who  don’t  hesitate  to  show  themselves  in  public  with 
major players!  Is this the image we want to give to the public that we are combating “nation 
zougadère”?      No  specific  measures  in  the  Budget  on  lotto.    Short  of  banning  lotto,  the 
Government could, at least, have reduced the number of drawing lots, le nombre de tirages.  
Instead of having a weekly draw, we could have a fortnightly draw.  That, at least, would 
have reduced the gambling habits slowly.  This is why, Madam Speaker, when we look at the 
measures announced by this Government, we feel that it is not far-reaching enough and will 
not have any real impact on the “nation zougadère”. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  disappointed  with  this Budget  because  it  does  not  provide 
clear policy statement for several Ministries.   In my short career as parliamentarian, never 
have  I  seen  any  Budget  where  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  merely  state  the  budgetary 
allocation without elaborating on what the funds will be used for. 

 

75 

There seems to have been a lack of concertation among the various Ministries during 
the preparation of the Budget.  For example, we are told that Rs442 m. will be provided to 
support  the  manufacturing  sector,  but  we  are  not  told  how  it  will  be  supported,  what  will 
happen to the manufacturing sector, what is the vision, what is the new product, what is the 
new market.  Nothing! We are just told that Rs442 m. are being provided.  Similarly, we are 
told that the Budget for MTPA will be increased to Rs560 m.   But, again, we are not told 
what these additional funds will be used for. 

No  wonder,  Madam  Speaker,  that  there  have  been  so  many  press  conferences  by 
various  Ministers  before  and  after  the  Budget  explaining  the  policies  of  their  Ministries.  
Sometimes, in these press conferences, Ministers even contradict what is said in the Budget.  
We  have  just  heard  hon.  Soodhun  from  a  sitting  position  saying  that  more  houses  will  be 
constructed  that’s  what  has  been  announced  in  the  Budget.    We  have  heard  hon.  Roopun 
challenged the figures of pockets of poverty.  We have heard how hon. Bholah seemed to 
contradict  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  as  to  the  future  of  DBM.    Hon.  Mrs  Dookun-
Luchoomun went even further and refused to comment on the nine-year schooling which was 
announced by her colleague in the Budget Speech.  

Hon. Sinatambou who is not here, is busy chasing millionaires.  According to his own 
interviews that is what he is doing, looking after millionaires.  But, maybe, the time has come 
for him to come forward with a coherent and holistic Africa policy. Maybe, it is time for him 
to explain how Mauritius would be positioning itself on the international scene, what role will 
Mauritius play regionally.  Maybe, he should  start by ensuring that career diplomats serve 
our country as Head of mission instead of jobs for the boys and the girls.   

We  are  told  that  a  Financial  Services  Promotion  Agency  will  be  reactivated  and, 
according to Estimates, a budget of Rs75 m. will be allocated to the promotion of financial 
services. This is a welcome initiative, Madam Speaker. For one,  I have inside and outside 
Parliament, been always a strong supporter that we needed a special agency to look after the 
promotion of financial services. But again, it would seem that this item has been added in the 
last  minute  of  the  budget,  at  the  eleventh  hour.  Otherwise,  how  can  we  explain  that  the 
amount  for  promotion  is  allocated  directly  to  the  Ministry?  Shouldn’t  we  have  a  separate 
corporate body to undertake promotional services just like we have MTPA for tourism; just 
like  we  have  Enterprise  Mauritius;  just  like  we have  Board  of  Investment?   Is  that  proper 
governance that the hon. Minister will now be concerned with promoting a sector where he 
will be called upon to also regulate that sector?  Is that good governance? 

 

76 

Madam Speaker, before resuming my seat I would like to comment on what has been 
termed  the  fourth  main  objective  of  the  Budget  which  is  to  ensure  transparency, 
accountability  and  good  governance.  This  has  been  a  recurrent  theme,  Madam  Speaker;  a 
whole chapter in the Government Programme was devoted to good governance. We have a 
Minister  dedicated  to  good  governance,  but  when  week  after  week  we  look  at  the 
nominations approved by Cabinet, can we really talk about transparency? Can we really talk 
about meritocracy? Is that good governance? I am not saying that the people who have been 
appointed are not qualified to occupy the posts.  They may well be, but so are the hundreds of 
professionals  out  there.    Why  should  a  Mauritian  be  favoured  over  another  Mauritian  just 
because  of  his  political  affiliation?    We  need  the  competence  of  all  Mauritians,  Madam 
Speaker.  We cannot afford to discriminate.   

Madam Speaker, several hon. Members sitting on the other side were with us in the 
Opposition  only  a  few  months  ago.    Week  after  week  we  denounced  and  objected  to  all 
practice of nepotism, cronyism, and favouritism. 

(Interruptions) 

Week after week, our good friend… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 
Mr Uteem:  Week after week, our good friend hon. Mahen Jhugroo would question the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  ‘Madame  là’,  on  the  partner  of  ‘Madame  là’  who  has  since 
shamelessly shifted allegiance. 

Week after week! And I don’t see anyone laughing anymore! Shamelessly shifted 

(Interruptions) 

allegiance! 

Madame so partner Gooljaury! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 Gooljaury!  I am talking about Gooljaury! 

Madam Speaker:  Please, don’t talk among yourselves! 
Mr Uteem:  We talked about SICOM Tower.  How many questions we asked about 

SICOM Tower? How many questions we asked about Airway Coffee?   

Where is Mr Gooljaury today? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Gooljaury is the star witness! 

77 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  

(Interruptions) 
Mr Uteem:  The star witness being in the VIP circle! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please!  Order! 
Mr Uteem: Week after week, hon. Mahen Jhugroo - you would recall - would question 
hon.  Dr.  Bunwaree  on  MITD  and  on  the  famous  ‘masseuse’,  and  now  you  are  in 
Government, look at the list of appointment approved by Cabinet since the election. 

There is no ‘masseur’…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 
Mr Uteem:  But  you have women who have shared chambers with Members of this 

Cabinet.  

(Interruptions) 

Take a close look at that list!  Take a close look at the list and ask yourself how 
different are you from the previous Government?  Nepotism, cronyism, favouritism! Is this 
the inevitable fate of this nation?  This is the real plague affecting our nation and it serves no 
purpose  talking  about  good  governance,  talking  about  meritocracy,  until  and  unless,  by 
action,  this  Government  stops  this  objectionable  practice  of  favouritism,  cronyism  and 
installs meritocracy.   

Madam  Speaker,  when  I  listened  to  the  Budget  Speech  it  reminded  me  of  these 
Bollywood movies that are released during Diwali and end of the year.  Before the movie is 
released, there are teasers.  You have actors and actresses come and tell you how great the 
movie will be.  You have songs which are released and then there is all a hype and people go 
and watch the movie.  Of course, there are a few good songs here and there, but when they 
come out, what is the reaction? All of this for this film! Fans will always see the good thing 
in a movie, however bad the actors perform and it is the same thing with this Budget. 

You will always have people… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

78 

Mr Uteem:  You will always have people to praise this Budget. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 
Mr Uteem:  You will always have people to praise this Budget.  But, Madam Speaker, 
this  Budget  will  be  no  blockbuster  and  I  say  it  with  a  lot  of  regret:  “Quelle  occasion 
manquée!” 

Merci. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the session for tea for half an hour. 
  At 4.26 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.02 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  commend  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development for his Budget. 

This is a Budget that the people of Mauritius trust and have confidence in, because it 
is  from  a  Government  which  is  on  their  side.  Everybody  is  aware  of  the  sincerity,  the 
seriousness and pragmatism which have guided the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development and his team in the preparation of this Budget. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in a healthy democracy like ours, the Opposition need not 
agree  with  everything  this  Government  does,  but  they  should  be  able  to  understand  its 
purpose and to appreciate why it will be for the long-term benefit of our country. The budget 
presented by the hon. Minister marks the beginning of a new era. This Budget sets the scene 
for the future, the basis for social justice and an all-inclusive society where the confidence 
level of young Mauritians is being rebuilt after years of doom and gloom. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, after listening to my good friend, hon. Reza Uteem, the first 
Member for Constituency No. 2, venting his spleen on the budget, I can only conclude that 
hon. Uteem has been expressing his master’s voice. Now, it is unfortunate that his master is 
not around, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I have just heard that there are three councillors of the 
MMM who have just resigned, probably he is attending to that. Hon. Uteem stated that this 
Budget is not bold enough. ‘Une occasion ratée’, he says. Disappointed he is. Il est déçu. 
Heureusement qu’il n’est pas ému comme son Leader. 

Now, that is absolutely true, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir!  

(Interruptions) 

 

79 

In fact, the only budget that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has ever praised was in 
2006 when he said publicly that he agrees totally on the fundamentals of the Sithanen Budget, 
a highly capitalist and ultra-liberal budget that brought absolute poverty to this country. Now, 
had  this  demonic  second  republic  gone  ahead,  had  they  won  the  general  elections,  then  it 
would have been Dr. Sithanen who would have been sitting here and my friend, hon. Uteem 
would have been applauding! 

The  third  Member  for  Constituency  Stanley  and  Rose  Hill,  hon.  Bérenger  has  also 
given all sorts of epithets to this budget, namely: ‘décevant’, ‘bad joke’, ‘bluff’, ‘mal foutu’, 
‘décousu’,  ‘massacre’.  Apparently,  this  is  the  worst  budget  he  has  seen  since  1976,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

Absolutely! He is an éternel insatisfait, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir and this is no way 
to describe a work of art. The stock market’s reaction to this budget was, in fact, the litmus 
test. On Wednesday 25 March 2015, the day following the presentation of the Budget, ‘Le 
Défi Media Group’ reported inter alia, and I quote – 

« Effets post-budget : La Bourse en ébullition. 

L’allocution du ministre des finances, Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, aura eu le 

 
mérite de faire revenir les investisseurs en force sur le marché. » 

This  is  the  acid  test.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  banks,  hotels  and  construction 
companies, all benefited from increased share prices and in one case it went up to as much as 
5%. It was further reported, and I quote – 

 

« Les  investisseurs  étaient  en  mode  d’attente  jusqu’à  fin  de  la  semaine 
dernière.  Le  signal  fort  du  gouvernement,  visant  à  doper  la  croissance,  les  ont 
ramenés. » 

Not  bad  at  all,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  for  allegedly  the  worse  budget  since  1976! 
Similarly, four days later another economist expressed his views and I quote from ‘L’Hebdo’ 
of 29 March 2015 – 

 

“C’est  un  Budget  qui  répond  aux  promesses  électorales  des  premiers  100 
jours  et  qui  promet  une  relance  économique.  Globalement,  c’est  un  Budget 
catalyseur. 

 

80 

 

C’est un Budget qui tente de tout rassembler sous un même chapiteau afin de 
s’acheminer vers une croissance de 5,7 %.(…) Et au bout, ce Budget fait miroiter le 
deuxième miracle économique. » 

 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, even a member of the bureau politique of the MMM 
had positive comments to make and I quote from ‘L’Express’ of 29 March 2015, Mr Steve 
Obeegadoo – 

“Je me contente de relever l’inspiration militante de certaines propositions. 
La  place  de  choix  accordée  aux  PME,  l’interdiction  des  sacs  en  plastique,  le  plan 
Marshall  contre  la  pauvreté,  l’offensive  contre  les  jeux  de  hasard,  la  transparence 
dans l’octroi des terres de l’État. Ces propositions sont aussi celles du MMM, je suis 
ravi de les voir dans le Budget. » 

How many MMM do we have today? One sitting on that side, one sitting over here, 

some of them walking away from the Municipal Council of Port Louis! So many MMM! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, silence! 

Mr Bhadain: If we had to define ‘mal foutu’… 

(Interruptions) 

This member of the MMM ‘politburo’ even added, and I quote – 

« Le MSM a été notre allié de 2012 à 2014, nous avions défini des positions 
communes,  c’est  logique  qu’elles  ressurgissent.  Il  y  a  aussi  quelques  nouvelles 
mesures très intéressantes, comme le soutien à l’agriculture bio. » 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the MMM no longer speaks in one voice and yet, they want 
this  House,  they  want  the  population  at  large  to  believe  them,  to  trust  them  and  to  have 
confidence  in  them!  At  least  they  were  united  this  morning  when  they  all  walked  out 
together! 

And with the Labour Party, I must add! 

(Interruptions) 

 

81 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please silence! Please remain silent! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  regretful  state  of  affairs  is  further 
exacerbated by what this Member of the bureau politique of the MMM says next and I quote 
–  

 
«C’est une question de vie ou de mort pour le MMM. Si l’on ne prend pas 
le  taureau  par  les  cornes,  l’hémorragie  des  départs  va  continuer.  La  direction 
doit réaliser que la défaite de 2014 n’est pas un accident de parcours. Ce n’est 
pas une… » 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, sorry to interrupt you. Can you please confine 

your observation to the Budget speech! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a Budget is all about confidence it brings and 
about leadership and before getting into the specific measures of the current Budget, I will 
have  to  address  these  two  issues  because  it  is  this  Budget  which  is  going  to  bring 
overwhelming confidence back into our nation and it is this Budget which is going to show 
that we are led by a living legend and the other side is led by a living deception! 

It goes on to say – 

(Interruptions) 

« La direction doit réaliser que la défaite de 2014 n’est pas un accident 
de  parcours,  ce  n’est  pas  juste  la  faute  du  Parti  travailliste.  Le  mal  est  plus 
profond et exige une remise à plat totale. Le MMM a un fonctionnement vieillot, 
ses  structures  sont  sclérosées,  ses  pratiques  désuètes  et  ses  méthodes 
décrédibilisées. Avec ça, nous allons dans le mur.” 

To  add  insult  to  injury,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  spokesperson  of  the  MMM 

further stated and I quote –  

« Le 

 MMM  et  son  leader  ont  une  image  de  gens  arrogants, 

imperméables à la critique, sourds aux attentes de l’électorat.» 

And  these  are  the  people  who  are  coming  and  lecturing  us  about  whether  this 
Budget is good or not good for our country! There we have it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Is 
there any need to say more? I  ask the question:  where is the bad joke? Who is the joker? 
Where is the bluff? Who is the bluffer and who is being massacred and by whom? 

 

82 

Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this situation reminds me of a scene in Act 1, Scene 4 
of  Le  Cid  of  Corneille  which  describes  a  predicament  similar  to  that  of  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition and the MMM today. The monologue of Don Diègue starting with –  

“Ô rage! ô désespoir! ô vieillesse ennemie!  
N'ai-je donc tant vécu que pour cette infamie?  
Et ne suis-je blanchi dans les travaux guerriers.  
Que pour voir en un jour flétrir tant de lauriers? 
Ô cruel souvenir de ma gloire passée!”  

(Interruptions) 

Now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is the price to pay… 

(Interruptions) 

 
… for double standards! This is the price to pay for hypocrisy! This is the price to pay 
for betrayal! Not only for having put a piece of birthday cake in the mouth of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth  but  for  days  later  breaking  the  Remake  2000.  This  also  reminds  us,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, of Shakespeare, Macbeth, Act V Scene 1 and I quote –  

“All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten thy little hand.” 

And  I  may  add,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  with  regard  to  that  deceitful  hand 

which fed that piece of birthday cake, all the perfumes of Dufry worldwide… 

will not sweeten… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

that treacherous hand. “Fair was foul, foul is fair!”  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that piece of cake was the bad joke! That was the bluff and 
the bluffer is now being massacred and butchered by his own kind. Some may call this poetic 
justice I call this divine justice. Happy birthday Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today with this first Budget of  l’Alliance Lepep Government 
we stand at a defining moment of our history. Once more we are confronted with the task of 
cleaning the Augean stable and restoring good governance and the rule of law at all levels 
within  our  society.  This  is  reminiscent  of  a  situation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1982  general 
election. Many will remember that the country was in ruins, dilapidated by years of Labour 
Government. The rupee had been devalued. Hon. Uteem is talking about depreciation of the 
rupee today… 

 

by 50%, absolutely!  

83 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And the country barely had reserves to afford the import of basic commodities, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Many  had  simply  lost  hope  and  were  legitimately  skeptical  of  any 
possibility of turning the tide. How many times have we heard that word today ‘skeptical’ 
again, after so many  years, quarter of a  century?  In the face of such adversity rose a man 
determined  to  rise  to  the  challenge  and  to  show  to  these  cowards  and  traitors  his  inherent 
capability to lead a nation and address the concerns of his fellow citizens!  

It will be remembered, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that Sir Anerood Jugnauth put this 
country back on the rails of economic progress, saw to it that employment opportunities were 
created  at  the  doors  of  those  looking  for  jobs  and  reversed  the  trend  of  labour  surplus 
economy  to  one  of  labour  shortage  economy  where  workers  were  imported  from  India, 
China, Bangladesh, Philippines, Madagascar and so on. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  current  Minister  of  Finance  stood  by  him  as  he  was 
convinced that he was the man of the moment. The scenario has not changed and we still 
have those familiar faces around. Even the speeches are the same. We have heard hon. Uteem 
today and his master’s voice! So are the challenges, save that they have scaled up in nature 
and  dimension.  Some  from  the  other  side  of  the  House  think  that  we  are  not  capable  of 
meeting this challenge once more. Well, I tell them think again! From 1983 onwards it was 
under  the  able  leadership  of  the  present  Prime  Minister  that  the  country  underwent  an 
unprecedented economic transformation thus setting the base for economic prosperity.  

This country was freed from the yoke of the dicta of the IMF, of the World Bank. It 
will be recalled that these international funding agencies had simply predicted that Mauritius 
would fail. Mauritius was written off from the charts and was in the league of failed nations! 
At each and every  Budget presented by the current  Minister of Finance, the  Leader of the 
Opposition, in his usual style, fidèle à lui-même, would criticise the measures proposed and 
use a vexatious language to freely distribute certificates of incompetence to Members of the 
Government. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what I have said is history and now history is repeating itself. 
Even after a quarter of a century the mindset is still unchanged and so remains the survivors 
who  cling  to  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  It  is  really  dramatic  however  that,  at  the  time 
when our economy is at the crossroads, our own nationals and no less than the Leader of the 

 

84 

Opposition and hon. Uteem are again attempting to instil doubts and negativity to dampen the 
spirit of our fellow citizens.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, those in the Opposition tend to forget that this country was 
being run for the last 10 years by cronies of the Labour Party and they wanted to go to bed 
with them and had as associates a number of scoundrels nearly une association de malfaiteurs 
who have bled this country up to the last drop and it is only now that we are finding out the 
extent of everything. Every single day, every single file  you look at, you see the extent of 
that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in our move to restore public order and good governance we 
faced  numeral  obstacles  and  threats  but  with  public  support  we  have  been  able  to  prevail. 
Today the result of the scoreboard is undisputed. It is in favour of this Government. Betamax! 
Neotown! JinFei! Mauritius Duty Free Paradise! The State land saga! All speak volumes in 
terms  of  our  achievements  for  the  first  100  days  of  our  mandate  to  instil  ethics,  good 
governance and transparency at the highest level of public administration.  

Never  before,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  has  the  tone  at  the  top  been  so  clear  to 
promote  good  governance  and  to  do  away  with  immoral  decision  making  as  was  the  case 
under the Labour regime. The very same regime which the then and now hon. Leader of the 
Opposition  has  been  vehemently  defending  during  the  last  electoral  campaign  and  is  still 
defending.   

Now,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  heard  my  friend,  hon.  Uteem,  referred  to  the 
nominations in the public sector.  L’Université de la vie! Can this be compared with what was 
happening  under  those  ten  years  of  the  Labour  Government?    People  who  have  no 
qualifications, no experience whatsoever were put at the Head of the CEB. L’Université de la 
vie  is  now  closed,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  and  even  the  lecturers  have  been  kicked  out.  
Now, when we look at the way that this Government has been operating, there are a number 
of  decisions  which  have  already  been  taken.    At  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  Cabinet  has 
decided that there is going to be a performance evaluation of all the Boards, parastatal bodies 
and State-owned enterprises.  We have said that we are going to conduct reviews in terms of 
the performance of the Chairperson, the Chief Executives of organisations; we are going to 
set  Key  Performance  Indicators  (KPIs),  we  are  going  to  conduct  self-assessment,  get  self-
assessment questionnaires prepared and we are going to appraise themselves which is known 
as 360 feedback.  All of that is a process to bring transparency and good governance.   

Now, a Minister who has a vision and wants to go and implement that vision, he has so 
many  institutions  which  are  basically  under  his  portfolio.    If  he  has  got  to  appoint  a 

 

85 

Chairperson,  who  is  he  going  to  appoint?  Somebody  who  is  going  to  fulfill  that  vision  or 
somebody  who  is  not  going  to  even  understand  what  he  wants  to  do!    When  he  puts 
somebody there, he takes the responsibility for it.  Tomorrow, he is going to be judged on the 
performance of that institution and that Chairperson who is leading that Board.  Similarly, we 
said in the case of Chief Executives, where possible we are going to advertise.  This has been 
done.  I, myself, I have advertised for the post of Advisors in my Ministry and even for the 
Attaché de Presse, I have advertised where I can.  They talked about the Director of FIU. 
Only  to  tell  you  one  thing,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  last  week,  there  was  an  ESAAMLG 
Conference in Arusha, Tanzania. The Director of FIU represented Mauritius with some of the 
officials from the Ministry. When he went there, they wrote a letter to him only yesterday to 
tell him that they have been so impressed with his technical expertise on (AML/CFT) Anti-
Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism and that they have appointed 
him on the panel of experts of the European Union to represent Mauritius and Africa over 
there.  Now, this is the same person, when  I  read the papers today, the  hon.  Leader of the 
Opposition  is  saying:  un  bébé  de  30  ans  a  été  nommé  a  la  FIU.  Now,  which  is  which?  I 
believe the European Union and I do not believe un éternel insatisfait.  I believe in youth. I 
believe that these people have got professional capabilities to lead those institutions and do 
the best they can for their country. 

Other nominations have been mentioned. My question is: so what? Chairpersons! We 
know  what  Chairpersons  do.  They  chair  the  Board.  When  they  chair  the  Board,  there  are 
policies  which  are  going  to  be  implemented;  it  is  going  to  be  implemented  by  the  Chief 
Executive. We know that this Government has relooked at the whole structure and decided 
that Chairpersons are not going to avail themselves or vote these millions of fees they were 
being paid. Only in SICOM, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Rs28 m. has been paid as Board fees in 
one year to Executive Directors and Rs8 m. to non-Executive Directors, that is, Rs36 m. in 
one  year.    The  question  was  put  this  morning  to  the  hon.  Attorney-General.  He  said  that 
SICOM falls under my Ministry, now I am going to say it.  There are people from the DPP’s 
office who were sitting on the Board of SICOM Financial Services Ltd and they are talking 
about independence.  Is that good governance? 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Ministers  of  Finance  are  judged  on  the  performance  of  the 
economy during their tenure. We should all accept that the current Minister of Finance has 
displayed  great  belief  in  a  much  improved  performance  of  our  economy  in  anticipating  a 
substantial increase in economic growth from 3.5% to 5.7%. Overwhelming confidence, as I 

 

86 

said, is now returning. And I can say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that he deserves a great deal of 
credit for paving the way to the second economic miracle of this country. 

Let  us  remind  ourselves  that  Governments  do  not  create  wealth.  They  provide  the 
necessary conditions and environment to pave the way for wealth creation. This is what hon. 
Uteem has not understood. This is exactly what this Budget is aimed at achieving, paving the 
way  for  wealth  creation.  A  lot  has  been  said  about  the  private  sector,  smart  cities,  smart 
partnership with the private sector to create wealth and this is what Government does. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Budget is again urging and appealing to the private sector 
to play its role, to make Mauritius a better place for the good of one and all. The smart cities, 
the  creation  of  technology  parks  and  the  adoption  of  selected  villages  is  a  step  in  this 
direction. Contrary to what hon. Uteem has been saying - because I also have an iPad now 
and I did some research on the Internet - I can say that in India, the major corporate houses 
have already shown the way. This concept establishes a smart partnership with the private 
sector for the establishment of small cities and techno poles. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government is not abandoning or abdicating its role. No, not 
at all!  Rather it is opening avenues for smart collaboration between the Government and the 
private  sector  becoming  partners  for  progress  as  it  has  been  in  the  past.  Employment 
opportunities will abound both to local residents and neighbouring areas.  

Just like the factory buildings which were put up in the 1980s and 1990s, in the North, 
South,  East  and  West  parts  of  Mauritius  which  created  thousands  of  jobs,  this  smart 
partnership will reinforce the economic drive for better jobs and opportunities. It will bring 
productive jobs for our young generation entrepreneurs and raise their hope that this country 
is on the move and we are going forward and not backwards. More importantly, there will be 
jobs at their doorsteps. The difference between the villages and the towns will be completely 
eliminated. This has other benefits, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  It is going to reduce the time 
lost in travelling long distances. It will provide more time and leisure in terms of the number 
of hours which these workers can spend with the family. Of course, there will be no traffic 
congestion in terms of people having to travel long distances to go to their jobs and also less 
accidents on our roads. 

Similarly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the actions aimed at improving the quality of life in 
the  identified  poverty-stricken  pockets  will  go  a  long  way  towards  improving  living 
conditions, employment and health. Government cannot bite more that it can chew, to answer 
hon. Uteem: why is not everything being done in one go? It has only been three months for 
God’s sake! This is our first Budget. We have got five years to go. If we have done all these 

 

87 

in three months, imagine what’s going to happen in five years’ time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
If we embark at one go on improving all the areas characterised by extreme poverty, at the 
end of the day, we will create mass dissatisfaction and nobody will be happy. Some people 
tend  to  forget  that  we  have  more  than  four  and  half  years  at  our  disposal  to  improve 
conditions in those poverty-stricken areas.  The experience obtained in the current identified 
poverty-stricken areas will guide us for the future projects that will come next year. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  has  not  been  any  echo  from  any  Member  of  the 
Opposition at all to condemn the abuse made by the former Prime Minister, his accomplices, 
his close friends. The world was shocked. Well, I am informed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that 
hon. Alan Ganoo and the hon. Leader of the Opposition went four times to the house of Mr 
Rakesh Gooljaury to negotiate the Labour/MMM alliance. Four times to his house in Quatre 
Bornes! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No, interruptions, please! 
Mr Bhadain:  The world was shocked… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No, interruptions! 
Mr Bhadain:  The world was shocked, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to witness the seizure 

of millions of…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, please allow the hon. Minister to continue! 

 (Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, I am on my feet!  Please allow the hon. Member to continue.  I will 

allow no interruptions.  You do not have the floor.  Allow the hon. Minister to continue. 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the world was shocked to witness the seizure 
of millions of rupees, US dollars and other currencies at the residence of the former Prime 
Minister.   It is as if we were watching the movie “Il faut sauver le soldat Ryan”.  Well, they 
may have to save Navin, Nandanee, Frank, Laurent, Dawood. I don’t know so many more; all 
of them together maybe, and decide whether the risks associated thereto is commensurate to 
the advantages if any.   The taxpayers, on the other hand, need to know the agenda of the 
Opposition.    It  is  indeed  a  real  mystery,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  why  there  is  so  much 
sympathy shown by the MMM to the former Prime Minister.  The leader of the Opposition 

 

88 

has a duty to explain his stand to the population.  Maybe, again, it is a question of chemistry, 
or even body chemistry this time. 

(Interruptions) 

Be that as it may, he cannot continue to sit on the fence. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, le Budget presenté par l’honorable ministre des Finances est 
un budget fédérateur.  It brings confidence and trust to the population, to investors and to 
other  stakeholders.    We  are  at  the  crossroads,  and  this  Budget  will  generate  accelerated 
growth and employment through an integrated contribution of the public, Government, and 
also  the  private  sector.    Unlike  the  Labour  regime’s  Budget,  which  was  full  of  effet 
d’annonce, the success of this Budget resides in readily implementable mega projects; a boost 
to  the  development  of  the  port  as  one  of  the  most  important  regional  ports  in  this  part  of 
Africa;  improvement  in  business  facilitation  to  bring  efficiency  and  reduce  costs  of  doing 
business  in  Mauritius  and,  of  course,  the  promotion  of  SMEs  to  tackle  the  challenges  of 
social equity and also of job creation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for the needy of our society, this Budget provides for better 
and  fairer  distribution  of  wealth  to  our  citizens, especially  the  vulnerable  ones,  in  contrast 
with the previous Labour Government whose leader publicly acknowledged that he preferred 
eating the cake all by himself.  This singularly contrasts with the esprit de partage of this 
caring Government. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the country will experience  an investment of Rs20 billion 
over the next eight years to change defective water pipes as well as provide six cubic metres 
of water free of charge, which will drastically improve access to water supply and alleviate 
the pain of the vulnerable ones in our society. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the proposed acquisition of hundred semi-low floor buses to 
provide  better  and  safer  public  transport  will  benefit  students,  the  old  age,  as  well  as  the 
working population.  We all know the recklessness with which the previous Government had 
exposed the lives of hundreds of thousands of passengers with buses which were not road 
worthy at all. 

We have also seen, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, provisions for the expansion of existing 
healthcare facilities with a new cancer centre and ENT hospital along with the recruitment of 
100 doctors on a full-time basis, with 1,400 new supporting medical staff to bring marked 
efficiency and improvement in the provision of healthcare to our population. 

 

89 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Budget  also  provides  strong  measures  to  curtail 
gambling excesses, to promote a culture of principles, of hard work, and to do anyway with 
the ‘nation zougadere’  mentality and the desire to get  rich quickly which has plagued our 
nation, and greed on top of that, which has seriously impaired morality in this country over 
the past 10 years under the Labour reign. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let us also not forget the special measures to cater for the 
housing needs of low and middle income group with the construction of low cost housing 
units provided for in this Budget.  Here again, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, while this Budget is 
conscious about creating value to the needy ones, we can see a clear contrast, ‘une rupture’ 
with the previous Labour Government where State land was shamelessly gifted to ti copines 
et gros copins. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  SMEs  feature  prominently  in  the  2015  Budget  with 
Government aiming to make them the backbone of our economy and also promote growth. 
The Budget’s focus on SMEs has its merits as a mechanism to tackle unemployment and also 
to drive growth. 

  This  currently  indicates  potential  inefficiencies  and 

Currently,  SMEs  contribute  to  around  41%  of  GDP  and  50%  of  employment  in 
Mauritius. 
lack  of  untapped 
opportunities.  Providing finance of Rs10 billion over the next five years with the setting up 
of  a  dedicated  SME  bank  will  unleash  the  potential  of  our  fellow  Mauritians  to  become  a 
nation  of  entrepreneurs,  address  current  inefficiencies,  and  promote  productivity  and  also 
competitiveness.  This  Government  has  gone  a  step  further,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    In 
addition  to  providing  finance  to  entrepreneurs,  the  current  Budget  provides  a  series  of 
targeted  initiatives  to  provide  the  right  tonic  to  the  SME  sector.    Entrepreneurs  will  also 
obtain appropriate advice on how to start their businesses. 

Small companies registered with the SMEDA will be exempt from corporate tax for a 
period of eight  years, thereby providing immediate financial relief to  companies.  Another 
innovative step, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is the introduction of a simplified tax system for 
income tax and VAT filing based on cash rather than the accrual system, further reducing the 
compliance burden on taxpayers. 

The setting up of a one-stop shop to provide support, financing, information, permits 
and  licences,  and  the  creation  of  seven  SME  parks  across  the  country  will  ensure  that  the 
development of SMEs reaches all regions of the island and benefits the population at large. 
This is what you call real democratisation, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir - not what we have seen 
in the past - unlike democratisation under the Labour reign with the Betamax, the MDFP, the 

 

90 

Dufry, the Frydu, the BAI empire.  And we have also seen now how Labour democratisation 
has filled in the coffers of ‘Mr Banker’ with the assistance of ‘Mr Shark’. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the reduction of the amount payable upon an objection to a 
tax  assessment  from  30%  to  10%  has  been  a  much  awaited  measure  by  the  business 
community, SMEs and individuals alike.  I was surprised to hear hon. Uteem say today that, 
as a lawyer, he was advising people on how to go to the SMEDA and get their businesses set 
up.  As a  lawyer, most probably he has gone to the Assessment Review Committee as well 
after having advised clients at the MRA.  This is un soulagement total for so many people in 
Mauritius, where this rate has been lowered down from 30%, when you have to object to a 
tax assessment, to 10%. This was stifling business before … 
 (Interruptions) 

They were availing themselves of that discretion because they had good ties with 

the Labour Party. 

(Interruptions) 

This will greatly relieve the financial burden on taxpayers. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please address the Chair! 
Mr  Bhadain:  This  will  greatly  relieve  the  financial  burden  on  taxpayers  awaiting 
finality on tax disputes.  The renewal of the Expeditious Dispute Resolution of Tax Scheme is 
another  step,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  accommodate  taxpayers  who  cannot  afford  an 
objection  to  an  assessment.    Also  -  and  this  is  not  in  any  court  judgement  -  the  statutory 
period for raising tax assessment will now be three years instead of five years, thereby further 
reducing the burden on taxpayers. Maybe this part of the Budget was not read by hon. Uteem. 
In short, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Budget aims at promoting sectors seen as future 
pillars of the economy through fiscal incentives and also seeks to alleviate the compliance 
burden on taxpayers – ils sont soulagés. 

This Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, creates the conditions for growth. The 13 Mega 
projects will usher Mauritius into an era of modernity with intelligent cities making use of 
ICT.  These  projects  will  create  the  much  needed  jobs  for  our  youth  and  opportunities  to 
entrepreneurs paving the way for a modern Mauritius.  

Coming  now  to  my  Ministry,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  2015-2016  Budget 
introduces  a  number  of  fundamental  measures  which  will  radically  transform  the  whole 
architecture of the financial services sector in Mauritius. These measures seek to improve the 

 

91 

sectors’  contribution  to  GDP  over  time  and  scale  up  its  activities  to  match  those  of  well-
known international financial centres like Singapore, Hong Kong and  Luxembourg.  I have 
said it before, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and  I will say it again, we  can be for Africa what 
Singapore is for Asia and what Luxembourg is for Europe. 

This Budget underscores the need to revitalise the secondary market for Government 
securities  and  the  setting  up  of  an  active  secondary  market  for  benchmark  Government 
securities through the Stock Exchange of Mauritius to replace the current Over-The-Counter 
(OTC) trading of Government securities long overdue.  

It is my firm belief that a functional secondary market will constitute a first step in the 
process of constructing a yield return in Mauritius, which will contribute to the emergence of 
a  fully  integrated  financial  sector.  The  stock  market,  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors, 
though not operating in total isolation, do not display currently the level of synergy and the 
degree of integration observable in more developed markets. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  paragraph  99  of  this  Budget  constitutes  another  measure 
which  clearly  shows  this  Government’s  determination  to  scale  up  the  activities  of  our 
Financial Services Sector to another dimension. The Fund and Asset Management Industry in 
Mauritius is still largely a domestic business comprising essentially of local operators.  

While the current structure of the industry has well served the needs and objectives of 
Mauritian  investors  over  the  years,  it  is  evident that  it  requires  a  major  overhauling  and  a 
fundamental  transformation  to  attract  international  Fund  Management,  Asset  Management 
and  Wealth  Management  players  to  relocate  their  front-office  operations  to  Mauritius. 
However,  given that the previous Government did little to set up a  financial ecosystem of 
substance that matches that of Singapore, Hong Kong or London, it was important that this 
present  Government  adopts  a  specific  Financial  Sector  Incentive  Scheme  to  attract 
International  Asset/Fund/Wealth  Managers,  who  have  Assets  under  Management  of  a 
meaningful size to relocate their front-office operations in Mauritius and use Mauritius as a 
platform to service African countries. 

My Ministry  will actively  work on the details and specifics of the  Financial Sector 
Initiatives  Scheme  together  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development, 
including  the  fiscal  incentives  that  may  be  needed  to  attain  our  objectives.  The  successful 
implementation of this important Budgetary measure, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will not only 
help our Financial Services Sector move up the value chain of services, but  will certainly 
generate  high  value-add  jobs  for  the  present  and  upcoming  generations  and  improve  the 

 

92 

overall  living  standards  of  our  citizens  from  the  associated  multiplier  and  wealth-effects 
common to well-diversified international financial centres. 

The reactivation of the Financial Services Promotion Agency (FSPA), under the aegis 
of  my  Ministry,  is  a  must  for  our  country.  It  is  essential  for  us  to  emerge  as  a  leading 
Financial Services Centre of the region and beyond. 

Now, again,  I heard hon. Uteem say that the budget of Rs75 m. is allocated to the 
Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms. But, this is why 
the FSPA is being set up. They should take the trouble to go and read the proposed Finance 
Bill. It’s all in there. And, at the end of the day, the FSPA will be operating under the aegis of 
the Ministry. I am not going to take Rs75 m. and put it in my pocket or buy a safe and put it 
in my house. 

(Interruptions) 

A revitalised  FSPA will not only be involved in the promotion of Mauritius as a 
ground-breaking financial jurisdiction of substance, but it will also help carve out the future 
of our internal Financial Services Centre in terms of new product development and also the 
search for new prospective markets, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. This Budgetary measure is a 
concrete illustration of this Government’s determination to take our Financial Services Sector 
further to its next stage of development. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, paragraph 101 of the Budget also refers to the setting up of a 
Financial Services  Institute to provide specialised training courses that focus on the actual 
needs of the industry. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, during the election campaign when we were 
doing the porte-à-porte and meeting people in our Constituency, how many people did we 
meet  who  were  young  graduates  who  had  a  degree  in  law,  in  management,  in  finance  but 
were sitting at home and did not have a job. There is a need for these people to have hands-on 
experience, for these people to be trained, but just having the qualification is one thing. Most 
of them, they were getting their parents to go and borrow money, get a loan to go and do a 
Master’s degree.  And where did they end up? In places like EIILM University, D.Y Patil and 
all these ‘universités marrons’ that we have seen, and that did not make things any better for 
them! But, we have to create this environment and get these people the experience as well as 
the qualifications that they have to be able to go and work, and this is what we are trying to 
do  with  the  Financial  Services  Institute.  Taking  our  Financial  Services  Sector  to  the  next 
level of its development phase in terms of higher value-added services and greater focus on 
front-office operations definitely requires specialised human resource skills and capabilities 
which are currently not fully available.  

 

93 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  setting  up  of  the  Financial  Services  Institute  will 
definitely help in addressing this resource gap and create an enabling environment conducive 
to  the  graduation  of  well-trained  financial  sector  specialists,  capable  of  bringing  their 
contribution  to  the  development  of  sophisticated  financial  products  and  activities  in 
Mauritius. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  world  of  financial  services  is  dynamic  and  innovation 
plays  an  important  part  in  maintaining  interest  of  stakeholders.  The  legislative  framework 
will be reviewed along with other associated legislation which complement the work of the 
Financial Services Commission, the Financial Intelligence Unit and, of course, the ICAC. I 
have in mind here, the setting up of the Financial Crime Commission which we have talked 
about before. 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  failed  record  of  the  previous  Government  is  now 
historical. We must not let our people forget what they promised when they came to power.  
They  told  the  people  of  this  country  that  they  will  change  our  lives,  but  they  failed  and 
instead change the size of their coffers and their bank accounts - onshore and offshore.  

This Government will put money in the pockets of the Mauritian people, not in the 
safes,  not  in  suitcases,  not  in  offshore  accounts  of  flamboyant  mistresses  whether  from 
Switzerland or even Carreau-Laliane.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, just for the sake of making comments, some hon. Members 
have  stated  that  this  Budget  is  just  a  catalogue  of  good  intentions  in  which  the  poor  and 
vulnerable will not benefit anything, or comments that the measures announced are simply 
effets  d’annonce.  One  former  Member  of  this  House,  known  to  have  a  sharp  tongue,  and 
normally wanders the streets of Quatre Bornes, has stated that the management of poverty is 
being privatised. Well, the measures announced in this Budget will materialise. We take the 
solemn commitment to live up to the expectations. This is our commitment to the nation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, still today accountability rests with those who form part of 
the  previous  Labour  Government.  They  have  to  explain  how  they  have  spent  billions  of 
rupees contracted as loan from international funding agencies. They have to explain why, in 
spite  of  such  unprecedented  scale  of  borrowing,  there  have  been  no  improvement  in  the 
infrastructure of this country and no improvement in the quality of life of our fellow citizens. 
They also have to explain why the infrastructure constructed are now collapsing and falling 
apart,  like  the  MMM.  They  have  to  explain  the state  of  the  dereliction  we  have  as  legacy 
today. 

 

94 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have to triumph over an uncertain future with honour, 
decency  and courage. This country belongs to all of us and all of us have the same rights 
irrespective  of  our  origins.  Politics  have,  so  far,  proved  to  be  a  divisive  element  in  our 
society. It is our duty to give as legacy to our children and the younger generation a country 
with a sense of patriotism, a country where the sense of brotherhood and fraternity prevail.  

Though, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, bringing a convergence of views is not within my 
remit, I would appeal to the Opposition to give priority to reason. In his book, ‘Identity and 
Violence,  The  Illusion  of  Destiny’,  Noble  Laureate,  Amartya  Sen,  narrates  the  story  of 
Akbar, the Great Mughal who was born a Muslim and died a Muslim, but insisted that, and I 
quote - 

“Faith cannot have priority over reason, since one must justify –  
and if necessary reject – one’s inherited faith through reason’.  

In reply to his detractors, Akbar replied as follows, and I quote – 

“The pursuit of reason and rejection of traditionalism  
are so brilliantly patent as to be above the need for argument.   
If traditionalism were proper, the prophets would merely have followed  
their own elders (and not come up with new messages).” 

In the words of Amartya Sen, I quote – 

“Reason has to be supreme, since even in disputing reason,  
we would have to give reason.” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  these  words,  the  Budget  before  this  House  should, 

therefore, stand the test of reason and nothing else. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Sewocksingh! 

 
(5.53 p.m.)  

Mrs  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, before I intervene on the budget, I would like to seek your permission to present 
my sincere condolences to the shattered family of Keshnee Purmasing who passed away in a 
very tragic way a few days back.  I present my deepest sympathy to the family. Our thoughts 
and prayers are with them. 

 

95 

I  would,  first  of  all,  like  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development for his Budget Speech delivered on 23 March 2015.  I also congratulate hon. 
Bhadain for his good governed speech.  

The overarching message in that budget was that our country was at a crossroad, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. And when we speak of crossroads, it is important for everyone in this 
House  to  realise  that,  never  before,  has  our  country  been  in  such  a  situation.  When  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth took over the country in 1982, he took the helm of the country at its lowest 
point  post-independence.  Our  coffers  were  empty.  We  were  a  country  at  the  brink  of 
bankruptcy and not far from being failed State. We were not far from proving James Meade’s 
predictions in 1961, that I quote – 

“An independent Mauritius would fall into a Malthusian poverty crisis.” 
Put into simple terms, in 1982, Mauritius had nothing to lose, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
The  situation  today  is  different.    In  the  last  35  years,  our  country  has  known  an 
economic miracle, making us the envy of many a nation. We have had good times and bad 
times  under  various  Governments,  and  being  an  open  economy,  we  have  to  weather  the 
storms of global economic crisis, tourism industry crisis, following outbreaks of pandemics 
like SARS, rising unemployment in our main export markets, and the ending of preferential 
treatments  under  the  Sugar  Protocol.  But  overall,  we  have  been  on  an  upward  trend  since 
1982.  I  need  not  go  into  detail  and  identify  who  were  the  leaders  who  did  most  for  our 
country during that period, and who were those who prevented this country from rising to 
even greater heights, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I need not do so, as the population proved it on 
10 December 2014. 

Today, we are at the crossroad because contrary to 1982, a lot is at stake. We have a 
diversified economy and many Mauritians enjoy a decent lifestyle. However, the drawings on 
the wall, or should I rather say the cracks in the building are visible. 

There  is  rising  unemployment,  especially  among  the  young  and  among  women.  We 
have over 3000 ‘gradués chômeurs’. Law and order is getting out of control. When we see 
Policemen who take an oath to serve and protect, acting like thugs and beating the lives out, 
there is something wrong in our society. And here, it is important to pay tribute to the large 
majority  of  Policemen  who  do  a  great  job  at  keeping  us  safe,  while  putting  themselves  in 
harm’s way. 

When we see pockets of poverty like in Cité Anouska found in Constituency No. 17, 
where people live a life of extreme poverty, not knowing where their next meal will come 
from  and  while  at  the  same  time,  there  are  thriving  companies  and  individuals  making 

 

96 

millions not far away - and here again I would like to say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that there 
is something wrong somewhere. 

When  we  see  politicians  being  caught  with  vast  unexplained  amount  of  wealth,  and 
their  inner  circle  making  billions,  it  is  the  Mauritian  taxpayer  who  is  footing  the  bill 
indirectly.  And I frankly do not understand to this day, how some otherwise very so-called 
competent  people  from  the  ranks  of  today’s  Opposition  still  associate  themselves  with  the 
human symbol of an era that will go down in history for its unmatched levels of nepotism, 
abuse of power, vulgarity and disrespect for women. But we are in a democracy, and people 
are free to exercise their rights of judgment and association. 

This  is  precisely  what  this  Government  has  done  through  the  Budget  2015-2016, 
presented by our grand argentier, hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo.  As a team, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, we have exercised our collective judgement in consulting with all stakeholders. 
And the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has come up with a budget 
that has Mauritians at the centre-stage.  That is, putting our people first.  A budget full of 
ambitions. 

Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I commend this Budget for the following reasons – 

1.  We promised that the increase in pensions would be delivered without an increase in 
taxes.  This  Government  stood  by  its  word.    We  said  that  we  would  finance  the 
increase first and foremost through a reduction in wastage of public funds. The salary 
compensation of Rs600 also counts. Since then, everyone knows about the scandalous 
deals and expenses where the past Government had been terribly cavalier at the best 
with  public  funds.  Money  that  this  Government  will  save  and  use  to  pay  out  the 
increase in pensions. 

I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  the  budgetary  measures  designed  to  curb 
unemployment.  There are 13 megaprojects which have been identified in the budget; 
8 smart cities and 5 technopoles.  It is clear that Government has sent a strong signal 
to the private sector. They will need to rise up to their responsibilities. These projects 
will provide an immediate boost to employment in the construction sector, but also in 
the peripheral industries. With the rise in disposable income that will naturally follow, 
people will have the ability to spend more on their needs and leisure, and hopefully 
save some money for the future. This will help overcome the retail slowdown in this 
country.  The local shops, carpenters, plumbers, electricians, restaurants, and all sorts 
of  small  businesses  would  automatically  benefit  from  this.  It  will  boost  economic 
growth, and, at the same time, give meaning to democratisation of the economy. It is 

 

97 

also important that I point out, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this budgetary measure has a 
vision well-aligned with the one hon. Xavier-Luc Duval presented in his last budget 
speech for the financial year 2014 when he was Minister of Finance.  The vision was 
then to invest for development in infrastructure, geared towards better traffic flows, 
efficient, safe public transport and regular supply of water and electricity.  And thus, 
the smart cities will help achieve this vision.  Imagine a city producing its own energy 
from renewable sources, having the areas for work and play side by side.  Imagine 
schools, hospitals and shopping malls all within walking distance.  This will improve 
the quality of life as well.   

In fact, if we judge by the official reaction of the private sector, we note their strong 
support of this approach. A support in stark contrast with the comments we just heard from 
the other side of the House. 

The other measure that would curb unemployment and democratise the economy is 

the whole package provided to SMEs. 

While shaking hands with the Minister of Finance after his speech on last 23 March, 
the phrase that I told him was that: “Hon. Minister, I am very pleased to go back to work into 
my business again.” Indeed, as hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo put it, the philosophy of this measure 
is that the Government is putting trust in Mauritians, especially the younger generation. This 
will  create  the  conditions  for  true  economic  democratisation.  We  could  also  consider  to 
integrate as condition within the 13 mega projects a request for the promoters or lead builders 
to  use  a  certain  percentage  of  SME  providers  within  their  value  chain.  This  prescriptive 
approach, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is the surest way to guarantee success for those SMEs. 
Naturally, these SMEs will need to deliver on quality and I am sure that the Government will 
leave no stone unturned to make sure that they deliver quality. 

I would further suggest that we allow established companies participate in the share 
capital  of  such  SMEs  to  a  maximum  of  49%.  Government  could  then  support  the 
entrepreneur by advancing the funds making the remaining 51% of the capital. This should 
help  promote  a  more  inclusive  and  collaborative  culture  in  business.  And  it  would  in  the 
interest  of  the  more  established  companies  to  succeed  in  the  venture,  resulting  in  tax  free 
profits for the next 8 years. 

 

98 

It is in that spirit that we would have to look at mechanisms to prevent abuse, but I 
believe  the  Government  will  put  all  the  gears  together  to  promote  SMEs;  therein  lies  the 
second economic miracle. 

As  regard  measures  for  the  tourism  industry,  being  myself  an  entrepreneur  in  the 
sector,  I  welcome  the  increase  in  the  budget  of  the  MTPA  to  Rs560  m.  this  year.  In  this 
country,  as  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Tourism,  Xavier-Luc  Duval  has 
several times said: “Quand le tourisme va bien, tout va bien.” This shows how important the 
tourism  industry  is  for  our  economy.  It  is  one  of  the  largest  employers,  largest  foreign 
exchange earners, and will play a key role in making Mauritius the Regional Hub we want it 
to be. Some days back, the Minister of Tourism announced that there is a keen interest from 
China to increase regular flights to Mauritius, and this could prove an ideal transit point for 
Far East travellers to access Africa. Air access has long been an issue, and this Government is 
going  further  by  ensuring  airlines  exercise  their  access  rights.  The  increased  connectivity 
between the  Far East and Africa is  what  will take our country to the next level. This will 
increase  the  attractiveness  of  Mauritius  as  a  Financial  Services  Hub  where  it  would  make 
sense of Far Eastern multinationals to set up their Regional Headquarters. 

The project for classification of hotels will encourage hôteliers to keep maintaining, 

modernising and upgrading their products. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  now  talk  about  CSR.  In  my  maiden  speech,  I  laid 
emphasis on the Corporate Social Responsibility and I am glad today that it did not go “dans 
l’oreille d’un sourd”. The changes proposed in the budget are bold and have been welcomed 
by the private sector at large. We need to understand a few things here. The private sector 
will still have to contribute 2% of its taxable profits to CSR activities. However, we have 
found that substantial sums of money do not get invested in CSR, but rather get paid over to 
the MRA and end up in the Consolidated Fund. There is no question that the CSR framework 
has been largely ineffective in alleviating poverty. By removing the regulations, we enable 
companies to make a more direct impact. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, some  poches de pauvreté are  found in our Constituency - 
Constituency No. 17 - Curepipe/Midlands. At long last, the Marshall Plan will make us able 
to work together with the corporate world in a true apolitical partnership, with the sole focus 
of improving the lives of those most in need. I will recommend that a framework be put in 
place to clarify the parameters within which companies can perform their CSR activities. This 

 

99 

is important, as we would not want the increased freedom of companies to result in MRA 
actions and assessments resulting from difference in appreciation as to what constitutes CSR 
and what does not. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I salute the measure proposed by the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development geared towards increasing the ratio of renewable energy by 35% and 
above by 2025; a measure where households would be able to deduct the purchase value of 
their solar energy units from their chargeable income. This will give a  boost to renewable 
energy consumption, and alleviate the pressure on our economy and environment. It will also 
give  a  boost  to  the  photovoltaic  industry  in  Mauritius  with  the  associated  job  creation.  In 
itself,  it  will  help  democratise  the  economy.  I,  therefore,  hope  that  the  CEB  will  quickly 
invest in the distribution grid to allow household to sell back their excess electricity to the 
CEB.  

Last  but  not  least,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  bold  measures  have  been  taken  in  the 
budget, for example, to ban usage of plastic bags in Mauritius; no to the ‘nation zougadère’ 
culture, the six cubic metres of water free of charge. All this shows the determination that this 
Government has to bring a brighter future for our country. 

We are particularly happy, proud  and at ease today  with this Government team we 
have formed, a team called ‘Lepep’ which is by ‘Lepep’ and for ‘Lepep’. Not only are our 
visions broadly similar, but we speak as people of action. 

The  roads  might  differ,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  but  the  destination  is  one.  Our 
country is at a crossroad. We have a chance ahead of us to make history, and by ‘we’, I mean 
hon. Members from both sides of the House. There will be criticisms from the Opposition 
and rightfully so. It is their role to keep Government accountable. But more importantly, let 
us criticise and offer alternative solutions. There has been a deep shift in mentalities on the 
ground. People are conscious that they all need to chip in and help take our country forward. 
It  is  up  to  us  elected  officials  to  make  sure  we  serve  in  the  best  interests  of  Mauritius. 
Inclusiveness and social justice, strong institutions and good governance are the ingredients 
that will make the country a model to follow. 

The  times  ahead  are  challenging,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Together  we  turn  our 

sleeves and change the fate of our country for the better. 

This is a feel food factor Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Thank you. 

 

 (6.11 p.m.) 

100 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Mr Deputy Speaker, despite the legacy of a difficult economic 
situation left by the previous Government, the  Minister of Finance has managed to craft a 
budget  that  lays  down  the  foundation  of  a  sustainable  society  for  a  brighter  and  more 
prosperous  future  where  meritocracy,  democracy,  transparency,  good  governance,  social 
justice,  safety  and  security,  peace  and  prosperity  prevail.  This  Budget  reflects  the 
expectations of the nation.   

We  have  to  congratulate  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  Prime  Minister  and 
Leader of the House; hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo and all those who are involved in the 
crafting  of  this  budget  for  their  wisdom  and  vision  in  presenting  an  inspiring,  caring  and 
courageous  Budget.    The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  presented  this  Budget  in  a  context 
where  the  country  was  facing  a  very  high  debt  where  almost  all  sectors  of  our  economy 
reached alarming level and were suffering; where investors were losing trust and hesitated to 
invest to boost the economy.   

Specifically where the former alliance declined to offer a reasonable financial support 
to workers of the Sugar Industry and to Senior Citizens, handicaps and all those benefiting 
social aids a time where majority of Mauritians were unable to obtain a budget for their daily 
basic  needs.    Unemployment  was  at  its  peak  at  all  levels  of  the  society  including 
professionals  like  doctors,  dentists,  engineers  and  graduates.    Social  and  economic  fabrics 
were disturbed at alarming levels.   

In spite of supporting all Mauritian families for a total subsidy for examination fees 
and without eliminating and disturbing the fabric of the welfare state, the hon. Minister of 
Finance, through his Budget, has strengthened the trust of the people for better days, coming 
with gigantic efforts for the eradication of social and economic injustices, preparing a youth 
for  future  challenges  and  building  a  brighter  Mauritius  through  the  creation  of  wealth  and 
opportunities for prosperity with sustainable development whilst protecting the environment.   
As regards  Law  and Order, the advent of  a Police Academy  will pave the way  for 
much institutional reforms in the Police force.  I have to reiterate that I had advocated the 
creation of a Police Academy as Commissioner of Police as far back as 1995. Since then, the 
population has been waiting for a Police Academy to upgrade policing knowledge and skills 
through  the  process  of  lessons  learnt.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  most  dimensions  of 

 

101 

sustainable development have been spelt out in this Budget, contrary to what the Opposition 
believes!  

This  Budget  has  also  created  the  enabling  conditions  to  foster  the  quality  of 
development that will benefit all in an equitable manner and can indeed be referred to as a 
Budget for a “projet de société”. Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are now beyond ‘wake 
up’ calls and ‘talks’. This Budget is in fact, calling us to engage into immediate action. Allow 
me to highlight some of the bold measures announced -  

(i)  On the economic front, this Budget will stimulate the economy through  investment 
and creation of employment in key productive sectors. In this vein, valorising SMEs 
as the backbone of a robust and resilient economy will empower our people, create 
jobs and give Mauritius the competitive edge that it requires to face globalisation. 
The  creation  of  13  mega  projects  is  rightly  commendable  as  it  will  additionally 
support the creation of employment in highly productive sectors, ensure employability 
and  bring  Foreign  Direct  Investment.  In  addition,  the  transformation  of  Port  Louis 
harbour  into  a  regional  hub  will  be  an  all-encompassing  facility  which  will  create 
employment, develop our ocean economy, promote tourism and be a show case in the 
region for a modern and state-of-the-art port. 

 

(ii) On the social front, this Budget has left no stone unturned. The House will agree that 
a  healthy  population  is  a  sine  qua  non  condition  for  sustainable  development.  
Rightfully,  with  an  investment  of  more  than  Rs9  billion  in  the  health  sector,  this 
Government will considerably improve the quality of health services for the benefit of 
our  population  and  subsequently  on  the  development  of  our  country.    Likewise,  a 
highly  educated,  skilled  and  well  informed  population  is  imperative  to  sustain  our 
efforts for economic development. I, therefore, applaud the high investment made in 
the  education  sector  at  all 
including  support  for  capacity  building. 
Environmental issues in connection with the 60th celebration of the Earth day was at 
the seat of the Royal College Curepipe with the full support of the management and 
student alike will definitely increase the versatility of our youth. 

levels 

 

(iii)  On the environmental sustainability front, I am particularly impressed by the bold 
measures  that  are  indeed  breakthroughs  in  environmental  planning,  never  heard 
before! The smart city concept will bring a total revolution in the way we live. These 
smart cities will enable us adopt sustainable lifestyles and sustainable consumption 

 

102 

patterns. They will provide the proper setting for waste minimisation and recycling, 
composting, rainwater harvesting and modern communication technology. They will 
generate  their  own  resources  in  terms  of  energy  and  water;  promote  modern  and 
sustainable mobility and reduce traffic congestion across the island.  After so many 
years of procrastination on the issue of plastic bags by the previous Government, this 
Government  has  been  bold  enough  to  outright  ban  plastic  bags.  Thank  you,  hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo! Hazardous waste management was rarely addressed in previous 
budgetary exercises. Again thank you! We are squarely addressing the sensitive issue 
of hazardous waste management.  Third thank  you! We will equally deal with the 
longstanding problem of asbestos in public buildings. I will continue thanking him. 

(Interruptions) 

But,  I  better  stop  here.  For  the  past  decade  the  water  sector  was  always  neglected. 
However,  it  is  a  fact  that  water  scarcity  periods  are  becoming  more  prolonged  and 
causing  serious  inconveniences  to  numerous  families.  The  sustained  provision  of 
Rs20 billion over the coming 8 years under the Public Sector Investment Programme 
bears  testimony  to  the  firm  intention  of  this  Government  to  address  both  water 
demand  and  supply.  This  Budget  is  also  investing  massively  in  renewables  for  the 
solar water heaters in households and SMEs as well as other equipment to optimise 
use of natural resources. 

(iv)   Last but not least, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, without equity, sustainable development 
will be a vain word. The Marshall Plan announced in the Budget will be the decisive 
enabler to tackle poverty and social exclusion. The vision of this Government is to 
address  the  root  cause  of  poverty  by  investing  in  sustainable  solutions  and 
empowering  the  vulnerable  group  so  that  the  latter  can  in  turn  contribute  to  the 
development of the country. In this endeavour, Government will harness the support 
of both the civil society and the private sector to do their share of Corporate Social 
Responsibility. I am convinced that by effectively addressing the poverty issue, we 
will  not  only  reduce  the  many  ills  of  society  but  we  will  also  solve  a  number  of 
environmental problems.  

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will now speak on the measures that have been put forth to 
enable my Ministry to better manage our environment. I am pleased to note that this Budget 
has charted the way for a cleaner, greener and safer Mauritius.  

 

103 

First,  this  Budget  has  shown  the  highest  level  of  political  commitment  for 
environment and sustainable development through the revival of the National Environment 
Commission (NEC) which is the pivotal body under the Environment Protection Act.   The 
House will note that environment is a cross-cutting sector and environment-related issues fall 
under the purview of different institutions. So far, there has been inadequate high level policy 
coordination to unlock difficult and challenging issues. The NEC, which is chaired by the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, will, therefore, provide firm policy orientations and directives from the 
highest level to ensure coordination, synergy among all stakeholders and achievement of set 
national environmental targets. 

Pollution Control & Prevention  

Pollution prevention and control is at the heart of the protection of our environment. 
With  the  emerging  environmental  challenges,  the  existing  enforcement  and  monitoring 
mechanisms in place need to be strengthened. My Ministry, in this Budget, will thus - 

• 

• 
• 

review the Environment Protection Act, and a number of relevant regulations 
and stricter control will be applied; 
 empower enforcing agencies to act promptly, and 
strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  National  Environmental  Laboratory  of  my 
Ministry  with  additional  recruitment,  by  acquiring  modern  equipment  to 
enable  better  monitoring  of  the  state  of  the  environment  and  for  timely 
decision-making.  

Economic instruments to manage the environment 

Government  will  also  have  recourse  to  economic  instruments  to  enhance  the 

management of the environment.  In this context - 

• 

• 

the scheme put in place for collection and recycling of PET bottles will be revised 
based on the financial incentive provided in the Budget, and 
similarly,  we  will  closely  follow  up  on  the  new  Carbon  Dioxide  Levy/Rebate 
Scheme which aims at mitigating air pollution and climate change impacts. 

Environment Impact Assessment as an environmental planning tool 

We all know that urbanisation leads to a growing demand for resources, energy, potable 
water,  and  efficient  transport.  The  development  of  new  cities  requires  an  integrated 
environmental  management  approach  to  meet  social  and  economic  objectives  without 
adversely  impacting  on  the  environment.  My  Ministry,  through  the  EIA  mechanism,  will 

 

104 

ensure  that  the  smart  cities  are  designed  accordingly  as  per  the  spirit  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and the Leader of the House. 

The  smart  cities  will  thus  be  environment  friendly,  generate  their  own  resources  in 
terms of energy and water, promote eco-friendly practices such as waste minimisation, reuse, 
recycling,  composting,  energy  efficiency,  renewable  energy,  green  building  practices  and 
rainwater harvesting at the project design stage itself. 

Integrated Coastal Zone Management 

The coastal zone of Mauritius is a key resource.  Intense pressure from sea and land-
based  activities  is  degrading  the  coastal  environment  and  threatening  to  prevent  its  full 
economic potential from being realised.  

Additionally, sea level rise and wave surges are putting coastal areas at stake and are a 
threat  to  coastal  inhabitants.  One  of  the  most  visible  impacts  is  the  accelerated  rate  and 
magnitude of beach erosion - our beach erosion. 

With a view to addressing this acute problem, the Budget provides that my Ministry 
will be undertaking, on a continuous basis, a coastal rehabilitation programme to restore the 
beach  shoreline.    Protection  comprises  both  hard  and  soft  measures.    Sites  for  coastal 
protection  are  being  selected  on  a  priority  basis  depending  on  the  gravity  and  urgency  of 
works required based on the recommendations made under different expert studies. 

Coastal  protection  and  rehabilitation  works  have  been  undertaken  at  many  critical 
eroded sites, namely Grand’ Baie, Pointe aux Sables, Poudre d’Or, Cap Malheureux beach 
adjacent to the cemetery, Quatre Soeurs, and Grand River South East.  Currently, works are 
on-going  at  Baie  du  Cap  and  Bain  Boeuf.    In  addition,  soft  measures  consisting  of  beach 
nourishment and flexible revetment have been carried out at other eroded public beaches in 
order to rehabilitate and maintain sandy beaches.  Additionally, this year, works will start at 
Le Morne village, La Prairie, and La Preneuse public beaches. 

It is, therefore, encouraging to note that the sum of Rs116 m. has been earmarked in the 
2015-2016 Budget for the rehabilitation of our beaches affected by erosion and additionally 
making them more appealing for tourists and local beach users. 

Climate Change 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  address  Climate  Change.    All  the  latest  global 
observations and reports on the climate change confirm that the indicators are in red, with 
new records being reached fast. We are in a global urgency to deal with climate change. 

My  Ministry  is  already  implementing  a  number  of  activities  in  relation  to  climate 

change, namely through - 

 

105 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the  formulation  of  a  Third  National  Report  to  mainstream  climate  change 
issues  into  relevant  social,  economic,  scientific  and  environmental  policies, 
programmes and strategies; 
the  formulation  of  a  Low  Carbon  Development  Strategy  and  Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Actions to mainstream low emission development, and 
formulation  of  a  Climate  Change  Bill  to  better  address  adverse  effects  of 
climate change in terms of adaptation and mitigation.  This Bill will honour 
our obligations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and its Kyoto Protocol, and provide the framework to make Mauritius 
a climate change resilient country and achieve a low carbon economy. 

This Budget has sent a very strong signal regarding the commitment of the Government 

to further our actions and enhance our resilience to the impacts of climate change. 

The  new  impetus  given  to  the  energy  sector  through  the  setting  up  of  a  Mauritius 
Renewable  Energy  Agency  will  significantly  help  increase  the  share  of  renewables  in  the 
energy mix to 35% or even higher by 2025 and reduce our dependency on coal.  Likewise, 
the promotion of green technology equipment through an accelerated income tax depreciation 
provision for green investment will contribute to climate change mitigation. 

Sustainable Consumption and Production 

The  House  will  agree  that  our  current  mode  of  consumption  and  production  are  fast 
depleting our non-renewable resources. The pollution and waste generated are also exceeding 
the planet’s carrying capacity. 

In this regard, my Ministry will ensure, in this Budget, that sustainable  consumption 

and production patterns are mainstreamed across key sectors of the economy. 

 

• 

• 

• 

The following actions will be undertaken - 
fact sheets on sustainable consumption and production will be disseminated to 
various target groups to encourage environmental stewardship; 
SMEs  will  be  encouraged  to  adopt  resource  efficiency  through  the  Switch 
Africa Green Initiative, which aims at greening the manufacturing, agricultural 
and tourism sectors by promoting resource use efficiency and supporting local 
green entrepreneurship in starting up and developing business avenues, and 
the  current  national  programme  on  sustainable  consumption  and  production 
will be reviewed to align itself with the new framework of actions proposed by 
the United Nations Environment Programme. 

 

106 

Environmental Education and Awareness  

Our  ultimate  goal  is  to  make  the  citizens  of  Mauritius  adopt  more  sustainable, 

environment-friendly and healthy ways of living for an improved quality of life. 

To  this  end,  my  Ministry  will  improve  its  outreach  programmes  on  pertinent 
environmental  issues.  More  training  programmes  with  community/social  leaders,  youth, 
women and NGOs will be conducted across the island to transform the population into an 
ecologically responsible nation.  The sensitisation campaigns are carried out, using various 
communication  tools  such  as  delivery  of  talks;  development  and  distribution  of  materials 
such as pamphlets, posters; setting up of exhibitions. 

Furthermore, in line with our pledge to foster a Cleaner, Greener and Safer Mauritius, 
my  Ministry  is  also  conducting  sensitisation  of  the  360,000  households  of  the  islands  of 
Mauritius  and  Rodrigues  on  the  sound  management  of  household  chemicals  and  good 
environmental behaviours.  In this spirit, some 50,000 pamphlets will be distributed in this 
Budget, and the House is in presence of, at least, one of it. 

My Ministry is  also involving all stakeholders, including the public  authorities, the 
private sector, schools, hotels, industries, the civil society and the public sector on an island-
wide embellishment programme “Embellir Maurice”.  

Upgrading physical environment 
The ambition of this Government is to maintain a healthy environment for a healthy 
population. 
  In  this  context,  we  will  intensify  cleaning  campaigns,  greening  and 
embellishment of strategic sites to maintain a healthy living environment for our citizens. To 
restore the pristine state of our environment, not only trees will be planted and green spaces 
created, but I also intend to create endemic gardens and ‘parcours de santé’ in public areas to 
inculcate  respect  for  our  biodiversity.  And  with  CSR,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  20  such 
projects will be launched in this Budget itself in all the 20 Constituencies. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  not  forgotten  what  hon.  Uteem  said.  Hardening  of 
targets  for  all  landslides  prone  areas  are  in  the  pipeline  in  this  Budget  itself.  I  will  now 
address  the  issue  of  Solid  and  Hazardous  Waste  Management.  The  subject  of  solid  waste 
management  is  one  that  has,  so  far,  been  dealt  with  in  a  linear  manner,  that  is,  goods  are 
produced  or  imported,  consumed  and  then  disposed  of,  and  we  start  all  over  again. 
Collectively, we are generating around 450,000 tonnes of solid wastes annually which require 

 

107 

an extent of nearly 3 hectares of land at an average depth of 20 to 25 metres for landfilling.  
This leads to loss of useful land and materials and also generation of gas and leachate that 
will  have  to  be  managed  for  many  years  to  come.  The  quantities  of  wastes  are  increasing 
annually  at  a  rate  of  nearly  2  %,  and  a  Business  as  Usual  scenario  will  lead  to  the  waste 
quantities reaching 500,000 tonnes by year 2020.   

This will require more land and more funds to collect, transport and dispose the wastes 
generated. If we want to prevent this scenario, we have to bring drastic changes in the way 
we are managing our waste. Acting for the future is a change journey that should start now. 
And in this Budget we are starting! The change journey starts with a complete shift in our 
mindset from simple waste disposal to waste avoidance and prevention. Here, I wish to quote 
Benjamin Franklin who once said that ‘An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure’.  
This is why, I am putting a lot of emphasis on waste minimisation, recycling and composting 
based on this budget allocation. 

i. 

The  banning  of  plastic  bags  is  one  of  the  many  bold  decisions  that  Government  is 
taking to the cause of waste prevention and avoidance. Plastic bags are convenient, 
but  they  have  a  cost  to  society  and  the  environment  as  they  pose  serious  risks  to 
ecosystems when discarded haphazardly in the  open environment and they  are  also 
filled  with  additives  that  do  not  have  a  safety  record.  Banning  of  plastic  bags  will 
open a window of opportunities for the production of alternative long-lasting bags. I 
am convinced that entrepreneurs will take full advantage of the incentives provided in 
this Budget for SMEs to engage in the production of alternatives to plastic bags. 
 

ii.  We also have a potential of recovering 250,000 tonnes from the wastes being disposed 
for recycling and production compost. However, this will only happen with adequate 
infrastructure, enabling factors such as legislation, economic instruments and through 
trial testing phases. The first phase of this ambitious waste diversion programme will 
be in the Vacoas-Phoenix region  

iii.  with the setting up of a Material Recycling Facility to service this Municipality and 
the  Municipality  of  Curepipe.  After  assessing  the  outcomes  of  this  first  phase,  the 
project will be extended to other regions of the island and this is in this Budget.  
 
While  this  will  initially  require  capital  investments,  they  are  insignificant  in 
comparison  to  the  costs  of  doing  nothing  which  can  have  serious  environmental 

 

108 

consequences.  Furthermore,  savings  in  transportation  and  landfill  costs  will  far 
outweigh the initial capital investments in the years to come. 

iv.  As a small island, we are also very concerned with hazardous wastes being generated. 
The quantities generated are not sizeable to invest in an on-site treatment and disposal 
facility.  We are thus going ahead with the setting up of an interim hazardous waste 
facility whereby such wastes will be characterised, packed, properly labelled, stored 
and exported for treatment.  It is expected that this facility will be operational in April 
2016.  The  interim  storage  facility  will  provide  waste  generators  with  an  outlet  that 
will  be  safely  controlled  and  managed.  My  Ministry  is  currently  revising  the 
regulations pertaining to hazardous wastes and also working closely with hazardous 
waste generators to ensure that these wastes are safely stored pending the coming into 
operation  of  this  facility.  Budget  allocation  has  already  been  made  in  this  Budget 
itself. 
The  problems  associated  with  end-of-life  electric  and  electronic  goods  have  been 
globally recognised in the past few years.  In 2012, a total of 25,000 tonnes of Electric 
and  Electronic  Goods  were  imported  in  Mauritius.  The  amount  of  electric  and 
electronic-waste  in  Mauritius  ranges  between  7,000  and  8,000  tonnes  per  annum. 
However,  only  a  small  fraction  (2  to  5  %)  of  it  gets  dismantled  and  treated  and/or 
landfilled, about 0.4 %.  

v. 

Presently, we have reviewed the existing legal frameworks and institutional 
set-ups  to  formulate  first  recommendations  on  policies  and  strategies  as  well  as 
economic  instruments  and  financing  mechanisms.  Pending  the  finalisation  of  this 
National  E-Waste  Policy,  my  Ministry  is  planning  to  collect  e-wastes  at  household 
level for recycling purposes. This will clear the backlog of e-wastes currently being 
stored by householders.  

In  order  to  sensitise  the  public  about  the  household  E-wastes  Collection 
Scheme  to  be  carried  out  with  the  collaboration  of  Local  Authorities,  my  Ministry 
proposes to conduct an awareness campaign through media and through distribution 
of about 300,000 flyers to householders via the Local Authorities. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, with regard to the management of public beaches, I have noted with 

concern -  

•  Only 55 out of 112 public beaches are provided with toilet facilities. 
•  There is inadequate security, lighting and safety on the beaches. 

 

109 

•  There is a problem of easy access to our beaches or in some cases access is being 

denied to beach users. 

•  Presence  of  stray  dogs  on  beaches,  which  is  a  nuisance  to  both  Mauritians  and 

tourists.  

In this Budget, my Ministry will take various measures to make sure that our beaches are 

more attractive and safer for all beach users. The following will be implemented - 

•  Preparation  of  a  Beach  Management  Plan  to  ensure  an  integrated  approach  in  the 

management of beaches.   

•  Provision of toilet facilities in the remaining 57 public beaches - where such facilities 
are not available - in a phased manner, starting with some 15 in this financial  year 
2015-2016. 

•  Enhancement  of  surveillance  and  enforcement  on  public  beaches  will  be  enhanced 
with  the  support  of  qualified  lifesavers  from  the  Police  Force,  Police  de 
l’Environnement and the National Coast Guard. In this context, Vigilance Towers and 
hotlines will be set up on some highly frequented public beaches in the first instance.  
•  There is a proliferation of commercial activities such as transacts and hawking which 
reduces  space  capacity  for  optimum  utilisation  of  our  beaches  by  the  public  and 
tourist alike. 

•  Review of the legal and institutional framework of the Beach  Authority to respond 
more  effectively  to  the  new  challenges  and  opportunities  facing  development  on 
public beaches.  Removal of obstacles and obstructions on the public beaches so as to 
allow a free access at all times to beach users. 

•  Relocation of unnecessary structures in the beach front to dedicated areas.  

Past events as well as future threats demonstrate the need for a multi-hazard approach 
to disaster management in the Republic of Mauritius. We have taken commitment towards a 
comprehensive and integrated approach to risk management.  

Give timely warning and alert to the first responders and the general public against 

hydro-meteorological events.  

The NDRRMC will also closely align its actions based on resources provided in this 
Budget on the outcome of the 3rd United Nations World Summit on Disaster Risk Reduction 
held  in  Sendai,  Japan  (also  known  as  the  Sendai  Framework  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 

 

110 

2015). In fact, I participated in this Summit.  And I must, because of time constraint, skip to 
the concluding part of my address.  

Let me say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the pursuit of sustainable development requires 
that attention be paid to the interactions between the environment, society and the economy. 
As a result, every small step towards sustainable development should be of value and needs 
to be assessed in relation to the scale of the long-term challenges.  

We  are  in  a  state  of  urgency.    We  need  now  to  ensure  that  all  our  efforts  are 
streamlined  so  as  to  be  more  proactive  and  efficient;  we  need  to  optimise  on  our  scarce 
resources, manpower, natural resources, infrastructure and energy. This only will enable us 
sustain the development that we need for our fellow citizens, without jeopardising our legacy 
to the future generations.  

Thank you.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

(Interruptions) 

 

(6.43 p.m.) 

Mr M.  Gobin (First  Member for Rivière des  Anguilles & Souillac): Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, before the hon. Minister leaves the House, I will seize this opportunity to thank 
him on my own name and also on behalf of the constituents of Constituency No. 13. Hon. 
Minister, I have had the opportunity of telling you that outside the House, I will seize this 
opportunity  now  to  say  it  here  officially.  I  know  you  have  been  physically  elected  in 
Constituency No. 7, but spiritually you were elected in Constituency No. 13. 

(Interruptions) 

I  see  that  you  have  not  omitted  to  include  Constituency  No.  13  in  your  Budget 
Speech. This takes me to the very first issue I want to talk about. I don’t want to talk about 
the  former  Government  because  otherwise  I  will  have  to  speak  volumes  about  it.  Let  me 
speak about what we proposed to do in this Government. We are a Government of action. 
The past is the past. Of course, we are going to clean up the mess.  Certainly! What I wanted 
to say is that the number one priority - and I see Constituency No. 13 is on that list - is the 
question of poverty alleviation. Out of the 38 poches de grande pauvreté listed in the annex 
to the Budget Speech, two are in Constituency No. 13. That is, EDC Camp Diable and EDC 
Batimarais.  Only a visit to those two places will show the harsh reality which the citizens of 
Constituency No. 13 face, and I am sure it is the same harsh reality in all the 38 places listed.  

 

111 

As a Government of action, it is not only a question of Budget Speech. In the first 
three  months,  there  was  a  clean-up  campaign  spearheaded  by  my  learned  friend  and  hon. 
Minister Bhadain.  We are all with you, hon. Minister in this clean-up campaign, because it is 
a huge mess. The more we dig, the more we find. But also, parallel to the clean-up campaign, 
there is a personal commitment of the hon. Ministers in Cabinet on poverty alleviation.  In 
three months, we have  had in Constituency No. 13, the visit of three hon. Ministers and  I 
seize  this  opportunity  here  to  thank  them,  hon.  Mrs  Perraud,  hon.  Sawmynaden  and  hon. 
Roopun. 

(Interruptions) 

And a fourth one added to the list, hon. Collendavelloo, yesterday. They were not 
courtesy calls; it shows the personal commitment of Members of Cabinet to address the plight 
of our citizens and I want to remind hon. Members and also the public at large, through this 
august Assembly, how do you explain to a worker of the tea industry in Bois Chéri who earns 
Rs7.90 for every kilogram of tea leaves plucked? Rs7.90 in 2015!  That’s not enough even to 
buy a morning newspaper. This is still the situation. How do you explain to those workers 
about the millions of rupees squandered? When we heard hon. Collendavelloo this morning, 
35% variation, a variation of Rs1 billion on one contract, I have never heard of that! How do 
we explain to all those citizens of this country?  How are we going to improve their lot?  And 
this is the very first difficulty that this Government has faced.  

We were faced with 10 years of a rotten Government. From the double taxation issue 
with India to the briani seller in Quatre Bornes!  Nothing done!  There was a gentleman, a 
Member  of  the  Labour  Party  elected  somewhere,  I  think,  in  Flacq  and  he  was  saying  that 
publicly on a private radio station, they wanted to amend the PSC regulations to recruit their 
friends  and  then,  when  he  was  caught  up  in  an  inquiry,  he  invented  some  sort  of  an 
explanation and he got away.  

That was the difficulty this Government had to face. With a public debt reaching 61%, 
I am laying the context in which this Budget has come and after reading this Budget Speech, I 
can  only  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and,  of 
course,  all  the  Members  of  Cabinet  who  have  participated  in  the  drafting  of  the  Budget 
Speech for coming up with this plan to improve the lot of our citizens.  

As  regards  poverty  alleviation,  how  do  you  tackle  this  question  of  poverty?  That 
worker from the tea industry, he is most probably not the owner of any plot of land himself, 
not  the  owner  of  the  house,  he  lives  in  rented  properties.  How  do  you  give  him  a  loan  to 
empower him? No financial institution will ever help such a person.  

 

112 

This is why I come immediately to that number one fundamental announcement: the 
creation of the SME bank. We lay a lot of emphasis on this and we have very high hopes on 
the performance of the new SME bank and this, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we firmly believe, 
will  empower  the  citizens  of  this  country.  I  spoke,  the  last  time  I  was  on  my  feet  in  the 
House,  of  the  paradigm  shift.  This  is  precisely  the  paradigm  shift  where  we  transform  a 
jobseeker into a job provider himself. If his enterprise succeeds, he will become an employer 
himself.  I’ll  come  back  to  that  Cité  EDC  Batimarais.    We  have  seen,  there  are  living 
examples  where  citizens  have  on  their  own  private  initiative  between  family  and  friends, 
gathered some money and started a small business; some pack ‘samoussas’ and sell, some do 
it with some ‘sev’, as we say it. They need some minimum capital just to buy a refrigerator or 
a refrigerated vehicle to transport and sell to the supermarket, but they cannot find the capital. 
This is where the SME bank will provide them with a solution and I thank the hon. Minister 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  Government,  more  particularly  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister, for having brought such a measure in the Budget.  

With the SME, poverty alleviation and the creation of the SME bank show how we 
have put such emphasis sur l’entrepreneuriat. There is not only the question of the SME bank 
now.  What comes next? Once you have the bank, and then, what? Should the entrepreneur 
run around and find that he has to get the licence from the Local Authority, Municipality or 
District Council, then the Fire Services, the Police Department, his neighbours and then the 
Registrar  of  Businesses  in  Port  Louis?  He  has  to  file  the  annual  returns,  to  queue  up  in 
January to pay his Rs2,500 to the Registrar of Companies.  Even before starting his business, 
the entrepreneur gives up.  

The second measure which comes after the SME bank is the one-stop shop.  That has 
been announced by the previous Government, I don’t even recall when, but it was never put 
in place.  In this Budget Speech, not only have we announced it, but we have even announced 
where it is going to be, how it is going to function and what are the measures, that is, for 
example,  the  omnibus  licence,  the  abolition  of  the  requirement  to  file  annual  returns,  no 
balance  sheet  except,  of  course,  the  filing  of  certain  records.  It  is  making  matters  much 
simpler for the entrepreneur to start his business.  

The third step is about trade facilitation which goes in the same line. What do these 
measures show?  They show that there is a clear vision where we want to go.  It is not une 
effet d’annonce, but full accompagnement of the entrepreneur. What is the next step?  

Once the entrepreneur stands up on his feet, starts his enterprise, becomes an employer; 
this will have un effet boule de neige. He will become, most probably, a first-time owner of 

 

113 

his home.  In this same Budget Speech, as a first-time home owner, he will have an increase 
in tax benefits. He will most probably be living, working and enjoying in the coming smart 
cities.  There is an alignment of thought, an alignment of ideas and this is what  I want to 
highlight.  It is not reasonable just to criticise for the sake of criticising.  I have heard my 
learned friend at the Bar, hon. Uteem.  I am not at all worried about the dam in Rivière des 
Anguilles.    I  know  it  is  going  to  be  constructed.    I  recall  the  answer  provided  by  hon. 
Collendavelloo  a  few  weeks  back;  that  money  was  provided  by  l’Agence  Française  de 
Développement.  It  lapsed  because  of  the  lashes  of  the  previous  Government.  Readily 
available money from l’Agence Française de Développement lapsed. 

(Interruptions) 

Even then it was not Government money.  It was l’Agence Française. Now, when 
we show our record of three months and we will show our record of transparency and good 
governance,  international  organisations  will  finance  it.    Not  only  the  dam  in  Rivière  des 
Anguilles, but elsewhere! All the drains that have been covered up with concrete everywhere 
will have to be looked into.  How can we explain to the inhabitants of Rivière du Poste who 
today  see  the  bridge  of  Rivière  du  Poste  crumbling  because  of  a  problem  of  drainage? 
Concrete  everywhere!    Bétonner!  En  plus  de  cela  bétonner  with  contracts  with  35%  of 
variation. In this context, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I can only say thank you once again and 
advise all those who are reading the Budget. Ce n’est pas un budget à lire.  C’est un budget à 
étudier. 

(Interruptions) 

Il faut étudier ce budget.  See the vision and the implementation how it is going to 
come. There are measures of implementation that have been set out at the back and I do not 
want to  go through them.  Those  reasonable  enough  will understand how we are  going to 
implement it. 

Just before resuming my seat, I just wish to draw the attention of the hon. Minister of 
Finance  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  one  matter  which  is  quite  worrying  for 
entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs to be; it is the question of the Mauritius Credit Information 
Bureau, the MCIB of the Central Bank. That MCIB holds, if I may say so, something called a 
blacklist of individuals and corporate bodies who have defaulted some time or the other in the 
repayment of some loans. Entrepreneurs very often face this difficulty because of their names 
appearing on that list, they have nowhere to go.  We will have to review the functioning so 
that the MCIB does not adversely affect, now, the coming into effect and the operations of 

 

114 

the new SME bank. They have to be given a second chance and if the MCIB comes in their 
way, we will have to review the situation.   

I will also highlight the need for interagency cooperation. We have reached a stage in 
the development of this country that all the agencies - most if not all- are already in existence. 
I  take  the  example  of  the  financial  services.  All  agencies  are  in  place,  but  we  face  the 
situation  where  sometimes  in  some  sectors  there  is  a  lack  of  interagency  cooperation.  
Sometimes  it  is  because  of  personal  ego  or  because  of  institutional  ego:  one  was  created 
before  the  other;  one  is  perceived  as  more  independent  than  the  other  and  this  sometimes 
blocks the cooperation. We will have to review this.  For example, the creation of a Financial 
Crime Commission is perhaps a solution for interagency cooperation in the financial services 
sector, but this is not only a question of financial services, I am just highlighting this for the 
attention  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  so  that  we  can 
implement fully all that we have announced.   

I will end where I started: the question of poverty alleviation.  We have heard a lot and 
it is now that we discover there are 38 pockets of poverty and these 38 have been listed.  I say 
it again; this Budget Speech doit être étudié. The question of parrainage and the 38 pockets 
of poverty are at paragraphs 173 and 176 at page 30 of the Budget Speech. I would quote 
paragraph 173 – 

“Madam Speaker, I would like to develop a new concept to allow for institutions that 
are  contributing  to  CSR  to  take  under  their  wings  those  unsustainable  pockets  of 
poverty  in  our  country.  I  am  speaking  here  of  the  concept  of  ‘parrainage’.  An 
indicative list of 38 pockets of poverty is at Annex.” 

The indicative list of 38 pockets of poverty is linked with the parrainage.  We did 

not say there are only 38 pockets of poverty in the whole of Mauritius.  

The 38 pockets of poverty will benefit from the parrainage. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence, please! 
Mr Gobin:  On the question of parrainage… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Henry, please! 
Mr  Gobin:    …  démission  du  gouvernement  or  a  question  of  privatisation  de  la 

pauvreté.  What not! 

(Interruptions) 

 

115 

Incompréhensible,  M.  le  president!    Those  companies  pay  15%  tax  plus  the  CSR.  Is  it 
Government money that we are taking out of the taxpayers money? We just want them to 
invest  priority  in  those  38  pockets  of  grande  pauvreté.  This  is  another  one  which  is  at 
paragraph 176 - ‘poches de grande pauvreté’.  The 200 and so pockets of poverty still exist, 
of course, but the priority for the parrainage will be for the 38.  

Of  course,  the  parrainage  will  take  place  in  collaboration  with  people  on  the 
ground, inhabitants and village councillors. Very soon, we are going to have, most probably, 
elections  and  we  will  have  the  right  persons  in  those  councils  and  we  will  really  bring 
development to the doorstep of the needy ones. 

I have been served with my notice, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I thank you. I thank 

(Interruptions) 

everybody and resume my seat. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

 (7.04 p.m.) 

Mr R. Rampertab (Second Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Madam Speaker, 
thank you for allowing me the floor tonight in this August National Assembly to address this 
House after our first great Budget Speech which was delivered by our Minister of Finance, 
hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo in the last sitting. 

Before I start my not too long delivery - as my Chief Whip has just sanctioned me on 
that - on the Budget Speech I would like to congratulate the Leader of this House, the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth for his 85th birthday which was greatly celebrated 
in Roches Noires last Sunday. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that there was something very peculiar about the birthday 
celebration this time compared to last year. In fact, this time the cake was shared only by Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth  and  without  even  a  shark  to  bite  it  despite  being  near  the  beaches  of 
Roches  Noires  which  is  a  very  famous  place  and  well-known  by  the  whole  population  of 
Mauritius today. 

Now  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  comments  on  the  great  Budget 
Speech  made  by  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. 

 

116 

Today,  Madam  Speaker,  one  of  the  challenges  facing  Mauritius  is,  as  outlined  in 

Chapter 5, page 11 of the Budget Speech, Training and Resource Development. 

I must say that and we all know that there is a good educational system in Mauritius, 
but  there  is  also  a  need  to  constantly  review  the  system  so  as  to  facilitate  access  for  all 
students  to  secondary  and  tertiary  education.  There  has  recently  been  a  lack  of  public 
confidence in the tertiary education and this confidence needs to be restored. 

Madam Speaker, the tertiary education sector has to be constantly reviewed so that it 
adapts to and answers the constantly changing market demands. It is an important sector that 
demands  considerable  funding  by  the  Government,  which  has  just  been  mentioned  in  our 
Budget, that is, over Rs80,000 to Rs100,000 per student per year. It also demands devotion, 
hard work and most importantly time at an important formative stage in the life of a student. 
Parents  and  students  themselves  need  assurance  that  appropriate  job  opportunities  are 
available on completion of the course of studies involving so much investment in terms of 
time  and  finance.  There  should  be  no  speculation,  Government  must  be  aware,  through 
proper planning of needs that will be available in the future. 

Madam  Speaker,  perhaps  we  should  look  back  at  our  history.  Our  country  has 
cleverly retained positive elements of both French and British colonial cultures with emphasis 
on  education  in  bilingual  (French  and  English)  cultures.  Post  independence  Mauritius  has 
pursued  their  vigourous  British  tradition  of  schooling  and  Mauritius  has  democratised  and 
adapted education to suit ethnic needs to preserve and promote ancestral values emanating 
from both Western and Eastern civilisations.  

The  educational  system  has,  by  and  large  produced  an  educated  workforce  and  an 
elite providing the necessary leadership. But it has also produced cultural elite that can bring 
positive  contribution  to  the  tourism  sector.  We  should  now  broaden  our  horizon,  Madam 
Speaker,  and  our  multi-cultural,  multi-lingual  abilities  needs  to  be  properly  tapped. 
Translation  studies  that  can  service  the  growing  international  television  industry,  film 
dubbing and generally translation at international conferences need to be tapped as well. 

Successive  Governments  have  encouraged  inter-culturality  and,  in  fact,  done  so  in 
areas of public entertainment and social gathering. We should look at inter-culturality as a 
binding force not as a source of division. 

Inter-culturality must become a Mauritian product, Madam Speaker. To start with, it 
promotes  a  sense  of  Mauritian  identity  conducive  to  patriotism  and  nation-building  and 

 

117 

peaceful co-existence. It also encourages positive cross-communal factors like upward social 
and economic mobility. There is also the growth of a sense of equity that can contribute to 
social stability which in turn will encourage the nurture of democratic values by maintaining 
social  harmony  and  capitalising  on  the  strength  of  its  ethnic  diversity.  Madam  Speaker, 
Mauritius can foster a stable democratic political system and high quality institutions. 

The  activities  of  the  proposed  three  campuses  in  our  budget,  namely,  at  Réduit, 
Montague Longue and Pamplemousses have to be constantly reviewed so that it answers the 
ever changing market demands of trained and skilled manpower. 

Government  is  taking  the  right  step  in  reviewing  the  role  and  functions  of  the 
Mauritius  Institute  of  Training  and  Development.  It  is  time  to  put  greater  emphasis  on 
training  for  trades  that  had  increased  demands  associated  with  rise  in  standard  of  living. 
Electricians,  plumbers,  builders,  bricklayers,  decorators,    carpenters,  painters  and  stylish 
furniture makers, such industries associated with providing services to these areas must be 
encouraged. 

Madam  Speaker,  again  looking  back  at  history,  the  boom  in  the  domestic  housing 
sector created a class of masons, crépiseurs and décorateur en pierre volcanique. We must 
look into this and encourage youngsters with the right aptitude to make careers in them. The 
domestic  housing  sector,  Madam  Speaker,  has  indeed  a  future  in  terms  of  investment, 
financial and skilled manpower. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  raise  another  issue  connected  with  education.  But  it  is  also 
linked with the Mauritian diaspora. In the years 1960’s, 1970’s and even early 80’s Mauritius 
provided UK and many  other countries with a lot of students mainly nursing.  Our fellow 
Mauritians seem to have done reasonably well in the UK especially, where some have even 
excelled providing nursing services to the elderly and handicapped.  We will soon have the 
growth of an ageing population in Mauritius. We can use the acquired skills and experiences 
of the Mauritian diaspora. As our Minister of Finance rightly said, encouragement should be 
given to them in Mauritius in terms of both finance and other help. 

I will come to the Pamplemousses Campus, which the Government has a vision for, 
and which will offer courses in health care for nurses, technicians and trained personnel in the 
medical field, which is mostly welcome - I know that. The care industry for the elderly, if I 
may call it, is bound to grow, Madam Speaker. We must carefully plan and encourage it.  We 
need to carefully plan for the care of our elderly. We will soon be elders; some very soon and 

 

118 

others soon after. Research in these areas must be encouraged, statistics must be compiled, 
and projection made with proper and appropriate arrangement. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, it 
will be a moral abdication. As a responsible, caring Government, we must act now. 

The Montagne Blanche Campus, reserved for a Polytechnic offering courses, mainly 
in Tourism and Hotel Management is a warmly welcome venture, Madam Speaker.  This is 
another sector that is bound to grow.  Madam Speaker, we do not realise how lucky we are in 
Mauritius.  We have the sun, the sea and the sand.  We must by all means maintain them eco-
wise.    We  must  hand  them  in  their  proper  appropriate  state  to  our  successors.    Ecological 
studies must form part of the curriculum from pre-primary to the tertiary.  Ecological care 
must become a part of our social habit. 

Madam Speaker, I must also say that recent speedboats and sea accidents have given 
our tourism sector some concern.  We must look into it and train our personnel properly, so 
that these kinds of things do not happen again.  As we know, we rely a lot on foreign tourists 
who do bring in billions of rupees in foreign currencies and, as we all know, it is one of the 
most profitable industries today.  It is our duty to make sure that those foreigners are safe in 
our country. 

Madam Speaker, as a legal person myself, I feel called upon to draw the attention of 
all  the  authorities  concerned  to  the  deplorable  conditions  prevailing  in  connection  with 
professional  legal  education  in  Mauritius.    I  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  vocational 
training of barristers, attorneys and notaries in Mauritius has many advantages, and many of 
our legal practitioners trained in Mauritius have excelled themselves in their respective fields.  
This  vocational  training  in  Mauritius  also  allows  those  who  are  financially  not  well  off  to 
pursue their ambition in a field in which they  may have innate talents.  However, Madam 
Speaker,  the  manner  in  which  vocational  training  is  being  organised  and  conducted  in 
Mauritius leaves much to be desired. 

In  a  gist,  the  problem  lies  with  the  inadequate  training  which  is  dispensed  to 
prospective barristers, attorneys and notaries.  We all know in this House, for a number of 
years, the  results of vocational examinations have been  catastrophic  and disheartening.   In 
most years, only a couple of candidates out of some 70 or 80 or so have passed Barristers’ 
exam, and the percentage of passes of Attorneys and Notaries has only been slightly higher. 

The testimony of those who have not succeeded in those exams makes it clear that the 
reason behind so much failure is the dichotomy between training and examination. In other 
words,  the  students  have  been  given  academic  lectures,  generally  speaking,  and  then  been 
faced in the exam room with practical problems which they have never been taught to solve.  

 

119 

The  situation  was  already  bad  when  the  courses  were  being  dispensed  by  the  Council  of 
Legal  Education  itself.    But  since  the  University  of  Mauritius  has  taken  over  the  training 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Council  of  Legal  Education,  the  situation  has  considerably 
worsened. Comme on dit: sap dans carraille tombe dans difé, as has been voiced out by many 
CLE students who have visited me lately. 

I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  lack  of  communication  between  the  Council  of 
Legal  Education  and  the  University  of  Mauritius  has  contributed  to  the  deterioration 
mentioned  above,  and  that  this  lack  of  communication  is  mostly  due  to  the  difficulty  of 
communicating with the Chairman and members of the Council of Legal Education. 

Imagine, Madam Speaker, a student being taught chemistry in a theoretical manner, 
and then at exam time being asked in the exam room to carry out practical exercises with 
Bunsen burners, test tubes, gases and what not. This is not an exaggerated analogy to what is 
happening to vocational students wishing to become legal practitioners. 

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, I am making a vibrant appeal to all those concerned to 
look into the matter urgently.  As a matter of fact, an amount of not less than Rs100,000 is 
being required by way of fees from every vocational student, and I am given to understand 
that the Council of Legal Education has been refusing lately to exercise its discretion to allow 
students  who  have  not  passed  the  exams  previously  to  take  those  exams  anew  without 
following again the university course but paying the Rs100,000 fees. 

Madam Speaker, some students and their parents have mortgaged their properties to 
take big loans amounting to millions of rupees to become graduates and try to get through the 
professional legal courses, but, unfortunately, nearly 90% of them are disappointed and still 
struggling to get through the professional exams conducted in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, some have to go elsewhere, abroad and again spend a fortune to do 
their  final  law  exams,  and  funnily  enough  they  all  come  out  with  flying  colours  in  their 
respective vocational exams. I feel sorry for those who cannot afford that extra bit of money 
to fulfil their dream of becoming a legal practitioner. Today, I can say that these exams which 
are  being  conducted  in  Mauritius,  failure  is  guaranteed  and  the  exception  is  to  pass  the 
exams, and there is no distinction between working hard or not.  I urge, Madam Speaker, that 
those  persons  who  are  involved  in  deciding  the  future  of  these  hard-working  students  do 
justice to them. 

Madam Speaker, before ending, I would like to quote the great writer and philosopher 

Rousseau who said – 

 

120 

“Children are only empty barrels when they are born.  It is our responsibility 
and duty to fill those barrels with the right ingredients and contents and prepare them 
for their adult life.” 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Tarolah! 

  
(7.21 p.m) 

Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.    First  of  all,  let  me  seize  this  opportunity  to  wish  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister happy birthday, and we pray to the Almighty for the blessing that all the happiness 
and good health be bestowed upon him. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  commencer  par  féliciter  chaleureusement 
l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo, ministre des Finances et du Développement économique ainsi 
que le Premier ministre pour ce budget qui est another building block at the crossroad pour 
une Ile Maurice pour tous. 

Madam Speaker, let me start my intervention on this very daring Budget, I must say.  
Je  dois  dire  qu’il  fallait  beaucoup  d’imagination  pour  laquelle  je  félicite  l’honorable 
Ministre des Finances, encore une fois, ainsi que le Premier Ministre, et toute son équipe qui 
a travaillé avec lui, parce que, sûrement, il y a des penseurs au niveau du gouvernement qui 
ont fait beaucoup de travail.  

This  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  comes  at  an  important  time  at  the  crossroad  in  the 
history  of  our  country.  In  fact,  we  came  to  power  a  few  months  ago  under  the  Prime 
Ministership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  We  have  seen  so  many  problems  cropping  up  for 
which the country itself was not responsible. 

Je  dois,  encore  une  fois,  dire  que  c’est  un  budget  -  un  coup  de  maître    -  avec  des 
mesures  encore  plus  révolutionnaires.  Bravo!  C’est  formidable!  Cela  va  faire  bouger  les 
choses et les mesures vont devenir aujourd’hui une réalité. Des mesures révolutionnaires pour 
les gens, surtout pour ceux qui sont en difficulté. 

Un  budget  nous  donne  les  orientations,  nous  donne  les  moyens  pour  agir  selon  un 
programme établi pour chaque ministère, mais le budget est aussi là malheureusement pour 
corriger les erreurs du passé, commises par nos prédécesseurs comme le Ring Road, le Terre 
Rouge/Verdun sans faire ressortir le fameux Bagatelle Dam, pour considérer les problèmes 
récents, de l’heure, qui sont à l’horizon et pour préparer une riposte à ces problèmes. Ce qui 
fait que le budget est aussi un exercice pour préparer l’avenir. 

 

121 

Il fait tout son possible pour que la population soit la plus heureuse possible dans la 
conjoncture actuelle, mais il fait tellement bien que la population risque de croire que tout va 
à merveille, c’est facile. Mais ce n’est pas du tout cela, il faut tenir le  poêlon pour savoir 
combien c’est chaud et comment il faut faire. 

Madam Speaker, it is essential that we have a clear vision of the future we want for our 
nation. The belief for a policy of national sharing is as crucial for maintaining social justice. 
Considering  the  prevalence  of  so  many  pockets  of  poverty  in  our  country,  the  idea  of 
parrainage  is  very  much  welcomed.  Having  a  look  at  the  list  of  regions  among  the  38 
pockets of poverty, we can notice that the largest number of households is in the region of 
Cité CHA, Bel Air with 321 households. This specific region had been visited in the past by 
the Leader of the MSM, hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth on the occasion of the celebration of 
the 30th anniversary of the MSM party. He is fully aware of the conditions of living and the 
state of their housing units. The inhabitants of the Cité CHA, Bel Air will soon be knowing a 
change  in  the  environment  and  are  very  thankful  to  the  Leader  of  the  MSM  and  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance for the consideration given to them in this very first Budget of l’Alliance 
Lepep. 

Madam  Speaker,  shelter  is  a  basic  need;  a  need  that  we  all  share,  and  one  which  is 
essential to a heavily populated life. Instead of providing either boîtes allumettes or ‘kazot 
poule’  to  poor  people,  Government  has  thus  embarked  on  a  number  of  projects  with  new 
housing programmes which will provide affordable houses to those needy families, without 
forgetting the concept of ‘roti, kapra aur makaan’. 

Madam Speaker, let us come to the primary education, where we know that our biggest 
challenge  is  to  tackle  the  rate  of  failure  at  CPE.  The  predecessors,  Madam  Speaker,  have, 
over the year, been toying with the idea of reforms and remedial action. They addressed this 
problem but they met with very little success. 

Madam Speaker, with the necessary support of this Government, the decision has been 
taken  to  introduce  the  necessary  reforms  that  would  give  a  new  orientation  to  the  whole 
primary sector for provision of quality education to every child, not only in terms of learner 
academic  achievement,  but  also  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  the  holistic  development  and 
integral development of the child, as we say. 

The Special Education Needs Resource and Development Centre est quelque chose de 
nouveau. C’est une école spécialisée pour les handicapés, autrement capables et cela pourrait 
être un enfant who is attending a school somewhere, run by  les Forces Vives. Ces enfants ont 
besoin parfois de choses extrêmement adaptées à eux. Pour cela, ces enfants peuvent utiliser 

 

122 

les services de ce Special Education Needs Resource and Development Centre.  Ils sont pris 
en charge à partir de l’école où ils sont et ils sont emmenés à ces écoles spécialisées. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  purpose  is  simple.  These  centres  provide  specialised  support, 
specialised  equipment  and  training  that  other  schools  cannot  provide.  Alors,  ce  qu’ils  ne 
peuvent  pas  faire  eux,  cela  existe  dans  ces  écoles.  On  voit  que  cet  enfant  a  besoin  de 
certaines choses spécifiques ; selon le cas, ils sont emmenés dans ces écoles spécialisées qui 
ont été mises sur pied.  One such school has already been set up at Ferney and the setting up 
of another Special Needs Resource Centre at Flacq is most welcome. 

Madam  Speaker,  emphasise  is  being  made  and  priority  actions  carried  along  the 
following fields: Curriculum development and adaptation for different types of impairments 
with the support and expertise from development partners. Norms and standards and quality 
assurance is SEN schools. 

Recognition of prior learning or staff est très important parce que ces éducateurs qui 
travaillaient, et qui travaillent encore avec ces enfants handicapés dans ces ONGs n’ont pas 
nécessairement des diplômes ou des certificats. Mais ils ont une expérience ; ils ont vécu et 
travaillé avec ces enfants, et y ont passé de longues années et parfois toute leur vie  avec ces 
enfants.  Le ministère peut voir leur condition de travail - ça aussi c’est une innovation – et  
quel doit être leur salaire. Quand on parle de salaire, on  commence à dire: ‘quel est votre 
certificat’?  C’est  pour  cela  qu’on  doit  donner  la  possibilité  d’adapter  what  we  call  the 
recognition  of  prior  learning,  c’est-à-dire,  l’expérience  que  vous  avez  eue  avec  une  petite 
formation théorique au niveau des écoles spécialisées. 

Madam Speaker, ICT, which is, in itself an emerging sector, un créneau porteur comme 
on dit, at the crossroad Mega projects have been announced in this Budget with the coming 
up of the technopoles, and thus ICT has already been initiated in education with efforts of 
Government to expand the process of digitising classrooms, which was initiated with what is 
now well-known as the Sankoré Project. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  provision  of  ICT  must  be  accompanied  by  the  necessary 
managerial and systematic change to ensure that ICT becomes common practice and part and 
parcel of the system as a whole.  Il ne suffit pas d’avoir le système, il faut que les enfants 
puissent faire des classes avec.  ICT should be taught and examined as a subject as from the 
primary level itself. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to innovative and  visionary measures  announced in the 
Budget  to  boost  growth  and  development,  the  Budget  provides  a  formidable  bundle  to 
facilitate business, more specifically, to SMEs with the setting up of a one-stop shop which 

 

123 

will provide under one roof all support, financing and information, as well as the delivery of 
permits to start and build up a business. 

Madam Speaker, these facilities that I spoke before, the Budget creates economic space 
for a smooth transition to the world of work, and introduces a package of reform measures to 
accelerate business activities. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  that  largely  reflects  the  vision  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister contains so many development issues that we would like to comment and explain to 
the nation, but time constraint make it necessary to draw a line somewhere. 

Madam Speaker, I will now say something which I think has caused a lot of problems 
in  this  country,  the  issue  of  ‘nation  zougadère’.  Many  people  in  the  vision  and  desire  to 
become rich, happen to lose the little they possess. It is a great and courageous measure taken 
in this Budget, people will benefit by it and improve their environment and their life.  

Last but not least, to note that this Government had to bring smile on the face of not 
only our elders by bringing the monthly pension to Rs5,000 but rather to those parents whose 
children are undergoing  SC and HSC examinations by removing this headache of the fees of 
these examinations mentioned above.  

I will conclude, Madam Speaker, with a quote from Thomas Carlyle which says - and 
this is the characteristic of this Government with hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo and the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, I quote – 

“Permanence,  perseverance  and  persistence  in  spite  of  all  obstacles, 
discouragements,  and  impossibilities:  It  is  this,  that  in  all  things  distinguishes  the 
strong soul from the weak.” 
Thank you for your attention. 

 
 (7.33 p.m.) 

Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & Grand River South 
East): Madam Speaker, I know it has been a very long session, so, I will not be too long and 
will stick to the essential part of the Budget. 

Thank you, hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

So, I will start by congratulating the hon. Minister of Finance for his excellent work 
and the good Budget which he has presented and also the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for all his 
guidance  to  his  team  and  the  Government  as  a  whole.  I  am  glad  to  intervene  on  this 

 

124 

Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill and contribute with the little experience I have in the field of 
finance and business.  

We  all  know  in  which  state  we  inherited  this  country  during  the  last  election.  The 
state  of  the  economy  was  such  in  a  bad  shape  that  when  we  look  at  the  economic 
fundamentals such as the growth rate, the rate of unemployment, the balance of trade deficit, 
the debt level of the country, all these indicators were in the red. We all know that for nearly 
a decade, the Labour Government has dipped our country with massive mismanagement, with 
lots  of  bad  decisions,  lots  of  frauds,  corruption  and  bad  governance  which  has  cost  us 
billions. Billions of rupees of public money have been wasted.  We know that this country 
was  not  doing  well  and  this  is  the  reason  why  during  the  last  election,  the  people  of  this 
country  decided to make a sweeping change in  Government. When  we  hear very negative 
comments  from  some  Members  of  the  Opposition,  we  can  only  realise  that  they  have  not 
changed as rightly said by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. For years, they have continued with 
the same rhetoric, with the same kind of speech painting a very pessimistic picture, but the 
people of this country have learned the lesson and they know what they are at because a few 
months  ago  these  people  who  are  teaching  us  lessons  today,  were  with  the  Labour  Party 
campaigning together and would have probably been in power if they would have won the 
last election. So, we have no lesson to take from them and, as a responsible Government, we 
know clearly in which way we are heading and we have a very clear strategy.  

Only yesterday, I saw a comment made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition saying 
that this Budget ‘c’est un crime contre l’avenir’. So, what has not been said on this Budget 
and just to pass a quick remark on this Budget which does not contain anything, which has 
been a deception for some, our friend from the Opposition, hon. Reza Uteem spent one hour 
fifteen minutes to comment a budget in which it has got nothing.  

So, to say that Opposition is here to oppose, Opposition is here to criticise, but there 
were  some  Members  who  initially  said  that  they  were  going  to  contribute  positively,  to 
engage in positive dialogue, to contribute to the construction of this country. So, I hope that 
they will contribute; they will bring constructive contribution for the future of this country.  

I know that the hon. Minister of Finance has got a philosophy for this Budget, which 
has  been  probably  misunderstood  by  some  Members  of  the  Opposition  because  they  have 
been highlighting the fact that Government is not investing much and that there has been a 
fall in the Capital Budget. But my friend, the hon. Minister of Financial Services highlighted 
that the role of Government has changed and Government is now playing a role of facilitator, 
a role of partner.  

 

125 

What we want to do is - if I may make an analogy - instead of travelling by a bus, we 
want to travel by a train, by a TGV to achieve our target in the quickest way possible. So, this 
is what we want to do. We want to embark the whole nation, the whole country, we want to 
embark the private sector at work and get the contribution of one and all in this process of 
transforming the economy of our country. This is what the hon. Minister of Finance is aiming 
at. Even if we want to invest more, we have limited amount of resources and we cannot do 
much.  So,  this  is  why  we  have  to  rely  on  diverse  sources  and  one  of  these  sources  is  the 
private sector.  We will also count on Foreign Direct Investment that we expect to get when 
we develop new sectors and, most importantly, the Minister of Finance has laid emphasis on 
the development of the entrepreneurship.  

New entrepreneurs will come at work and they will create economic activities, they 
will be self-employed, they will also create additional employment. So, when we look at the 
Opposition claiming that we said that we are going to create 15,000 jobs, they give this false 
impression  to the  public  that  Government  was  going  to  employ  15,000  people  every  year. 
This is not true, Madam Speaker. What we said is: we will engage on the path of growth with 
the  objective  of  creating  maximum  employment  with  expectation  of  15,000  on  an  annual 
basis.  Government  is  already  doing  its  lot.  We  have  embarked  on  a  policy  whereby  over 
6,000 people will be employed by the Government, but we want to do more. That’s why there 
have  been  many  new  institutions  which  are  being  set  up  like  the  SME  bank.  The  hon. 
Minister has also come up with new ideas like the Gold Reserve Fund to make maximum use 
of our limited resources so that we  can attain the objective of  growth in the quickest way 
possible. 

Madam Speaker, I think the whole philosophy is to enlarge our economic base and we 
can only enlarge our economic base by empowering our people, those who want to become 
an entrepreneur, those who want to engage in business and this Government has made this 
process  very  simple  by  offering  a  complete  package  of  facilities  and  incentives  for  those 
Mauritians who want to engage in business.  

Madam  Speaker,  for  many  years  we  have  had  an  economy  which  was 
underperforming. We have been underinvesting. This Budget is undoubtedly a new edifice in 
the  economic  transformation  of  our  country  just  as  in  1983,  the  first  economic  miracle. 
Despite headwinds besetting the global economy, the hon. Minister has convinced one and all 
that  Mauritius  outlook  remains  bright  and  optimistic.  The  hon.  Minister  has  been  greatly 
successful in the ways he has balanced various stakeholders’ demands. The Government has 
set a high target and I agree that we all have to be a bit more ambitious. The positive intention 

 

126 

to  stimulate  investments  and  rekindle  economic  growth  cannot  be  achieved  by  the 
Government  only.  In  this  fast  moving  world,  the  role  of  Government  in  the  economy  has 
changed into that of a facilitator and a partner with narrow intervention as I just said.  

There have been some  frivolous criticisms about the Budget mainly  concerning the 
low  level  of  capital  expenditure  proposed.  The  Opposition  has  not  well  understood  the 
economic  strategy  of  the  Government.  The  population  is  now  used  to  the  negative  and 
pessimistic comments and the sweeping generalisations of the Opposition. The Government 
is  serious  about  its  growth  plans  for  the  Mauritian  economy,  job  creation  and  poverty 
alleviation.  Fortunately,  not  all  in  the  Opposition,  I  must  say,  have  seen  only  the  negative 
side, because Members of the political bureau: Steven Obeegadoo, even Arvin Boolell and 
Eric Guimbeau have all a contrary view from their colleagues. They have admitted that the 
Budget  also  contains  good  measures.  The  Budget  has  been  widely  acclaimed  as  a  bold, 
innovative and has given much hope to the nation. According to latest surveys, public opinion 
is favourable and 80% of Mauritians approve Government action.  

Indeed, after decades of lagging behind the curve, Mauritius is now set to work its 
way  from  stagnation  to  a  more  buoyant  economic  landscape.  Even  if  socio-economic 
challenges persist at various levels, there is every reason to shed pessimism and embrace a 
positive mindset which contemplates economic and commercial prospects after the Budget. 
The  economic  miracle  will  certainly  be  achieved  with  the  contribution  of  our  fellow 
countrymen. The long-term economic plan is all about raising living standards for everyone 
in  this  country.  Prosperity  is  strengthened  when  everyone  has  the  capacity  to  participate 
effectively in the economy and the benefits of growth are widely shared. We know that if we 
are to bring prosperity this will require providing the right conditions for investment in skills, 
infrastructure and innovation.  

As  I  said  earlier,  the  role  that  the  Government  plays  in  the  economy  is  changing. 
Thus, collaboration across the public, private and not-for-profit sectors is fast becoming key 
nodes to delivering services. Co-creation and co-production are becoming more important in 
policy  development  and  delivery.  Well-being  is  at  the  core  of  diverse  policy  agendas  and 
having a job is rated the highest contributor to life satisfaction of most people. Our ability to 
deliver on job creation is highly dependent on investment. A major objective of the Budget is 
to ignite the economy and improve overall business environment in a bid to further motivate 
the private sector to invest more and create jobs. Thus, a massive investment of some Rs123 
billion  in  megaprojects  is  expected  in  the  next  coming  years.  Major  emphasis  on  self-

 

127 

employment  and  developing  an  entrepreneur  culture  by  a  series  of  measures  to  facilitate 
business creation has also been announced.  

For its part, Government plans to create more than 6000 jobs in the next coming year 
whereas young graduates will be fast tracked to an employment of their choice by upgrading 
their technical skills and abilities through special training. I, nevertheless, believe that there 
are  some  areas  which  could  be  further  improved  in  this  Budget  by  the  Government.  The 
decision  to  set  up  the  Gold  Reserve  Fund  to  reactivate  the  Financial  Services  Promotion 
Authority and, at the same time, increase MTPA’s Budget is salutary. In this same breath, it 
would pay dividend to redefine the role of the Board of Investment and review the Mauritius 
brand. Mauritius can  get high marketing mileage by reviving these institutions and getting 
talented people to lead them.  

I believe improving productivity of manpower, management, capital and technology 
are critical for efficiency and our global competitiveness. Being an open economy which is 
competing  globally,  I  think  Mauritius  badly  needs  international  expertise  and  a  transfer  of 
know-how.  We  should  be  prepared  to  invest  in  institutional  capacity-building  instead  of 
pursuing short-term goals only.  

The Civil Service is the principal instrument of Central Government for ensuring the 
delivery of its programme, improving public administration and public services would have 
been another area which deserves careful attention.  

Coming  to  the  African  agenda,  I  would  like  to  add  a  few  words  on  our  African 
strategy, having myself been involved on numerous assignments in the past in Africa. Indeed, 
Africa  presents  interesting  opportunities  and  we  should  not  wait  further  to  pursue  our 
regional diversification strategy. Government should drive this important initiative itself by 
way of a roadmap. A good initiative would be to get State-owned enterprises such as SIC, 
SBM,  SICOM,  MT,  MHC  to  participate  in  this  adventure  into  Africa.  Implementation  of 
budgetary measures has always been the biggest challenge and many good ideas and projects 
have  failed  to  take  shape  for  various  reasons.  There  must  not  be  any  gap  between  the 
intention of policy and the actual achievement of that policy. There is policy failure when 
there is a gap between a policy decision and its implementation for any Government is judged 
on its administrative competence to implement the whole plan.  

Growth and health of an economy are highly dependent on the functioning of its social 
and environmental condition.  We are optimistic of the future of our country.  We believe that 
the  confluence  of  intertwined  and  self    reinforcing  factors  will  power  the  economic  and 
development  takeoff  like  in  the  80s.  Improved  macroeconomic  management,  economic 

 

128 

diversification  as  well  as  enhanced  business  climate,  increased  FDI  flows  to  a  diversified 
range of sectors. Technological and innovation leapfrogging. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget marks a policy change from that of the previous Labour 
Government, from that of an economic ultra-liberalism, from that which made the rich richer 
and the poor poorer, from economic stagnation, from jobless growth, from mismanagement 
of  public  funds,  fraudulent  and  corrupt  practices  and  opacity,  from  bad  governance, 
favouritism,  nepotism  and  protection  des  petits  copains.  This  budget  therefore  sets  our 
country  on  a  new  path  for  a  meaningful  change  in  the  life  of  Mauritians  and  for  many 
generations to come. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Aliphon:  Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Rampertab rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime  Minister:    Madam Speaker,  I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Wednesday 01 April 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

 

MATTER RAISED 

(7.54 p.m)  
LYCÉE LA BOURDONNAIS - POLITICAL SCIENCE – BACHELOR DEGREE 
Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a specific matter at adjournment time.  
A specific matter which reads as follows and addressed to the hon. Minister of Education and 
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research – 

 

129 

“The plight of the students following a bachelor degree course in political science at the 
Lycée La Bourdonnais in collaboration with ‘Sciences Po d’Aix en Provence’” 

This  is  a  very  sad  and  unfortunate  matter.  Madam  Speaker,  the  Lycée  La 
Bourdonnais, since January 2014, has been conducting a degree course leading to a bachelor 
degree  in  political  science  in  collaboration  with  Sciences  Po  d’Aix  en  Provence.  For  the 
launching  of  that  degree  course  in  2014,  Mr  Michel  Dumas, chargé des  relations 
Internationales à Sciences Po d’Aix en Provence/Océan Indien-Caraïbes came to Mauritius 
and made a speech during the launching of that course.  I will quote what he said during the 
launching of that course - 

« Sciences  Po  Maurice  est  maintenant une  véritable  entité  juridique.  Elle  a  été 
enregistrée et j'en ai pris la direction »  

Thus, the three-year degree course is validated after obtention of 180 Euro Credit 
Transfer System and, therefore, the degree is awarded by the Department of Political Studies 
at the Institute of Political Studies of the University d’Aix en Provence.  I would also, Madam 
Speaker, draw the attention of the House of the existing partnership between the University 
d’Aix en Provence and the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry.   

It was also stated at the time that a Masters course will be offered in due course. The 
educational  requirements  for  such  a  course  is  the  baccalauréat,  the  HSC  and  the  GCE 
Advanced level.  Admissions were considered after study and approval of a dossier submitted 
to the Commission.  Mr Dumas also stated the following in his speech – 

«Cette formation supérieure est une réelle opportunité pour les élèves mauriciens des 
lycées  français  et  des  écoles  internationales  pour  offrir  une  formation  aux  cadres 
professionnels et cadres supérieures. » 

On that day, le Proviseur du Lycée La Bourdonnais also took the floor and stated 

the following – 

«Nous  voulons  qu’une  information  sérieuse  soit  passée  alors  que  les  étudiants 
mauriciens se présentent actuellement aux examens de fin d’études secondaires afin 
qu’ils puissent se positionner en vue des études tertiaires. 

Après  soixante  ans  d’expérience  en  matière  d’éducation  primaire  et 
secondaire  nous  élargissons  notre  offre  de  formation.  Nous  allons  au-delà  du 
baccalauréat  et  nous  offrons  une  filière  d’enseignement  supérieur.  Ce  n’est  pas  un 
diplôme du Lycée La Bourdonnais mais un diplôme estampillé IEP d’Aix en Provence 
et une carte d’Aix en Provence assortie de tous les avantages de ceux ayant un statut 
d’étudiant d’Aix en Provence. 

 

130 

Ainsi  que  pour  les  bacheliers  de  l’océan  Indien.  Elle  va  leur  permettre  de 
poursuivre  leurs  études  dans  une  grande  école,  reconnue  internationalement  tout  en 
restant pour la majorité  d’entre eux dans leur pays. En délocalisant un établissement 
d’enseignement  supérieur  à  Maurice,  au  Lycée  La  Bourdonnais,  établissement 
conventionné avec l’Agence pour l’enseignement français à l’étranger l’excellence du 
système éducatif français à l’étranger s’en trouve renforcée. » 

Et il ajouta ce jour là- 

« Nous ne sommes pas là pour faire du business uniquement.  
Nous  sommes  là  pour  durer  dans  le  temps.  Nous  voulons  participer  au 
développement  de  l’enseignement  à  Maurice  avec  des  diplômes  français.  Nous 
disposons désormais d’un dispositif à travers la MCCI Business School » 
Madame la présidente, déjà une année de cela il y avait des rumeurs qui circulaient sur 
la possibilité d’arrêter ce cours.  Mais les élèves furent rassurés par le proviseur du Lycée La 
Bourdonnais.  Les élèves terminèrent donc leur deuxième année et poursuivirent un stage de 
formation de trois mois.  Le 17 mars 2015, les élèves furent convoqués par le proviseur du 
Lycée.  Le 24 mars, les parents et les élèves de la deuxième année ont rencontré le proviseur.   
Hier, ils ont eu une session de vidéoconférence avec le directeur de Sciences Po d’Aix 
en Provence, M. Franck Biglione qui a été nommé à ce poste après le départ de M. Dumas en 
décembre 2014.  Voilà le contenu de cette discussion.  

« Le  Bachelor  Science  Politique,  objet  de  la  convention  signée  entre  le  Lycée  La 
Bourdonnais et IEP d’Aix en Provenance n’a pas d’existence légale car il n’a jamais été 
validé  par  le  conseil  d’administration  de  Science  Po  d’Aix  en  Provence.    Ce  qui 
implique  l’attestation  de  scolarité  de  première  année  du  Bachelor  d’étude  politique 
stipulant la validation de 60 CTS délivrés aux étudiants sur entête officiel de Sciences 
Po et signés par le Directeur et présentant le tampon de l’IEP n’a aucune valeur.  Les 
élèves de deuxième année ne se verront décerner aucun crédit alors qu’initialement ils 
en  devaient  obtenir  60  pendant  la  première  année.  Pour  intégrer  maintenant  un  autre 
cursus  universitaire,  nos  jeunes  étudiants  doivent  justifier  de  l’obtention  de  ces 
crédits. »    

Maintenant  ils  demandent  à  ces  élèves  d’aller  se  faire  inscrire  ailleurs.  Mais, 
malheureusement,  les  inscriptions  post-bac  France  sont  terminées.  Cette  piste  est,  donc,  à 
exclure pour la réorientation de ces enfants. L’IEP d’Aix-en-Provence propose de remplacer 
le Bachelor en sciences politiques par une Licence d’administration publique. 

 

131 

Cette  Licence  propose  des  débouchés  professionnels  visant 

les  concours 
administratifs.  Cette  Licence  est  un  diplôme  français.  Malheureusement,  des  étudiants  de 
nationalité mauricienne ne pourront en aucun cas utiliser cette Licence en dehors du territoire 
français.  Il  fraudrait  souligner  que  le  coût  de  cette  Licence  réalisée  en  France  est  compris 
entre 350 et 500 euros par an, ce qui ne correspond pas avec les 4,000 à 5,000 euros par an 
versés au Lycée La Bourdonnais depuis deux ans. Si tel est le cas, le gouvernement mauricien 
devra  aussi  certainement  valider  cette  formation,  ce  qui  risque  de  prendre  énormement  de 
temps puisqu’il n’est pas encore au courant de cette information. Ce qui est plus difficile à 
accepter pour ces étudiants, c’est que maintenant l’IEP d’Aix-en-Provence leur demande de 
se faire enregistrer sous un autre statut. Ces étudiants ne veulent pas se faire enregistrer sous 
ce  statut,  parce  qu’en  France  ce  sont  les  seniors  qui  se  font  enregistrer  sous  ce  statut-là. 
Conclusion,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  Bachelor  d’études  politiques  vendu  à  ces  enfants 
mauriciens  a  été  annoncé  en  grande  pompe  dans  la  presse  locale,  que  ce  soit  par 
l’ambassadeur de France à Maurice, que ce soit par le proviseur du Lycée La Bourdonnais, 
que ce soit par le représentant de l’Université d’Aix-en-Provence. 

Madame  le  présidente,  des  communications  ont  été  envoyées  par  ces  parents  à 
Madame  Lagarde,  présidente  du  conseil  d’administration  de  Sciences  Po  et  présidente  du 
FMI, et aussi à Madame Najat Vallaud-Belkacem, actuelle ministre de l’Education nationale 
française. Ce qu’il faudrait savoir c’est que ces parents estiment que c’est une escroquerie. Ils 
se sont fait avoir depuis deux ans, et leurs enfants malheureusement, maintenant, ne savent 
plus quoi faire, aussi bien que les parents. 

I  have  raised  this  issue  because  we  are  talking  of  Mauritius  as  a  knowledge-hub.  I 
think, yesterday, the hon. Minister was with representatives from universities from France.   I 
think we should look into this issue seriously and try to find a very rapid solution. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam  Speaker,  this  matter  has 
been reported to my Ministry, and  I have requested the Tertiary Education Commission to 
conduct an exercise and to initiate appropriate action. 

I am informed by the TEC that the situation is as follows - this has already been stated 
by the hon. Member of the Opposition, but I will still mention a few points. The Bachelier 
d’études en sciences politiques was a programme awarded by the Institut d’études politiques 

 

132 

of the Université d’Aix-en-Provence, Grandes Ecoles, in France. The programme is run and 
managed  in  Mauritius  by  the  Lycée  La  Bourdonnais,  which  is  registered  with  the  Tertiary 
Education Commission as a post-secondary education provider. 

The programme of Bachelor d’études en sciences politiques is awarded by the IEP. 
There are currently 15 students enrolled on the programme, of which seven are in the second 
year and eight in the first year. On 19 February 2015, the proviseur of Lycée La Bourdonnais, 
Mr Marc Haradji, was informed by  IEP of  Aix-en-Provence that the  Bachelor  d’études  en 
sciences politiques would no longer be offered or awarded by IEP of the University of Aix-
en-Provence.  Instead of the Bachelor d’études en sciences politiques, the IEP has offered to 
allow students to complete a programme leading to a Licence d’administration publique. This 
was suggested from the IEP in a correspondence to Mr Haradji, the proviseur of Lycée La 
Bourdonnais in a letter dated 19 February 2015. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry views this situation with concern given that there has 
been a departure from the ethical commitment taken by an institution vis-à-vis its students 
population. 

Furthermore, the institution did not deem it fit even to secure the approval of TEC for 
this  change  in  proposition  for  the  new  programme  entitled  “Licence  d’administration 
publique”. It is also unfortunate that the Lycée La Bourdonnais has conveyed the information 
of the programmatic change to the parents and students only orally and that this decision for a 
change in course structure and contents has been taken without prior consultations with the 
parents, the students and even the Tertiary Education Commission. 

Following  representations  made  by  parents,  the  Lycée  La  Bourdonnais  organised  a 
video conference yesterday, as stated by the hon. Member, with the course providers so as to 
elucidate  matters  and  respond  to  the  queries  of  parties  concerned.  Further  to  discussions  I 
have had with the French Ambassador yesterday, I am given to understand that the matter has 
been taken up with l’Université d’Aix-en-Provence which has, however, indicated that it is 
not  in  a  position  to  continue  the  Bachelor  d’édudes  en  sciences  politiques  programme  for 
technical reasons.  It is maintaining its proposal to allow students after completion of the first 
two years to follow Licence d’administration publique to be delivered by Aix-Marseille. The 
proposal to reimburse the students concerned as well as compensate them for moral prejudice 
caused is also being considered.  My Ministry is following this matter very closely and has 
directed the Tertiary Education Commission to engage with the Lycée La Bourdonnais in the 

 

133 

exploration of all other options with the view of coming up with satisfactory provisions for 
the  aggrieved  parents  and  students.    We  are  also  asking  TEC  to  be  more  vigilant  before 
issuing permits to foreign institutions willing to collaborate with Mauritian institutions in the 
provision of higher education. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

At 8.07 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 01 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

MELROSE PRISON – MOBILE PHONES, DRUGS & COMPLAINTS  

(No.  B/204)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis 
West) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Melrose Prison, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the – 

(a) 

(b) 

Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  number  of  reported  cases  of 
entry of mobile phones and of drugs threat, and 
Human Rights Commission, information as to if complaints of the prevalence 
of inhumane conditions of detention thereat have been reported thereto. 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Prisons and the Commissioner of Police that since the coming into operation of the Eastern 
High Security Prison at Melrose in March 2014, 20 mobile phones have been secured as at to 
date.  During the same period, there have been 6 reported cases whereby dry leaves suspected 
to be Cannabis and drug powder have been secured. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the National Human Rights 
Commission that the National Preventive Mechanism Division has carried out site visits at 
the Eastern High Security Prison and complaints from detainees have been received on the 
following – 

(a) 

(b) 

Lack of warm or hot shower; 

Presence of surveillance cameras in bathrooms of Segregation and Protection 
Unit; 

 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

134 

Type of food in view of dietary problems; 

The furniture is not appropriate; 

No proper ventilation; 

Letters sent to the Commission do not reach the intended destination, and 

There is no methadone induction programme at Melrose. 

To  address  the  above  problems,  the  National  Preventive  Mechanism  Division  has 
made  a  number  of  recommendations  with  a  view  to  ensuring  greater  compliance  with  the 
United Nations guidelines governing such detention centres.  I am also informed that most of 
the complaints made have already been attended to by the Prisons Department as at March 
2015 and the National Preventive Mechanism Division will continue to monitor the situation 
in respect of the outstanding complaints. 

POLICE OFFICERS – ALLEGED CRIMINAL CASES 

(No. B/205) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers who are 
allegedly involved in criminal cases, either as victims or as accused parties, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  if 
consideration will be given for the cases to be referred to the State Law Office for advice – 

(a) 
(b) 

prior to the drafting of the provisional charge, and 
as to the stand to be taken concerning applications for bail. 

Reply:  I  presume  that  the  hon.  Member  is  making  reference  to  the  Office  of  the 

Director of Public Prosecutions from which advice is usually sought by the Police. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that for Police Officers or any other civilian who are allegedly involved in criminal cases, it is 
not the practice of the Police to seek advice from the Office of the DPP prior to the Police 
drafting the provisional charges.  It is only in certain serious criminal cases that such advice 
is sought as it will not be practical to do so in all cases. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Office of the DPP is not 
consulted  if  the  Commissioner  of  Police  does  not  object  to  bail.  Otherwise,  when  the 

 

135 

Commissioner of Police intends to resist the bail application, he will, in some serious cases, 
seek advice from the Office of the DPP. 

If  the  Office  of  the  DPP  advises  that  bail  may  be  objected,  then  it  will,  in  some 
serious cases, designate an officer to represent the Police before the Bail and Remand Court. 
However, in accordance with the provisions of the Bail Act, it is for the Court to decide as to 
whether bail should be granted or not.  

I wish to inform the House that I am not at all satisfied with the present system of 
provisional  charges.  As  announced  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  my 
Government will come up with a modern legal framework modelled on the UK Police and 
Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) to address the issue of abusiveness and arbitrariness of the 
present system of provisional charges.   

The  implementation  of  the  PACE  may  involve  the  Police  having  its  own  in-house 
Legal Advisers who may advise the Police at enquiry stage.  It will be for the DPP to advise 
whether prosecution is to be initiated for any offence. 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – PROJECTS EARMARKED 

(No. B/207) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black 
River, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Development Unit and 
table a list of the future projects earmarked for implementation thereat. 

Reply: I am informed that a list of projects identified for future implementation by the 
National  Development  Unit  for  Constituency  No.  14  is  presently  being  compiled  and 
estimates are being worked out. 

The  list  was  submitted  to  the  NDU  by  the  Parliamentary  Private  Secretary  for  that 

constituency. 

Prior to the final list of proposed projects being drawn, the NDU needs to assess the 
outstanding balance on ongoing and completed projects.  Thereafter financial commitments 
for any new projects can be taken. 

This process will ensure that proper financial management and planning are effected 
and will also avoid situations which occurred in the recent past, where funds earmarked for 

 

136 

new  projects,  were  already  committed  to  ongoing  projects,  resulting  in  the  NDU  being 
heavily financially drained. 

The NDU will as far as possible implement, amenities, roads and drain projects in all 
constituencies.  The final list of projects for Constituency  No. 14 will be tabled once it is 
drawn up. 

TERRITORIAL WATERS – ACCIDENT – REPORTED CASES 

(No.  B/210)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  accident  within  our 
territorial  waters,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Police, information as to the number of reported cases thereof, since January 2010 to date, 
indicating in each case, the number of death having occurred as a result thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that since January 2010 to date, 

three cases of accident within our territorial waters have been reported as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

on 31 October 2014 in the Port area, a heavy duty boat of the National Coast 
Guard  collided  with  a  tug  of  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  resulting  in  the 
death of two Police Officers; 

on  23  February  2015  in  the  lagoon  at  Belle  Mare,  two  French  tourists  who 
were snorkeling in the sea were hit by a speed boat, causing their death, and 

on  14  March  2015  in  the  vicinity  of  Flat  Island,  a  trimaran  was  capsized.  
Eleven tourists who were aboard fell into the sea, and one of them, a French 
lady, got drowned. 

The recent fatal accidents concerning tourists during recreational activities at sea are 
tragic occurrences which should be avoided at all costs.  The concerned Government bodies, 
including 
the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications have already taken a series of measures geared towards ensuring safe and 
secure nautical activities for all sea-goers, including skippers, fishermen and tourists. 

the  National  Coast  Guard  and 

MEDICLINICS - OPERATION 

(No. B/215) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the mediclinics, he will 

 

137 

state the number thereof in operation over the period October to December 2014, indicating 
in each case, on a daily basis, the – 

(a) average number of patients who attended thereat and  
(b) number  of  staff  on  duty,  including  doctors  and  nurses,  who  attended  to  the 

patients. 

Reply: I will reply to both parliamentary questions B/215 and B/216 together as they 

deal with the same topic relating to mediclinics. 

During  the  period  October  to  December  2014,  a  total  of  five  mediclinics  were  in 
operation, namely the Dr. Hyderkhan Mediclinic at Plaine Verte, the Triolet Mediclinic, the 
Goodlands Mediclinic, the Lady Sushil Ramgoolam Mediclinic at Belvèdere and the Dr. H. 
Nkajima Mediclinic at L’escalier. 

As regards part (a) an average number of 833 patients attended all the five mediclinics 
on  a  daily  basis  during  October  to  December  2014.    Average  daily  attendance  at  each 
mediclinic during this period was as follows - 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Plaine Verte (Dr. Hyderkhan)   
•  Triolet  
•  L'Escalier (Dr. H. Nkajima)  
•  Goodlands  
•  Bélvédère   

108 
194 
122 
271 
138 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Regarding part  (b), a total of 136 staff members, including doctors  and  nurses, were 
posted at all five mediclinics from October to December 2014.  Government is in the process 
of  recruiting  100  Medical  Health  Officers/Senior  Medical  Health  Officers  for  all  hospital 
services including mediclinics and Area Health Centres. 

In line with Government Programme to strengthen primary health care, a batch of 40 
doctors will follow a 3-year training programme with the University of Bordeaux to graduate 
as  Primary  Care  Physicians.    They  will  subsequently  be  posted  in  primary  health  care 
institutions in Mauritius. 

The Master Plan for primary health care which is being prepared will encompass an in-

depth review of the organisational set-up at primary health care level. 

It must be brought out that with the operation of mediclinics, it has been possible to 

curb the spread of infectious diseases such as conjunctivitis and gastro enteritis. 

 

138 

Similarly  Government  will  recruit  some  1,400  paramedical  staff  including  nursing 
officers  to  be  posted  overall  in  the  public  health  system,  including  mediclinics  and  Area 
Health Centres. 

Furthermore, daily attendance at all the mediclinics is being followed closely.  A total 
of 49,543 attendances were recorded at all the five mediclinics during the one month period 
starting  16  February  to  15  March  2015,  with  a  total  of  15,932  attendances  after  normal 
working hours, i.e from 1800 hours to 0800 hours the next day. Given the high attendance up 
to 2000 hours, two medical officers, two pharmacy dispensers and two health records officers 
have been posted up to 2000 hours in all mediclinics.  A hotline has been set up to connect 
mediclinics to the regional hospitals.  In case of an emergency or if there is an upsurge in 
attendance, the regional hospitals have been given instructions to provide reinforcement of 
staff at the mediclinics. 

A request has been made to the Commissioner of Police to reinforce security of staff by 

posting additional Police Constables at the mediclinics. 

 

MEDICLINICS – DOCTORS & NURSES - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/216) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the mediclinics, he will 
state if Government is proposing to recruit doctors and/or nurses to work specifically thereat 
and,  if  so,  give  details  thereof  and,  if  not,  indicate  the  organisational  set-up  that  is  being 
contemplated in relation to the extension of the hours of service on a 24 hour basis. 

(Vide Reply PQ to No. B/215) 

LIGNE BERTHAUD AVENUE – REHABILITATION 

(No.  B/219)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether he will state if he will 
consider  the  urgent  rehabilitation  of  the  Ligne  Berthaud  Avenue  which  links  Trèfles  to 
Quatre Bornes. 

Reply (The Prime Minister): I am informed that the NDU issued two Works Orders, 
firstly in respect of drains and secondly, in respect of roads to the contractor Super Builders 
Co. Ltd on 26 May 2014 for works to be executed along Berthaud Avenue. 

The  contract  values  for  the  drain  works  and  road  works  were  respectively 

Rs24,237,203.93; and Rs23,959,732.50 VAT inclusive. 

 

139 

The drain Works Order comprised the construction of 1,400 metres of covered drain, 

the enlargement of bridge and the relocation of services. 

The road Works Order comprised the construction of about 1,400 metres of road and 

the relocation or diversion of services. 

I  am  informed  by  the  NDU  that  both  Works  Orders  have,  however,  not  yet  been 
executed  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  procedures  for  land  acquisition  required  for  the 
enlargement of the road from 3.5 mts to 10.00 mts as well as the construction of foot paths on 
both sides, have not been finalised by the Road Development Authority. 

Moreover,  I  am  informed  that  the  original  Works  Orders  issued  for  the  drain 
component of the project, although it makes mention, inter-alia, of the enlargement of bridge, 
did  not  provide  the  required  design  for  same.    Furthermore,  it  does  not  provide  for  the 
demolition of the existing boundary walls and reconstruction after enlargement works. 

The  urgent  rehabilitation  of  Ligne  Berthaud  Avenue  which  links  Trèfles  to  Quatre 
Bornes can only be effected once land acquisition is completed and the detailed design of the 
bridge finalised. 

 

BASSIN/PALMA - SEWAGE PROJECTS – ROADS REINSTATEMENT 

(No. B/227) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the sewage projects in the Bassin/Palma 
regions  in  Constituency  No.  14,  Savanne  and  Black  River,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House,  obtain  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  reinstatement  of  the  public 
roads damaged as a result thereof. 

Reply (The Vice Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities):  Part of 
the  regions  of  Bassin/Palma  are  concerned  with  the  implementation  of  wastewater  project 
under  the  Plaines  Wilhems  Sewerage  Project  –  Lot  1A.  Once  the  infrastructure  works  are 
completed,  the  public  roads  are  temporarily  reinstated  using  Asphaltic  concrete  over  the 
working area.  

Upon completion of all house connection works, water pipe replacement, testing and 

commissioning, the roads are reinstated to its full width. 

I am tabling a list of all the roads in the region of Palma, Bassin that are concerned 

under the project.  

 

 

140 

FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE UNIT - DIRECTOR 

(No. B/230)  Mr R. Uteem  (First  Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the Financial Intelligence Unit, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the -  

(a) name of the director thereof, indicating his – 

(i) qualifications, and  
(ii) terms and conditions of employment, and  

(b) reasons for the termination of the employment of the former director thereof. 
Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I refer the hon. Member to my reply to 
PQ B/113, wherein I, inter alia, informed the House that Mr Guillaume Nicolas Ferdinand 
Ollivry is the current Director of the FIU.  

Mr Ollivry holds a degree in law from the University of Kent, Canterbury, UK. Section 
9(2) of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act (FIAMLA), provides for 
the  Director  of  the  FIU  to  be  “a  person  of  high  repute  with  substantial  experience  in  the 
financial  services  industry  or  law  enforcement  and  experience  in  management  and 
accounting.” The House may wish to note that from February 2012 to December 2014 Mr 
Ollivry has worked as a Forensic Researcher in Anti- Money Laundering, Financial Services 
and  Human  Rights.  The  first  two  areas  of  practice  during  these  2  years  are  of  particular 
relevance for the purposes of section 9(2) of the FIAMLA.  

It is to be highlighted that Mr Ollivry’s work included working on assessment of the 
Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  reviewing  offences  in  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti–
Money Laundering Act (FIAMLA), researching on the interaction between FIAMLA and the 
‘FSC Code’ in the context of flaws in relation to the term ‘reasonable measures’ to combat 
money laundering. 

Mr Ollivry has also worked on the Financial Services Act, the Mutual Assistance in 
Criminal  and  Related  Matters  Act,  the  United  Nations  Convention  against  Corruption,  the 
Proceeds of Crime Act and the Asset Recovery Act and in the context of his work money 
laundering, fraud, prosecution of offences and investigation were relevant to his work.   

The House may further wish to note that at the 29th ESAAMLG Task Force of Senior 
Officials Meeting held last week in Arusha, Tanzania, Mr Ollivry has been included in the 
Roaster of experts in view of his operational expertise in the AML/CFT. It is to be noted that 
the  AML/CFT  project  in  the  Greater  Horn  of  Africa  is  a  European  Commission  funded 

 

141 

project  and  is  being  implemented  by  Civipol  Conseil  which  is  an  agency  of  the  French 
Ministry of Interior. 

Mr Ollivry has been appointed as Director of the FIU, on a contractual basis, for a 
period of 3 years with a monthly salary of Rs150,000 compared to Rs238,000 drawn by the 
previous Director. The new Director has not been granted the privilege of a chauffeur driven 
car, as was the case for the former Director.   

The  employment  of  the  former  Director  of  the  FIU  was  terminated  by  virtue  of 

section 113(4) (5) of the Constitution.  

 

MAURITIUS CREDIT INFORMATION BUREAU – LOANS - 

REPAYMENT 

(No.  B/231)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius Credit Information Bureau, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Bank of Mauritius, information as to the number of borrowers registered therewith and who 
have defaulted on the repayment of their loans, indicating the aggregate amount of money 
defaulted in respect of the -  

(a) individuals, and  
(b) corporate borrowers. 

Reply: The Mauritius Credit Information Bureau (MCIB), set up under section 52 of 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act,  came  into  operation  in  December  2005.  In  fact  the  MCIB  has 
been set up to be a repository of credit information on all recipients of credit facilities. The 
main  objective  is  to  ensure  the  development  of  a  sound  credit  environment  and  aims  at 
directly assisting in fighting over-indebtedness, mainly that of households. 

I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius that the MCIB has currently 43 participants 
comprising  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions  including  Insurance  companies,  leasing 
companies, the DBM Ltd, MHC Ltd, NHDC Ltd and utility service providers.  

The MCIB does not classify information according to borrowers who have defaulted 
on the repayment of their loans. The MCIB is just a repository of credit information and only 
the lenders have information concerning defaults by their clients.  

As such, the information requested is not available. 

DR. A. G. JEETOO HOSPITAL - INCINERATOR 

(No.  B/232)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

 

142 

incinerator  of  the  Dr.  A.  G.  Jeetoo  Hospital,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
remedial  measures  proposed  to  be  taken  by  his  Ministry  in  relation  to  the  thick  smokes 
emanating therefrom. 

Reply: Presently medical waste produced at Dr. A.G. Jeetoo Hospital is disposed of in 
the  incinerator  located  within  the  premises  of  the  hospital.    This  incinerator  is  in  working 
condition and is being maintained on a regular basis. 

It  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  as  per  Government  Notice  No.  157  of  2001,  1st 

Schedule, Regulation 2 of the Environment Protection Act 1991 - 

“Human  or  animal  healthcare  and  research  related 
waste 
 are categorised as hazardous waste”. 

to  such  healthcare; 
treatment  or  prevention  of  disease  and  natal  care  

from  diagnosis, 

Incineration of medical waste generated by public health institutions is undertaken in 
incinerators located within hospitals’ premises.  Most of our hospitals, however, are situated 
within highly residential agglomerations. 

At  times,  due  to  an  excess  of  medical  waste,  there  is  over-accumulation  of  waste 
giving  rise  to  inconvenience  and  odour  nuisance.    Moreover,  during  incineration  the 
likelihood of the environmental nuisance exists with regard to emission of black smoke due 
to extensive use of the incinerator.  It is worth mentioning that most incinerators have been 
purchased some ten (10) years ago and are nearly reaching their lifespan. 

My Ministry has taken the following measures - 

Short Term Measures 
(a)  The  height  of  the  chimney  of  the  incinerator  at  Dr.  A.G.  Jeetoo  Hospital  has 
extended by 3 metres to a maximum permissible height of 12.6 metres 
provide  for  the  dispersion  and  dilution  of  the  emissions  over  longer 

been  
to  
distances; 

(b)  Medical waste is incinerated only during weekdays from 08.00 hrs up to 14.00 

hrs.  No incineration is carried out during weekends and Public Holidays. 

(c)  Medical  waste  (waste  from  surgeries/treatments  -  bandages,  cotton,  sharps, 
catheters,  pharmaceutical  and  pathological  waste)  is  being  segregated  in 
coloured yellow plastic bags and sent for incineration.  However,  medical waste 
generated from renal dialysis unit which is likely to contribute to black smoke 
emission is being segregated for disposal at J. Nehru Hospital. 

 

143 

Non-Medical  waste  (office  waste,  food  waste  packing  materials)  is 
separately  collected  in  coloured  black  plastic  bags  on  a  regular  basis  by 
Municipal  and  District  Councils  and  safely  disposed  of  at  the  Mare  Chicose 
Landfill. 

(d)  Regular maintenance of Incinerators is undertaken by a maintenance contractor 

under the supervision of Energy Services Division (ESD). 

(e)  Training of the operators and personnel has been provided whereby emphasis 
has  been  laid  on  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  the  incinerator  reaches  the 
required  combustion  temperature  of  850o  C  as  well  as  post  combustion 
temperature  of  1100oC  for  optimal  destruction  and  avoidance  of  smoke 
emission.  

(f)  In case of over accumulation of waste likely to give rise to odour nuisance, the 
excess  waste  is  redirected  to  incinerators  of  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam 
National Hospital, Jawaharlall Nehru Hospital and Brown Sequard Hospital. 

Medium Term Measures 

A  technical  team  of  the  Ministry  has  undertaken  a  visit  to  Reunion 
Island to examine its method of disposal/treatment of medical waste which is a 
sterilization  system  rather  than  incineration.    Also  the  sterilization  system  is 
apparently more eco-friendly with regards to emissions in the atmosphere. 

Following the visit, recommendation has been made on the appropriateness 
of  adopting  such  technology  at  the  Dr.  A.G.  Jeetoo  Hospital  to  replace  the 
existing incinerator on a pilot basis. 
Long Term Measures 

My  Ministry  is  looking  into  various  possibilities  to  prevent  pollution  during 
medical waste treatment by incineration.  One alternative will be to have recourse 
to new generation of incinerators with inbuilt pollution abatement technology for 
treatment to reduce and prevent pollution.  

 

Another alternative would be to invest in new equipment which would involve 

autoclaving and shredding of medical waste for its disposal. 

 

 

 

144 

NATIONAL SOLIDARITY FUND - FOOTBALL BETTING – UNCLAIMED 

WINNINGS 

(No.  B/239)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  football 
betting, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority, 
information as to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

amount of money remitted as unclaimed funds to the National Solidarity Fund 
during  the  period  2003  to  2011,  indicating  the  names  of  the  companies 
suspended during the said period for non-compliance, and 
if Peerless Ltd. and Empowering People Ltd. were suspended in 2010. 

Reply  (The  Prime  Minister):  The  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  was  set  up  in 
December 2007.  I understand that prior to December 2007, football betting was unregulated. 

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  in  2008,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority 
issued  licences,  for  conducting  fixed  odds  betting  on  football  matches  played  outside 
Mauritius, to 10 bookmakers.  I am informed, however, that not all the bookmakers started 
operation in 2008: some started in 2009 whilst others in 2010. 

An  amount  of  Rs74,356,316  was  remitted  as  unclaimed  winnings  to  the  National 

Solidarity Fund for period 2008 to 2011. 

The licenses of five companies, namely, Peerless Ltd, Empowering Ltd, Booksystem 
Ltd,  Bosco  Co.  Ltd  and  Value  Plus  Ltd  were  suspended  during  the  said  period  for  non-
remittance of the unclaimed prize to the National Solidarity Fund within the prescribed time. 

However,  the  licences  of  Bosco  Co.  Ltd  and  Value  Plus  Ltd  were  subsequently 

reinstated in 2011. 

With respect to Part (b) of the question, I am advised that the licences of Peerless Ltd 
and  Empowering  People  Ltd  were  suspended  on  21  February  2011  for  failing  to  remit 
unclaimed winnings to the National Solidarity Fund. 

I am further advised that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the licence of Peerless Ltd was not renewed on expiry on 16 July 2011, and  

Empowering People Ltd was revoked on 29 July 2011. 

 

145 

I am informed that both these Licensees have applied for Judicial Review before the 

Supreme Court against the decision to suspend their licences. 

In the case of Peerless Ltd, I am further informed that the Supreme Court has refused 
to grant leave to apply for Judicial Review. Peerless Ltd has appealed against the decision of 
the Supreme Court to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The matter was heard on 
25 March 2015 and judgment has been reserved. 

HORSERACING - 2015 TURF SEASON   

(No.  B/240)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
organisation  of  horseracing  in  Mauritius  for  the  2015  Turf  Season  by  the  Mauritius  Turf 
Club, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority, 
information  as  to  if  the  approval  thereof  was  made  in  full  compliance  with  the  Code  of 
Corporate Governance and of the Guidelines under the Financial Reporting Act. 

Reply (The Prime Minister): I am informed that the organisation of horseracing in 
Mauritius  for  the  2015  Turf  season  by  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  was  approved  by  the  new 
Gambling Regulatory Board, at its meeting held on 19 March 2015.  This was done in strict 
compliance  with  the  Provisions  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  (GRA)  Act  2007, 
especially as it relates to section 7(1) (g) and the licensing conditions under section 31 (3). 

However, the hon. Member should be aware of the catastrophic situation in the horse 
racing sector as a result of the ‘silence coupable’ of some people at the helm of the Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority  under  the  previous  régime.  Furthermore,  following  widespread 
concerns emanating from different stakeholders on horse racing in Mauritius, a Commission 
of Inquiry was set up, inter-alia, to inquire into the matter and to come up with appropriate 
recommendations to address these issues. 

I have the pleasure to inform the House that the Commissioners have submitted their 
Report  and  in  line  with  the  commitment  undertaken  by  my  Government  to  tackle  the 
problematic issue of “nation zougadère”, I shall later on, today, make a Statement thereon. 

 

CANCER HOSPITAL PROJECT  

(No.  B/246)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed Cancer 
Hospital Project at the former Medpoint Clinic, he will state - 

 

146 

(a) the responsibility under which it would be placed;  
(b) the estimated cost thereof in respect of the - 

(i) renovation of the building;  
(ii) purchase of equipment, and  
(iii) furniture, fixtures and other costs;  

(c) if quotations have been launched for the purchase of equipment and, if so, give a 

list thereof;  

(d) if the personnel for the running thereof has been identified and, if so, give details 

thereof, and 

(e) the expected date of coming into operation thereof. 
Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  former  Medpoint  Clinic  which  will  be 

rehabilitated into a modern Cancer Centre, will be under the responsibility of my Ministry. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  project  for  a  Cancer  Centre  would  be  carried  out  in  two 

phases, as follows - 

a.  Phase I would comprise rehabilitation of the existing building infrastructure 
and the premises including creation of parking area and landscaping works to 
render the Centre operational. 

b.  Phase  II  would  consist  of  (a)  the  construction  of  a  Bunker  or  other 
appropriate  structure  to  accommodate  a  Linear  Accelerator  and  (b)  the 
procurement, 
the  Linear 
Accelerator and Accessories. 

testing  and  commissioning  of 

installation, 

The  estimated  cost  of  the  rehabilitation  works  will  be  prepared  by  the  Consultants 
who will be appointed to work out the design and tender documents for the project. Presently 
the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport is working on the terms of reference 
for consultancy services for the rehabilitation of the ex-Medpoint Clinic. 

With respect to part (b) relating to the estimated cost of the purchase of (ii) equipment 
and (iii) furniture, fixtures and other cost, I would wish to point out that it has been decided to 
resort to consultancy services. Based on the design and the scope of works, estimated cost of 
construction, equipment, accessories and other requisites will be worked out for preparation 
of bid documents. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, the House may wish to note that expressions of 
interest have been invited for the procurement of a Linear Accelerator and the construction of 
a bunker to house the apparatus. The expressions of interest will be assessed and examined 
for shortlisting of suitable bidder.  

 

147 

As for part (d), the medical, nursing and other staff presently working at the Cancer 
Unit of Victoria Hospital will eventually be transferred to the new Cancer Centre and we are 
working with the IAEA for the training of our personnel. 

With the completion of the rehabilitation works and the transfer of the Cancer Unit 
from  Victoria  Hospital,  it  is  expected  that  the  Cancer  Centre  will  become  operational  by 
December 2015. 

 

BELLE MARE WATER PARK AND LEISURE VILLAGE - CLOSURE 

(No.  B/248)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard 
to the Belle Mare Water Park and Leisure Village, he will state since when it is closed to the 
public, indicating - 

(a) if the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry set up by Government in 

relation thereto have been implemented and, if not, why not, and  

(b) when the re-opening thereof to the public is being contemplated. 
Reply:  I  am  advised  that  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  set  up  to  investigate  into  the 
death of two children at Belle Mare Water Park and Leisure Village has submitted its report. 
The  recommendations  are  actually  being  examined  by  the  Board  of  the  Sugar  Investment 
Trust. 

One the main recommendations is that the Water Park should be revamped to attain 
world class standard. However, this would necessitate an investment estimated at more than 
Rs200 m. 

In  view  thereof,  the  Board  of  the  Sugar  Investment  Trust  has  decided  to  seek  a 
strategic partner for the modernisation of the infrastructures that would render the Water Park 
safer, more attractive and profitable. 

The Water Park is closed to the public since October 2013. The date of its re-opening 
cannot be known at this stage as much would depend on the outcome of the Board’s initiative 
to secure a strategic partner for the renovation project. 

 

PAY RESEARCH BUREAU REPORT - PUBLICATION 

(No.  B/249)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative reforms whether, in 
regard to the next Pay Research Bureau Report, he will state the expected date of - 

(a) publication, and  

 

(b) implementation thereof. 

148 

Reply:    I  am  informed  that  the  publication  of  the  Pay  Research  Bureau  Report 
would, in principle, be in October 2015 and the effective date of its implementation would be 
01 January 2016. 
 

MSPA – LAND TRANSFER 

(No.  B/250)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the 2000 acres 
of land obtained from the sugar industry, he will state the extent thereof – 

(a) received region-wise, and  
(b) released, giving details as to the  

(i) name of the beneficiaries thereof;  
(ii) date of release thereof, and  
(iii) project to be implemented and the terms and conditions thereof, indicating 
the number thereof implemented to date, giving details thereof in each case. 
Reply:  The  agreement  signed  between  the  Government  and  the  Mauritius  Sugar 
Producers Association (MSPA) on 22 April 2008 provides for the transfer of 2000 arpents of 
land to the State over a period of 10 years, ending in December 2017. 

Out of the 2000 arpents, an extent of 1200 arpents were to be released for agriculture 

and 800 arpents for housing and other social infrastructure projects. 

The Government has so far acquired 757 arpents, out of which 460 arpents have been 

vested in my Ministry for agricultural projects. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, land has been acquired in the following regions 

– 

• 
• 

• 

• 

50 arpents at the Rouge Terre in the North; 
63.11 arpents at  Mare D’Albert, 34.76 arpents at St Hubert; 24.31 arpents at 
Joli  Bois,  Mare  Tabac;  43.86  arpents  at  Grand  Bois  and  19.55  arpents  at 
Rivière du Poste in the South; 
50  arpents  at  L’Esperance,  (Quartier  Militiare);  40  arpents  at  Melrose;  7 
arpents at La Laura; 25 arpents at Bel Etang and 72 arpents at Olivia for the 
eastern region, and 
30 arpents at La Chaumière in the West. 

 

149 

With regard to part (b) of the question, out of the 460 arpents vested in my Ministry, 
420 arpents have been released to 69 Cooperative Societies/Agro-Based Companies for food 
crop and livestock production. 

Note  also  that  one  plot  has  been  released  at  L’Esperance  (Quartier  Militare)  and  St 
Hubert respectively for implementation of small-scale farming projects under the Vulnerable 
Woman Empowerment Programme being implemented by the Ministry of Social Integration 
and Economic Empowerment. 

Details  regarding  date  of  release,  projects  implemented  and  conditions  of  lease  are 

being tabled. 

CITÉ MARTIAL - SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE 

(No. B/251) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, 
in  regard  to  the  proposed  sewerage  network  project  for  the  sewerage  connection  of  house 
numbers  20  to  26,  at  the  Alfred  Gellé  Street,  Cité  Martial,  in  Port  Louis,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Waste Water Management Authority, information as to 
where matters stand, indicating the expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority that the Alfred Gellé 
Street houses number 20 to 26 are included in the Cité Paul et Virginie Housing Estate, Port 
Louis which has been identified as one of the six priority sites for the rehabilitation of the 
sewerage infrastructure.  

Topographical  surveys,  detailed  design  and  the  bidding  documents  for  the  works 

contract have been completed. 

The detailed design report has revealed that - 

(a)  many  houses  have  been  constructed  over  the  existing  sewer  line  and  sewer 

manholes contributing to the degradation of the sewer system, and 

(b) rehabilitation works will have to be carried out in some cases, inside the houses 
and the collaboration of the inhabitants will be needed for the sewer works to be 
carried out.  

I  have  requested  the  WMA  to  discuss  with  the  inhabitants  concerned  and  the 
neighbours.  The  collaboration  of  the  hon.  Member  is  most  welcome  to  help  the  WMA 
resolve this issue. 

 

