No. 05 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 26 FEBRUARY 2015 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

 

 

5 

 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 05 of 2015 

Sitting of 26 February 2015 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

   

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO & TROMELIN ISLAND – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice)  asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the 
Chagos Archipelago and over the Tromelin Island, he will state –  

(a)   where  matters  stand  before  the  United  Nations  Arbitration  Tribunal  on  the 

Chagos Archipelago Marine Protected Area;  

(b)   what  initiatives  Mauritius  is  taking  on  the  Chagos  Archipelago  sovereignty 

issue at this 2016 turning point, and  

(c)  

if Mauritius has confirmed to France its decision not to go ahead with the 2010 
“Accord-cadre  sur  la  co-gestion  de  l’île  Tromelin”,  and  if  so,  indicate 
whether discussions over the sovereignty issues have started. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, it has always been the 
unequivocal  stand  of  Mauritius  that  the  Chagos  Archipelago,  including  Diego  Garcia  and 
Tromelin form an integral part of its territory. 

In line with its commitment to ensure that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
Mauritius  are  fully  respected  and  safeguarded,  Government  will  spare  no  efforts  so  that 
Mauritius can effectively exercise its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin.  

Madam Speaker, let me also remind the House that in the Government Programme 
2015/2019,  we  have  expressed  our  concern  at  the  lack  of  progress  to  resolve  the  long- 
standing dispute over the Chagos Archipelago and we have pledged to speed up diplomatic 
talks with the UK and the US Governments and actively seek the support of the international 
community in this respect.   

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, Mauritius 
initiated on 20 December 2010 proceedings against the UK under Article 287 of, and Annex 
VII to, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to challenge the 
legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the UK has purported to establish around the 
Chagos Archipelago.  Mauritius considers, inter alia, that the UK, not being a “coastal State” 
under UNCLOS and international law, had no authority to establish a marine protected area 
around the Chagos Archipelago.   

8 

 
Since  Mauritius  and  the  UK  did  not  agree  on  the  means  for  the  settlement  of  the 
dispute, it has been submitted to arbitration in accordance with Annex VII to UNCLOS.  In 
this respect, an Arbitral Tribunal, consisting of five members, including three Judges of the 
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, has been set up.   

The  team  of  Counsel  who  have  assisted  Mauritius  in  this  case  includes  prominent 
lawyers such as Mr Philippe Sands QC, Professor of Law, University College, London and 
Mr Paul Reichler of Foley Hoag, a law firm in Washington, DC.  Professor James Crawford 
who was Whewell Professor of International Law at the University of Cambridge was also 
part of the team prior to his assumption of the post of Judge of the  International Court of 
Justice on 06 February 2015. 

In accordance with the timetable which was initially set by the Arbitral Tribunal for 
the filing of pleadings by Mauritius and the UK on the merits of the case, Mauritius filed its 
Memorial on 01 August 2012. 

The  UK  subsequently  raised,  on  31  October  2012,  preliminary  objections  to  the 
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal in respect of the dispute.  The UK also requested that its 
preliminary objections be dealt with as a preliminary matter and that in case that request is 
not  accepted  by  Mauritius,  a  separate  hearing  be  held  on  the  procedure  to  be  followed  in 
dealing with its preliminary objections. 

After  consideration  of  the  written  submissions  of  the  Parties  and  their  oral 
submissions at the hearing held on 11 January 2013 in Dubai, the Arbitral Tribunal adopted 
on 15 January 2013 a Procedural Order, ordering that - 

(a) 

(b) 

the  UK’s  request  that  its  preliminary  objections  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Tribunal  be  dealt  with  in  a  separate  jurisdictional  phase  as  a  preliminary 
matter is rejected, and  

the UK’s preliminary objections will be considered with the proceedings on 
the merits. 

At  the  request  of  the  Arbitral  Tribunal,  Mauritius  and  the  UK  engaged  in 
consultations with a view to reaching agreement on a revised schedule for the filing of the 
remaining pleadings on the merits of the case.  Pursuant to the revised timetable, the UK’s 
Counter-Memorial was filed on 15 July 2013, Mauritius’ Reply on 18 November 2013 and 
the UK’s Rejoinder on 17 March 2014. 

9 

 
Thereafter,  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  held  a  hearing  from  22  April  to  09  May  2014  in 
Istanbul, Turkey on both the merits and the preliminary objections raised by the UK.  The 
Award  of  the  Tribunal  is  awaited.    The  Tribunal  has,  in  a  letter  to  the  Parties  dated  17 
November 2014, indicated that it would not issue its Award before the end of 2014 and that it 
would later provide the Parties with an update on the anticipated date of issue of the Award. 

In reply to part (b) of the question, as I have mentioned earlier, Government is much 
concerned at the lack of progress made so far to resolve the long-standing sovereignty dispute 
over the Chagos Archipelago.   

In view of the expiry in 2016 of the initial 50-year period of the UK-US agreement in 
respect of the Chagos Archipelago, Government is currently considering the diplomatic and 
other strategies to adopt with regard to an eventual agreement, bearing in mind that the US 
considers that Diego Garcia continues to be of strategic importance.   

In  keeping  with  the  bi-partisan  approach  we  have  always  adopted  on  issues  of 
national importance, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will be consulted at the appropriate 
time. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, pending the settlement of the sovereignty dispute 
between  Mauritius  and  France  over  Tromelin,  the  two  countries  reached  an  agreement  in 
2010 on the co-management of Tromelin, without prejudice to the sovereignty of Mauritius 
over the island.   

I am informed that when the former Prime Minister met the French President on 03 
October 2014 in Paris, he said that since there had been considerable delay in the adoption by 
the  French  National  Assembly  of  the  Bill  relating  to  the  ratification  by  France  of  the  co-
management  agreement, the whole question of sovereignty should be revisited and that he 
was no longer in favour of the ratification of the agreement. 

He proposed that if France were to acknowledge the sovereignty rights of Mauritius 
over Tromelin, Mauritius would be ready to conclude a new bilateral agreement with France 
for the sharing, on a 50/50 basis, of the natural, mineral and other resources of Tromelin, and 
their joint exploitation on the same basis.  The French President indicated that the proposal 
made  by  the  former  Prime  Minister  would  be  considered  by  the  French  Government.    To 
date, there has been no reaction from the French Government to that proposal. 

10 

 
Government intends to press for the early resolution of the dispute between Mauritius 
and France over Tromelin, in the spirit of friendship and trust that has always characterised 
the relationship between the two countries. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to reaffirm, most emphatically, the commitment of my 
Government  to  ensure  that  the  territorial  integrity  and  sovereignty,  and  rights  as  well  as 
security interests, of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded. 

 Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  on  the  first  part  of  my  question,  that  is,  the  UN 
Arbitral  Tribunal  sitting  in  The  Hague,  I  have  not  heard  any  indication  of  when  we  can 
expect the Tribunal to come with the judgement, with the findings.  Can I know from the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  -  since  he  refers  to  Professor  Philippe  Sands,  who  leads  the  team  of 
lawyers on behalf of Mauritius; we know that he visited Mauritius recently - who represented 
Mauritius in discussions with Professor Sands? 

The Prime Minister: As  I have said already, the Tribunal has not set any specific 
date when its Award is going to be known. In a similar case, they have said that it will not be 
in 2014. Insofar as the second part of the question is concerned, I have not met Mr Sands and 
I do not know with whom he has discussed. 

Mr Bérenger: I was a bit surprised, Madam Speaker, since Government says that it is 
dissatisfied with the lack of initiatives by the former Government on the Chagos Archipelago 
issue when the Cabinet communiqué relating to Cabinet decisions of 09 January 2015, stated 
that  “Cabinet  looked  forward  to  the  Award  of  the  Arbitral  Tribunal”  which  seems  to  be 
positive in tone in contrast to the general comment made.  Can I know on what basis, that 
kind of comment, that we look forward to the arbitration pronouncement, is based? 

The Prime Minister: Well, how can we do better than that? We are waiting for the 

Award. We look forward to get the Award. That is all we can do for the time being. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Do  we  have  any  indication  that  indeed  the  Tribunal  is  going  to 

consider – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Sovereignty, and 

whether we have any indication that once it considers that it can take a stand 
on sovereignty it will go our way? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  suppose  both  issues  are  interlinked.  Therefore,  that  is  my 

opinion; they will have to consider both. 

11 

 
Mr Bérenger: Last question on that part of my question. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister whether he has looked into it that it is confirmed that there can be no appeal against 
the pronouncement of the Arbitral tribunal? That is, if it rules against Mauritius, there is no 
appeal against that ruling. 

The Prime Minister: Well, I cannot answer that. I have not looked into it. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Fortunately  that  is  the  case.  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  said,  2015  is  the  turning  point  because  the  agreement  between  London  and 
Washington in 1966 was for 50 years, and it was in the agreement that should either party, 
UK  or  United  States,  want  to  change  anything  in  the  agreement  or  put  an  end  to  it,  they 
would  have  to  make  a  move  in  2015  or  2016,  and  if  there  is  no  move,  it  is  renewed 
automatically for 20 years. Surely the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that if that 
agreement is renewed for a further 20 years, it will make our case even more difficult. Can I 
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this issue of discussions, supposedly, possibly taking 
place  this  year  or  next  year  and  the  role  of  Mauritius,  our  stand  on  sovereignty,  has  been 
discussed with either London or Washington or both? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  do  not  know  what  the  previous  Government  has  done, 
whether they have had certain discussions. I am not aware of it. Our stand is very clear; we 
have through diplomatic channel made it known that we will not  agree to anything that is 
going to be done between these two parties alone. We want to be concerned and we want to 
be  party  to  what  takes  place  because  we  consider  that  the  whole  thing  from  the  very 
beginning had been illegal. United Kingdom had no right to extract from our territory, before 
giving it its independence, any part of it. Whatever has been done is illegal and whatever is 
being done in that context, so far we are concerned, is illegal. 

Mr Bérenger:  From what I am hearing, Madam Speaker, it seems that there has been 
no contact between the new Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and the Prime Minister of 
the UK and the President of the United States since the last elections, in particular, London.  
Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether we have tried to raise, at the highest 
level,  the  issue  with  London,  being  given  this  crucial  turning  point  of  2016?  I  am  asking 
whether London has refused to discuss the issue pending the Tribunal pronouncing itself on 
the case in The Haye.  Is that the stand taken or have we simply not asked for the matter to be 
taken at the highest level with London? 

12 

 
The Prime Minister: I have had no chance of meeting either the Prime Minister of 
UK  or  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America.  Insofar  as  the  second  part  of  the 
question is concerned, well, as I have said we have made it known what our stand through 
diplomatic channel is. For the time being, we could not do anything more than that. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  for  the  time  being!  However,  can  I  know  whether  the  new 
Government is preparing action at any level, in case London and/or Washington do not wish 
to  discuss  the  issue  again?    Are  we  considering  new  initiatives  at  the  United  Nations 
including the General Assembly or anywhere else, at the Commonwealth Summit, that are 
coming this year? 

The Prime Minister: Definitely, we are working on it.  We are considering the stand 
that we should take and we want the matter of sovereignty to be thrashed out once and for all. 
At this juncture, it will not be wise for me to give any details of what we intend to do. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  know  whether  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  had  the 
opportunity since the last general elections of raising or discussing that issue with India, the 
friendly country that has been very helpful on that issue and, if not, whether it is the intention 
of Government to seek  once more  India’s support when the Prime Minister of  India visits 
Mauritius in a few days? 

The Prime Minister: India has always been supporting us. I will certainly raise the 
matter  with  him.    I  have,  throughout  my  political  career,  whenever  I  have  been  meeting 
Heads of Government of other countries, been raising this matter and have been asking for 
their support at the international level. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to Tromelin, Madam Speaker, it is indeed in 2010, on 
07 June that the agreement for co-gestion was agreed upon by the two sides, Mauritius and 
France, and when the former Prime Minister was in Paris on 03 October 2014, being given 
that the agreement for co-gestion was for five years initially and more than four years after, it 
had still not been ratified by the French side, we are informed that the former Prime Minister 
asked President Hollande, in a way, in English, that enough is enough, and that Mauritius no 
longer  wishes  to  go  forward  with  the  co-gestion  agreement  and  we  wish  to  discuss  the 
sovereignty issue over Tromelin. Has there been any reaction on that part of my question, that 
is, discussions on the sovereignty issue, either in Paris or here with the French Ambassadeur  
in Mauritius on the sovereignty issue? 

13 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  as  I  have  said,  the  former  Prime  Minister  made  his 
position clear. We were definitely taken for a ride and he has been waiting for the reaction of 
the President of France, but there has been so far no reaction and, unfortunately, since we are 
here now in Government, we have had no time to take up the matter with the President of 
France. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard very strong, I would not say undiplomatic, but strong words, 
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that we were being taken for a ride by a friendly country, 
France. 

(Interruptions) 

I  take  note!    My  point  is  the  following:  being  given  that  France,  like  India,  is  a  friendly 
country, are we prepared in case we see no reaction from the French side, no move to discuss 
sovereignty,  will  we  consider  asking  this  friendly  country  which  France  is,  to  agree  to 
arbitration before the  International Court of Justice or any  other Court for that matter but, 
obviously, the International Court of Justice is there for that kind of issue. If both sides agree, 
are we prepared to try and convince France to go for arbitration before the International Court 
of Justice? 

The Prime Minister: We have not yet discussed at Government level what stand we 
are going to take. As soon as we are ready we will do the needful and we will approach the 
President. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  have  a  last  question  before  others  coming,  if  they  wish, 
Madam Speaker. For years, Madagascar and other friendly, brotherly countries next door to 
us, had been claiming sovereignty over all of the so-called Iles Éparses, including Tromelin - 
for years - and then it was in 1978 that I discussed the issue with then President Ratsiraka in 
Antanarivo and Madagasar agreed to stop claiming sovereignty, that Mauritius only would 
claim sovereignty over Tromelin and we would support their claim on the other Iles Éparses, 
and since then, the next year, 1979, Madagascar moved a resolution in the United Nations 
General Assembly, claiming sovereignty yet obtaining the support of the General Assembly 
for its sovereignty over the Iles Éparses and excluded Tromelin as we had agreed, and since 
then,  on  every  occasion,  Madagascar  has  kept  that  stand,  but  there  is  a  new  President  in 
Madagascar and, here, now, Sir Aneerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister.  Can I know whether 
we have taken the first opportunity or we will take the first opportunity to, in a friendly way, 
obtain from our Malagasy brothers and sisters that this stand is reconfirmed? 

14 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  We  certainly  congratulate  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  for 
having achieved that with Madagascar and we are very grateful to Madagascar for the stand 
that it has taken.  We will certainly do what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting, we 
will take it seriously. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioning in his 
answer when answering to part (b) of the question, that the hon. Leader of the Opposition will 
be consulted in due time. This is very positive and we appreciate that.  Can I ask the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister since this is an issue of national importance which concerns the whole nation 
and all the political parties in this House, shouldn’t it be the case that, to transcend political 
considerations, wider consultations, more meaningful consultations – une concertation plus 
large  - should take place between all political parties in this House and perhaps structure 
these  consultations  in  the  form  of  an  All-Party  Parliamentary  Group  or  Committee  which 
exists in the UK, for example, and this All-Party Committee, which should be across political 
parties,  to  be  chaired  by  somebody  who  has  showed  long  interest  on  that  issue  like  hon. 
Minister Bodha or the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Order!  Can  the  hon.  Members  please  allow  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister to reply? 

The Prime Minister: This question of Chagos Archipelago, Tromelin, is of national 
interest and in the interest of what we want to achieve, we want to have as wide consultations 
as possible but, at the same time, we have to be careful not to let things leak out that may 
cause prejudice beforehand to what we intend to do. Therefore, we have to take some care 
and precaution. 

Mr  Bérenger:  One  last  question,  with  your  permission,  Madam  Speaker.    Being 
given that time is of the essence, 2016 is a turning point, my information Madam Speaker - 
and I don’t know if the hon. Prime Minister has the same information - is that discussions 
between Washington and London on this agreement that will be renewed automatically for 20 
years if there are no changes suggested by either side, have already started. Can I, therefore, 
insist that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister should, as soon as possible, take up the issue with both 
the Prime Minister of the UK, although elections are derrière la porte, and the President of 
the United States because time is of the essence? 

15 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  I  have  already  taken  this  matter  even  in  the  past  with  the 
President of the United States of America and the position of the United States has always 
been that they have nothing to do with Mauritius. They have dealt with UK. There is a lease 
agreement  between  United  Kingdom  and  United  States  and,  therefore,  they  always 
recommended us to go and deal with UK; and even with UK, I have been raising this matter 
on  all  occasions  whenever  I  was  Prime  Minister,  I  was  meeting  the  Prime  Minister.  The 
Prime Minister of UK made it always very clear that the day it is no longer required for the 
defence  of  the  West,  the  Chagos  Archipelago  would  be  returned  to  Mauritius  and  full 
sovereignty  will  come  back  to  Mauritius.  And  we  are  made  to  understand  always  that  the 
threat to the West was the Soviet Union, the Cold War, but Cold War does not exist today. 
Today, what we hear now? This information that they are already negotiating, I have it also, I 
know. But can we stop them? Have we got the means to stop them? And you know, this is a 
matter with the UK, a question of might, might is right. They feel they are in a very strong 
position,  they  don’t  care  to  heed  what  we  say,  but  that  won’t  prevent  us,  of  course,  to 
approach them to do our best and I hope they will come to reason. 

Madam Speaker: No more questions? Time is over! 

 

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS - MOTION OF THANKS 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the following motion of the hon. Second 

Member for Grand River North West and Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 
following terms - 

 

16 

We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, 
beg  leave  to  offer  our  thanks  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius for the Speech which he has addressed to us on the occasion 
of the Opening of the First Session of the Sixth National Assembly." 

Question again proposed. 

 

(12.07 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  (Mr  S.  Baboo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  the 
honour and pleasure to address this august Assembly for the first time today. First, let me 
seize this opportunity to congratulate  you, Madam Speaker, upon  your  appointment as the 
first Lady Speaker of the National Assembly. I also wish to extend my congratulations to the 
hon. Adrien Duval, Deputy Speaker and youngest Member of the National Assembly. Indeed, 
this  is  what  we  call  Meaningful  Change,  a  change  which  has  marked  the  history  of  the 
Republic of Mauritius.  

My congratulation also goes to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 
“un vrai sage” for having inspired us all in this landslide victory of l’Alliance Lepep and for 
constituting a new Government according to the wish of the population – “un gouvernement 
du peuple, par le peuple et pour le peuple. » I wish to assure the House that I will deliver to 
the best of my abilities as Minister of Arts and Culture and I shall leave no stone unturned to 
ensure that we achieve meaningful and sustainable change for the benefit of all citizens of the 
Republic.  

I  also  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  my  leader,  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon. 
Xavier-Luc Duval for having put his trust in me. We all know how he has followed in the 
footsteps of the visionary, Sir Gaëtan Duval to serve the nation with dedication and passion 
for the last decades.   Sir Gaëtan Duval never gave up in the face of adversity and he will 
continue to be a source of inspiration, a role model for the young generation and us.  

Last but not least, I am grateful to the people of this country, for having called a halt 
to years of moral and socioeconomic decadence. I shall work to live up to their aspirations 
and expectations. I have been elected to build a castle for myself and I have not been elected 
to build a castle which will cause problems to the population. I shall endeavour to bring all 
our citizens under the same castle, “une île Maurice meilleure”. 

 

17 

Madam Speaker, it is an ill wind that blows no one any good! In addition, the good 
news is that the people of Mauritius have created these dynamic winds of change to usher in a 
new era and a new team. It is not about yet another new team trying to play a new game, it is 
about a new winning team that is slowly but surely changing the rules of the game.  

Better  still,  a  game  played  on  a  level  playing  field.  Ce  ne  sera  plus  le  règne  des 
exceptions pour justifier la règle. Si nous allons faire des exceptions, ce sera pour le peuple 
dans son intégralité. 

We  have  closed  the  road  that  leads  to  the  hôtel  de  petits  et  grands  coquins,  our 
copains are all the citizens of this Republic. What do these winds of change say? « Coq fine 
chanter,  soleil  fine  lever,  caré  caré  nous  alle  de  l’avant  pou  nou  libère  ça  pays-là  et  pou 
amène li vers so destin ». Indeed, we have started achieving a meaningful change as spelt out 
in the Government Programme.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  soon  as  the  people  of  Mauritius  brought  in  the  Tempest  of 
December last, we set ourselves to task. We did not wait till the Twelfth Night to give what 
we had promised: decent pension for our senior citizens and all the other vulnerable groups in 
our society! In addition, we are not playing a Comedy of Errors! We really mean business. 
Now it is no longer business as usual. We are bent upon putting an end to the Midsummer 
Night’s Dream of those who confused their private property with the State’s property: l’État 
c’est moi.  

Unlike Shylock, we are not out to look for our pound of flesh!  Far from that!  The 
voters have already moved the Birnam wood till the Dunsinane Castle to slay tyranny! We 
are not trampling on those who have fallen heavily to the ground and reduced to a deafening 
silence. No, Madam Speaker! We only want justice to be done, and, more importantly, to be 
seen to be done because without the mirror of transparency, there is the danger of democracy 
being lulled into sleep.  

We want our children to live in a society where respect for the rule of law and for 
institutions  reign  supreme.  This  population  has  already  shown  the  door  to  those  who 
manifested utter disrespect to an institution as august as our Parliament. 

Madame la présidente, j’accuse ces parle-menteurs, ces parle-menteurs qui ont failli à 
leurs  tâches  de  chiens  de  garde  de  la  démocratie  pour  courtiser  sans  pudeur  les  aspirants 
monarques  dans  le  dos  de  la  population,  tout  en  prenant  honteusement  l’argent  du 
contribuable. J’accuse ceux qui ont traité l’institution qu’est la presse de tous les noms, car 

 

18 

celle-ci ne voulait pas être à leur solde! J’accuse ceux qui ont trahi les aspirations légitimes 
de leurs partisans en poignardant la sincérité dans le dos, avec leurs interminables épisodes de 
‘cause  causer’  à  la  sauce  des  telenovelas  brésiliennes!  ‘Pas  nek  cause  causer  mam,  bizin 
conner ki pe causer, parce qui ena ene jour ki appelle demain!  Ça jour là même, mam fine 
virer!’ 

Unsurprisingly, that day came, ushering a new era of hope and belief in a free, fair 
and egalitarian society. Madam Speaker, this is precisely what we are out to achieve through 
the  Government  Programme  that  was  presented  to  the  population  on  Tuesday  27  January 
2015, aptly entitled ‘Achieving Meaningful Change’.  

The population has plebiscited this new vision which defines the contours of such a 
society,  a  vision  full  of  hope  for  the  future.    It  is  worthy  to  mention  that  all  those  who 
addressed the House before me supported the Government Programme. I congratulate those 
Members of the Opposition who have been honest enough to appreciate the quality of the 
proposals made in the Government Programme.  

As a caring Government, we shall bring about sea changes to empower our citizens 

and work towards improving the quality of life. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  vote  of  10  December  2014  is  unequivocal!    The  people  sent 
winds of change to attack the era of corruption, nepotism and favouritism. This Government, 
under the able leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, took the bull by the horns by creating a 
Ministry dedicated to ensuring good governance and fair dealing!  

The Minister of Finance has, amongst others, announced a package of incentives to 

empower those who have driven an initiative in order to foster a nation of entrepreneurs.  

The  hon.  Minister  for  Tourism  has  announced  plans  to  diversify  our  markets  and 
make Mauritius an up-market destination. The law and order situation is being revisited to 
afford better security to all. 

We are taking measures to reduce the gap between the haves and the have-nots.  To 
that  end,  Government  has  decided  to  remove  VAT  on  a  number  of  food  items;  we  also 
propose to introduce a Minimum Wage Bill for those at the lower rung of the ladder.  Our 
ultimate goal is to ensure social inclusion of the population and to protect those at the bottom 
of the ladder. 

 

19 

Madam Speaker, people and businesses need the proper environment and facilities in 
order to enjoy a meaningful life.  We will adopt a sustainable environment policy with a view 
to ensuring a cleaner, greener and safer Mauritius.  Il n’y a pas que la misère économique, 
mais  aussi  la  misère  sociale!  How  many  libraries  do  we  have  in  these  orphan  regions? 
Madame  Speaker,  I  have  been  elected  in  the  Constituency  No.  16.  There,  we  have  many 
sports and recreational amenities that have been closed, such as Residence l’Oiseau. 

How  far  do  people  have  to  walk,  like  in  Residence  Mangalkhan,  to  get  access  to 

primary health care?  I can go on and on. 

I am of a different metal, a different brand! I think positive and I see positive! Let 

bygones be bygones!  

I have fathomed the depths of these problems and I shall make it a priority to address 
these  shortcomings  as  far  as  possible,  in  close  collaboration  with  all  stakeholders.  The 
citizens of this nation deserve better! 

In the same vein, many novel initiatives will be brought up by other departments of 
this Government to make Mauritius a true post-card nation. So, Madam Speaker, riding on 
these winds of change, we are bringing in a new wave of investor and consumer confidence, a 
far cry from the morosity and deficit in leadership of last year.  

We shall leverage on these feel-good factors to pave the way for the second miracle 
on the economic, social and cultural fronts; an inclusive miracle where we really put all the 
people first and no one is left behind. 

We want to achieve an inclusive society where no child of this country feels he or she 

is a second-class citizen. 

It is inadmissible, that in 2015, when we are talking of broadband, Wi-Fi, iPad and all, 
many people in this Republic still do not have the basic necessities of life; things as basic as 
water and  housing. 

This brings to my mind the harsh realities prevailing in my own Constituency, that is, 
Constituency  No.16.  During  the  electoral  campaign,  I  was  an  eyewitness  to  the  “laisser-
aller” and sheer neglect in the infrastructure in some no-man’s lands. 

La circonscription No. 16 est un réel choc des contrastes.  D’un côté, vous avez des 
quartiers huppés comme River Walk avec ses millionnaires, « compter fini millions rester » et 
de l’autre côté, ceux comme les pauvres de Résidence l’Oiseau et Résidence Mangalkhan qui 

 

20 

n’ont pas de millions.  « Millions pas enan, enan juste nerfs, pour affronte la misère et la 
précarité! » 

Madam Speaker, now  I  move on to the subject matter of Arts and Culture and our 
vision for a refined Society.  A society that upholds shared values, tolerance and our intention 
to  promote  the  creative  genius  of  Mauritians  and  make  a  high  value  addition  to  our  GDP 
through our Creative Industries. 

The four cardinal points of my vision are - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

less Government, more governance; 
empowerment of all stakeholders; 
innovation and facilitation, and 
nation building. 

Implementation of this vision will require a departure from established norms. It is not 
about cosmetic changes, changements pour la galerie. It is not about changing the Emperor’s 
clothes; it is about doing away with the Emperor himself! 

Madam Speaker, we shall promote the creativity of Mauritians through the creative 

industries, which comprises of - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

the Music Industry; 
film and Broadcasting Industry; 
performing Arts and Fine Arts; 
design Industry; 
authors and composers; 
architecture;  
advertising; 
software and Games Industry, and  
publishing. 

I must emphasise that the importance of arts and culture and its contribution to our 
economic and social well-being has not been properly recognised. Culture has been the vector 
of  development  of  humankind  since  time  immemorial  and  the  importance  of  the  human 
factor, beliefs, values, culture, and intercultural dialogue has to be acknowledged. We have to 
be  able  to  use  creativity  and  cultural  expressions  as  a  powerful  instrument  for  human  and 
social development. 

21 

 
To achieve human and social development, we have to create conducive conditions 
for the furtherance of the spiritual development of the nation. Pilgrimages to holy lands are an 
integral part of Mauritian life. Government will facilitate that such pilgrimages take place in 
the best possible conditions. 

The integration of culture into development will definitely enhance the quality of life 
of  the  population  with  the  Creative  Industries  as  its  main  driver.  It  will  bring  supportive 
livelihood to creators, artists and performers as well as economic growth, thus allowing them 
to earn a decent living. 

The Creative Industries should not be seen with blinkers. It has a wide manoeuvring 

spectrum. Culture is, therefore, a fundamental component of sustainable development. 

Madam Speaker, the vulnerability of our creators, artists and performers to-day is a 
matter of great concern to this Government. Rapid changes in technology, the elimination of 
geographical  barriers  and  the  effects  of  globalisation  are  major  challenges  that  have  to  be 
addressed immediately by this Government. 

This  is  why  my  Ministry  is  proposing  measures  which  will  promote  the  Creative 

Industries as another pillar of the economy. 

The Creative Industries encounter threats that need to be tackled to enable the process 

of creativity to continue. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to elaborate on these threats and on the means to combat 

them - 

One of the major threats faced by our artists is piracy, which hampers creativity. We 
have  the  problem  of  enforcement  of  the  Copyright  Law.  While  acknowledging  the 
contribution of IT in all fields, we have yet to fight piracy faced by artists through the 
misuse of such developments.  

Our policy on Copyright, will henceforth, be based on four important aspects, namely 
(1) 

legal norms; 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

licensing and contract; 

enforcement, and 

overall functioning of the Copyright system. 

22 

 
As regards the rights of artists, creators and performers, my Ministry will ensure that 
the  Rights  Management  Society  will  work  on  these  four  aspects.  We  want  transparency, 
accuracy,  efficiency  and  good  governance  in  the  Management  of  the  individual  rights  of 
artists, creators and performers.  

Another  threat  to  the  Creative  Industries  is  the  Restrictions  on  the  movement  of 
artists.  We  have  a  very  small  market  for  our  cultural  goods.  In  fact,  we  do  not  have  the 
critical mass required to enable the artists to draw a decent living from their art. Our creators 
have to explore other markets in the region. Our artists are constantly confronted with major 
hurdles such as visa, tax and work permit.  

These  problems  will  be  addressed 

in  consultation  with  artists,  appropriate 

stakeholders and our friendly countries through our Cultural Exchange Programs.  

We will see to it that our artists and creators benefit from the exposure, be it region-
wise or at international level. Furthermore, the domestic market is saturated with imported 
cultural  goods  and  products.  This  has  damaging  consequences  on  the  process  of  creation, 
leading  to  erosion  of  local  identities.  We  thus  have  to  nurture  the  creative  economy  and 
transform the creative potential into economic reality by facilitating the sales of our cultural 
products. 

Now,  is  the  time  to  make  the  most  of  the  economic  opportunities  offered  by  the 
Creative Industries and place it on the mainstream of the economy? It is an innovative sector 
that can no longer be ignored.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  past  decade,  ‘Lepep’  has  witnessed  a  massive  erosion  of 
values. This Government will bring a new dynamism in the field of Arts and Culture for the 
benefit of the population. It will be geared towards the cultural, spiritual and moral upliftment 
of  the  citizens.  Creators,  artists  and  performers  are  the  positive  forces  that  can  help  us  to 
solve many societal ills and problems. 

Madam Speaker, we have to leapfrog from the preservation and promotion concept to 
economic realities. We have to make the future economically viable for our artists, creators 
and performers. Cultural entrepreneurs will be encouraged to set up Micro Enterprises. This 
will  be  a  positive  step  towards  empowering  our  artists  and  creators.  It  will  contribute  to 
capacity building, market mechanism, funding for innovation and growth, economic support 
providers  and  networking.  We  shall  ensure  that  the  fruits  of  economic  development  are 
shared equitably among all sections of the population. 

23 

 
I wish to thank the hon. Minister of Finance who announced that Rs10 billion will be 
placed at the disposal of SMEs for the development of Micro Enterprises. This incentive is 
most  commendable  since  it  will  provide  a  new  impetus  to  the  creative  sector  and  boost 
artistic creativity.  

Cultural  Entrepreneurship  is  the  motor  for  developing  Creative  Industries.  Cultural 
entrepreneurs,  including  artists  and  creators  will  have  their  share  in  the  Rs10  billion 
announced in the form of Start-Ups and other schemes. In this respect, my Ministry will work 
in close collaboration with the Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives and other 
relevant  institutions  and  organizations.  The  Cultural  value  chain,  that  is,  Creation  – 
Production – Distribution and dissemination of creative goods and services will have to be 
worked out along professional lines. 

Madam Speaker, the concept of Cultural Tourism will be given a new dimension with 
the  support  of  the  Hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications. 

We will promote Cultural and Heritage Tourism through our Sega typique, Bhojpuri 
folk  songs  and  dance  amongst  others,  Mauritian  Cuisines,  Arts  and  Crafts,  our  World  and 
National Heritage sites, museums, and cultural festivals. We will also work in collaboration 
with  the  other  islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean  to  promote  cultural  tourism,  taking  into 
consideration our desire to make Mauritius a High-Income country.  

After  47  years  of  Independence,  it  is  high  time  for  the  setting-up  of  a  Mauritian 
History and Culture Museum. It will retrace our history from the discovery of the Island up to 
contemporary Mauritius. Other museums, such as Natural History Museum and the National 
History Museums will be rehabilitated to be more lively and attractive. 

The  National  Archives,  which  is  the  memory  of  the  Mauritian  history,  is  in  a 
deplorable state and is located in a high-risk area at Coromandel. Pending the construction of 
an  appropriate  building  to  house  our  National  Archives,  my  Ministry  is  looking  into  the 
possibility  of  relocating  the  Archives,  not  only  for  security  reasons  but  also  for  better 
accessibility and improved service to the general public.  

Madam  Speaker,  currently,  the  services  of  my  Ministry  are  being  offered  from 
scattered locations, with the result that the Ministry has to meet the costs for rentals. I would 
prefer  to  have  all  the  major  services  to  be  provided  from  one  centralized  building.    My 

 

24 

solemn  wish  is  to  provide  improved  service  to  the  population  at  large  and  also  to  lower 
operational costs. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  quality  and  content  of  programmes  presented  to  Tourists  in 
hotels need to be revisited. Government will come up with appropriate Regulations to protect 
our  artists  working  in  the  hotel  Industry.  Artists  should  not  be  considered  as  seasonal 
workers.  Their  status  has  to  be  recognized  and  respected.  The  Ministry  of  Tourism  and 
External Communications, the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training and my Ministry will work together in the drafting of Legislation, in consultation 
with relevant stakeholders, to safeguard Creativity and the interests of artists. Their social and 
economic  status  will  be  fully  acknowledged.  Assistance  will  be  sought  from  WIPO  and 
UNESCO to draft a modern legislation in line with the UNESCO Declaration of Belgrade in 
1980 on the Status of the Artists in the Society. 

Madam  Speaker,  for  the  benefit  of  artists  and  the  population,  Government  is  very 
keen to accelerate the renovation of Serge Constantin Theatre. It is high time that we keep 
our cultural infrastructure up-to-date with modern sound and light technology of international 
standards,  through  renovation  and  maintenance  so  that  a  new  impetus  is  given  to  the 
performing arts. Uplifting the cultural standards of our infrastructures will not only benefit 
local  artists  but  also  the  theatre-loving  public.    The  Serge  Constantin  Theatre  is  being 
provided with the state of the art technology.  The reopening of the modern Serge Constantin 
Theatre  will  be  effected  this  year.  It  will  be  the  only  modern  theatre  in  the  Indian  Ocean 
region. 

Madam Speaker, Artists and Performers have been urging for a “Stade Musical” for 
years  to  enable  the  organization  of  open-air  concerts  at  affordable  cost.  Therefore,  my 
Ministry  is  looking  for  an  appropriate  plot  of  land  in  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of 
Housing and Lands, for the construction of a permanent “Stade Musical”. It will enable our 
artists to promote their talents and give the population the opportunity to attend high quality 
local and international concerts.  

Madam  Speaker,  to  sustain  our  Creative  Industries,  capacity  building  is  a  must  to 
meet  the  needs  of  the  market.  Hence,  Government  will  set  up  a  National  Centre  for 
Performing Arts, which will act as the nursery to nurture the required manpower. In the first 
instance, this Centre will initiate training in – 

• 

sound and light techniques; 

 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

25 

events management; 
make-up; 
scenography; 
acting, and  
marketing of cultural goods and products. 

Capacity  Building  will  be  catered  for  at  all  levels  through  the  respective  curricula.  

Our children are gifted with inborn talents which cannot be left to oblivion. 

In the spirit of inclusive development, my Ministry will collaborate with the Ministry 
of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  for  the 
setting up of a School of Arts. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  briefly  refer  to  Rodrigues.  Besides  new  measures  already 
mentioned regarding the promotion of artists, performers, creators, cultural entrepreneurs and 
cultural tourism, my Ministry will ensure that Rodrigues is not left out and will work in close 
collaboration with the Commission of Arts and Culture in Rodrigues for the setting up of a 
Museum and a Unit of the National Archives.  

In fact, only this Monday I met Mrs Rose Delima Edouard, Commissioner for Arts 
and Culture at the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to discuss these issues. I intend to proceed 
to  Rodrigues  after  the  National  Day  celebrations  to  finalise  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding on Arts and Culture between Mauritius and Rodrigues. 

 I shall conclude by referring, once again, to the salubrious winds of change that have 
not  only  changed  our  political  landscape  but  have  also  shaken  deep-seated  beliefs  and 
prejudices. These have demonstrated that we have to reckon with the maturity of a nation that 
has given the lie of those who wanted to perpetuate the myth of the so-called ‘dépot fixe’.  

The events of 10 December 2014 have abundantly shown that this nation can unite 
and  become  one  in  the  face  of  threats  to  its  culture  and  ethos.    As  Minister  of  Arts  and 
Culture,  all  my  actions  will  be  inspired  by  the  sacrosanct  necessity  of  preserving  and 
promoting  this  culture  and  ethos  within  the  larger  framework  of  nation  building,  where 
promotion of arts and culture would become an instrument of national policy for achievement 
of greater growth.  

In order to achieve that, Madam Speaker, I will focus on three levers – 

(i) 

Action; 

26 

 
(ii) 

Action, and 

(iii)  Action. 

because, as Nelson Mandela said: 

 

“Action without Vision is only passing time,  

Vision without Action is merely daydreaming, 

 but Vision with Action can change the world.”  

This is the roadmap for achieving meaningful change! 

This is the commitment of our Government, a government for its people by its people! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(12.39 p.m.) 

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker,  first  of  all,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  you  for  your  election  as  Speaker  of  this 
august Assembly. As you may know, to elect a woman as Speaker of the National Assembly 
was also the wish of the MMM during the last general elections, so I wish you good luck. I 
also seized this opportunity to congratulate the Deputy Speaker as well as all the new elected 
Members of this House. 

For  my  part,  it  is  an  honour  to  serve  the  Constituency  No.  20,  Beau  Bassin/Petite 
Rivière,  for  the  second  mandate  running,  though  my  election  was  more  difficult  than 
expected.  The  reason  is  the  reluctance  of  the  MMM  base  to  accept  the  alliance  with  the 
Labour Party and we could really feel it during the electoral campaign.  

Nous avons effectivement payé très cher le fait d’avoir ignoré … 

(Interruptions) 

Je dis les choses telles qu’elles sont - d’avoir ignoré les réticences de notre électorat et de la 
population  en  général  par  rapport  à  cette  alliance.  Mais  c’est  déjà  chose  du  passé.  Nous 
sommes résolument tournés vers l’avenir, que nous abordons avec sérénité. 

Lors des précédentes interventions, Madame la présidente, j’ai entendu beaucoup de 
critiques  à  l’égard  du  gouvernement  sortant,  venant  pour  la  plupart  de  l’autre  côté  de  la 
Chambre. Certaines de ces critiques sont justifiées. 

27 

 
Je dois tout de même rappeler qu’une des composantes du gouvernement actuel était 
partenaire  de  l’alliance  au  pouvoir  de  2005  à  2014,  soit  pendant  neuf  années!  Si  cela  ne 
relève pas de l’hypocrisie, je me demande ce que c’est! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  some  good  intents  in  the  Government  Programme  and  I  do 
sincerely hope that they will be implemented in the best possible way; but only time will tell 
if this Government really means business. I must, however, stress the fact that there are some 
points which are of some concerns to me. 

A commencer, Madame la présidente, par les mesures sociales. Mendès France disait, 

et je cite –  

« La  République  doit  se  construire  sans  cesse,  car  nous  la  concevons 
éternellement révolutionnaire …. à l’encontre de l’inégalité, de l’oppression, 
de la misère, de la routine, des préjugés…. éternellement inachevés tant qu’il 
reste des progrès à accomplir.» 

Nous devons donc nous inspirer de ces paroles pour bâtir une île Maurice meilleure. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  logement  est  un  secteur  qui  mérite  une  attention  très 
spéciale. C’est fort louable de vouloir construire 10,000 unités sur une durée de cinq ans pour 
les  personnes  à  faibles  revenus,  mais  je  m’inquiète  que  la  classe  moyenne  n’ait  pas  été 
mentionnée.  J’espère  simplement  que  ce  n’est  qu’un  oubli.  Il  faut,  en  effet,  Madame  la 
présidente, tenir en ligne de compte qu’il n’existe qu’une fine ligne entre la classe moyenne 
et ceux se trouvant au bas de l’échelle. Les deux catégories ont besoin d’un ‘helping hand’ de 
l’État. Du moins de la même attention. 

Les  grosses  pluies  de  ces  derniers  jours  ont  occasionné  des  cas  d’inondations  dans 
plusieurs parties de l’île. Cette situation dure depuis plusieurs années déjà et, à chaque fois, 
de nombreuses familles sont dans la détresse et leurs biens personnels sont abîmés. Ce serait 
souhaitable que les gens se trouvant dans ces situations bénéficient d’un ‘special scheme’ leur 
permettant d’effectuer les travaux et réparations nécessaires chez eux pour que l’évacuation 
d’eau se fasse comme il se doit en périodes de déluge. Et que le gouvernement accorde une 
attention  particulière,  en  urgence,  à  ces  régions,  pour  que  ces  images  d’inondations  et  de 
drame humain soient vite du passé. 

28 

 
Par ailleurs, Madame la présidente, j’aimerais aussi attirer l’attention de la Chambre 
que  très  souvent  les  catégories  de  personnes  ciblées  pour  obtenir  les  facilités  pour 
l’acquisition de ‘low-cost houses’ ne sont pas en mesure de satisfaire le critère de la somme 
requise comme dépôt. L’État devrait, à mon avis, faire un effort dans ce sens pour revoir cette 
somme à la baisse. 

De  même,  mes  mandants  ont  régulièrement  attiré  mon  attention  sur  le  critère  de 
salaire total de R 10,000 par famille afin de pouvoir bénéficier de cette facilité. Souvent, les 
demandes des ménages touchant un salaire légèrement au-dessus de cette somme requise ne 
sont pas prises en considération. C’est injuste, vous en conviendrez, Madame la présidente. Il 
faudrait  donc  ne  pas  avoir  une  somme  fixe,  mais  plutôt  une  fourchette,  avec  une 
considération malgré tout aux ménages dont les revenus se trouvent légèrement au-dessus de 
ce plafond. 

Dans la même foulée, la mention pour une politique de salaire minimal est salutaire. Il 
faut évidemment s’assurer que nos citoyens touchent un salaire qui leur permet de faire face 
au coût  élevé de la vie.  Il ne  faudrait pas non plus, Madame la présidente, que les petites 
entreprises  se  retrouvent  dans  une  situation  où  elles  se  voient  obliger  de  réduire  leur 
personnel afin de pouvoir débourser le salaire minimal. Ce serait catastrophique sur le plan 
humain! 

Toujours dans le secteur du travail, Madame la  présidente, je note que le discours-
programme  fait  mention  d’une  mesure  pour  étendre  le  Youth  Empowerment  Programme 
(YEP) à deux ans au lieu d’une année, et je cite –  

« To  increase  the  chances  of  young  jobseekers  and  fresh  graduates  secure 
permanent employment at their training stations. » 

En même temps, il est question, dans une autre mesure énoncée, de « new fiscal incentives  

«(…)  granted  to  the  private  sector  to  encourage  them  recruit  unemployed 
people on a full-time basis. » 

Comment peut-on, Madame la présidente, encourager les employeurs à étendre la formation à 
deux  ans  au  lieu  d’une  année  et  en  même  temps  recruter  les  sans-emploi  sur  une  base 
permanente?  N’encourage-t-on  pas  les  employeurs  à  retarder  le  recrutement  permanent  en 
étendant la durée du YEP? En même temps, cela n’augmenterait-il pas le nombre de jeunes 
sans  emploi  qui  attendent  d’être  embauchés  sous  le  YEP?  Je  demande  donc  au  présent 
gouvernement de faire très attention et d’avancer savamment avec cette mesure, car il y aura 

 

29 

toujours  des  entrepreneurs  sans  scrupules  qui  vont  profiter  outre  mesure  de  l’extension  de 
cette facilité. 

Madam Speaker, our elders are our treasures! I am happy that the Government has 

granted a sizeable increase in pension payment to the elderly.   

However, I make a plea so that the payment be done in a way that takes into account 

the age and physical condition of our old people. 

Dans certains endroits - et je ne généralise pas -  nos vieux sont contraints de faire des 
queues  interminables  pendant  des  heures.  Nous  sommes  en  2015  et  je  crois  que  c’est 
primordial de mettre en place un système d’attente digne de ce nom, avec des sièges et un 
système de numérotation.  

Pour que nos aînés n’aient plus à attendre debout pendant une demi-heure, trois quarts 
d’heure, une heure ou plus, avant de pouvoir toucher leur dû. Je crois bien qu’ils méritent 
toute cette attention pour avoir tant contribué pour ce pays. 

Je vais maintenant, Madame la présidente, aborder le ‘Law and Order’.  Nos policiers 
sont souvent pointés du doigt. Il faut dire, toutefois, qu’ils ont perdu confiance en eux-mêmes 
ces dernières années. Par manque d’égard, par manque d’encouragement et aussi de la part du 
sommet de la hiérarchie et de l’État. Et, bien sûr, par manque de discipline à tous les niveaux 
dans le pays.  

Il faut donc redonner confiance à la force policière dans son ensemble. Car sans une 
police  disciplinée  et  efficace,  la  population  vivra  dans  une  frayeur  constante.    Une  société 
tétanisée ne pourra jamais prendre le train du développement. La détérioration du ‘law and 
order’ est une des raisons qui poussent nos compatriotes à aller voir si l’herbe est plus verte 
ailleurs. Nous avons assez de ces vols avec violence et viols qui font les unes de nos journaux 
toutes les semaines. Nous voulons tous que la situation s’améliore et pour cela il nous faut 
restructurer la force policière, et, comme je l’ai dit plus tôt, la redonner confiance en elle-
même.   

Du moment que la police, Madame la présidente, pourra fonctionner à plein régime en 
toute indépendance et sera en mesure de deliver the goods, la population sera rassurée, cela 
dissuadera les bandits et la confiance et le feel good factor seront de retour.  

Donner  le  droit  aux  policiers  de  se  syndiquer  est  une  initiative  qui  mérite  d’être 
saluée. Mais je suis d’avis qu’il y a aussi d’autres mesures qui doivent être prises, afin que les 

 

30 

membres  de  la  force  policière  puissent  avoir  le  ‘self  esteem’  et  donner  le  meilleur  d’eux-
mêmes. 

Madame la présidente, le discours programme fait référence à, et je cite – 

“Degree holders will be encouraged to join the Force and new incentives will 
be introduced to reward performance.” 

Encore une fois, l’intention est fort louable. Dans un passé récent, j’ai reçu la visite de deux 
mandants  qui  n’ont  pas  été  embauchés  dans  la  force  policière  simplement  parce  qu’ils 
n’avaient pas de credit en mathématiques. Ils sont pourtant bien bâtis et tous deux ont réussi 
dans  les  autres  sujets  en  HSC.  C’est  à  se  demander,  Madame  la  présidente,  si  la  force 
policière recrute exclusivement pour compter l’argent dans les coffres-forts surtout après le 
cafouillage  sur  les  chiffres  fournis  par  la  police  au  début  de  l’enquête  sur  l’ex-Premier 
ministre.  

Le recrutement des policiers, Madame la présidente, doit se faire dans la transparence, 
selon la méritocratie et en donnant la chance égale à tout citoyen qui veut s’engager comme 
un soldat de l’ordre et de la paix.  

Pas plus tard que la semaine dernière, nous avons appris avec stupéfaction l’agression 
d’un policier par trois jeunes en plein jour dans  la capitale. Je sympathise avec l’agent  en 
question et je l’encourage à se reprendre psychologiquement pour continuer à servir le pays. 
Mais cette agression, Madame la présidente, démontre que l’uniforme ne force plus le respect 
au sein de la population. En d’autres temps, on respectait la police. On la craignait presque! 
De  nos  jours,  la  population  s’interroge  sur  les  critères  de  recrutement.  Les  calibres  de 
certaines  nouvelles  recrues  sont  parfois  source  de  dérision.  À  une  époque,  les  policiers 
recevaient des entraînements physiques spécifiques. Est-ce toujours le cas de nos jours? 

Madam  Speaker,  Police  officers  should  receive  continuous  physical  training,  self 
defence and martial arts training. We need a Police in good health and always ready to fight 
criminality.  Donnons  tous  les  moyens  nécessaires  à  notre  police  pour  rétablir  le  law  and 
order dans le pays.  

Madame la présidente, la distribution de méthadone est un autre souci majeur pour la 
population.  La  décision  de  décentraliser  ce  service  a  été  accueilli  favorablement  dans  son 
ensemble. Mais il existe, toutefois, des problèmes dans certaines régions à propos du système 
de distribution. Je citerai deux exemples pour étayer ce que j’avance.  

31 

 
A  Chebel,  par  exemple,  dans  ma  circonscription,  les  habitants  se  plaignent  que  les 
patients de méthadone se regroupe sous le kiosque, dans le jardin toute la journée, une fois 
leurs  doses  obtenues.  On  m’informe  qu’il  en  est  de  même  dans  d’autres  régions  de  Port 
Louis, à Ste Croix en particulier, et je pense que les élus de la région peuvent en témoigner. 
Ces rassemblements, Madame la présidente, une fois la distribution terminée ne rassurent pas 
les  habitants  de  ces  localités.  Ils  dénoncent  même  des  cas  d’intimidations,  de  vols  et 
d’insécurité.  Il  est  du  devoir  des  autorités,  Madame  la  présidente,  de  la  police  et  les 
travailleurs sociaux de s’assurer que les patients de méthadone ne se regroupent pas à ne rien 
faire et quittent les lieux une fois la distribution terminée.  

Dans ce même ordre d’idée, j’ai de la peine à parler des enfants des rue, Madame la 
présidente. Il est malheureux que des enfants de plusieurs quartiers du pays se retrouvent à 
traîner  les  rues,  à  vagabonder  au  lieu  d’être  à  l’école  ou  dans  une  institution  pré-
vocationnelle.  

En 2012, l’ONG Safire et le planning familial avaient recensé 6,780 enfants de rue à 
Maurice. Si l’État ne s’attaque pas à ce problème, ces enfants seront comme des bombes à 
retardement qui s’exploseront un peu partout à travers le pays. Si rien n’est fait, ces jeunes 
citoyens, sans éducation et sans repères, deviendront des adultes à problèmes dans quelques 
années.  

Dans certains cas, ces enfants sont déjà des sources d’ennuis: de vols et d’agressions. 

Le gouvernement doit agir bien et vite sur ce dossier. 

Madame la présidente, le terme ‘national unity’ n’est que vaguement mentionné en 
deux occasions seulement dans le programme gouvernemental. Le combat sans cesse contre 
le  communalisme  est  un  programme  en  lui-même.  L’unité  nationale  est  la  clé  pour 
l’harmonie sociale et le développement durable du pays. Notre diversité culturelle est une de 
nos plus grandes richesses. Nous devons nous assurer, Madame la présidente, que personne - 
je dis bien personne - ne vienne mettre en péril notre unité nationale. Il est souhaitable donc 
de renforcer la loi au sujet de l’incitation à la haine raciale. Nous devons débarrasser notre 
société de ce réflexe répugnant. Ces têtes brûlées qui s’amusent à mettre l’unité nationale en 
danger, en prônant le communalisme - surtout en période de campagnes électorales - doivent 
être mis hors d’état de nuire.  

Et  je  remarque,  à  ce  propos,  qu’un  certain  individu,  connu  pour  être  un  danger  à 
l’unité nationale, s’affiche très souvent ces derniers temps aux côtés du gouvernement. Et il 

 

32 

se fait gaiement prendre en photos dans des fonctions officielles. Comme si que ses qualités 
de ‘caméléon’ et sa capacité à ‘virer mam’ lui ont conféré une virginité. 

Le  Premier  ministre  a  exhorté  les  membres  de  son  gouvernement  à  dissocier  la 
politique de la religion, mais il semble que les personnes qui lui sont proches ne respectent 
même pas cette consigne. ‘Plorer mam!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qui  concerne  l’art  et  la  culture,  je  note  que  le  programme 
gouvernemental  parle  de  réhabilitation  du  théâtre  de  Port  Louis  et  du  Plaza.   It’s  long 
overdue!  Je plaide que le budget total soit déboursé pour compléter ces projets.  

(Interruptions) 

Car  plus  on  tarde,  plus  ces  patrimoines  nationaux  vont  tomber  en  ruine  et  plus  le  coût 
augmentera. 

Par ailleurs, s’il est clair que le gouvernement ne veuille pas du projet de métro léger, 

par contre, mention est faite dans le discours programme et je cite – 

« A  new  state-of-the-art  transport  system  will  provide  rapid  access  and 
connectivity  throughout  the  country  for  the  population  and  tourists,  fuel 
economic activities and promote social integration within the country.” 

De quel moyen de transport est-on en train de parler ici? Ce serait bien que le gouvernement 
vienne avec plus de détails pour mieux éclairer la population. 

Madame la présidente,… 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, le financement des partis politiques est un projet que le MMM tient à 
cœur. Avec les événements de ces dernières semaines, le débat est revenu sur le tapis. Il est 
grand  temps  -  à  mon  avis  -  de  procéder  avec  une  bonne  législation  pour  que  les  partis 
politiques évoluent dans la transparence. De même, l’obligation pour ministres et députés à 
déclarer leurs avoirs devrait vite entrer en vigueur. Notre souhait, de ce côté de la chambre, 
c’est que ces déclarations soient rendues publiques.  

En  parlant  de  la  politique,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  souhaite  que  le  gouvernement 
légifère au plus vite contre le transfugisme. « Carapate sanz lisien » diront certains, il faudra 
donner toute sa valeur au poste de député, qui ne se marchande pas, ni ne se vend. D’ailleurs, 

 

33 

nous avons été témoins lors du précédent mandat de ces élus qui ont changé de bord du jour 
au lendemain.  

Je  ne  peux  également  passer  sous  silence,  Madame  la  présidente,  l’attitude  de  ces 
gens qui changent de casaque à la veille des élections comme ce monsieur, ex-député de ma 
circonscription, grand donneur de leçons - qui distribuait des ‘Foong Pow’ et sollicitait les 
votes en faveur de l’Alliance Lepep, et cela sans aucun scrupule.  

Par  ailleurs,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  note  que  le  gouvernement  fait  part  de  son 
intention de régler le problème de marchands ambulants.  Encore une fois, je dis les choses 
telles qu’elles sont. Je pense qu’il est grand temps de prendre les taureaux par les cornes en ce 
qui concerne les marchands ambulants.  

Le  gouvernement  MSM/MMM  de  2000  à  2005,  avec  l’honorable  Paul  Bérenger 

comme Premier ministre à partir de 2003 avait trouvé une solution …. 

pour la capitale en construisant le Hawkers’ Palace … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please order! 

Mr Quirin: Pourrais-je intervenir? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! 

Mr Quirin: …tout comme l’avait aussi souligné avant moi mon collègue, l’honorable 
Ameer Meea. C’était un bijou pour les marchands ambulants. Mais l’histoire retiendra que le 
gouvernement  Parti  Travailliste/PMSD  qui  nous  a  succédé  a  dilapidé  le  projet  pour  des 
raisons  bassement  politiques.  Que  du  temps  perdu,  Madame  la  présidente.  Aujourd’hui,  il 
faut tout recommencer à zéro.  

Les  marchands  ambulants  contribuent,  à  leur  manière,  à  l’économie  du  pays.  En 
même  temps,  un  pays  moderne  doit  s’assurer  de  sa  sécurité  routière,  de  la  sécurité  de  ses 
piétons et s’assurer qu’il n’y ait pas de concurrence déloyale surtout envers ceux qui payent 
leurs patentes de magasins. Je souhaite qu’une solution soit trouvée dans l’intérêt de toutes 
les parties concernées. Qu’on prenne aussi en considération l’environnement et le paysage de 
nos  villes.  

34 

 
En parlant de ville, Madame la présidente, une nouvelle Local Government Act est 
vivement souhaitée. Au MMM, nous sommes en faveur d’une municipalisation du pays, en 
particulier tout en incluant les grandes agglomérations rurales. Villes et villages doivent être 
sur le même pied d’égalité.  

Chaque citoyen a les mêmes droits et doit, en même temps, avoir droit aux mêmes 

services.  

La  nouvelle  loi  devra  conférer  plus  de  pouvoirs  décisionnels  au  conseil.    Ceux  du 
ministre  de  tutelle  et  des  administrateurs  devraient  être  limités.  De  même,  les  budgets  des 
municipalités  et  des  conseils  de  districts  devraient  connaître  une  hausse  significative  si  on 
veut qu’ils aient une participation active. Ma circonscription, Madame la présidente, est mi- 
urbaine/mi-rurale.  Je  suis  donc  bien  placé  pour  constater  la  disparité  qui  existe  entre  les 
budgets des villes et des conseils de district. Le plus vite on donne les mêmes moyens aux 
administrations le mieux le pays en profitera pour un développement meilleur. 

L’Internet, Madame la présidente est un outil primordial dans la vie de tous les jours. 
Maurice veut se positionner comme une plaque tournante en Afrique dans le domaine de la 
technologie informatique. Le ‘upgrading’ du réseau à travers l’île et une baisse significative 
dans le prix d’accès à l’Internet doivent être les priorités du gouvernement. Selon net index, 
une source de mesures de la connectivité, Maurice a un ‘Household Download Index’ de 16.9 
Mbps, contre une moyenne mondiale de 22.0 Mbps. 

La technologie informatique se développe à vitesse grand V sur le plan  mondial et 

Maurice ne peut se permettre de rester à la traîne.  

Je  vais  maintenant,  Madame  la  présidente,  aborder  un  sujet  qui  me  tient 

particulièrement à cœur, comme vous le savez, le sport et la jeunesse. 

À  la  première  lecture  du  programme  gouvernemental,  je  m’étonne  que  très  peu  de 
mesures figurent à ce chapitre, alors que le ministre de tutelle occupe une bonne place dans la 
hiérarchie actuelle. Comme la communauté sportive dans son ensemble, je suis resté sur ma 
faim. 

La  promotion  du  football  professionnel,  telle  que  mentionnée  dans  le  programme 
gouvernemental,  n’est  rien  de  nouveau.  Le  processus  de  professionnalisation  de  cette 
discipline  a  commencé  depuis  l’année  dernière,  sous  l’ancien  régime.  Le  gouvernement 
devrait plutôt se demander si ce processus est fait de la meilleure façon avant toute chose. 

 

35 

Quel est le premier impact de la professionnalisation, telle que lancée l’année dernière, sur le 
niveau de jeu et au niveau de l’assistance? 

Dans  le  sport,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  plus  important  c’est  la  base.  La  Mauritius 

Professional Football League investit déjà gros dans cette ligue professionnelle. 

L’État devrait plutôt se concentrer sur la formation des formateurs, et ainsi mettre en 
place un système de formation des très jeunes, «at grassroot level». C’est de cette façon que 
nous aurons de bons footballeurs dans 4-5 ans, voire 10 ans. Alors, ceux-là pourront intégrer 
une académie,  avant de  faire le saut dans le football professionnel. C’est ce que le MMM 
avait proposé dans son programme gouvernemental lors des dernières législatives. Madame la 
présidente, le gouvernement actuel fera une bêtise s’il fonce tête baissée et persiste dans la 
voie  tracée  depuis  2014.  Ignorer  la  base,  c’est  s’assurer  de  l’effondrement  de  la  pyramide 
dans quelques années. De même, la création d’une académie de football n’est pas un projet 
clair et si je me base sur ce qui est mentionné dans le programme du gouvernement. Ou alors 
on s’y prend mal. Je m’explique - 

Que lit-on à ce sujet? Je cite – 

« In  collaboration  with  an  English  Premier  league  soccer  club,  a  high-level 
football academy will be set up in Mauritius to offer talented youngsters the 
opportunity to pursue a career locally and abroad”. 

Comment voulez-vous qu’on ait des «talented youngsters » pour faire partie d’une académie 
si on ne donne pas à nos jeunes footballeurs en herbe une formation digne de ce nom? 

Combien d’écoles de football ne fonctionnent plus à travers le pays par manque de 
formateurs ou parce que ces derniers sont démotivés n’ayant pas obtenu leurs salaires? C’est 
à ce niveau qu’il faut mettre de l’ordre avant tout. 

Le gouvernement court le risque de mettre la charrue devant les bœufs dans le seul 
but de vouloir honorer sa promesse électorale. L’on se souvient que l’Alliance Lepep avait 
mêlé l’entraîneur anglais de West Ham, Sam Allardyce, à la politique mauricienne lors de la 
dernière campagne électorale. Et cela, je dois le dire de façon grotesque! Pour prouver que ce 
n’était qu’une mise en scène, où on a voulu marquer des points, je me réfère à l’embauche du 
technicien français Didier Six comme Entraîneur National et Directeur Technique National 
tout récemment. Je suis très intéressé à savoir comment on compte s’y prendre pour concilier 
un système de formation et d’académie anglais avec un DTN français? 

 
Je vous cite, Madame la présidente,  

36 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow the hon. Member to continue! 

Mr Quirin: Une récente étude de l’observatoire du football CIES, basé en Suisse, en 
date du 21 janvier 2014. Cette étude concerne la formation de footballeur professionnel en 
Europe. Sans surprise, c’est la France qui arrive en tête avec 179 joueurs formés qui évoluent 
dans les plus grands championnats européens. 

L’Espagne suit juste derrière avec 177. L’Allemagne est troisième avec 66 joueurs et 

l’Angleterre quatrième avec 52 joueurs, devant l’Italie, 44 joueurs. 

Le  système  français,  reconnu  mondialement,  a  fait  ses  preuves  à  Maurice  dans  le 
passé avec le passage de François Blacquart. À l’époque, l’île Maurice de Désiré Periatambee 
se permettait de battre le Cameroun de Samuel Eto’o au stade Anjalay. C’était les années de 
gloire du football mauricien.  

Madame  la  présidente,  le  gouvernement  a  intérêt  à  définir  la  meilleure  façon  pour 
relancer  le  football  à  Maurice.  Il  n’existe  pas  mille  solution,  il  nous  faut  investir  gros  au 
niveau de la racine et attendre les fruits du travaille dans 10 années ou plus.  

Lancer une académie en grande pompe, juste pour épater la galerie ne nous amènera 

rien de bon, si ce n’est qu’une perte de temps et beaucoup d’argent.  

En ce qui concerne le sport d’élite, Madame la présidente, on n’a presque rien à se 
mettre sous la dent. A croire que le gouvernement n’a pas encore défini sa politique sportive. 
Pire, il n’a même pas un programme digne de ce nom pour le sport.  

Le  projet  de  construction  de  ‘Residential  Sports  Training  Centres’  à  Bel  Ombre  et 
Anse la Raie est néanmoins fort louable. Ce serait bien de moderniser aussi celui de Pointe 
Jérôme, tout en projetant de construire un centre similaire pour la région de l’Est.  

Madame la présidente, pas une seule ligne dans le programme du gouvernement sur 
les Jeux des îles qui auront lieu bientôt, et l’on ne sait encore quelle politique le ministère de 
la jeunesse et des sports compte adopter par rapport à cet événement.  

Je suis révolté! - et le mot n’est pas fort - de la réponse… 

(Interruptions) 

 

37 

Madam  Speaker:  Don’t  interrupt  the  hon.  Member,  please!  Allow  him  to  proceed 

with his speech. 

Mr Quirin: Je suis révolté, Madame la présidente, - et le mot n’est pas fort - de la 
réponse  fournie  par  le  ministre  de  la  jeunesse  et  des  sports  mardi  dernier  à  propos  de  ses 
attentes pour les Jeux des îles. Il n’a rien trouvé mieux à me dire qu’il n’a pas de boule de 
cristal. Madame la présidente, en sport on se fixe des objectifs, après avoir évalué nos forces 
et nos faiblesses, aussi bien que celles de nos adversaires.   

Setting a target is something natural in sport. The hon. Minister should already have 
met  with  representatives  of  all  sports  disciplines  and  should  ask  them  about  their  targets, 
about the difficulties they are facing during their preparation and how they can be helped to 
reach their goals by giving them all the necessary facilities.  

If this was already done, the hon. Minister should have known what is the legitimate 
ambition of the Club Maurice for the Indian Ocean Games. Je vous assure - malheureusement 
il n’est pas là - qu’il n’a nullement besoin, l’honorable ministre des sports, de boule de cristal 
pour le savoir. Mais simplement de bon sens et de vision!  

La  politique  sportive,  telle  que  préconisée  à  Maurice,  Madame  la  présidente,  est 
dépassée. C’est bien d’accorder de l’attention au football, qui a besoin d’un renouveau, mais 
il faut aussi voir les besoins des autres disciplines. Le sport collectif dans son ensemble se 
porte  mal.  Le  manque  de  résultats  dans  les  différentes  sélections  nationales  sur  la  scène 
internationale ces dernières années en est la preuve.  

Ce qu’il nous faut… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin, for how long do you have? 

Mr Quirin: Five minutes, I can say. 

Madam Speaker: Five minutes. 

Mr  Quirin:  Ce  qu’il  nous  faut  préconiser,  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  une 
professionnalisation du sport dans son ensemble. Pas uniquement le football mais là encore, il 
faut s’assurer de revoir le fonctionnement à partir de la base. Le volleyball, le basket et le 
handball  sont  des  disciplines  collectives  qui  ont  autant  besoin  d’un  coup  de  fouet  que  le 
football. Il ne faut pas qu’il y ait des parents pauvres dans le sport. Pas de discrimination. Il 
en est de même pour les autres disciplines. Là où nous faisons bien déjà, il faut viser plus 

 

38 

haut,  alors  qu’il  faut  sensiblement  hausser  le  niveau  dans  les  disciplines  où  nous  faisons 
moins bien.  

Par  ailleurs,  si  j’accueille  favorablement  l’annonce  de  fitness  facilities  dans  les 
complexes sportifs, je note l’absence de création de parcours de santé à travers le pays, avec 
des  équipements  pour  les  exercices.  On  peut  se  baser  sur  le  modèle  du  parcours  de  la 
Montagne des Signaux. Une nation sportive, Madame la présidente, est une nation en bonne 
santé.  

Le  volet  Jeunesse  dans  le  programme  gouvernemental  est  squelettique.  J’aimerai 
attirer l’attention du gouvernement sur les horaires d’opération des centres de jeunesse.  Ces 
centres ferment normalement à une heure où les jeunes sont libres.  

Je  suis  d’avis  qu’il  est  temps  de  revoir  les  heures  d’ouverture  et  les  rendre  plus 
flexibles, afin que les jeunes puissent avoir un lieu de détente dans l’après-midi jusqu’à tôt 
dans la soirée. Les centres de jeunesse doivent offrir toute une série d’activités et de loisirs 
qui attireront les jeunes et les éloigner des fléaux que sont l’alcool et la drogue. Un effort 
considérable doit être fait à ce niveau.  

Je m’étonne aussi, Madame la présidente, que le gouvernement n’ait pas fait provision 
d’un audit des infrastructures sportives du pays, dont la plupart sont dépassés. À cet égard, je 
m’interroge aussi sur le rôle du Mauritius Sports Council et je me demande si cette institution 
a toujours sa raison d’être.  

De même, je lance un appel pour qu’on recouvre les terrains de basket, de volley et de 
handball, à travers le pays, car ce sont des sports qui se pratiquent essentiellement en salle. 
Cela ne pénalisera pas les sportifs non plus en situation de mauvais temps.  

Madame la présidente, nous sommes une Opposition responsable. Je n’ai pas fait que 
critiquer, mais j’ai aussi proposé. Pour finir sur le volet jeunesse et sport, j’aimerai énoncer 
quelques  points  rapidement  qui  faisaient  partie  du  programme  du  MMM  lors  de  dernières 
élections. 

Si le gouvernement peut s’en inspirer pour redonner un nouveau souffle à ce secteur, 

je serais comblé et je cite - 

1. 

redonner ses lettres de noblesse aux sports collectifs, avec un accent particulier 
sur la formation; 

 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

39 

mettre le sportif au centre du développement de ce secteur en lui offrant les 
facilités nécessaires et les incentives pour atteindre l’excellence;  

faire un audit des infrastructures sportives du pays, réaménager et upgrade les 
sites  nécessaires;  identifier  les  sites  pour  la  construction  de  nouvelles 
infrastructures dont un gymnase pour le kick-boxing et un vélodrome;  

revoir le fonctionnement, le rôle du Mauritius Sports Council;  

encourager les collectivités locales à être un acteur majeur du développement 
du sport à Maurice; 

encourager l’introduction de nouveaux sports; 

accorder  une  attention  particulière  aux  bourses  sportives,  sports-études  et 
plancher sur la création à long terme d’une académie des sports; 

revoir le système d’aide aux fédérations; 

utiliser  le  sport  comme  un  moyen  efficace  pour  combattre  la  pauvreté,  en 
collaboration avec le ministère de l’intégration sociale; 

encourager  l’introduction  du  sport  comme  un  sujet  à  part  entière  dès  le 
primaire  et  la  pratique  du  sport  dans  les  écoles,  en  collaboration  avec  le 
ministère de l’éducation; 

plancher sur un plan de retraite pour les sportifs de haut niveau; 

accorder une attention particulière à Rodrigues; 

accorder plus d’autonomie aux fédérations sportives; 

trouver des sources de financement pour les différents projets qui mèneront à 
la professionnalisation du sport et la quête de l’excellence; 

offrir les facilités et les encadrements nécessaires aux fédérations et sportifs en 
vue des Jeux des îles, et  

accorder  une  attention  particulière  au  handisport  et  voir  quelles  sont  ses 
besoins, à moyen et long termes; 

revoir  aussi  certaines  clauses  du  Sports  Act  pour  qu’elle  soit  en  harmonie 
parfaite  avec  les  lois  et  instances  internationales  et  ainsi  permettre  aux 
fédérations et clubs de fonctionner en toute autonomie; 

 
18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

40 

restructurer le centre médico-sportif de Vacoas; 

doter la jeunesse de ce pays de ‘Youth Centres’ modernes et dynamiques; 

s’assurer que chaque région du pays ait un ‘Youth Council’ actif et dynamique;  

remettre à jour les ‘Youth Recreational Centres’ existants et construire deux à 
trois nouvelles structures à travers le pays; 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, allow him to complete his speech! 

Mr Quirin:  

22. 

23. 

24. 

organiser un Festival de la Jeunesse sur une base annuelle, et qui culminera sur 
la tenue d’un Youth Carnaval et d’un Youth Concert; 

repérer  et  récompenser  les  talents  parmi  les  jeunes  à  travers  des  concours 
régionaux et nationaux; 

création d’un National Youth Aid pour venir en aide aux jeunes, les orienter, 
les conseiller et finalement,  

25. 

encourager les projets montés par les jeunes pour les jeunes.  

Pour clore, Madame la présidente, j’aimerai faire part de quelques difficultés dont fait 

face ma circonscription, Beau-Bassin/Petite Rivière. 

Le MMM, dans son programme, a tout un plan pour la circonscription. Je salue, par 
ailleurs,  le  bon  travail  abattu  par  la  mairie  de  Beau-Bassin/Rose-Hill,  qui  tombe  sous 
l’administration du MMM. 

Le centre-ville et les régions de Chebel et de Barkly ont besoin d’un marché moderne. 

Les routes et les drains méritent une attention particulière à Maingard, Petite Rivière, 
Belvédère, Coromandel, Hermitage, entre autres. Les travaux d’aménagement de drains par la 
NDU à Chebel Branch Road ont stoppé court après les élections de décembre dernier et cela 
au grand dam des habitants de la région. 

Les autorités devraient également s’atteler à la construction d’un medi-clinic à Petite 

Rivière, d’une gare routière à Mont Roches et d’abribus à Albion, entre autres. 

 

41 

À Canot, Madame la présidente, la propriété de Médine a déjà mis à la disposition de 
l’État un espace nécessaire pour la construction d’un terrain de foot. J’espère que la NDU et 
les autorités concernées feront le nécessaire dans un proche avenir. 

Madame la présidente, je soulèverai d’autres problèmes relatifs à ma circonscription 
au  cours  de  mon  mandat,  afin  d’aider  à  améliorer  le  quotidien  des  habitants  de  ma 
circonscription. De même, je soulèverai des questions d’intérêt national pour l’avancement et 
le bien-être des citoyens du pays en général. 

Je vous remercie. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hour for lunch. 

At 1.12 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.43 p.m with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY – COMMITTEES – COMPOSITION 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

COMMITTEE OF SELECTION 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 

STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE 

HOUSE COMMITTEE 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, I have a few announcements to make with regard 

to the composition of Committees in accordance with  Standing Orders 69. 

Composition of Sessional Select Committees 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  accordance  with  Standing  Orders  69(1),  and 
following consultations I had with both sides of the House, I have nominated the following 
hon. Members to serve on the Committee of Selection - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Honourable Adrien C. Duval, Deputy Speaker 

Honourable Purmanund Jhugroo, Chief Government Whip 

Honourable M. S. Abbas-Mamode, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable Toolsyraj Benydin, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

 
5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

42 

Honourable Mrs Deveena Boygah, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, Opposition Whip 

Honourable Jean-Nel Alain Aliphon 

Honourable M. Osman C. Mahomed 

Honourable J. P. France Quirin 

Honourable Dhananjay Ramful 

Honourable Sudesh Rughoobur 

In  accordance  with  the  same  Standing  Order,  I  shall  be  the  Chairperson  of  the 

Committee. 

Furthermore, I wish to inform the House that the Committee of Selection met under 
my chairmanship earlier today and has approved the composition of the following Sessional 
Select Committees as hereunder –  

A. 

Public Accounts Committee 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Honourable Purmanund Jhugroo, Chief Government Whip 

Honourable J. H. Thierry Henry, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable Sangeet Fowdar 

Honourable Mrs M. C. Jeanne Monty 

Honourable Gowkaran Oree 

Honourable Kalyan Tarolah 

Honourable S. M. Aadil Ameer Meea 

Dr. the Honourable M. Raffick Sorefan 

Honourable Ezra S. Jhuboo 

In addition, I have, in accordance with Standing Order 69(2) of the Standing Orders 
and  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly,  appointed  Honourable  Alan  Ganoo,  to  serve  as 
Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. 

B. 

Standing Orders Committee 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

43 

Honourable  Mrs  Roubina  Jadoo-Jaunboccus,  Parliamentary  Private 
Secretary 

Honourable  Satyaprakashsing  Rutnah,  Deputy  Chief  Government 
Whip 

Honourable Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, Opposition Whip 

Honourable Vedasingam V. Baloomoody 

In  accordance  with  Standing  Order  69(3)  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the 
National  Assembly,  the  Honourable  Deputy  Speaker  is  an  ex  officio  Member  of  the  said 
Committee and I will be chairing the Committee.  

C. 

House Committee 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Honourable Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, Opposition Whip 

Honourable M. C. Eddy Boissézon, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable J. H. Thierry Henry, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable A. Bashir Jahangeer 

Honourable M. Osman Cassam Mahomed 

In  accordance  with  Standing  Order  69(4)  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the 

National Assembly, the hon. Deputy Speaker is the Chairperson of the Committee. 

Hon.  Members,  as  you  are  aware,  section  59  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act 
provides  for  the  setting  up  of  the  Parliamentary  Committee  to  monitor  the  Independent 
Commission against Corruption and it also provides for the mode of designation of the hon. 
Members and of the Chairperson thereof to serve the said Committee.  

I have thus to inform you that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition have designated the following hon. Members to serve on this Committee –  

1. 

2. 

3. 

Honourable M. S. Abbas-Mamode, Parliamentary Private Secretary 

Honourable Maneesh Gobin 

Honourable  Satyaprakashsing  Rutnah,  Deputy  Chief  Government 
Whip 

4. 

Honourable Dharmendar Sesungkur 

 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

44 

Honourable Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, Opposition Whip 

Honourable Vedasingam V. Baloomoody 

Honourable Zouberr H. Joomaye 

Honourable Shakeel A. Y. A. R. Mohamed 

Honourable Kalidas Teeluckdharry 

In  accordance  with  Section  59(3)  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  the  Rt. 
honourable Prime Minister has appointed hon. Maneesh Gobin to be the Chairperson of the 
Parliamentary Committee. 

I thank you. 

 

(2.53 p.m.) 

The Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Mr P. Jugnauth):  
Madame la présidente, permettez-moi aussi de me joindre aux autres pour vous féliciter pour 
votre nomination en tant que présidente de notre auguste Assemblée et, encore une fois, nous 
marquons l’histoire parce que c’est la première fois que notre auguste Assemblée est présidée 
par une femme. Mes félicitations vont aussi à l’honorable Adrien Duval pour sa nomination  
en tant que Deputy Speaker. C’est la première fois qu’il est candidat ; premier essai, premier 
succès.  Donc,  je  lui  souhaite  un  long  chemin.    I  look  forward  that  nos  chemins  se  font 
ensemble.  

 Let me also say that in the past election, we have presented Mrs Ameenah Gurib-
Fakim as our candidate for the post of President and that it was overwhelmingly vote. I am 
looking forward that she will assume Office, I would say sooner than later, et nous allons 
marquer, encore une fois, l’histoire à l’avenir car ce sera pour la première fois qu’une femme 
sera nommée Présidente de la République.   

Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  aussi  remercier  le  peuple  mauricien  pour  la 
confiance  placée dans l’équipe de l’Alliance Lepep, à son programme et aussi, et surtout, 
pour avoir sauver notre pays de la tyrannie d’un Premier ministre devenu  dictateur, prêt à 
tout pour non seulement dévaliser mais dévaluer la nation mauricienne.   

Le peuple a encore une fois prouvé que le vrai pouvoir est entre ses mains et qu’il sait 
sanctionner sans pitié. Mais, si le changement tant espéré est arrivé lors des élections du 10 

 

45 

décembre dernier, c’est qu’il y a eu aussi une main divine qui a béni notre pays et a tracé le 
cours des événements.  Je me souviens encore de ses déclarations teintées d’une arrogance 
démesurée, qui nous faisait croire que l’Alliance de l’Unité et de la Modernité se dirigeait 
vers  une  victoire  de  60-0  car  un  certain  professeur,  et  expert  en  mathématique  électorale, 
avait  déjà  comptabilisé  que  40%  plus  40%  donnerait  un  cinglant  80%,  et  même  en  tenant 
compte des discounts de 10 à 20% peut-être… 

(Interruptions) 

Cela allait donner aux environs de 50% au moins. Donc, cela ferait un score sans appel de 60-
0. Mais le peuple a fait voler en éclats ce fameux laptop utilisé par cet expert. Lui-même et 
ses compères qui avaient concocté une alliance contre nature dans le dos du peuple ont été, 
pour  la  plupart,  balayés  par  l’électorat.  Et  nous  n’avons  pas  encore  oublié,  Madame  la 
présidente, que cette auguste Assemblée avait été fermée pendant presque toute l’année 2014, 
afin de servir les desseins d’alliance obscurantisme visant à un partage de pouvoir entre le 
Premier ministre et le Président de la République désigné. 

L’Alliance  de  l’Unité  et  de  la  Modernité  vous  avez  proposé  un  Président,  élu  pour 
sept ans, qui aurait eu des pouvoirs exécutifs, qui aurait pris des décisions majeures, mais qui 
n’aurait pas de compte à rendre à qui que ce soit, tout en bénéficiant d’une immunité contre 
toute action légale. L’ancien Premier ministre voulait instituer un régime absolutisme pour 
verrouiller le pays et le mettre à sa merci. Mais, heureusement que le peuple nous a épargné 
ce malheur. Car, avec tout ce qu’on découvre, surtout maintenant, sur l’ex-Premier ministre, 
ces  millions  amassés  dans  des  coffres  et  valises,  les  scandales  qui  ont  marqué  son 
gouvernement, les abus de pouvoir, le copinage, le favoritisme, le népotisme, on réalise bien 
que notre pays a échappé à un catastrophe. En tout cas, le peuple a bien senti le danger. 

Je  suis  sûr  que  le  partenaire  du  Parti  Travailliste  savait,  comme  a  dit  auparavant 
l’honorable Quirin, il a senti lui aussi les dangers. Mais malgré toutes ces critiques, malgré 
tout ce qui a été dit – et je me souviens encore, à un certain moment le Chef de l’opposition 
disait: « Mais dans la tête de l’ancien Premier ministre qu’est-ce qu’il y avait? » Mais ce n’est 
pas pour autant qu’ils se sont alliés. Mais le peuple, lui, n’a pas changé d’opinion et de cours, 
car le peuple a fini par démasquer cet homme à double visage qui pensait que ses excès, ses 
menaces,  son  langage  outrancé,  ses  frasques  et  ses  caprices,  ses  combines  malsaines,  sa 
culture d’immoralité et son affairisme au sommet de l’État allaient être cautionnés. 

46 

 
Aujourd’hui, le peuple et la classe politique réalisent à quel point j’avais raison dans 
mes  dénonciations  contre  l’ancien  Premier  ministre  et  le  régime  Travailliste.  J’ai 
malheureusement côtoyé la personne entre 2010 et 2011, de très près, Madame la présidente. 
J’ai été témoin et victime de ses machinations et de l’utilisation des institutions à des fins de 
persécution politique et personnelle. Donc, c’est en homme averti que j’ai sillonné le pays 
pour conscientiser la population face au danger que représente le Dr. Navin Ramgoolam. J’ai 
vu la colère et le dégoût du peuple vis-à-vis de l’ex-Premier ministre et de la pourriture qu’il 
caractérise. C’est pourquoi je n’ai jamais cru dans cette chansonnette de mauvais goût qui 
nous faisait croire que l’alliance que dirigeait l’ex-Premier ministre allait vers un walk over.  

Madame la présidente, si le peuple a vu juste et prouvé sa maturité, je peux dire que 
j’ai  été  étonné  de  constater  comment  le  Chef  de  l’opposition,  avec  tout  ce  qu’il  a  dit  lui-
même au sujet du Dr. Navin Ramgoolam, du Parti Travailliste, avec toute son expérience, ait 
pu  se  faire  prendre  par  l’hameçon  du  pêcheur  de  requin!  Je  n’ai  jamais  pu  comprendre  - 
malgré le sang qu’il y avait avec cet appât - comment le Chef de l’opposition ait pu se mettre 
aux côtés de Navin Ramgoolam pour concocter une alliance contre nature! Que les militants 
ont tant contesté comme l’a si bien dit l’honorable Quirin. Comment le Chef de l’opposition 
ait  pu  croire  à  un  seul  moment  qu’il  allait  nettoyer  le  pays  en  s’alliant  à  un  Dr.  Navin 
Ramgoolam qui voulait à tout prix étouffer la vérité sur les scandales qu’il avait engendrés! 
Comment  le  Leader  de  L’opposition  ait  pu  se  liguer  à  Navin  Ramgoolam  pour  prendre  la 
démocratie parlementaire en otage pendant presque toute une année et allait contre la volonté 
de  l’électorat!  J’avoue  que  je  ne  comprend  pas!  Comme  ont  dit  certains,  même  si  l’appât 
appétissant  de  cinq  ans  de  Prime  Ministership  ait  pu  perdre  la  raison!  D’autant  plus  que 
maintenant – l’autre jour d’ailleurs j’ai entendu le Chef de l’opposition critiquer l’ex-Premier 
ministre, mardi dernier, lors des échanges sur la PNQ concernant l’ICAC. Je présume donc 
que  le  Leader  de  l’opposition  prend  la  mesure  aujourd’hui  du  désastre  qu’aurait  connu  le 
pays si l’ex-Premier ministre était revenu aux affaires. Imaginons un seul instant, Madame la 
présidente,  que  l’ex-Premier  ministre  avait  réussi  son  coup  dans  le  dos  du  peuple  avec  le 
concours  du  Chef  de  l’opposition,  cela  aurait  été  un  grand  recul  pour  la  démocratie,  cela 
aurait été aussi de restreindre encore plus la liberté sous toutes les formes. La recette pour 
plus de pauvreté, plus de corruption, encore plus d’excès, plus de népotisme et de copinage et 
les  frasques  de  Navin  Ramgoolam  seraient  restés,  au  fait  des  secrets  de  l’État.  D’ailleurs, 
qu’il a franchement emporté avec lui! 

47 

 
Le pays a été sauvé. Le peuple s’est rassemblé derrière Sir Anerood Jugnauth, derrière 
les autres dirigeants et l’équipe de l’Alliance Lepep pour nous donner un mandat net et clair. 
Je tiens, ici, à saluer le courage de Sir Anerood Jugnauth, son rôle inestimable dans la victoire 
de  l’Alliance  Lepep,  sa  vision  d’une  île  Maurice  meilleure  traduite  dans  le  discours-
programme du gouvernement et surtout sa détermination à mettre en pratique ce programme 
dans l’intérêt du peuple. 

Mes salutations vont également à mon ami, Xavier-Luc Duval, Leader du PMSD et à 
Ivan Collendavelloo, le Leader du ML, qui se sont donnés à fond pour assurer la victoire de 
l’Alliance  Lepep,  et  qui  travaillent  eux  aussi  d’arrache-pied  pour  matérialiser  le  vrai 
changement qu’attend la nation mauricienne. Et, bien sûr, je ne peux oublier mes camarades 
du MSM qui ont été à mes côtés dans ce combat contre les présumés Goliath et qui m’ont 
soutenu en tant que leader du MSM contre vents et marées. 

Madame  la  présidente,  l’équipe  au  pouvoir  aujourd’hui  a  la  bénédiction  du  peuple 
pour  nettoyer,  réformer  et  reconstruire.  Le  discours-programme  reflète  notre  ambition  de 
bâtir  une  société  juste,  prospère,  moderne  où  chacun  aura  sa  part  du  gâteau  national  et  le 
discours-programme  est,  au    fait,  loin  d’être  un  chapelet  de  bonnes  intentions  comme  le 
disent  certains  membres  de  l’opposition.  Il  englobe  des  engagements  fermes  que  le 
gouvernement a déjà commencé à honorer avec passion et dévouement. Le peuple réalise que 
nous traduisons nos paroles et nos promesses en actes, ‘Parole donnée, parole sacrée’. C’est 
cela notre devise!  

Nous avons démarré avec la bénédiction de nos aînés quand à peine quelques jours 
après l’entrée en fonction du nouveau gouvernement, nous avons augmenté, comme promis, 
la  pension  de  vieillesse  à  R  5000.  Le  nettoyage  au  Karcher  a  été  bien  enclenché  et  les 
chantiers de reconstruction sont immenses. 

Madam Speaker, during the past nine years, fraud, corruption, lies and bluffs have, in 
fact, ruined our country. We all realise that we are now in the midst of a crisis. The society’s 
health has deteriorated since 2006  and is in  a very poor state littered with unemployment, 
poverty,  institutional  malfunctioning,  drugs  and  insecurity.  In  fact,  the  poor  has  become 
poorer  while  those  close  to  power  and,  certainly,  the  inner  circle  of  the  former  Prime 
Minister, les copinages, have prospered. They have prospered in, I must say, a gigantic way. 

The income gaps have widened. Income inequality has risen. This is confirmed by the 
Gini coefficient. The taxpayers have seen their contributions to the State being lavishly spent 

 

48 

on financing unproductive, inefficient and wasteful projects. We can see today how billions 
have  been  spent  in  supposedly  projects  that  would  have  put  Mauritius  into  a  forward  and 
modern age and which are now really crumbling down.  

The  enquiries  are  underway  and  we  hope  eventually  that  the  guilty  parties  will  be 
exposed publicly. Today, when we see those millions of notes cascading from the coffers of 
the former Prime Minister, probably now we can have a clearer picture why there have been 
large  cost  overruns  on  infrastructural  projects.  Our  economy  has  critically  been  weakened 
due to the irresponsibility, the incompetence and, more specifically, the greed of the outgoing 
Government.  

Our mission now is to bring meaningful change at all levels and steer our economy 
anew on the path of sustainable growth. We are fully committed and we mean business when 
we  say  that  our  ultimate  objective  in  Government  is  to  pave  the  way  towards  achieving  a 
second economic miracle. 

As  stipulated  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  we  have  taken  the 
commitment  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  forward-looking,  environmentally  sustainable, 
economically  vibrant  and  innovative  country  with  the  provision  of  modern  infrastructure, 
global connectivity, high skills and technology. In fact, the second economic miracle will be 
driven by technology and innovation. My Ministry will have a key role in shaping the new 
economy  and  lifting  our  society  to  a  higher  paradigm  of  economic  development  and  high 
standard of living that is worthy of the status of a developed economy. 

Madam  Speaker,  Internet  connectivity,  broadband,  information  and  communication 
technologies  and,  indeed,  innovation  will  be  at  the  heart  of  all  our  economic  and  social 
strategies cutting across not only through our existing pillars but as importantly, through all 
the new economic sectors that this Government will be kick-starting during the course of its 
mandate. The ICT sector has an inherent dynamism for boosting economic growth through 
wealth and employment creation. It is expected that with the new innovations in computing 
which  will  change  the  way  IT  services  are  delivered  to  business  and  end-users,  new 
employment  opportunities  can  be  created  in  the  sector  through  the  mastering  of  the  latest 
trend  in  IT  architecture  comprising  of  social,  mobile,  analytics  and  cloud  technologies 
collectively  known  as,  SMAC.  Businesses  in  Mauritius  will  need  to  move  up  the  value 
change and success will most likely be realised by those organisations that not only migrate 

 

49 

quickly  to  the  new  SMAC  paradigm,  but  who  figure  out  how  to  deal  with  hybrid 
environments as they effect transition from one evolution of ICT to the next. 

The  Government  Programme  highlights  the  development  of  the  ICT/KPO  industry 
and through the provision of the necessary incentives to attract foreign direct investments; 
global  players  will  be  willing  to  establish  their  operations  in  Mauritius  in  the  following 
sectors –  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

the BPO non-voice, that is, back office; 
payroll; 
finance and accounting outsourcing;  
legal process outsourcing; 
information  technology  outsourcing,  that  is,  software  development,  mobile 
apps development, web development, e-commerce and multimedia, and 
IT services, that is, data centres, disaster recovery, training and consultancy. 

In  view  of  spurring  growth  in  the  ICT/KPO  industry,  Government  will,  in  fact, 
concentrate  its  efforts  on  developing  new  value  added  and  high-end  activities,  thus 
spearheading innovation. 

Research and development will, of course, inevitably emerge as a major component of 
the economy in order to sustain innovation. Through a compelling alternative for higher value 
works,  Mauritius  will  also  increasingly  leverage  as  the  ideal  platform  for  the  delivery  of 
business services to Africa with regard to ICT. Mauritius has the potential for becoming the 
new business platform for Africa and position itself as a gateway between Asia and Africa. 
This Government is committed to maximise fully on the potential of the African dividend. In 
addition, we will strive our best to make of Mauritius the back office of Europe and the USA 
through the provision of high-end knowledge process outsourcing.  

However, Madam Speaker, no meaningful progress can be made in the ICT sector if 
we  do  not  ensure  the  delivery  of  high-speed  connectivity  at  competitive  costs  across  the 
island. Broadband technology, digital technology should be available to everyone, to every 
household, from the young student with artistic talents cachés to the small entrepreneur, from 
the child to the older, from the hotel operator to the taxi driver, from the textile company to 
the medical doctor at the hospital, from the household in the city area to the remotest place in 
both Mauritius and Rodrigues. My Ministry will soon make proposals on the strategies we 
shall execute to make this happen.  

50 

 
I wish to inform the House that my Ministry is already working with service providers 
here in Mauritius to connect, at least, 50,000 new households scattered across the country; 
many will be from economically deprived areas to the digital economy before the end of this 
year. We are delighted that we will, in the same breath, be able to install Wi-Fi3 structures in 
as many as 300 spots comprising schools and colleges, community centres, shopping malls, 
places of high student concentrations such as campuses and libraries and at the airport. This 
project is sitting high among my priorities and I hope to conclude happily part of it in the 
very near future. After all, this is what broadband and the Internet should be all about, not 
only as an instrument of growth and progress, but also as an instrument to reduce the social 
divide and its impact on society. 

Internet should be all about, not only as an instrument of growth and progress, but 

also as an instrument to reduce the social divide and its impact on society. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  in  our  hands  a  whole  host  of  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed in order to make our country a fully digitalised smart city called upon to drive the 
country in its quest to become a newly developed economy. Let me, Madam Speaker, deal on 
a couple of points that will inevitably come up as we address the digital agenda. 

First, about the broadband plans that have been prepared by my predecessors, but that 
were  never  implemented.  Consequently,  little  actions  have  taken  place  to  look  after 
broadband speed compared to other countries even in our near vicinity. Hence, the first major 
challenge  is  about  what  we  understand  by  the  concept  of  broadband  and  what  will  be  the 
definition that we will give to it today and in the years to come. One or two decades ago, a 
speed of 256 kbs was the norm, then it was upgraded to 512 Kbs, recently, we wanted 4 Mbs 
up to 10 mega to be the standard. But, let me tell you, Madam Speaker, that in some countries 
of our own region, 30 Mbs or more has become the norm and that, in some countries, or what 
was known as Eastern Europe broadband speed definition is now 100 Mbs and over. What 
does  this  mean?  We  will  have  to  focus  on  providing  fast  and  robust  broadband  to  all, 
including those in the deprived areas and the economically weak. We will have to face of fact 
that  it  may  not  be  commercially  viable  to  internet  service  providers  to  bring  broadband 
whatever definition we give to it eventually to 20% or 30% of the homes of our country. But 
we  shall  need  to  implement  some  form  of  public  support  scheme,  so  that  nobody  is  left 
behind. Government is clear about this necessity and my Ministry is already working on it. 

51 

 
The second point is about the different models and the different technologies that are 
available today for deployment of broadband, to the homes and businesses and to the various 
public  places.  We  will  eventually  have  to  make  choices,  but  one  issue  is  clear  cut, 
Government  will  have  to  intervene  if  high  reliable  speed  internet  is  to  be  deployed  to  all 
citizens of the country and to all sectors of the economy. In that respect, Madam Speaker, the 
staff of my Ministry is actually busy talking with the major service providers, the regulator 
and other stakeholders of the industry to come up with an integrated action plan. We want to 
bring basic broadband to all by 2016. I know this is a high target, but still we need to aim 
high in order to achieve what we want in terms of our objectives. We will have to determine 
how and when we can upgrade the norm to a higher level of speed, let’s say about 30 Mbs 
and to eventually start deploying 100 Mbs by 2020, in line with targets set in some countries 
of  Europe  and  South-East  Asia.  Again  my  staff  has  started  to  work  on  these  long-term 
targets, even if they appear, as I have said, to be very ambitious and very challenging. 

If  we  are  indeed  committing  ourselves  to  become  a  smart  island  city  then  we  will 
have to think how small and medium enterprises can reinvent their business, so that they will 
not discover too late that their customers have, in fact, gone to another supplier or that the 
textile  factory  and  the  hotel  catering  for  foreign  clients  have  lost  their  clients  to  savvy 
Internet  users  in  competing  countries.  It,  therefore,  follows,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this 
Government will act on several fronts to transform Mauritius into a fully digitalised country 
and we will endeavour to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

provide  a  digital  platform  to  all  the  enterprises  and  institutions  including 
SMEs, which are not presently online or adequately online; 

reach out to the young and the education system and to unlock their potential 
for transformation, creativity and innovation, and 

(iii) 

reduce the digital divide between the haves and haves not. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  overall  strategy  of  my  Ministry  will  not  be  comprehensive 
enough, if I do not dwell on the issue of data protection and security. Over and above trust in 
all respect, security and data protection are also key pillars of our digital strategy. We need to 
revisit all our information security systems to be in line with the best in the field of cyber 
security strategies and any breach, cybercrime, and cyberfraud should be readily identifiable 
and dealt within the framework of the law. 

52 

 
Last,  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  another  priority  of  my  Ministry 
consists in working with the private sector, tertiary and research institutions of the country on 
an  Action  Plan  to  spur  innovation  that  will  include  competition  and  prizes  to  creators  and 
inventors. We expect that this initiative will motivate our young people to create and innovate 
and in that respect my  Ministry is also looking at the opportunity of organising a national 
seminar  later  this  year.  Let  me  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  our  young  people  will  be  a  key 
theme in all our endeavours and that on one day as a matter of example and to illustrate the 
vision  we  have  through  our  youth,  we  hope  -  it  is  not  limited  only  to  our  youth  -  that  a 
youngster  will  come  forward  to  tell  us  that  he  has  done  a  perfect  computer  aided  three-
dimensional  figure  of  an  object  over  a  famous  personality  or  an  application  that  will  help 
patients to better connect with their doctors both in the public and private sector. And why 
not,  a  software  application  that  will  enable  the  whole  hotel  sector  to  more  effectively  sell 
their rooms across the world. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  will  have  to  do  everything  possible  to  encourage  the 
entrepreneurial spirit of the nation in the four corners of our country. We will have to provide 
an  effective  broadband  platform  at  the  lowest  possible  cost  so  that  our  firms  can  more 
effectively  compete  both  internally  and  for  export.  We  will  have  to  provide  to  our  young 
creators  a  free  platform  for  them  to  unlock  their  potential  to  create  and  to  turn  ideas  into 
commercially  viable  ventures  and  to  create  in  turn  new  jobs  and  accelerate  economic 
development  while  knocking  off  all  obstacles  that  might  come  their  way.  That’s  how  the 
technology, communication and innovation will spur the second economic miracle that I hope 
will  bring  along  it  inclusiveness  and  social  justice,  progress  and  prosperity  to  one  and  all. 
That’s how we will achieve the meaningful change that the country is waiting for. 

Thank you Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 (3.25 p.m.) 

Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, first of all, I wish to congratulate you for being the very first Lady of the Republic 
of Mauritius to accede to the chair of this august Assembly, and I am sure, all of us present 
today and the whole of Mauritians are very proud of it. 

53 

 
My sincere congratulations also go to the Deputy Speaker, my very good friend, hon. 
Adrien Duval, who is only 24 and I think he had got long way to go, more than ten mandates 
and if he wants to become like our hon. Prime Minister, it may become to 12.  

I also extend my warmest congratulations to all elected Members of the last General 
Election. I feel greatly honoured to be on the right side of Sir Anerood Jugnauth who marks 
history by becoming the Prime Minister of Mauritius for the sixth time in his political career. 

I  deeply  thank  the  hon.  Minister  Pravind  Jugnauth,  my  leader,  who  entrusted  his 

confidence in me to stand as candidate for the third consecutive time. Thank you, leader! 

Je tiens finalement à féliciter et à remercier chaleureusement tous ceux qui ont voté 
pour moi, et aussi pour mon ami l’honorable Henry et mon ami l’honorable Hurreeram dans 
la circonscription no. 12. 

Madam Speaker, let me draw your attention that this Assembly has been hijacked last 
year by the former Prime Minister, avec la bénédiction du Leader de l’Opposition. Ceci ayant 
pour  résultat  l’entrave  à  la  bonne  marche  de  notre  auguste  Assemblée,  créant  ainsi  un 
obstacle à la démocratie parlementaire à Maurice. Le peuple a gardé un très mauvais souvenir 
de l’épisode de la réforme électorale, ‘koz Kozé’, la deuxième République, le on/off, ‘frotte 
frotté’ et les cooling off periods. 

Aujourd’hui,  cette  Assemblée  est  ‘on’  et,  eux,  ils  sont  ‘off’  pour  un  bon  bout  de 
temps, cela peut durer 10 ans, 15 ans. Where is our famous pêcheur requins? Li fine tasse 
dans filets! Mais savez-vous quels filets? Dans les filets du CCID, dans casier! C’est cela 
qu’on appelle ‘Grandeur et Décadence’! 

Madam Speaker, I wish to mention today that, during the last electoral campaign, Dr. 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam had got the guts to treat l’Alliance Lepep as ‘camion saleté’! Let 
me remind him that this ‘camion saleté’, with our driver Sir Anerood Jugnauth has been able 
to elect 51 MP’s, when the party of ‘Mr Ali Baba’ has elected only 4 MP’s while he, himself, 
landed  at  Mare  Chicose!  Ce  ‘Roi  lion,  qui  croyait  être  le  propriétaire  de  l’île  Maurice,  a 
oublié que c’est le peuple qui détient le pouvoir. Croyant qu’il avait de la classe et beaucoup 
de cash, il se comportait comme ses homologues dictateurs africains.  

Madam Speaker, for the past nine years, it has been repeatedly said by some grandes 
gueules of the previous Government - vous savez de qui je parle - that the development of 
Mauritius has been only the doings of the Labour Party, which is absolute false.  

54 

 
Pendant  ces  10  dernières  années,  ils  ne  disaient  que  c’est  seulement  le  Parti 
Travailliste qui a tout fait à Maurice – le développement. Ils n’ont jamais pensé qu’il y avait 
le MSM qui, de 1982 à 1995, a vraiment  fait bouger l’ile Maurice, et ils ont faussé l’histoire. 

Madam Speaker, the Labour Party est renommé pour faire ‘maja caro’, ‘kalépilé’ et 
sans  oublier  ‘touss  salis’.  Madam  Speaker,  the  Mauritian  people  made  the  right  choice  in 
1982 by electing Sir Anerood Jugnauth as the Prime Minister of Mauritius.  

Laissez-moi vous rafraîchir la mémoire, ce pays était au bord de la banqueroute après 
la défaite de SSR en 1982. C’était la misère noire avec plus de 80,000 chômeurs à Maurice, le 
pays  était  au  bord  du  précipice.  Grâce  aux  efforts  constants  de  l’équipe  de  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth,  le  pays  a  connu  un  développement  sans  précédent  dans  tous  les  secteurs,  créant 
ainsi le plein-emploi.  

Je  tiens  à  remercier  le  Leader  de  l’Opposition  qui,  malheureusement,  est  absent 

aujourd’hui…. 

Pour avoir convaincu… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Who use unparliamentary words? Hon. Rutnah, please do not use 

unparliamentary words! 

Mr  Hurreeram:  On  a  point  of  order  Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Baloomoody  used  the 

word ‘batchiara’ against my colleague Rutnah! 

Madam Speaker: Did you use that word hon. Baloomoody? 

Mr Baloomoody: I withdraw. 

Mr Jhugroo: Je tiens à remercier le Leader de l’Opposition pour avoir convaincu Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth de quitter son poste de Président de la République et descendre à nouveau 
dans l’arène politique pour sauver le pays, nettoyer les pourritures et remettre le pays sur les 
rails.  Au  lieu  de  donner  un  coup  de  main  pour  sauver  et  nettoyer  le  pays,  il  s’est  laissé 
embêter par l’appât du pêcheur de requins pour un poste de Premier ministre pour cinq ans. 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth et son équipe ont continué leur route dans tous les coins et recoins du 
pays  avec  la  bénédiction  du  peuple  et  les  rescapés  du  MMM  sont  toujours  durables  dans 
l’opposition, comme j’avais prédit dans mon premier discours gouvernemental de 2010.  

55 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  avez-vous  une  idée  du  bilan  de  l’ancien  Premier  ministre 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam durant ses deux mandats de 1995-2000  et 2005-2014? First, do 
you still remember the famous ‘Macarena’ party held at Albion? This party was organised to 
please  the  former  Prime  Minister  to  be  in  the  company  of  several  young  girls  seeking  a 
foreign job. What a shame! What a shame for the Labour Party! This was in the first mandate 
of the Labour Government. 

(Interruptions) 

This first episode of ‘touss sali’ was also largely displayed in the press, thus curtailing the 
image of the Prime Ministership of Navin Ramgoolam and that of our island.  

Second, la mort de Kaya en cellule policière en février 1999 qui causa une émeute à 

Maurice; there was no law and order. 

Let me refresh the mind of everybody in this Assembly about the émeutes of 1999. 
The then Prime Minister Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam took a very long time to put down 
the rebellion which started in Roche Bois and propagated in other areas in Mauritius. During 
this very sad period of unrest, Madam Speaker, it is most unbelievable that our former Prime 
Minister disappeared completely from the screen and become l’homme invisible… 

(Interruptions) 

…ou introuvable comme le dit notre Premier ministre. He remains silent for more than 72 
hours, while the country was à feu et à sang. Le public pensait que le Premier ministre ti ale 
kassiet  emba  lili for 72 hours! 

No, now li ti dan lili?  

(Interruptions) 

How can we forget the episode of the escadron de la mort qui a semé la terreur parmi 
la population? There was a sense of insecurity prevailing among the public at large. Law and 
order was beyond the control of Navinchandra Ramgoolam. No proper decisions were taken 
by the then Prime Minister to check them and to restore peace in the country. 

Let me talk about the Tianli, Sin Jin project. L’ancien gouvernement avait déraciné 

les planteurs et éleveurs de Riche Terre pour le fameux projet qui a coûté la bagatelle de       
R 630 millions out of public fund which were invested in this project by the then Minister of 
Finance, Mr Sithanen, without creating a single job which they promised. Sithanen promised 
40,000 jobs to be created. This was another bluff of the then Minister of Finance.  

 
How can we forget the State Trading Corporation scandals?  Do you still remember 

56 

les gros pois d’Ah Fat qui n’ont jamais poussé à Madagascar? 

(Interruptions) 

Non,  non,  jamais  poussé.    Millions  of  rupees  disappeared!  How  can  we  forget  le 
détournement  de  parfums  et  de  whisky  au  Mauritius  Duty-free  Paradise  by  the  then 
Chairman, Mr Joy Beeharry and the Human Resource Manager, Mr Veeren Coomaren? How 
can we forget? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order. This is not right that you accuse Mr Joy Beeharry 

by name when there is no case that has been proved against him. This is very unfair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, could you please refrain from mentioning names. 

Mr Jhugroo: Yes, okay. I rephrase.  So, Joy Beeharry is J. B. and Veeren Coomaren 

is V. C.; J. B. and V. C. 

Souvenez-vous, Madame la présidente, de la fameuse conseillère du Parti Travailliste 
qui  se  promenait  sur  la  plage  de  Flic-en-Flac  avec  son  ‘cabas  rouge’  rempli  de  billets  et 
vendant des étaux de la foire de la mairie de Quatre Bornes? 

Si  la  police  avait  fait  son  travail  correctement,  elle  n’aurait  pas  récidivé  en  faisant 

d’autres victimes avec le Ponzi Scheme. 

How  can  we  forget  the  hedging  at  Air  Mauritius?  More  than  Rs6  billion  lost!  Rs6 
billion!  How can we forget the hedging at STC where the Mauritian people had to pay Rs8 
billion,  Madam  Speaker?  On  peut  oublier  le  fracas  du  ministre  Jeetah,  le  dumping  du  lait 
Amul à Mare Chicose? Combien de questions, PNQ, on a eu dans cette auguste assemblée, 
par  millions  et  des  millions  qu’on  a  jeté  à  Mare  Chicose  à  cause  de  l’incompétence  de 
l’ancien ministre Jeetah. Toujours favori, on ne sait pas pourquoi.  

La dilapidation des terres de l’État à des petits copains et copines. Le fameux contrat 
de  Betamax  taillé  sur  mesure  pour  les  familles  Jeetah  et  Bhunjun!    Taillé  sur  mesure! 
Heureusement,  que  nous  avons  notre  ministère  de  la  bonne  gouvernance  qui  est  en  train 
d’ouvrir une enquête et on a terminé son contrat. 

 

57 

Le fameux Ring Road ‘ki ine fini crazé avant fourmi marcher.  How can we forget 
this? La route Terre Rouge-Verdun inaugurée en grande pompe mais fermée à toute vitesse 
pour cause de danger public - fissures partout, pareil comme il y a dans l’opposition. 

How can we forget les universités ‘marrons’ de Jeetah ‘kot certificat pena valère’? 
How can we forget the D. Y. Patil Medical College de la famille Bappoo? How can we forget 
des terrains qu’on a donnés à un pandit.  Je croyais pour faire un pooja shop mais pour faire 
un  restaurant,  Madame  la  présidente!  C’est  ça  notre  Premier  ministre,  le  leader  du  Parti 
Travailliste, qu’on a toujours gardé comme leader modèle, donner du terrain à un pandit pour 
faire un restaurant et si demain les hindous ne vont plus aller dans les Shivalas, ils vont aller 
dans les restaurants, qui va être responsable? 

‘Li gagne contrat.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Can we forget l’allocation du contrat de l’aéroport à Airway Coffee, cette dame: ‘ou 
conné are kisanla ou pe gagne zafaire!’ Can we forget le jour qu’il y avait le counting pour 
les élections municipales, je me souviens j’étais dans l’école Aryan Vedic avec mon amie, 
Françoise Labelle pendant le counting? J’ai reçu un coup de téléphone de mon ami, Yogida 
Sawmynaden quand je suis entré dans la station, vous savez combien officiers de police il y 
avait?  Il  y  avait le DCP, ACP, les surintendants et les inspecteurs,  comme si on avait un 
criminel dans la station de Vacoas.  Il y avait le Commissaire de police.  Heureusement que 
j’étais là. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! 

Mr Jhugroo: Non, c’est passé, c’est vrai! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, address the Chair, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Après  qu’est-ce  qu’on  a  fait?    Le  dictateur  Navin  Ramgoolam  a  fait 
fouiller  la  maison  de  mon  ami,  de  mon  voisin  Yogida  Sawmynaden,  comme  s’il  est  un 
criminel.  Aujourd’hui,  il  est  en  train  de  payer  tous  les  péchés  qu’il  a  faits  avec  les  gens. 
Laissez-moi dire à cette auguste Assemblée what he did with me for the past ten years and 

 

58 

the  hon.  Members  of  the  Opposition  are  well  aware,  même  le  Leader  de  l’opposition. 
Tellement  que  je  pose  des  questions  au  PNQ,  quatre  fois  pendant  10  ans  il  a  envoyé  des 
officiers d’ADSU pour faire fouiller ma pharmacie où moi je pratique comme pharmacien, 
Madame la présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

Et savez-vous qui travaillait dans ma pharmacie?  La sœur de Mme Soornack travaillait dans 
les deux pharmacies qu’on a et le Premier ministre était au courant, mais malgré cela il avait 
envoyé  l’ADSU.  ‘Dominère’!    Navin  Ramgoolam  est  en  train  de  payer  les  péchés 
aujourd’hui. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

Mr Jhugroo: Maintenant, laissez-moi venir sur le scandale d’Airway Coffee. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

Mr Jhugroo: Revenons au scandale d’Airway Coffee. Heureusement, qu’on a posé la 
question mardi dernier. On a fait deux tenders, Madame la présidente.  Il y a une dame qui est 
aussi membre d’AML; c’est elle qui a présidé l’évaluation du deuxième tender et ça aussi 
dans  le  bureau  du  Premier  ministre.  Il  faut  faire  une  enquête  approfondie.  Les  conditions 
n’étaient  pas  respectées  pour  les  tenders.  Il  faut  faire  une  enquête;  on  aura  beaucoup, 
beaucoup à voir, ce qui s’était passé avec AML. Maintenant, quel était le rôle de Monsieur – 
je peux dire les noms? 

Madam Speaker: Refrain from mentioning names, hon. Jhugroo!  

Mr Jhugroo: Est-ce qu’on doit faire une enquête sur le rôle de Monsieur S. P, the 
Chief Executive of Airports of Mauritius Co. Ltd sur tous les fracas qu’il a faits depuis 2005?  
Quel était son rôle pour l’octroi du contrat à Madame Sournack concernant Airway Coffee?  
On doit faire une enquête sur tous les recrutements qu’on a faits à Airports of Mauritius Co. 
Limited  depuis  2005.    On  aura  beaucoup  des  surprises,  Madame  la  président,  croyez-moi!  
Pour quelle raison une compagnie qui n’a pas payé une dette de R 25 millions à Airports of 
Mauritius Co. Ltd, a eu le red carpet pour aller à ATOL? Pour quelle raison l’ancien régime a 
formé une compagnie privée nommé ATOL quand il y a bel et bien Airports of Mauritius Co. 
Ltd où il y a des auditeurs?  Là-bas, il n’y a pas des auditeurs. It is a private company which 

 

59 

is not governed by PoCA, which is not governed by the Procurement Act.  Pour quelle raison 
notre ancien Premier ministre a fait cette compagnie privée?  Je laisse le soin à la nation de 
poser  la  question  pour  quelle  raison  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  le  lion,  avait  fait  cette 
compagnie privée. 

Concernant 

le 

les  autres  scandales, 

fameux  saga-night  de  Roches-Noires, 
heureusement il y a une enquête.  On va savoir si le Premier ministre était bel et bien présent. 
Et  s’il  était  présent,  comme  un  Premier  ministre  responsable,  pourquoi  il  a  menti  à 
l’Assemblée Nationale? J’ai été choqué d’apprendre cela. Il a quitté River Walk pour aller à 
Roches Noires parce qu’il avait loué son campement à une heure ou deux heures du matin, 
j’ai oublié l’heure.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, there is an enquiry going on, so refrain from making 

comments on this issue, please! 

Mr Jhugroo: Concernant le vol de la montre Rolex. Il avait montré sa montre Rolex. 
Il  a  fait  une  conférence  de  presse  pour  montrer  la  montre.  On  a  une  seule  comme  ça  à 
Maurice.  Ene sel le roi lion.   

Concernant la pendaison suspecte de monsieur Ramdhony dans une cellule policière, 
comme  l’a  dit  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  à  plusieurs  reprises,  est-ce  qu’on  peut  pendre 
quelqu’un sur une porte de cellule de cinq pieds?  La question que je me pose: quelle était le 
rôle des DCP?   Je ne vais pas nommer leurs noms.  

Madam Speaker: Here also, hon. Jhugroo, could  you, please, refrain from making 

comments on this issue!   

Mr  Jhugroo:  Okay.    Ma  question  maintenant est  celle-ci:  est-ce  qu’on  avait  retiré 

Monsieur Ramdhony ce soir-là de la cellule de la station pour l’emmener dehors? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, I am sorry, I have to interrupt you!  I just asked you 

not to elaborate on this issue.   

(Interruptions)

60 

 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Okay.    Madame  Speaker,  last  but  not  least,  how  come  anyone 
  
conceived that the former Prime Minister has in his possession at his residence such a huge 
amount of money 110 million Mauritian rupees and 110 million in foreign currencies?  If my 
memory  serves  me  well,  je  pense  avoir  écouté  à  la  radio,  ce  soir-là,  l’intervention  de 
l’honorable Shakeel Mohamed quand il avait déclaré: qu’est-ce qu’on va voir chez le Premier 
ministre à River Walk quand on va ouvrir l’armoire?  C’est Madame Soornack qui va sortir! 
Après il a eu la réponse. 

Il a eu la réponse! 

Lui-même, il était choqué! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Son papa ne savait pas quoi faire.  Enfin, je retire le mot ‘papa’.   

(Interruptions) 

Tone choqué!  Tu as raison, j’apprécie! What a shame for the Labour Party! 

(Interruptions) 

We were made aware that the former Prime Minister had in his custody sex toys and more 
than 540 sexual erection tablets… 

(Interruptions) 

… which are prohibited in Mauritius thus contravening our existing law!   

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, have you, in your political career, ever heard of any Head of Government in 
the world, having in his custody a stock of sex toys and sex tablets? 

Madam Speaker: Don’t ask me the question! 

Mr Jhugroo: What message is he sending to our children, to our youngsters to join 

politics? 

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

What a shame! My question to all the Labour agents in Mauritius: is this the model leader 
who was heading our country for a second Republic? 

(Interruptions) 

So programme ine trop chargé! Madam Speaker, let me refresh the memory of hon. Members 
that in the year 2011, when the MSM was in the Government, I still remember, my very good 
friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, who had treated the MSM party as a little party, very little 
party- un parti où il  avait lui-même pris son biberon politique.   

(Interruptions) 

I  still  remember  that.    The  then  Prime  Minister  did  nothing  to  recall  his  hon.  Member  à 
l’ordre.  Il était stoïque et sans réaction avec son sourire narquois, which I consider was – 
we can say it today – his instruction to hon. Shakeel Mohamed to do so, et il n’avait rien dit. 

(Interruptions) 

I cannot forget that night.  My friends, on the other side, know my temper.   

(Interruptions) 

I  was  expelled  from  this  august  Assembly  because  of  the  3%  they  were  saying  about  the 
MSM.  3%! 

(Interruptions) 

Tiny party!  Now, I ask hon. Mohamed to give me the answer. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, address the Chair, please!   

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Not now! When the hon. Member will come with his speech. 

(Interruptions) 

I  know  I  can’t  ask  you  this  question,  so  I  am  asking  my  very  good  friend,  hon.  Shakeel 
Mohamed, to give me the answer. 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  hon.  Jhugroo,  you  don’t  have  the  right  to  question  another 

hon. Member; you have to address the Chair. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Okay! So how come, Madam Speaker, 3% plus 0.5% of the PMSD and 

62 

the newly joined Party ML, we have got 51 elected members? 

And I cannot catch how come 40% and 40% which makes 80%. You can count over there… 

(Interruptions) 

How can you explain? 

(Interruptions) 

Leur expert en réforme électorale, le Maître et fameux Guru Sithanen, qui avec ses 
calculs savants, prédisait un ‘60-0’ dans toutes les circonstances. Toutes les circonstances, 
‘60-0’!  Yet,  the  very  small  parties,  selon  les  dires  de  Shakeel  Mohamed  a  fait  élire  51 
députés. 

I  am  sure  hon.  Mohamed  that  you  cannot  find  the  explanation  of  this  simple 
mathema…tricks. In this case, I shall advise you to consult our well experienced professor, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who would be pleased to teach you the ABCs of electoral equations. 

Madame la présidente, dans le passé, certaines grandes-gueules… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Do not use this language, hon. Jhugroo.  It is unparliamentary to 

use these words. 

Mr Jhugroo: Certaines grandes bouches disaient haut et fort que le MSM montait à 
‘kadadak’. Now I want to know qui a monté kadadak? MMM sur Travailliste ou Travailliste 
sur  MMM?  I  want  to  know  it  today.  Le  MSM  n’est  pas  monté  kadadak.  Madame  la 
présidente,  je  tiens  à  faire  ressortir  que  peut-être  l’homme  de  Roches  Noires  qui  a  monté 
‘kadadak’ ……  

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, je tiens à faire ressortir qu’à chaque fois que Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
était au pouvoir, il y a eu de belles réalisations, car il tient toujours ses promesses. 

Il avait maté les escadrons de la mort et les barons de la drogue, avait rétabli le Law 

and Order dans notre chère Ile Maurice. Il avait redonné l’espoir à tout un peuple. 

Encore une fois, ce peuple admirable a conduit Sir Anerood Jugnauth au pouvoir. Et 
nous  sommes  tous  certains  que  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  avec  son  équipe,  saura  tenir  les 

 

63 

promesses énoncées pendant la dernière campagne électorale, rejoignant ainsi, les 300 points 
énumérés dans le discours-programme. 

A cet effet, je me réjouis de la mise sur pied d’une commission d’enquête sur le trafic 
de la drogue à Maurice. I wish to put on record that the last Commission of Enquiry was held 
in  1985,  when  Sir  Snerood  Jugnauth  was  Prime  Minister  and  after  nearly  30  years,  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth will set up another Commission of Enquiry. The former Prime Minister, 
Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, had, on several occasions, been asked for such Commission, 
but to no avail. 

Madam Speaker, the previous Government implemented the free transport scheme to 
students  and  the  senior  citizens  without  any  planning.  We  all  know  the  burden  the 
beneficiaries  are  encountering,  such  as  non-availability  of  school  buses,  drivers  of  buses 
refusing to stop on bus  stops at which the senior citizens are waiting.  We have heard and 
witnessed several cases reported through the private radios every day. 

Madam Speaker, I humbly propose that the Ministers concerned sit together and come 

up with solutions, so that we come to a win win situation. 

I shall now say a few words about my constituency. My constituency of Mahebourg 
and Plaine Magnien, Madam Speaker, has been left out by the previous regime. We have had 
MPs who, soi ti pe la guerre entre zot même, or were welcoming subutex traffickers at the 
VVIP lounge. 

I firmly believe, that though the NDU, which now falls under the purview of the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, and with the close cooperation of my colleagues, hon. Hurreeram and 
hon. Henry, we shall be able to improve the quality of living of our constituents. I beg to 
make the following proposals in that regard - 

Mahebourg  is  well-known  for  its  waterfront,  which  unfortunately,  est  dans  un  état 
lamemtable. I have myself set PQs on that issue when I was in the Opposition. The south east 
part  of  the  island  will  surely  attract  more  tourists  if  the  Mahebourg  Waterfront  is  fully 
upgraded,  to  include  tuck  shops,  food  courts  and  other  commercial  units.  Bref,  faisons  de 
Mahebourg un village touristique digne de ce nom et ce qui fait honneur au rôle important  
qui  a  joué  dans  l’histoire  de  ce  pays.  I  propose  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  gives  due 
consideration in the forthcoming budget. 

Les  régates,  Madame  la  présidente,  sont  des  évènements  bien  accueillis  parmi  les 
habitants  du  Sud.  I,  therefore,  propose  that  Government  valorise  cette  activité,  qui 

 

64 

augmentera l’activité touristique à Mahebourg. Je suis sûr qu’avec le soutien de l’honorable 
ministre des Sports, on va aller de l’avant avec cela.  

I  would  also  appeal  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  us  because  we  promised  to  the 
inhabitants of Plaine Magnien, me and my friend Henry regarding the Plaine Magnien market 
to be covered. Il faut couvrir le marché de Plaine Magnien. 

Water supply remains a serious issue for the inhabitants of the south, Trois Boutiques, 
Plaine Magnien, Ville Noire, Mare Tabac and Mahebourg. This is due to the fact that water 
pipes, which date back to more than 50  years, have not been replaced nor have they been 
upgraded for so many years while the number of houses/commercial units have considerably 
increased. So, I appeal to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to see to it. 

As far as the lease of Camp Carol/Kenya is concerned, we had a PQ last time and with 

the answer of the Vice-Prime Minister, who is absent today, I am sure that he will do the 
needful. 

To end, Madam Speaker, on 10 December 2014, a lion went to sleep dreaming of a 
Second Republic. On 10 December 2014, le jour des élections, a lion went to sleep dreaming 
of a second Republic. On 11 December, the sun was shining so bright that his dream melted 
like thin ice. Since then mother nature has been showering her blessings on our dear country. 
I am confident that this Government sera à la hauteur de l’honneur qui nous a été fait. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

 

(4.05 p.m.) 

Mr R. Rampertab (Second Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Madam Speaker, 
may I wish to seize this opportunity, on behalf of my constituents, especially all the ladies of 
Constituency No. 9, to congratulate you for being the first lady Speaker to preside over this 
august National Assembly in this history of Mauritius. May I also congratulate hon. Adrien 
Duval for being the youngest ever Deputy Speaker of this House. 

Let me also take the opportunity of thanking the Leader of this House, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth together with hon. Pravind Jugnauth, Leader of the MSM, for choosing me to stand 
as a candidate in the last general elections. 

65 

 
My  thanks  also  goes  to  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval  and  hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo,  as 
leader  of  the  respective  parties  for  their  support,  and  my  two  colistiers, without  forgetting 
hon. Ministers Roopun and Dayal for their support and help. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  have  been  elected 
democratically  as  a  Borough  Councillor  in  the  county  of  Surrey  in  the  United  Kingdom 
where I served the British community with great pride between 2007 and 2011. But, Madam 
Speaker,  to  stand  as  a  candidate  in  the  general  election  in  Mauritius  and  to  serve  the 
population  of  the  island  is  a  privilege  and,  indeed,  I  think  it  is  a  dream  of  every  single 
Mauritian who has spent several  years  abroad to come back and serve  their home country 
with dignity. In this context, Madam Speaker, as a professional having spent many years of 
my  career  in  the  United  Kingdom,  I  resolutely  decided  to  come  back  home  and  serve  the 
same. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that the trigger which made me decide to come back and 
throw  myself  in  the  political  arena  was  no  doubt  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  our 
Prime Minister, whom I have known to be a man of his word and integrity.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  got  no  doubt  that  like  me  other  experienced  Mauritian 
professionals,  les  fils  et  les  filles  du  sol  will  come  back  and  share  the  experiences  and 
knowledge they have acquired abroad. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  this  Government  has  taken  office  there  is  indeed  a  good 
feeling factor that is felt across the country and even among all the Mauritians living abroad. 
One  thing  that  really  baffles  me  is,  Madam  Speaker,  when  we  embarked  on  our  electoral 
campaign  people  said  we  are  no  hopers,  we  are  only  a  small  party.  But,  what  we  and  the 
people have witnessed in Mauritius and especially in the east of Mauritius, is the destitution 
of a self-proclaimed king and his lieutenants and, an old lion who is now without a den today. 
In Constituency  No. 9,  I must say, on one hand, there  was arrogance of a self-proclaimed 
king  and  his  servants  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  faced  the  electorate  with  great  humility, 
Madam, and the result said it all. 

Madam Speaker, I can see today that it is with the same humility that this Government 
will serve the people of the country and will implement our Government Programme. This 
Government is a government of action. We have already shown within a few days of coming 
into power how we have honoured our commitments.  For instance, the increase in the old 
age  pension,  the  increase  in  pension  of  disabled  and  those  in  need  and  the  additional 

 

66 

remuneration  for  the  workers  of  this  country.  It  shows  how  a  considerate  and  how  caring 
Government  we  are.  Madam  Speaker,  likewise,  this  Government  will  honour  the 
commitments taken in the Government Programme 2015-2019. 

Madam  Speaker,  one  thing  in  particular  of  which  I  was  really  shocked  during  our 
campaign is the level of poverty I witnessed during the course of election campaign, while 
my colleagues and I were going around in the constituency doing du porte-à-porte. I could 
not believe my eyes when I saw people in 2014 having no electricity and no water in the so-
called “modern country” by the last Government.  

Madam Speaker, I am sorry to say that the previous Government was known to be a 
Labour Government for the labourers, but has totally failed to look after the working class of 
this country. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, we had a Government led by someone who was 
in  quest  in  digging  gold  from  the  population  like  those  days  in  Eldorado.  This  has  been 
witnessed by the entire nation and around the world when the famous safes with no codes or 
forgotten codes were opened a few days ago in the CCID office. Needless to say that this 
nation has undoubtedly witnessed that the last Government was motivated by protecting les 
petits copains et copines in the name of démocratisation de l’économie.  

Madam Speaker, today, I am glad that the high horse on which the previous Prime 
Minister  was  riding  has  been  brought  down  by  the  population  on  10  December  when  the 
armada of l’Alliance Lepep - ‘Viré Mam’ - decided to take the bull by its horn and set the 
record right by placing the trust in the leadership of the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth who is 
now commonly known as le grand père de la nation and le grand père du deuxième miracle 
économique which we are anticipating in the very near future by virtue of the Programme that 
has been presented on 27 January of this year. 

Madam Speaker, changes are bound to occur and we know as well as those who are 
on the other side of the  House that our educated population is now ever ready to face the 
challenges and help us to bring about a new culture of politics where meaningful change will 
really  take  place  by  firstly  treating  all  the  citizens  of  this  country  equal  as  per  our 
Constitution. The real démocratisation et diversification of the economy will take place. 

May  I  also  seize  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  for  setting  up  the  SME  banks,  thereby  giving  the 
opportunity for children and individuals coming from all strata of life to develop this country 
economically, socially and positioning it as one of the leading State of the African Continent 

 

67 

so that we can play an active part in the SADC community and extend our bilateral, social 
and economic cooperation with Asia and, in particular, with the emerging countries like the 
Great China, the Mother India as well as Europe and USA. 

As our Government Programme is entitled “Achieving Meaningful Change”, Madam 
Speaker,  we  will  set  the  example,  unlike  the  previous  Government.  We  will  show  the 
population of Mauritius the right way and the right direction that they should proceed. Here, I 
will end by quoting Mahatma Gandhi who said, and I quote –  

“BE THE CHANGE YOU WANT TO SEE IN THE WORLD.” 

I rest my case, Madam Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

(4.16 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Toussaint  (Second  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Madam  Speaker, 
allow me, to congratulate you for your appointment as Speaker of this august House. Indeed, 
as the first lady ever being appointed to this post, you are the pride of the Republic. I am sure 
that you will be à la hauteur et que vous dirigerez notre auguste Assemblée d’une main de 
fer.  

I  would  like  also  to  congratulate  the  Deputy  Speaker,  the  hon.  Adrien  Duval,  for 
being the  youngest Member ever being appointed to this post. He is, Madam Speaker, the 
hope of all the  young people of this country. He is also the pride of Constituency No. 17, 
Curepipe and Midlands. 

My congratulations also go to hon. Mrs  Malini Sewocksingh for her election. I am 
sure that you will be une digne représentante des femmes de notre circonscription et de toute 
l’île Maurice. I would like also to congratulate all the Members of this August Assembly. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  thanks  and  gratitude  go  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. Thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to stand as candidate in the 
last elections. Thank you also for my nomination as PPS for Constituencies Nos. 16 and 17.  
Je puis vous rassurer que je serai à la hauteur de vos espérances.  

My thanks also go to the leaders of  l’Alliance Lepep – 

(i) 

the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier Duval; 

 
(ii) 

68 

the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Ivan Collendavelloo, and 

(iii)  my leader, hon. Pravind Jugnauth.  

Thank  you dear leader for believing in me and  for giving me the opportunity to serve my 
country. 

My thanks also go to my hon. friends of the MSM for their support and their friendship. 

Special thanks also to the YOs. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  victoire  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  aux  dernières  élections  est 
effectivement la victoire du peuple. Nous pouvons être le meilleur des mathématiciens, à la 
fin, Madame la présidente, c’est le peuple qui décide et, en effet, lepep finn décidé. Le peuple 
n’en pouvait plus de toute cette arrogance qui provenait de l’alliance de la honte. Le peuple, 
Madame la présidente, a sanctionné, comme disait l’honorable Mahen Jhugroo, le 40 + 40. 

Madame la présidente, la circonscription numéro 17, Curepipe/Midlands n’a pas été 

épargnée de la bassesse dont l’honorable Roubina Jadoo Jaunboccus faisait allusion dans son 
discours. Les candidats de l’alliance soi-disant de la Modernité et de l’Unité parlaient de 
‘pena adversaires dans Curepipe’ et traitaient l’honorable Madame Sewocksingh de novice, 
‘pas conne narien, novice, ti zenfant’ et traitaient l’honorable Adrien Duval de ‘Ti coq’.  Et, 
Madame la présidente,  ‘ti coq fine tire zot manzé’. 

(Interruptions) 

Quant à moi, Madame la présidente, on me traitait de ‘piti cité’.  Oui, Madame la Présidente, 
mo  ene  piti  cité,  mo  habite  Cité  Malherbes  et  mo  fier  ki  azordi  ena  ene  piti  cité  dans  ça 
parlement-là, Madame la présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

Merci, l’honorable Sir Anerood Jugnauth et, bien sûr, notre Leader. 

Madame la présidente, je veux aujourd’hui ouvrir la voie aux plus démunis de notre 
société. Si moi j’ai pu arriver là où j’en suis, d’autres pourront le faire.  Yes, they can.  En 
effet, … 

(Interruptions) 

En  effet,  demain  dans  nos  cités  ouvrières,  dans  nos  faubourgs  ou  dans  nos  villages,  nous 
aurons,  Madame  la  présidente,  des  CEOs  de  grandes  compagnies,  nous  aurons  de  grands 

 

69 

chirurgiens,  nous  aurons  de  grands  avocats,  pour  ne  citer  que  quelques-uns.  C’est  cela  le 
‘meaningful change’ dont parle notre programme gouvernemental. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  réforme  dans  notre  système  éducatif  sera  un  élément 
catalyseur.  Elle  entraînera  dans  son  sillage  la  transformation  de  notre  pays  vers  une  vraie 
modernité,  pas  bann-là  zot  modernité.  Je  suis  sûr,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  l’honorable 
ministre de l’éducation fera un bon travail, vu les compétences qu’elle possède. Madame la 
présidente, le ‘meaningful change’ c’est aussi le deuxième miracle économique.  Ena ti pe 
rode deuxième république.  Avec l’expérience et les connaissances de l’honorable ministre 
des finances, je suis sûr et certain que le pays connaîtra son deuxième miracle économique. 
Des nouveaux piliers de l’économie verront le jour, tel que l’économie océanique, le duty-
free shopping et les TICs entre autres. 

Les petites et moyennes entreprises auront un très grand rôle à jouer dans la réalisation 
de  ce  deuxième  miracle  économique.  Le  gouvernement  proposera  diverses  mesures  qui 
aideront  ces  entreprises  à  s’épanouir.  Tous  les  entrepreneurs  pourront  avoir  accès  à  ces 
facilités. Je dis bien, Madame la présidente, tous les entrepreneurs, pas zis maîtresse ek ti-
copains.  Tous  ceux  intéressés  par  le  monde  du  business  bénéficieront  de  l’aide  du 
gouvernement afin de faire croître la richesse de notre pays. 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  vivons  dans  un  monde  de  technologie.  Les  plus  petits  - 
trois ans ou quatre ans - demandent maintenant au Père Noël des tablettes tactiles, des laptops 
et non des zouzous ménaz.  Les jeunes parlent de Facebook, de réseaux sociaux. Enfin ena ti 
pe dire facebook poison zot. 

L’informatique,  Madame  la  présidente,  fait  partie  intégrante  de  notre  vie  de  tous  les 
jours.  C’est  pour  cela  que  le  plan  gouvernemental  parle  à  la  page  31  de  National  TIC 
Strategic Plan 2015-2020. Ce plan transformera notre pays en un Smart Mauritius avec des 
smart people. La connectivité de l’Internet à travers le système wifi sera installée dans les 
places publiques et les différentes institutions éducatives. Je suis sûr, Madame la présidente, 
que mon Leader, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, mettra toutes ses compétences au service de 
son ministère afin de très vite transformer le pays in an intelligent and smart Mauritius. 

Madame  la  présidente,  étant  moi-même  un  peu  animateur  et  comédien  amateur, 
chanteur  un  peu  de  tout,  je  peux  vous  dire  que  l’artiste  a  bien  souffert  pendant  ces  neuf 
dernières années. 

(Interruptions) 

 

70 

Rien n’a été fait pour la dignité de  l’artiste. Nos deux plus belles salles hélas, de théâtre et je 
salue l’initiative de l’honorable ministre des arts et de la culture pour la transformation de la 
salle Serge Constantin. Mais il y a deux autres qu’il ne faut pas oublier et je suis sur que c’est 
le cas. Nous parlons du Plaza, Madame la présidente, et nous parlons aussi de notre théâtre de 
Port Louis. Malheureusement, ce ne sont plus que des ruines et je dis cela avec beaucoup de 
tristesse puisque j’ai eu l’occasion de fouler ces planches moi-même, en tant que comédien 
amateur. Le théâtre de Port Louis, Madame la présidente, qui est un théâtre à l’italienne, est 
unique  dans  l’hémisphère  sud,  unique,  Madame  la  présidente.  Je  fais,  donc,  appel  à 
l’honorable  ministre  des  arts  et  de  la  culture  afin  qu’il  puisse  mettre  tout  en  œuvre  pour 
sauver ces deux belles salles de théâtre et je suis sûre que tout un chacun nous mettrons la 
main à la pâte pour régler ce problème. 

Madame la présidente, l’industrie du film et du cinéma peut devenir un autre pilier 
important de notre pays. Avec les changements que le gouvernement apportera dans le rôle et 
le  fonctionnement  de  la  MFDC,  cette  industrie  connaîtra  un  nouvel  essor.  Je  vois  déjà  de 
nouvelles productions de films mauriciens qui inonderont bientôt nos téléviseurs et nos salles 
de  cinéma.    Je  peux  même  proposer  des  titres  à  nos  producteurs  locaux:  Chemistry,  Koz 
kozer. Certains pourraient même s’inspirer du célèbre titre de Hemingway, le vieil homme et 
la mer pour nous donner le pêcheur et le requin. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, la circonscription numéro 17, a été très longtemps laissé à l’abandon. 
Notre  ville  lumière  est  hélas  devenue  une  ville  morte.  Nos  villages  ne  sont  plus  que 
désolation. Quel développement l’ancien régime a-t-il apporté dans la circonscription numéro 
17? Rien, si ce n’est … 

(Interruptions) 

…que  la  distribution  de  macaroni  à  la  veille  des  élections  municipales  2012  Madame  la 
présidente. Et en plis gagne touper pou bat madame dans élection.  

Je  fais,  donc,  Madame  la  présidente,  un  appel  pressant  à  notre  honorable  Premier 
ministre  afin  que  nous,  les  députés  de  la  circonscription,  puissions  avoir  les  moyens 
nécessaires afin de transformer la circonscription no. 17 into a shining Constituency.  

Laissez-moi  rappeler  à  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  que  c’était  lui,  qui  dans  les 
années 80, avait transformé la cité Malherbes en quelques jours. Madame la présidente, à la 
cité Malherbes dans les années 80 pas ti ena cimé, ti ena corail, ti manque zis la mer.  Juste 

 

71 

après un site visite, en l’espace de quelques jours, rapide comme l’éclair comme il a toujours 
été notre honorable Premier ministre, a transformé la cité Malherbes et les coraux de la rue 
principale ont été remplacés par de l’asphalte faisant ainsi la joie et le bonheur des habitants. 
En  quelques  jours  aussi  après  la  visite  de  notre  honorable  Premier  ministre  la  fontaine 
publique a été remplacée par des compteurs de la CWA – un dans chaque maison, Madame la 
présidente. C’était dans les années 80! 

Madame  la  présidente,  comment  oublier  aussi  les  développements  apportés  jadis 
toujours  sous  le  Prime  Ministership  de  notre  honorable  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  Les 
développements  dans  les  villages  qui  forment  partie  de  la  circonscription  No.  17.  Les 
développements dans le village de Midlands, je suis sûre que l’honorable Premier ministre 
s’en souvient encore, la construction de notre bureau de CAB, the Police Station et tous les 
développements autour de ce village. Aujourd’hui encore, honorable Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 
la  circonscription  no.  17  a  besoin  de  vous.  Je  vous  remercie  d’avance  au  nom  de  ces 
habitants.  

Madame la présidente, je voudrai avant de conclure rendre hommage à mon épouse et 

mes enfants pour leur soutien pendant la dernière campagne électorale. 

(Interruptions) 

Malgré les critiques, ils ont toujours été à mes côtés et m’emmenant, moi ainsi que mes deux 
collègues, vers une victoire nette et sans bavure. Je remercie aussi les membres de la régional 
MSM de la circonscription no. 17 pour leur fidélité et leur encouragement.  

Madame  la  présidente,  je  fais  appel  aux  honorables  membres  de  l’opposition  afin 
qu’ils apportent des critiques constructives qui pourraient faire avancer le pays. Ce ne sont 
certainement pas vos piques et vos ‘mo pas peur toi’ qui feront de vous des dignes membres 
de cette auguste Assemblée. 

Madame la présidente, nou pas bizin 100 jours pou sanz la vie dimoune nou, dan 2/3 
jours  mem  la  vie  fini  sanzer.  Comment  ne  pas  parler  de  l’augmentation  de  la  pension 
vieillesse, de la compensation salariale, de l’arrêt des radars, du freezing du permis à point 
parmi tant d’autres et ziska lapli tomber réservoir rempli, déborder! 

L’Alliance  Lepep,  Madame  la  présidente,  apporte  un  vrai  changement  et  cela  la 
population peut le constater tous les jours et ce sera ainsi durant notre mandat de cinq ans. Je 
dirais aux honorables membres de l’opposition, pas gagne nous tracas.  

72 

 
Nous  réussirons  dans  notre  tâche,  pas  pressé.  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  allons 
réussir  notre  projet  pour  cette  île  Maurice  car  il  ne  faut  pas  oublier  nous  avons  un  sage 
comme Premier ministre. God bless  you, honourable Sir Anerood Jugnauth and God bless 
l’Alliance Lepep, God bless Mauritius.  

Merci, Madame la présidente! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Sewocksingh! 

 

(4.35 p.m.) 

Mrs  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker,  allow me, first of all, to congratulate  you for being the 
first lady presiding this House. You are our pride Madam and thank you for making us proud. 
I would also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker, hon. Adrien Duval, who is none other 
than the grandson of late Sir Gaëtan Duval. Hon. Adrien Duval who was also my running 
mate  in  the  past  election  has  become  an  icon  not  only  for  the  youths  but  for  the  whole 
population. I have had and still have the privilege to work with such dynamic and enthusiastic 
people like himself and my brother, hon. Stephan Toussaint, whom we have all just heard and 
I would like to congratulate him for his great speech. 

Our success, Madam Speaker, in the last election is nothing but our solidarity that was 

prevailing and that is prevailing in our constituency. 

Madam Speaker, it is an honour for me today to address the House, an honour for me, 
because, like every Member of this House, the people chose us to represent them. I have gone 
through two elections within two years, Madam Speaker, one was for the Municipal Elections 
and the second one was lately, the General one. 

I have had the chance to climb the ladder in a short period of time, Madam Speaker, 
because I am blessed to be in a Party as the PMSD where democracy, ideology, meritocracy 
and equal opportunity prevail. 

And,  these  ideals  are  there  mainly  because  we  have  a  Leader  as  hon.  Xavier-Luc 
Duval who is a person full of integrity, humility and with wisdom, with both a conscience 
and charisma of course.  

Unlike  others,  Madam  Speaker,  who  haven’t  seen  further  than  their  nose,  I  shall 

always be grateful to my party and to my Leader for what he made me today. 

73 

 
I have experienced more important values with my party namely- loyalty, sincerity, 
trust and faith and I am sure that those ingrats must be repenting today. I even know a case 
where  someone  who  went  so  low  in  not  only  changing  his  party,  but  even  changed  his 
appartenance ethnique just to stay in power. 

On  10  December  2014,  Madam  Speaker,  the  population  clearly  and  unequivocally 
disapproved  a  way  of  doing  politics  which  was  characterised  by  repression,  opacity, 
nepotism, and waste of public funds. A way of doing politics where the select few of certain 
inner  circles,  Madam  Speaker,  amassed  untold  amounts  of  wealth,  under  the  guise  of 
economic democratisation. 

L’Alliance  Lepep under  the leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth  who  has  become  a  living  legend  and  is  an  example  of  strength,  courage, 
determination and wisdom. L’Alliance Lepep won the elections because the population in its 
wide majority was fed up with all the scandals. And we sought to respond to the needs of the 
population  by  listening  to  them,  and  crafting  an  electoral  program  which  later  became  the 
Government Programme. 

Madam Speaker,  I have been elected in Constituency No. 17 together with my two 
good friends, hon. Adrien Duval and hon. Stephan Toussaint. Constituency No. 17 is special 
in its own way not only because it is one of the largest Constituencies by geographical area, 
but it is also a Constituency where almost all political parties are being represented during 
elections. We always have almost all of them. Unfortunately, we did not have Parti Malin 
this time, but we always have some, most of them. And, Madam Speaker, it becomes quite 
challenging to stand as candidate and to be elected, to have a 3-0 in Curepipe/Midlands, was 
a big deal and we proudly did it, and I would like to thank all the people, all our mandates, 
who believed in the three of us and made us here. 

This Constituency is a landmark. Curepipe/Midlands, No. 17, is a place, it is almost 
the  centre  of  the  country  where  almost  all  tourists  have  to  cross  to  go  down  for  their 
sightseeing, but unfortunately, as hon. Toussaint just mentioned nothing much, nothing has 
been  done,  I  should  say,  for  the  past  years.  For  some  20  years,  if  I  am  not  mistaken, 
Constituency No. 17 was in the hands of the Opposition.  

When  I  was  a  Councillor  of  the  town  of  Curepipe,  I  have  had  the  time  and  the 
opportunity to be close to the people. I have seen the town and its people in good times, and I 
have seen how people in remote locations live in bad times too. 

74 

 
Constituency No. 17 is just not about Rue Lees at Curepipe, or Rue Chasteauneuf, it is 
also  about  places  like  Cité  Anoushka,  Madam  Speaker,  and  Dubreuil  where  there  are  big 
problems of waste water management. I have seen how the families suffer in times of heavy 
rain,  or  how  the  children  go  to  sleep  hungry.  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  we  still  have  a  big 
problem of poverty in our Constituency. The problem of poverty is not because these people 
are lazy, far from that, but it is that they have been deprived from many things. And, for this, 
we cannot resolve poverty just by inaugurating a village hall, or a children’s playground. We 
all  have  to  resolve  it  in  a  well-structured  manner.  It  is  all  about  empowerment,  Madam 
Speaker. 

Sustainable  poverty  alleviation  can  only  happen  when  we  make  the  people  believe 
they are worth something. We need to invest in bringing back the self-esteem. We need to 
have  committed  stakeholders  who  will  invest  their  willpower  in  uplifting  the  whole 
community and this is where we, l’Alliance Lepep stand, Madam Speaker. 

Providing  a  decent  roof  under  which  families  can  thrive  is  what  the  actual  Deputy 
Prime Minister achieved to an extent when he was the Minister of Social Integration and I am 
sure,  Madam  Speaker,  that  together  with  our  actual  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and 
Economic Empowerment, hon. Roopun, we will find ways and plans to alleviate poverty. 

Many people have skills, but unfortunately, do not have access to markets, or do not 
have  the  equipment  or  workplace  to  make  a  living  out  of  their  skills.  We  have  many 
mechanics,  carpenters,  painters,  plumbers,  who  find  their  clients  confined  to  a  small  area. 
This  is  the  intent  behind  the  creation  of  a  kind  of  ‘Business  Park’,  geared  towards  la 
revalorisation des métiers. 

Madam Speaker, coupled with the intention of this Government to put a credit line for 
the SME sector, this will provide the necessary  seed capital for those craftsmen to get the 
right equipment and deliver quality products and services. 

And,  not  later  than  yesterday,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development announced that there will be a one-stop shop for SMEs. This shows again the 
commitment and dedication of this very Government. 

We  need  to  focus  on  the  future,  Madam  Speaker,  but  it  is  also  important  to  draw 
lessons  from  the  past,  especially  when  we  look  at  the  scandals  that  have  tainted  contract 
allocations, be it at the airport, or the distribution of crown lands to petits copains which is a 

 

75 

total disregard of good governance and ethics. The pictures of unexplained wealth as yet that 
appeared in the press are still fresh in our minds. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  natural  aspiration  is  to  become  a  high  income  and  to  achieve 
this, we need to look at other places in the world where other countries have achieved. Our 
main  resource,  Madam  Speaker,  is  our  human  capital.  We  need  to  invest  more  in  quality 
education and training. 

Education is not only about the teaching of facts, but rather training of the mind to 

think.  

Public Education today is not what it could have been, but I am very much confident 
that the Minister of education, hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun, who is the right 
person  at  the  right  place,  will  have  the  right  strategies  in  place  to  revamp  our  education 
system totally. 

I take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to mention in my speech about companies 
who  just  pay  up  their  CSR  contributions  to  the  MRA,  as  opposed  to  engaging  in  their 
neighbourhoods to support worthy causes. Together with the Deputy Speaker, hon. Adrien 
Duval and hon. Toussaint, we shall spearhead CSR approved projects in Curepipe/Midlands, 
with a particular focus on the well-being of children and education. This will enable a more 
direct impact to be created regionally and also raise awareness of needs within communities 
and, of course, the Government will keep channelling the CSR funds to worthy and noble 
causes, Madam Speaker. 

Madame la présidente, the Tourism Sector in which I personally work a pris un sale 
coup  ces  dernières  années.    It  is  high  time  to  bring  back  our  brand,  our  destination  by 
enforcing the law and promoting the destination in a more diversifying way and for sure there 
is  no  doubt  that,  the  actual  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications, hon. X. L. Duval, will find ways to change things.  And this leads me to 
my last point, which is about integrity and honour in politics, as mentioned by hon. Bhagwan 
- who is unfortunately moving.  I wish the hon. Member could stay for two minutes.   

(Interruptions) 

I don’t think it will be so boring.  You will be happy, hon. Bhagwan.   

(Interruptions) 

 

76 

While giving his speech, and I should say here, that I have had the opportunity to have a chat 
with hon. Bhagwan – I don’t know why the hon. Member is moving just now when I was 
about to tell this.  Hon. Bhagwan told me of his 32 years in politics; indeed, it is a long way, 
yes.   The hon. Member mentioned in his speech that, all of us who are sitting here, Madam 
Speaker, have ‘Honourable’ in front of our names, which means a lot. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, being a newcomer, being a woman in politics, I wish to see an Assembly 
where  there  are  elegant  debates,  discussions  and  arguments.    So,  my  appeal  to  all  hon. 
Members of the House is, let us do politics differently.   Let us show that,  yes, we  can do 
politics autrement.   Let us debate issues and not people. Let us put our country first like we 
always say and let us truly work for the whole population and, especially, Madam Speaker, 
when we refer to women particularly, especially in this august Assembly - you know why and 
what I am referring to.  We are going to encourage more women to join this place.  And when 
there are good suggestions, we have to work together and make those become reality for our 
country.  After all, we all have a common purpose, that is, the welfare of the Republic of 
Mauritius and its people. 

A special word  goes to all hon. Ministers, and hon. Members of the Parliament on 
both sides of the House, members of the staff of this Assembly, my family, my father, my 
daughter, my late mother, my agents, my good friends who have helped me in being what I 
am today and all my good friends who are sitting here, who are helping me in adjusting, in 
getting me through this teething period. I thank you all for that and I thank God for that.  I 
would not like to mention each and every one so that I don’t miss anybody. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  ne  pourrais  pas  passer  à  côté  d’un  commentaire  qu’on 
entend de temps en temps du côté de l’Opposition, disant qu’il y a quelques mois de cela, le 
PMSD faisait partie de l’ancien régime et nous traite d’hypocrites.  Permettez-moi, Madame 
la présidente, de dire qu’il n’y a rien de plus hypocrite lorsqu’on est assis dans le siège de 
l’Opposition et en même temps on fait les yeux doux avec l’autre parti. 

(Interruptions) 

L’hypocrisie, Madame la présidente, ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Order, please! 

 
Mrs Sewocksingh: L’hypocrisie, Madame la présidente c’est lorsque… 

77 

le cœur est ailleurs, et la clé est peut-être dans le coffre - je ne sais pas. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Qui ne se souvient pas de l’épisode ‘on and off’? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, order! 

Mrs  Sewocksingh:  Le  peuple  en  a  jugé.    Le  PMSD  est  un  parti  sincère;  lorsqu’il 

fallait mettre les points sur les ‘i’, on l’a fait.   

Madam Speaker, when we are attached to our principles, and better still, when you 
join forces with other people of goodwill, this creates a compelling case to get elected. The 
population today is far more information savvy than they used to be. This is why l’Alliance 
Lepep got elected. On an ending note, I would like to reinstate my gratitude to the Leader of 
the  House,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  and  other  Leaders  of 
concerned party for having ably led this Alliance to the resounding victory that few thought 
possible. In the end, we all learnt that elections are more about people, about how we can 
impact their lives positively, and not about statistical models built on history and often out-
dated data. 

The outcome of the recent elections shows that Mauritians want a return to principles 
in politics. This is why I just mentioned, let us do politics autrement.  This is what people 
want to see.  People have sanctioned those who sold their principles and causes for pecuniary 
reasons.  Our intent is common, Madam Speaker.  We are all here sitting to serve the country 
and I look forward to serving my country with honesty and dignity. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 4.50 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.28 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Koonjoo! 

78 

 
The  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer  Islands  (Mr  P.  Koonjoo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  allow  me,  first  of  all,  to 
congratulate  you  on  your  election  as  the  Deputy  Speaker,  and  if  I  don’t  make  mistake,  I 
believe that  you are the  youngest Deputy Speaker that this House has known.  I know this 
House  since  1976.  Until  now,  it  makes  about  39  years  in  politics.  So,  first,  it  is  a  huge 
congratulation for you as a young lawyer, young MP. The coincidence is that both the father 
and the son are working together in the Parliament. 

Also,  I  would  like  to  congratulate,  Madam  Speaker,  Mrs  Hanoomanjee,  as  the 
Speaker  of  the  House,  because  that’s  true,  as  the  others  outside  would  have  said,  historic 
because  a  lady  for  the  first  time  has  become  a  Speaker  in  the  House,  in  Mauritius. 
Congratulations to Mrs Hanoomanjee as well! 

I  must  also  congratulate  all  the  hon.  Members  who  have  been  elected  in  the 
Parliament,  and  especially  the  Leaders  of  l’Alliance  Lepep.  We  have  got  above  all,  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, whom I happen to know, as I said, for more than 38 years, a dynamic, a 
man of word, a man of action, what we say in Hindi he is a Karmic Yogi, a man who believes 
in action. He is here in front of me. 

He was the person in 1976 to ask me to join MMM, because there was lacking one 
candidate in 1976 to stand against the ex-Prime Minister, SSR, in Triolet. For me, it was quite 
difficult at that time, because I came from a very modest family. My father was a labourer 
and I just married, I just became father of a child, my father had a stroke, he was bed-ridden. 
Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  at  that  time  came  to  my  place.  He  said:  “Give  us  a  helping  hand.” 
Without any hesitation, I told him: ‘Okay’. And from that time, I have never refused anything 
that Sir Anerood Jugnauth has asked me to do in politics. He is a Leader who has changed the 
destiny of Mauritius, of every Mauritian.  The world knows that. 

Today, he has led the l’Alliance Lepep together with my good friend, the Vice-Prime 
Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, whom I happened to know in the MMM and the DPM, hon. 
Duval, with whom I had the opportunity to work as a Minister in the Cabinet of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth.  These  were  the  persons  who  led  the  country  from  darkness  to  light.  I  must 
congratulate them as well. Above all, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had faith in me, not only to 
offer me a ticket, but also to give me a portfolio, a huge one,  I must tell  you, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

 

79 

At the same time, I would like to thank the electorate of Constituency No.11. For me it was a 
bit tough, difficult to start from Plaine des Papayes to go to Vieux Grand Port and la cote 
comme on disait dans numero 11. It was a bit tough. But, I had given my word and I hold my 
word. I also thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for that and I congratulate and thank the people 
of Constituency No. 11 for having elected, not only myself, but the three of us. I said on the 
day the election results were proclaimed that it was a matter of pride for me because at that 
time there were many kings in Mauritius. Le roi du sud, le roi du nord, le roi de l’est, so 
many kings! 

Le roi lion! 

(Interruptions) 

And for the son of a labourer to defeat a king in his constituency, who had reigned 

there for more than 26 years! 

(Interruptions) 

A lion king also! Yes!  For me, it was a matter of pride, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir.  I thank and 
congratulate my two friends from Constituency No.11 and, through this Parliament I want to 
thank all the members of public who worked for us and voted for us. 

Today, in this House, in l’Alliance Lepep I think we have seven ladies as Members of 

Parliament and Ministers. I do not find anyone there on that side of the House! No lady! 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it is an irony because the ex-Prime Minister used to say: “qui ou lé frère ban femmes 
content mwa!” 

(Interruptions) 

That was the weapon of defeat for him and it was a matter of pride for l’Alliance Lepep. I can 
tell you one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that in this election people said this: la masse, le 
peuple a voté. Yes, I agree. There was an invisible hand, the hand of God. Yes, I agree. But, I 
will add that it is mostly because of the women who voted for this l’Alliance Lepep! 

(Interruptions) 

The women, ladies, girls, daughters and sisters of this country were fed up with the manner in 
which the ex-Prime Minister was behaving himself! Il était une honte pour le monde entier et 
pour la famille mauricienne, surtout pour les femmes! 

 

80 

(Interruptions) 

It is said in the Hindu culture that where women are respected, where women are honoured, 
there God lives. Unfortunately, I do not know which culture our ex-Prime Minister here… 

I better not name it!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Ministry I was bestowed is a five-pronged sectors: the 
Ministry of Ocean Economy, which I believe is the future of this country - l’économie bleue; 
we have marine resources, living and non-living; we also have the sector of fisheries which I 
also believe has a bright future and the sector of shipping which later on we will know how it 
has been blundered by the last Government. Lastly, we also have the responsibility of outer 
islands, that is, about Agalega and other small islands. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  allow  me  now  to  embark  on  the  mandate  of  my  Ministry 
which, as I said, is huge. The setting up of a new Ministry of Ocean Economy should come as 
no surprise to anyone. The development of the ocean has always been the vision of our Prime 
Minister  as  far  back  as  1980s.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  Mauritius,  the  Prime 
Minister  initiated  bathymetric  surveys  of  our  coastal  waters  including  Rodrigues  in  the 
1980’s! He also promoted major infrastructural development for the harbour and container 
handling  facilities.  During  his  mandate  in  2000-2005  where  I  was  present,  he  set  up  the 
Mauritius Oceanography Institute (MOI) which is still here. 

Since the exploitation of productive land resources globally, as well as in Mauritius, 
are  necessarily  reaching  their  limits  economically  and  ecologically,  the  importance  of  the 
ocean  as  a  resource  for  economic  development  has  become  increasingly  prominent.  This 
Government is committed to making ocean economy an important sector to sustain economic 
diversification,  job  creation  and  wealth  generation.  Indeed,  the  creation  of  a  Ministry 
dedicated to the ocean economy is a major breakthrough by this Government. The potential 
of economic advancement and prosperity that this resource can generate, if developed in a 
sustainable manner, can help to take Mauritius in the long run to the next level, that is, of a 
high income country. The landslide victory of l’Alliance Lepep in itself is a catalytic indicator 
to motivate us to move in this direction. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  ongoing  police  enquiry  concerning  the  coffers  and 
massive  sums  of  money  found  at  the  residence  of  the  former  Prime  Minister  can  have 
important financial and economic ramifications for the country. This observation transpires 

 

81 

when we read an extract from the Economist’s article of 21 December 2013 and 03 January 
2014 at page 86, entitled Dirty Money: Rich Smell, and I quote –  

“The  leakage  of  wealth  from  poor  countries  through  tax  evasion,  money 
laundering and other misdeeds is indeed an ever bigger worry for those who 
want poor countries to get rich. Global Financial Integrity calculates that such 
‘illicit financial flows’ have increased sharply over the past decade and may 
now  be  $1  trillion  a  year  or  even  more.  Even  experts  who  question  the 
campaigning  group’s  methodology  accept  that  outflows  probably  exceed 
income and investment combined.”  

Mr Deputy, Speaker, Sir, such behaviour can offset the country’s efforts to raise funds 
and attract investments thus tarnish the country’s image internationally. This Government is 
already  using  the  flag  of  transparency  and  efficiency  to  combat  mismanagement  of  public 
funds, maladministration of the public service, and overall laxism in law and order, security 
and  safety  to  the  society,  particularly  children,  women  and  elderlies.  Thus,  the  looming 
economic  debacle  stemming  from  the  way  the  former  Government  conducted  business  is 
getting avoided by this Government. 

Mr Deputy, Speaker, Sir, taking cognizance that the ocean provides jobs, food, energy 
resources, ecological services, recreational and tourism opportunities, and play a critical role 
in shipping and sea transportation, in the national economy and trade; it is clear that it cuts 
across and encompasses various sectors and disciplines. 

Mr  Deputy,  Speaker,  Sir,  before  moving  to  the  strategy  fit  of  this  Ministry,  let  me 
remind the House that the former Government has lamentably failed in setting the right vision 
for the development of the ocean economy. My Ministry will be working towards a set of 
clear-cut national policies and strategies to encompass all ocean and ocean related matters for 
both  the  medium  and  long  term.  We  will  thus  be  shifting  from  a  fragmented  and  ad  hoc 
approach to a permanent, coherent and integrated strategy that would fully optimise the ocean 
related resources of Mauritius and Rodrigues with the support of technological know-how, 
innovation and research. 

Taking into account the cross-cutting nature of the ocean economic sectors, and in the 
process of realisation of our mission, we will require the support of relevant institutions in 
attracting  investors,  and  international  funding.  For  example,  we  will  need  the  Board  of 
Investment to support us in the promotion of our major projects and attract both foreign and 

 

82 

local  investors.  Similarly,  the  Mauritius  Research  Council  together  with  the  University  of 
Mauritius  will  complement  the  Mauritius  Oceanographic  Institute  in  leading  research  and 
development  for  all  ocean  activities.  Notwithstanding  the  advent  of  this  Ministry,  the 
supporting  Ministries  and  institutions  will  be  crucial  in  developing  core  competencies  to 
promote the ocean economy. 

It is with great pleasure, Mr Deputy, Speaker, Sir, that I have the honour and humility, 
and I am dedicating myself to the vision, mission, policies and strategies of this Government. 
My Ministry will provide the necessary leadership for tapping the full potential of the vast 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and help to bring about meaningful change in the life of 
people. Every effort will be made to consolidate existing economic sectors such as fisheries, 
seafood hub and shipping and promote aggressively the development of new growth poles 
such as the shipping industry, the maritime services including flagship registration, which is 
in a mess today, deep ocean water applications and the sound utilisation of marine resources 
present in our continental shelf and the EEZ. There is no doubt that growth of these sectors, 
will  in  the  long  run,  bring  employment  opportunities  for  thousands  of  people,  be  it  at 
unskilled, skilled or professional level. 

My  Ministry  considers  research  and  development,  and  training  as  key  support  to 
economic  growth,  not  only  in  the  living  and  non-living  marine  resources,  but  also,  in 
strengthening  the  capacity  of  our  institutions  through  technology  transfer  and  innovative 
skills. For example, the policies and objectives of the Mauritius Oceanographic Institute will 
be  revisited  to  assess  how  it  can  be  restructured  to  take  care  of  new  challenges  of  my 
Ministry  through  research  including  scientific,  technological  and  economic  studies  for 
development. So will be the case of the Mauritius Training Academy, which will be called 
upon to prepare a new Strategy Plan for the long term. Empirical research is still lacking in 
the  elaboration  of  an  inventory  of  resources  of  our  continental  shelf  and  the  EEZ.  In  this 
regard,  every  effort  will  be  pursued  to  develop  joint  programs  with  our  Indian  Ocean 
neighbours and traditional friendly countries. My Ministry will carry out a performance audit 
of the fisheries, aquaculture and shipping economic sectors to identify constraints and new 
challenges, following new national sustainable policies will be formulated and implemented. 

Mr  Deputy,  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  turn  towards  Industrial  Fisheries.  Particular 
attention  will  be  given  to  this  sector.  Though  annual  growth  in  the  seafood  industry  is 
constantly increasing, my Ministry feels strongly that there is still room for expansion, and 
increase export through the provision of a new incentives and infrastructural facilities to new 

 

83 

investors. Research for development will be carried out within the EEZ for an inventory of 
primary  productivity  and  stock  of  demersal  fisheries.  Port  Louis,  as  a  transhipment  and 
bunkering hub, will be a novel development in the region and the private sector would further 
capitalise on this asset to attract fishing vessels in the region; to make use of updated facilities 
for  bunkering,  landing  and  transhipment  of  their  products  in  Mauritius.  The  Government 
would  encourage  the  foreign  fish  operators  to  move  to  engage  in  the  fish  processing  in 
Mauritius. 

As  regards  the  Artisanal  Fisheries,  Mr  Deputy,  Speaker,  Sir,  I  understand  that  the 
fishing communities are very vulnerable to sea level rise and their livelihoods are threatened 
by storms and extreme weather conditions, coupled with other anthropogenic activities. The 
poorest  will  be  least  able  to  adapt  to  these  impacts.  In  an  open  competitive  world  with 
obvious  priorities  on  sustainability  and  innovation,  we  need  to  develop  well-equipped  and 
competent fishermen, ready to provide high-level quality services to meet the new challenges.  

Mr Deputy, Speaker, Sir, my Ministry is very sensitive to the outcry of fishermen to 
damaged and loss gears. We will attempt to alleviate their difficulties through the provision 
of materials to construct wired basket traps for their daily subsistence. 

My  Ministry  would  be  fully  involved  in  upgrading  the  artisanal  fisheries  sector  by 
imparting advanced training to fishermen, to enable them to fish further offshore, use long 
lines to fish, and target other species such as tuna fish. Since fishermen will be required to 
travel  further  offshore  and  stay  longer  at  sea,  safety  equipment  (such  as  hand-flares,  radar 
reflectors,  life  jackets,  life  rafts,  first  aid  box  and  fire  extinguishers  and  fluorescent 
tarpaulins)  will  be  provided  to  improve  security  and  safety  at  sea.  The  training  will  also 
include  placement  of  Fish  Aggregating  Devices  called  (FADs)  offshore.  We  will  also 
empower the fishermen community to install and manage FADs.  

More importantly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government would not turn its back 
when confronted with obstacles, whatever they are and never shirk from extending a helping 
hand to the most disadvantaged. Our approach would be multi-pronged, comprehensive and 
integrated. To meet the fisheries economic challenges, I assure the House that my Ministry 
will pursue with programme of improving artisanal fisheries as follows - 

1. 

Introduction  of  a  new  Fisheries  and  Marine  Resources  Bill  in  line  with 
international instruments and ensure best management practices. 

 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

84 

Carrying out research for the protection, conservation and management of the 
marine ecosystem and its sustainable development and to improve the growth, 
productivity, competitiveness and environmental sustainability of aquaculture 
(including offshore aquaculture). 
Potential  cage  culture  sites  around  Mauritius  will  be  publicised,  and  same 
would ultimately be leased to small scale enterprises for cage culture, with due 
regard not to hamper tourism and coastal development. 
Comprehensive  support  to  fishermen  communities  by  speeding  up  sea 
concessions  and  providing  technical,  infrastructural  and  other  support  to 
engage in subsistence fish cage farming. 
Create opportunities for diversification of the artisanal fisheries sector through 
joint  partnership  for  culture  of  octopus,  Groupers  (vieille);  sea-cucumbers, 
oysters, seaweeds and pearl. 
Empower the fishermen community in alternative jobs such as fish farming; 
secondly,  through  the  promotion  of  fish  cage  culture  and  also  provision  of 
training to join the industrial fishing sector. 
Assist  small  and  medium  entrepreneurs  in  developing  projects  pertaining  to 
barachois and cage culture. 
Focus  on  export  market  development  in  the  fish  processing  industry,  and 
pursue  new  markets  to  promote  strong  and  sustainable  fisheries  and 
aquaculture. 
Encourage the development of a national fleet for harvesting resources in our 
EEZ,  which  would  have  direct  bearing  on  the  seafood  hub,  with  multiplier 
effects on the economy. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I’ll turn now to the non-living marine resources in Mauritius 
EEZ.  Mauritius  is  a  small  island  developing  State  with  no  known  mineral  resources 
endowment,  but  against  a  landmass  of  some  2,000  square  kilometres,  Mauritius  has 
jurisdiction  over  a  large  Exclusive  Economic  Zone  of  approximately  2.3  million  square 
kilometres with significant potential for the development of a modern and prosperous marine 
base  sustainable  industry.  Moreover,  the  strategic  location  of  Mauritius  in  this  part  of  the 
Indian Ocean makes it an attractive place to develop such industries.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government will create the right conditions and options for 

business to take up the innovation challenge in a sustainable way.  

85 

 
To give the necessary push to this most promising sector, my Ministry will support 
tailored policies for extracting renewable energy from offshore such as wind energy, wave 
energy,  exploitation  of  oil  and  natural  gas  and  harnessing  Deep  Water  Ocean  Application 
(DOWA). 

Now  let  me  turn  to  shipping  development  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your 
permission. Mauritius, as a small island economy, relies on sea transportation as a means of 
importing  and  exporting  goods.  In  addition,  the  structure  and  geo  economic  status  of  the 
country  highlights  that  maritime  transportation  is  an  important  intermediate  service  in  the 
production  process  of  Mauritius  industrial  and  manufacturing  sectors.  As  liberalisation 
continues to reduce artificial barriers, the effective rate of protection provided by transport 
costs is now in many cases higher than the one provided by tariffs. 

The importance of  good logistics performance for economic  growth, diversification 
and  poverty  reduction  is  now  firmly  established.  Improving  logistics  is  at  the  core  of  the 
economic growth and competitiveness agenda. Higher maritime connectivity is important for 
our global competitiveness in the wake of liberalisation and globalisation of the international 
trade. With the erosion of our trade preferences, the transitional sectors are facing a lot of 
difficulties to remain viable.  

Today, high maritime connectivity has enable the ailing sugar sector in Mauritius to 
move to higher value addition activities such as refinery. As transhipment activity is volatile, 
we  need  to  develop  appropriate  strategies  to  enhance  our  competitiveness  in  view  of 
international trade becoming transport intensive and time sensitive. 

In a similar vein, the impact of poor logistic performance was also highlighted in the 
report  entitled  -  competitive  position  of  the  Mauritius  seafood  hub,  present  and  future 
challenges, development options and scenarios - World Bank Report December 2009 (BOI). 
It was recommended that we should investigate and prevent misinterpretation of the World 
Bank logistic performance index which ranked Mauritius 132 in 2007. 

This ranking reflected the relative logistics weakness at Port Louis, and the core of the 
Mauritius  seafood  hub.  The  same  story  repeats  for  the  provision  of  modern  logistics. 
Unfortunately,  the  absence  of  essential  strategies  impacted  negatively  on  our  World  Bank 
logistics performance index, which has been downgraded from 72th position in 2012 to 115th 
in 2014. Today’s world economy Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is characterised by unprecedented 
globalisation.  If  one  keeps  pace,  this  offers  great  potential  for  improvement  in  shipping 
development;  but,  if  not  properly  handled,  this  may  in  fact  have  negative  economic 
consequences. 

86 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government will implement the necessary policy initiatives 
to  improve  our  logistics  performance.  In  so  doing  and  given  the  strategy  location  that  is 
located halfway between Africa, Latin America and Asia, Mauritius will be positioned to take 
advantages  of  the  potential  offered  by  the  accelerated  growth  of  BRICS  countries.  In  this 
regard, there is a growing need for the local maritime industry to operate in a professional 
manner. To meet this challenge, Mauritius would establish equality flagship registry, as well 
as try to become a major base for the international shipping operations and other activities 
related to shipping.  

Mauritius  also  needs 

to  offer  business  opportunities  beyond  mere  flagship 
registration, ranging from marine insurance, financial facilities, port services, bunkering, ship 
chandlers  and  marine  communication.  The  development  of  our  shipping  sector  can  create 
thousands of jobs for our unemployed youth, provided these vertical integration supported by 
training and skills development. 

It  is  to  be  deplored,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  due  to  the  absence  of  a  national 
policy  on  shipping,  the  development  aspect  has  been  neglected.  This  Ministry  has  been 
allocated  the  task  to  develop  the  maritime  cluster  as  an  engine  of  economic  development. 
Accordingly, the existing shipping division will be revisited to orient it to meet the aspiration 
of  Mauritius  becoming  a  pivotal  shipping  and  maritime  hub  along  the  south  maritime 
corridor.  As  a  result,  this  entity  would  focus  on  the  elaboration  of  policies  for  the 
development of the shipping sector. 

In  addition,  there  is  a  huge  and  long  term  potential  for  Mauritius  to  develop 
infrastructure  facilities  for  ship  recycling,  ship  repair,  maintenance  and  refurbishment  for 
countries of the Indian Ocean region. In this regard, my Ministry will be coming up with a 
feasibility study, and will seek collaboration with overseas partners for joint venture. 

And now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will come to the Ocean Governance. 

This maritime realm defined as encompassing oceans, seas, coastlines and harbours, is 
vulnerable to a wide array of threats, including illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing; 
environmental degradation; smuggling in persons, narcotics trafficking, piracy, proliferation 
of  weapons  of  mass  destruction  and  aggressive  actions  including  terrorism.  The  western 
Indian Ocean region is one of the last regions in the world where fishing activities are largely 
unregulated.  Vessels  from  Europe  and  Eastern  Asia  heavily  exploit  tuna,  cape,  hake, 
blackhand sole and other species within the exclusive economic zones of Mauritius and our 
island  neighbours  regretfully  they  land  the  catch  outside  the  region,  without  reporting  the 

 

87 

catch to the national authorities. Improvements in fishing methods have led to great numbers, 
larger  sizes  and  increased  variety  of  fish  being  caught.  As  a  consequence,  fish  stocks  are 
shrinking  and  several  species  face  potential  extinction.  Thus,  we  need  to  reinforce  our 
maritime security domain. 

In the same vein, piracy off the coast of Somalia impacted on our economy which is 
highly dependent on international trade. Maritime piracy affects imports and exports of goods 
by sea, insurance costs, cruise ship calls, fishing and fish processing industry as well as the 
tourism industry. Similarly, maritime supply chains are susceptible to terrorism and this may 
involve  loss  of  lives,  damage  and  destruction  to  property,  and  a  reduction  in  economic 
activity.  Hence,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  the  priority  of  my  Ministry  to  ensure  that 
necessary legislations are enacted for enhancing maritime security. 

Turning to Navigation Authority and Maritime Security, I will say the first step we 

are taking - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Regarding  the  Shipping  sector,  twenty-one  regulations  have  been  drafted  to 
incorporate  the  provisions  of  Conventions  acceded  to  by  Mauritius  in  our 
national law. 
The Shipping Division of my Ministry is responsible for safety of navigation 
and  Aids  to  Navigation  around  Mauritius  and  the  Outer  Islands.  A  needs 
assessment  mission  was  conducted  by  an  expert  from  the  International 
Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authority, that is, 
IALA, and he proposed to establish an ‘Aids to Navigation Authority’ with a 
view to enhance safety of navigation in our waters. The Authority would be 
responsible to upgrade Aids to Navigation through better provision of aids to 
navigation around Mauritius and the Outer Islands as well as maintenance of 
the same. 
In  order  to  ensure  continuity  and  improvement  of  the  Global  Maritime 
Distress  and  Safety  System  (GMDSS),  and  HF  maritime  communication 
services for the safety of the ships and fishing vessels in our territorial waters, 
the GMDSS equipment has been replaced with modern and hi-tech equipment. 
With  an  increase  in  piracy  attacks,  especially  in  the  northern  sector  of  our 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), the use of security technology is essential 
for  tracking,  identification  and  exchange  of  navigation  information  for  our 
ships  by  the  Maritime  Administration  and  related  agencies.  Mauritius  as  a 

 

88 

responsible State, is very much concerned with maritime security, and since 
the merit of utilising technologies for maritime security is undeniable, it has 
been  decided  that  all  vessels,  including  fishing  vessels  and  pleasure  crafts, 
operating in the Maritime Zones of Mauritius would be fitted with Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) by 2015, as it provides the following benefits - 
(i) 

(ii) 

all inward and outward movements around the Mauritian coasts would 
be  actively  and  positively  monitored  by  the  National  Coast  Guard 
through their Coastal Surveillance Radar System and by their planes, 
ships/boats on patrol. 
It will also provide better identification and distress response during a 
search and rescue operation for – 
- 
- 

early detection of ‘unidentified’ craft, and 
better monitoring of pleasure craft and tourist boats operating 
inshore. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Maritime  Labour  Convention  (MLC),  2006  is  an 
important  Labour  Convention  for  the  Maritime  Transport  industry  as  it  emphasises  on  the 
need for decent working and living conditions on board ships regardless of nationality or flag. 
Mauritius has ratified the MLC 2006 on 30 June 2014, and drafting of regulations is almost 
finalised for effective implementation of the MLC 2006. 

I will now turn to the Blue-Green economy. The concept of green economy applies 
also to the blue economy. My Ministry will take the laudable steps forward to monitor that 
the irrational growth of the blue economy does not take place. Natural capital from the ocean 
has to be sufficiently preserved for future generations, as it cannot be replaced with economic 
capital. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, an oil spill, accidents at sea, marine pollution due to leakages 
(as we had recently witnessed at St. Brandon), and dumping of ballast water and ship wastes 
result  in  irreversible  negative  impacts.  In  this  context,  a  Marine  Pollution  Bill  has  been 
drafted  to  incorporate  provisions  of  the  International  Convention  for  the  Prevention  of 
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) to regulate ships registered under the Mauritius flag as well 
as ships plying in our maritime zones. The success of a sustainable ocean economy directly 
depends on the health of the marine environment. 

 

89 

All  these  measures  together  with  regional  and  international  cooperation  will  help 
protect our sea ecosystem, and ensure that shipping in the region be classified as sustainable; 
more so that it is the policy of my Ministry to expand the local shipping industry. 

Last but not the least, we come to the Outer Islands, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Government is committed to the enhancement of the quality of life of the inhabitants 

of the Outer Islands, specifically Agalega.  

My Ministry will ensure the implementation of the two major projects, namely, the 
upgrading of airstrip to ease landing and taking off of aircrafts at Agaléga, and secondly, the 
construction of a new jetty of 150 metres long to allow vessels to berth easily. Installation of 
essential communication and navigation equipment would also be undertaken. 

Now, concerning international cooperation, Government will synergise all the efforts 
towards  building  stronger  partnership  worldwide  to  improve  global  management  of  fish 
stocks  and  marine  ecosystems  in  line  with  international  instruments  and  regional 
organisations.  My  Ministry  will  continue  to  collaborate  and  consolidate  linkages  with 
agencies  such  as  the  Indian  Ocean  Tuna  Commission,  South  West  Indian  Ocean  Fisheries 
Commission, SADC, COMESA, IORA, World Bank, IMO, AFDB, EU and the UN system.  
It goes also without saying that my Ministry will, through bilateral agreements, seek technical 
and  financial  assistance  from  our  friendly  countries  for  the  development  of  the  ocean 
economy in the following areas – 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Exploration of marine resources 

Scientific and technical training for resource mapping and its management 

Fisheries aquaculture 

Seaport development and shipping 

Green tourism 

R & D Ocean technologies 

Creation of centres on excellence in marine biotechnology 

This Ministry, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is adopting a strategic approach to translate 
our  vision  into  reality  by  setting  up  a  steering  committee  for  the  purpose  of  elaborating  a 
national  strategy  plan.  This  plan  would  be  implemented  following  the  promulgation  of  an 
Ocean Act and the setting up of a National Ocean Authority which will lead and facilitate the 

 

90 

development of Ocean related activities in a sustainable manner. In this regard, my Ministry 
will  set  up  the  appropriate  legal  framework  and  regulatory  body  to  licence,  monitor  and 
regulate the activities of operators in the Ocean economy.   

In this context, the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat is being sought for the 

services of a consultant. 

In recent years, all kinds of new marine industries have emerged. In this respect, my 
Ministry would ensure that all ocean-related activities are carried out within the ambit of a 
well-defined plan with clear cut objectives.  

While promoting the Ocean economy, building a skilled workforce, inclusiveness and 

sustainability will be the key areas of my Ministry. 

Before  ending,  given  that  the  Ocean  economy  will  be  the  next  frontier  of  global 
economy, I would like to assure this House that every effort will be undertaken to meet the 
needs of all ocean related stakeholders and leave no stone unturned in the endeavour to make 
the Ocean economy the next wave of prosperity. 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

 (6.20 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or): Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, let me first of all congratulate you on your election and request you to convey 
my  warmest  congratulation  as  well  to  the  Speaker,  Mrs  Hanoomanjee,  on  her  election.    I 
would  also  congratulate  all  hon.  Members  of  this  august  Assembly  on  their  election.  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, my election as a Member of Parliament would not have been possible 
without the support of my parents, mes deux collistiers, hon. Ashit Gungah and hon. Sangeet 
Fowdar  and  the  electorate  of  Constituency  No.6  and  I  will  remain  eternally  grateful  and 
thankful to them. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my election as a Member of Parliament is a long cherished 
dream  and  let  it  be  an  inspiration  to  the  youth  today  as  the  journey  has  been  extremely 
difficult.  There  have  been  moments  of  happiness,  joy  but  moments  of  despair  as  well.  
However, let me share with the House what the great Nelson Mandela had to say in one of his 
famous speeches, and I quote – 

“There is no passion to be found playing small, settling for a life that is less 

 
than the one you are capable of living ".  

91 

It is both a privilege and a honour to be inspired by Mr Mandela and use him as a 

marked reference in my maiden speech in this august Assembly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

I am fully decided to live a life  I am capable of living, that is precisely the reason 
why, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have a vision for my country.  My vision for my country rests 
on three important pillars that are - 

• 
• 
• 

liberty; 
solidarity, and 
durability. 

Je  veux  d'une  l’île  Maurice  libre,  Madame,  la  présidente.  Je  milite  pour  une  l’île 

Maurice solidaire, et finalement aussi je milite pour une l’île Maurice Durable. 

This Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, under the able leadership of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is committed to the concept of liberty. We have freed 
the  citizens  of  this  country  from  the  shackles  of  nepotism,  shear  corruption  and  a  failing 
leadership, utterly autocratic without a vision and without the interest of the nation at heart. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have the interest of the nation at heart. 

We are going to ensure, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that institutions in this country have 
the means and resources to deliver. We will ensure that they operate in absolute transparency 
and that they contribute in the promotion of equality and fairness in our society. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, confidence is back among our youth and the population at 

large appreciates the series of measures currently being taken by the Government. 

In our endeavour to consolidate democracy and decentralise power, we want to put in 
place a system of Local Government that meets the aspiration of our youth and the population 
at large.  This is not the case today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Successive Governments have failed to put in place an appropriate system of Local 
Government  because  the  priorities  were  wrongly  addressed.  They  have  been  wrong  in 
concentrating all efforts in amending the Local Government Act but Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
the best laws in the world does not bring in efficiency and effectiveness in a system if you do 
not have the means to implement that law, that is, whatever law you want to implement. In 
the weeks to come, this Government will bring in reforms that will be meant at looking at the 
structure,  the  resources  and  only  after  being  satisfied  that  these  two  important  issues  are 

 

92 

addressed, will look into law and regulations for a better system of Local Government.   

Under liberty, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we will walk the talk in upholding the doctrine 
of the separation of powers, bring reform in our system of Local Government, review the role 
of  our  institutions  including  the  police  force,  uphold  Parliamentary  Democracy  where  the 
Parliament will no longer remain closed for months and months against the wish of the nation 
only because of the whims and caprices of a dooming and failing Leader of the House. This 
Government will be an inspiration to the youth of this country and to the nation at large. 

Solidarity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is a concept stronger than unity. During the recent 
electoral campaigns, much has been said on national unity, but what a paradox, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir?  Those  same  people  who  have  been  self-proclaiming  the  great  defenders  of 
national  unity,  le  grand  rassembleur, have  also  been  the  main  allies  of  socio-cultural 
organisations that stunk nothing, but sheer communalism and division. 

This Government believes that National Unity is too important for our stability, but is 
convinced  that  we,  politicians  have  no  lesson  to  give  to  the  nation  after  the  last  general 
election. On the contrary, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it will be an insult to those same citizens if 
we,  politicians  constantly  fail  to  understand  that  they  are  miles  ahead  from  us. They  fully 
understand  how  unity  in  diversity  is  a  sine  qua  non  condition  for  the  security,  safety  and 
wellbeing of their children, family and the country at large. When I refer to unity these days, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  refer  to  the  importance  of  unity  among  our  neighbours  in  the 
region. We need to work closely with our partners in the Indian Ocean Commission and the 
African  continent  and  this  is  where  we,  politicians  have  our  part  to  play  to  meet  the 
challenges of our nation ahead. This is what the population is expecting from us as we are a 
tiny little dot in the map of the world and we can make a difference if  we understand the 
importance of regional integration and address it with the priority and importance it deserves. 

Still under solidarity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, apart from the concept of unity, social 
justice is another issue that this Government has among its priorities. The recent decisions in 
regards  to  pensions  and  salary  increments  are  meant  to  reduce  the  poverty  gap.  A 
Government  led  by  the  Right  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  has  always 
understood the importance of discipline, hard work and the equitable distribution of wealth 
much in the interest of the less fortunate of our society. Naturally, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
better social justice for us under the able leadership of our Prime Minister does not mean free 
distribution of crown lands to "petits copains et copines”, better social  justice for us,  Mr 

 

93 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, does not mean protecting the rights of a selected few "’’au detriment des 
plus méritants”. We will bring “une vraie démocratisation de l'économie» with the dream we 
cherish to make of Mauritius "une nation d’entrepreneurs". Everybody will recall, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  that  it  was  during  the  late  90's  under  the  Prime  Ministership  of  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth that the country  witnessed the  emergence of a new breed of entrepreneurs in the 
textile,  tourism,  immovable  property  and  many  other  sectors.  The  concept  of  unity,  social 
justice and democratisation of our economy are, Mr Deputy Speaker, aspects of the second 
pillar of my vision that I call "Solidarity”. 

Finally,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  the  third  pillar  of  the  vision  I  have  for  my  country  is 

‘Durability’. 

We  can  no  longer  develop  a  nation  without  taking  into  consideration,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, the economic, social and environmental aspects of development concurrently, 
that caters for and protects the rights, interest, security and comfort for our generations ahead.  

This  Government,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  will  ensure  that  every  investment  does 
necessarily consider, in a holistic manner, not only the economical, but also the social and 
ecological/environmental impact of the development we wish to undertake.  

A  good  mix  of  the  three  elements  along  with  the  will  to  innovate  and  the 
responsibility  always  associated  with  such  decisions  will  no  doubt  make  the  future 
generations proud of the achievement of this Government.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the expectation of the population is extremely high outside 

and we have three options – 

1. 

2. 

3. 

To meet those expectations; 

To meet those expectations, and 

To meet those expectations. 

I make an appeal to members on both sides of the House. Let us work together in the 
reconstruction of our country, setting aside petty politics, but share genuinely ideas we have 
for  a  better  Mauritius.  History  bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that  great  achievements  have 
resulted from a sum total of differences shared by people who understood that “humility is 
the best policy". We  are living in  a world  where fierce competition is the norm. We often 
have been referring to Mauritius having nothing in terms of resources apart from its human 
resource.  

94 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, such a statement is today more than outdated. The countries 
around  the  world  are  struggling  hard  to  prevent  brain  drain  and  providing  all  sorts  of 
facilities/benefits to their expatriates to come back to their homeland. 

The  request  and  proposal  that  I  will  be  having  for  the  Minister  of  Finance  in  the 
context  of  the  forthcoming  budget  is  to  provide  special  attention  to  "Empowerment  and 
Training",  especially  on  those  fields  where  we  have  a  shortage  of  expertise  to  consolidate 
some  important  sectors  of  our  economy  like  financial  services,  ICT,  ocean  economy.  We 
should  also  provide  incentives  to  local  experts  who  are  settled  abroad  to  return  back  to 
Mauritius. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let the youth of today not lose hope in our country, let we, 
Members on both sides of the House, endeavour in bringing back the confidence lost in our 
youth because of the way this country was managed in the recent years. 

As  a  concluding  note,  Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  quote  from  the  words  of  the  great 

Mahatma Gandhi.  I quote – 

 “Man often becomes what he believes himself to be. If I keep on saying to 
myself  that  I  cannot  do  a  certain  thing,  it  is  possible  that  I  may  end  up  by 
really becoming incapable of doing it. On the contrary, if I have the belief that 
I can do it, I shall surely acquire the capacity to do it even if I may not have it 
at the beginning”. Unquote. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

  

(6.33 p.m.) 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): 
Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, rising today  for my maiden speech in this august Assembly,  I  am 
conscious  of  the  immense  responsibility  I  owe  to  the  people  of  my  Port  Louis  No.  2 
Constituency, both to those who have voted for me and those who did not, but whom all I 
represent here, today. 

Building on the words of those who have preceded me in this debate, I congratulate 
the  Government  on  much  of  the  programme  they  have  set  before  us.  Not  least  because  it 
complies with the socialist principles I espouse. I also congratulate you, Sir, on your election 

 

95 

as Deputy Speaker of the House and also to Mrs Hanoomanjee as Speaker of the House. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  probably  well-known  that  I  bring  with  me  some 
experience,  dare  I  say,  some  expertise,  on  the  concept  of  sustainability.  I  must,  therefore, 
commend  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  being  the  very  personification  of  that  concept. 
Indeed, he has lasted well. He made his maiden speech here, some years before even I was a 
twinkle  in  my  father’s  eye.  As  for  his  policies  and  those  of  the  Government  they  have 
sustainability  too,  especially  in  their  enunciation;  let  us  hope  that  their  promise,  as  he 
emphasised, will be amply fulfilled. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in roundly endorsing much of the Government Programme, 
whilst, to be fair I support much of it, my principal regret is that there are so few beside me in 
this part of the House, our absent friends, who did not achieve the resilience to join us here, 
on these benches of Opposition. I know, however, that their spirits are here in strength, to 
ensure  we  underscore  the  flaws  “les  manquements”  in  the  programme  before  us.  In  our 
defeat  we  may  be  humble,  but  nonetheless  resolute  and  trust  that  magnanimity,  not 
recrimination, will be the touchstone of the style of this Government. 

Now, if I may, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me turn to the substance of my critique, 
much of which will be based on the triple bottom line of Economic Growth, Social Progress 
and Environmental Stewardship and not environmental sustainability per se. 

I commend hon. Bhagwan for the part of his speech on sustainable development. He 
did mention that I was quite active on that front. I am happy to learn from Minister Dayal’s 
speech that the new Programme will build on and revise as needed the Maurice Ile Durable 
policy, strategy and action plan, which I hope will be widely supported on all sides of the 
House and will continue to attract the technical and financial support of our long standing 
development partners, such as Agence Française de Développement, the European Union, the 
United  Nations  system,  to  name  but  a  few.  Many  projects  and  schemes  for  greener 
development are ripe to be taken further forward. External finance has been well established 
and technical support through the Partnership in Action for a Green Economy is at hand, as 
well as finance through the EU under the Global Climate Change Facility Plus. 

The time is ripe for this Government to take the lead and I have every hope that they 
will  stride  forward  with  the  objectives  of  their  Programme.  This  can  include  financial 
incentives  to  encourage  renewable  energy  production  plus  greater  energy  efficiency  in  the 
public and the private sectors which could tremendously cut the costs of energy we use, based 

 

96 

on international experience from countries like Germany, Italy, France, China and Singapore. 
For here lies a huge opportunity for the Government right now to bag on one of the biggest 
win-win prizes out there today.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I strongly urge the Government to 
do the sums and hit on this jackpot early on. 

USA  studies  show  that  improving  refrigerator  efficiency  alone,  for  example,  saves 
more energy than all they are generating from renewables, excluding hydroelectric power. An 
Energy Efficiency Management Office was set up here in Mauritius in 2011. But to hit this 
jackpot it needs strong backing leadership and vigorous technical staff working closely with 
the  public  and  private  sectors.  Then  we  can  go  the  extra  mile  in  the  quest  of  the  buried 
treasure trove of energy efficiency. The starting point for this treasure hunt might well be the 
2013 Report on the National Energy Commission and its 21 recommendations for action to 
avoid power cuts and to move towards greener energy production. And let’s knock the really 
bad idea of a coal fired power station on the head for good and all. Another low hanging fruit 
could well be the extension of the solar water heaters scheme, under which nearly one in five 
families in Mauritius has benefited, half of which comes from the lower rung of the ladder. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  not  against  renewables,  far  from  it,  and  I  trust  the 
Government will continue developing this important field of what in the trade is known as 
intermittent  energy  production.  It  is  just  not  true  that  when  the  sun  goes  in  and  the  wind 
declines  all  the  lights  go  out  when  you  have  solar  panels  and  wind  farms.  The  key  is 
achieving balanced production and storage. Storage for renewable energy is a domain I urged 
the Government to master. The Central Electricity Board has signed contracts for 65 MW of 
renewable energy under the MID initiative for projects on two major wind farms and six solar 
photovoltaic farms. Several countries are working on the fiscal and technical challenges such 
sources present. We are not alone. France and our neighbour Reunion Island are ahead and 
can offer useful technical support to keep up with the best in the field. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to express my own assessment of the future of 
public transport. Car drivers like roads but providing first-class public transport is the way for 
the future. Our dilemma is more and more people are attracted to the beautiful high-powered 
cars  now  available,  heavily  subsidised  in  the  public  and  the  private  sector  with  duty-free 
access  and  home  to  office  pay.  Moreover,  the  public  transport  is  way  behind  the  times. 
Anyone  who  travels  abroad  can  see  that,  whether  in  Singapore,  Sydney,  London,  Paris  or 
Rome.  And  as  I  speak  now,  even  Ethiopia  is  taking  the  first  steps  to  open  a  new  railway 
service. Evidence shows that building more roads brings with it more demand for cars and 

 

97 

lorries and more congestion already costing the country millions in daily traffic congestion 
and environmental pollution. 

In  1985,  some  thought  Lee  Kwan  Yew  was  mad  to  back  a  railway  system  when 
Singapore  was  heading  for  recession.  Without  its  urban  railway  system  where  would 
Singapore  be  now?  Probably  where  we  are  today  without  first-class  public  transport,  a 
country desperately trying to escape the middle-income trap. To make that breakthrough we 
not  only  need  first-class  systems  for  internal  public  transport  but  first-class  inter-regional 
shipping, airlines and ICT. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I do urge the Government to reappraise its policy on public 
transport  and  look  again  at  the  Singapore  model.  I  know  about  its  economic,  social  and 
environmental benefits, not just from books and reports but from leaving there for 10 years, 
studying  and  practising  Civil  and  Structural  Engineering.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  a  key 
element in this model is a cleaner, greener, healthier environment. 

 But let me now turn to another health issue. When recently a Mauritian was admitted 
to a Singapore hospital he was recognised as coming from here, Mauritius, not from his ID 
card but from the pesticide levels in his blood! Some have complained about the impact of 
excessive  pesticides  in  the  lagoon  and  rivers.  Now  we  must  take  action  on  the  rivers  of 
pesticide in our own blood stream. This is a serious public health issue. I trust in our new 
Government, the two relevant Ministries will be talking to each other on how we can do more 
to protect health from such environmental threats. Moreover, Green Agricultural Certification 
will also go a long way to enhance demand, creating a bigger market for green agricultural 
products and make our farmers pause before they add more pollutants to our bloodstream. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a further opportunity for greater efficiency arises in a better 
waste management on our islands. There is a growing awareness in this country that waste is 
a  resource,  and  that  reduction,  reuse  and  recycling  offer  large  social,  environmental  and 
economic  benefits.  Much  has  been  done,  but  we  are  just  in  our  infancy  in  this  field  by 
comparison with the best international practice. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I also welcome the commitment of the Government to make 
the Ocean economy an important industry to sustain economic diversification, job creation 
and wealth generation. This is a long-term task and the process must be established so that it 
can be sustained well into the future, which I am sure will receive all-party support. 

98 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  greatly  welcome  the  Government’s  commitment  to  civil 
services  reform.  Internationally,  by  the  World  Economic  Forum,  we  are  labelled  as  being 
over bureaucratic and lacking a work ethic. The next stages of development, the economic 
miracle Mark II, depend greatly on innovation and productivity in the private sector. So, we 
cannot afford to have a civil service that is over staffed and holding the private sector back. 
For too long civil servants have become used to the habit that they are sitting in jobs that are 
secure  for  life,  no  matter  how  they  perform.  Reform  we  need  is  not  just  a  new  game  of 
musical  chairs.  We  need  a  performance-based  culture,  no  more  security  for  life.  We  need 
work measurement and real incentives to efficiency and innovation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I hope the new Government will also look urgently at the 
growing  undisclosed  underfunding  of  the  public  sector  pensions.  Let  us  see  the  figures 
published, as in the EU, of the future commitments on the existing pensions’ scheme and the 
provision being made to fund it. If we are like all the EU countries, we are in for a shock. I 
will also forward to that debate and to see how far the new Government will come up with a 
new  pensions’  policy  that  seeks  to  avoid  the  nightmare  sweeping  Europe  and  the  USA  of 
underfunded pension scheme bankrupting public sector funding. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  close,  let  me  say  that  I  have  spoken  much  about  the 
welcome, national policies of this Government, how they have evolved from our long history 
of independent Government and how they can be further developed to provide Mauritius with 
the real prospects for a better tomorrow for our children and our children’s children, through 
consultation on integrated long-term development. 

Now, let me finally mention the special needs of the people of my Constituency No. 
2.  I  am  glad  to  see  that  better  housing,  the  relief  of  poverty  and  support  for  those  sadly 
addicted to drugs are high on the Government agenda.  These are all pressing needs of my 
Constituency and much voiced abroad by people when I meet them. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would be glad to provide, at another time, advice on how 
these  issues  can  be  most  effectively  and  efficiently  addressed  to  meet  the  local  needs, 
building on local evidence and views through local consultation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am thankful to the hon. Prime Minister for enlightening the 
House  that  the  inquiry  being  conducted  by  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission    in 
relation  to  the  case  of  arson  at  the  gaming  house,  known  as  L’Amicale  de  Port  Louis,  is 
expected to be completed by mid-2015, albeit a delay of five months. I would like to make a 

 

99 

plea  here  this  afternoon.  I  trust  that  if  there  are  any  new  findings  and  fresh  evidence 
uncovered, the Government will swiftly refer the case to the Supreme Court under section 
19A(4) of the Criminal Appeal Act, so as to avoid any taint of miscarriage of justice. I feel 
bound to stress that I fully expect that this case, and others concerning Mauritians, in general, 
if ever there is a case like that one, will be followed on the basis of the undertaking that was 
publicly  articulated  by  leading  Members  of  the  l’Alliance  Lepep  during  the  last  electoral 
campaign. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if the voice of the people is but the voice of God, may I say 
before  resuming  my  place,  praise  to  the  people  for  their  electoral  choices,  for  us  all,  and 
indeed praise to the Lord for giving me this opportunity to review the many sound elements 
in the Government Programme and to offer my  suggestions for some modest but essential 
further improvements.  

This, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is my approach to fashion a new culture in political 
debate,  in  which  as  a  loyal  opposition,  we  eschew  fractious  conflicts,  we  avoid  personal 
attacks on Ministers trying their best to do a good day’s work, we sidestep venomous party 
politics and focus together on the priority needs of the country and how these can be best met 
in the interests of all people. 

I thank you for your attention.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

 

(6.51 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton and Rivière du Rempart):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, I am inwardly pleased today to address this Assembly and you as being the first 
youngest Deputy Speaker of this House.  I also wish to convey my congratulation to the first 
Madam Speaker of this House and perhaps you could use your best endeavours to convey my 
congratulation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today what I am about to say in this house will come from 

my heart and my mind and that’s why I do not have a script to read. 

Some time ago, a bus conductor from Rivière du Rempart, who in the late years of 
70s became an active member of the General Workers Federation at Rivière du Rempart Bus 
Service, came with my pregnant wife to Port Louis on a trip. And then, at a certain moment 

 

100 

in time, both of them found themselves in the public gallery of the National Assembly. They 
were watching quality debates going on and then the couple spoke to themselves and said: 
“we wish that if this child is born one day, he will sit in this Parliament. And then, at some 
point in time, I was born and I grew up. When I was growing up, my father used to take me 
on bicycle to every public meeting, public gathering of the Movement Militant Mauricien. 
Just like my hon. friend, Mrs Selvon, said in her address that since her childhood she grew up 
watching  and  witnessing  political  history.  I  witness  political  history  unfolding  since  my 
childhood. When I used to go to public meetings, I used to watch  Sir Anerood Jugnauth, hon. 
Ivan  Collendavelloo,  Mr  Jayen  Cuttaree  at  the  time,  there  was  hon.  Prem  Koonjoo  and  a 
number  of  lawyers,  Mr  Subash  Lallah,  hon.  Veda  Baloomoody,  hon.  Alan  Ganoo  and  my 
father used to tell me: “this is how I want you to speak on a political platform one day.” 

Eventually,  came  a  time  when  I  was  in  my  teenage,  I  joined  Régional  No.  7, 
Piton/Rivière du Rempart. Those days were hard times for the MMM. They were only about 
five or six militants coming to Régional, and, unfortunately, it is still hard time. In those days, 
I  can  clearly  remember  like  yesterday,  my  friend  Rama  Poonoosamy,  Steve  Obeegadoo, 
Zayed Ameer, Sheila Babajee, Eshan Abdool Raman and many others leading the jeunesse 
militante and I was in there.  Those days, I could not see my hon. friend Uteem, but this is 
how  I  grew  up  in  politics.    Eventually,  while  I  grew,  I  became  a  very  active  member  in 
Régional No. 7.  And there came a time when I was told that I will be a candidate for the next 
general election in Constituency No. 7 by the Leader of the Opposition.  I wish he could have 
been here today to hear the truth.  Unfortunately, he is not here for reasons I know that have 
been conveyed to me by my hon. friend, Mr Mahen Jhugroo.   

Then, at a moment in time, a transfuge became more militant than I am, an arriviste 
became more militant than I am and yet I remain loyal to my party and my leader, the MMM. 
Like this, during the historical period that I have been with the MMM, I have witnessed only 
transfuges, arrivistes and others who have taken advantage of the party. It was in my blood, 
MMM! Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I was shell shocked when I heard the hon. Leader of the 
MMM  and  a  few  of  his  “yes”  men,  crony  on  one  hand  in  remake  and  on  that  other  hand 
negotiating  alliance  with  Le  Parti  Travailliste  de  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam;  not  le  Parti 
Travailliste  de  my  very  good  friend  Shakeel  Mohamed  but  Le  Parti  Travailliste  de 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam. 

(Interruptions) 

 

101 

And the bilan of Navin Chandra Ramgoolam can only be witnessed if you look at the clip 
that l’Alliance Lepep produced during the course of the electoral campaign which is called 
‘Vire Mam’. Against that background, against the background of a corrupt regime, against the 
background of a Prime Minister with no seriousness at all, against the background of a Prime 
Minister who was taking this country to the brink of collaspse, taking it really to the rotten 
dogs. 

(Interruptions) 

My  ex-leader  then  decided  to  bury  the  remake  and  make  an  alliance  with  the  Parti 
Travailliste.  We should never forget history, the manner in which they were trying to fool 
the nation while they were saying “on and off”, “on and off”.  

(Interruptions) 

Exactly!  I  am  greatful  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  the  comments  he  has  made.  It 
became worse than Parti Malin.  At least, Parti Malin has got principle and consistency, but 
today I am ashamed. 

(Interruptions) 

The word “ashamed” is frequently used by the hon. Leader of the Opposition in this House.  
Today  I  am  ashamed  to  say  that  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  against  all  these 
backgrounds, sold the militants, sold the workers and sold virtually everybody who had trust 
in him. All the glory he acquired since the 70’s, he sold that glory for nothing in days and 
today he has been reduced to a man with no credibility in his own party, right now. 

(Interruptions) 

Right now, we know the position of hon. Barbier, we know the position of hon. Sorefan, we 
know the debilitating position in which hon. Lesjongard is. We know also the accrochage, as 
it has been termed in the newspaper, between the hon. Leader of the Opposition and my very 
good friend, Steeve Obeegadoo.  

(Interruptions) 

When I was growing, my peers was listening to ‘I am a disco I dancer’ while I was listening 
to  ‘soldat lalit  militant’.  But  then,  eventually  I  left  MMM  on  a  point  of  principle  like  my 
Leader, hon. Ivan Collendavelloo, did. I left on a point of principle! 

(Interruptions) 

 

102 

When we left, we were joined by my very good friend who is like a big brother, hon. 
Boissezon and later on by a number of other militants all across the country. When we left, 
we left against all odds of a 60/0 because someone called Rama Sithanen, who is the 
mathematical and economical guru and who claims to be one of the most intelligent 
economist in Mauritius  … 

(Interruptions) 

…  produced  this  equation  that  it  is  going  to  be  60/0  and  he  managed  to  dupe  the  entire 
bureau politique of MMM into it. Except one man, my leader Ivan Collendavelloo.  We, in 
Movement Liberateur when it was formed, decided to call the unity of opposition. And those 
who really believe in the future of this country, those who really believe that they should put 
the country first, decided to unite and thank you, hon. Sir Aneerood Jugnauth, thank you hon. 
Xavier Duval.  Thank you so much! Today, if there would have been no hon. Sir Aneerood 
Jugnauth, no hon. Xavier Duval, we would not have been sitting here. There is a likelyhood 
that there would have been a dictatorship placed in Mauritius. 

(Interruptions) 

Because we have witnessed it, we witnessed it during the course of the electoral campaign. It 
was very clear, with the written contract and the agreement they reached, one was going to be 
Prime Minister for five years, another one going to be President for the seven years with all 
sorts of powers in hand, including immunity for seven years. 

(Interruptions) 

Believe me, even if they would have won the election, in less than two weeks the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition would have got the first kick out of the Government and would have found 
himself in prison. That’s what would have happened. But God saved the king. 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! And we saved  him today.  During the  electoral  campaign what  did our opponents 
have to criticise us. The other day, I heard the outcry of my very good friend, sister at the 
Bar, hon. Jadoo-Jaunbocus. The kind of campaign against her.  

Wait a minute, I am coming to you! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

103 

Order! 

Mr Rutnah: against … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The campaign against a sister who came from Rivière du Rempart and who was candidate, 
hon. Boygah and against other women. And the campaign against women is still going on.  

The campaign against Dr. Gurib-Fakim, the campaign that is currently going on against the 
lady who is now in charge of the Cardiac Unit, because there is a tendency of the Parties in 
the opposite side to criticise women and that’s why today - because they have so low esteem 
about women coming into politics - they sit there alone a whole day. 

But, they use it as a defence punch line time and time again that they are going to empower 
women in this country, but no, they prefer to empower Soornack and others. There is a list, I 
can go on and on, but against that particular campaign when personal attack came on me by 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition when he says he has got a révélation, ‘ène révélation pou 
faire’  against  a  candidate  of  Constituency  No.  7  who  has  come  from  Great  Britain.  So,  I 
thought that I must have done something massively wrong in my life and that’s what he was 
going  to  come  about,  but  what  transpired  is  extraordinary.  He  managed  to  obtain  a  few 
photographs of me with my very good friends of a Christmas party in December 2007 and 
with the complicity of Advance newspaper and multimedia, they created a clip to discredit 
me, to ruin my reputation, but the electorate who is now intelligent did not buy into that and 
they got their lesson that they had to get. But, what was more extraordinary coming from the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition is when he had nothing to criticise, he criticised my hairstyle 
and… 

(Interruptions) 

he said now that I wear ties, I talk too much.  But when I wear ties, I wear it because I have 
worked hard in my life. 

 (Interruptions) 

And I earned it with respect. I have never sold my country, I have never sold my people, I 
have never sold any militant. I have not sold my dignity or my soul and that’s why I am able 

 

104 

to wear a tie with dignity and with respect, and other than a tie, the noble profession in which 
I am, enables me to dress in gown, in band and in collar worn by a barrister. And, call me 
‘avocat malpropre’ in a comité central, because I, together with my learned friend, who sits 
today in this Parliament, hon. Kalidass Teeluckdharry defended a young man who was really 
innocent, who has had nothing to do with a crime.  Later on, we were persecuted, victimised, 
but yet we did our job and because of that, I was even called ‘ène avocat malang’.  

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! What the hon. Leader of the Opposition forgot is that no matter who you are in this 
country, there is by virtue of our Constitution, the rule of law. The rule of law simply means 
that  everybody  is  equal.  But,  in  the  days  when  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam  was  the  Prime 
Minister  of  this  country,  some  were  more  equal  than  others  and  there  was  a  campaign  of 
persecution  against  everybody  who  spoke  the  truth  about  him,  about  his  Party,  about  his 
politics and about his wrongdoing in the country and my friend, hon. Kalidass Teeluckdharry 
and I have been that victim, and others as well. Even hon. Soodhun was not spared; someone 
whom I know for ages when I was a kid I used to ….… 

(Interruptions) 

The  persecution  was  not  only  against  lawyers  and  politicians!    The  persecution  was  also 
against journalists, journalists who were doing their jobs, journalists who were reporting.  

(Interruptions) 

Dharmanand Dhooharika who was doing his job, simply his job of informing public interest 
was sent to jail, Deven Anacootee and others, but in this Government never and never again 
any journalist will be arbitrarily arrested  ……… 

(Interruptions) 

Because  we  are  a  Government  that  believe  in  the  rule  of  law  and  we  are  going  to  treat 
everybody equal before the law. Even though the population knows the track record of the 
Prime Minister, an enquiry has started against him in relation to the money found at his place 
and in relation to the Roches Noires affair. He has been given all the latitude and all his rights 
have  been  respected.    I  have  said  it  outside  and  I  am  not  hesitating  to  say  it  here,  in  this 
House, that should anybody in this country be arrested and his rights not respected, me as a 
human rights lawyer, I will intervene and I will be prepared to sacrifice whatever sacrifice I 
have to do … 

 

105 

(Interruptions) 

We have, on 27 January of this year, presented a programme to achieve change and change 
will surely come because that is what the population is expecting from us.  I am proud, today, 
that I will be forming part of that change and that I was a candidate alongside with one of the 
greatest Prime Minister that this country has known… 

 (Interruptions) 

…and one of the greatest Minister of Finance this country has known and together with the 
team,  we  are  going  to  bring  the  second  phase  of  miracle  économique  in  this  country  and 
that’s for sure. 

(Interruptions) 

I can assure my very good friend, friend at the bar, hon. D. Ramful that he should not worry.  
You  are  in  safe  hands  in  the  hands  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  in  the  hands  of  Xavier-Luc 
Duval, in the hands of hon. Pravind Jugnauth and in the hands of hon. Ivan Collendavelloo. 
We are safe, we have already taken this country out of danger. 

But, you can be assured… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I agree, I have had the opportunity of working with my learned friend at the bar and he is, 
indeed, a very good man, he’s a gentleman. 

(Interruptions) 

Whilst we strive to achieve what we want to achieve and to bring change, we have to look at 
our institutions and I was pleased… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! Silence, please! Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: I was pleased to hear my very able and learned friend and hon. Member 
of this House, Ravi Yerrigadoo, the Attorney General, when he was addressing his speech in 
which he dealt with very serious issues regarding law and order and the judiciary. 

In  relation  to  law  and  order  and  in  relation  to  Police,  I  have  said  it  outside  on 
numerous occasions - and I do not hesitate to say it in this House, that on the very apex of our 

 

106 

Police force, there were certain high level Police officers behaving like  real  gangsters  and 
criminals, and that culture will have to stop as a result of the reform that the hon. Attorney 
General  is  proposing,  and  I  anticipate.  This  is  going  to  be  remedied  once  and  for  all,  in 
particular with the implementation of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.  There is also a 
need for change in our judiciary. We have to reform and look at the ways Magistrates and 
Judges are recruited in our country. We have to look again at Section 72 of our Constitution 
to see the way in which the Director of Public Prosecutions executes his duties and the way 
he is recruiting. We have to review the way in which prosecutors are recruited at the State 
Law office, at the Attorneys General’s office, and at the Solicitor General’s office. We can’t 
have in this country, Judges or Magistrates not following guidelines of Judicial conduct on a 
daily  basis,  but  yet,  there  is  no  mechanism  to  enforce  any  guideline  for  judicial  conduct, 
because we do not have a Judicial Complaint Commission in this country. 

 It is high time to bring change, and in order to bring changes, we have to reform our 
institutions, so that the public at large will have confidence in all our institutions, and that 
should start from investigating authorities and from the Judiciary.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  is  a  long  list  of  programmes  in  the  Government 
Programme that was presented on 27 January.  One thing I should say is that the Government 
of Navinchandra Ramgoolam was prepared to spend billions of rupees on a Light Railway 
Project,  all  about  Rs500  m.  on  an  election  should  they  have  won  to  bring  reform  for  the 
election of the President, whereas many parts of the country do not have water supply.  I am 
proud today that, that sector is being looked after by my Leader, hon. Ivan Collendavelloo, 
who has already set a framework to modernise the entire pipeline system within the country 
for the efficient, proper and continuous supply of water.  Water is more of a necessity than a 
presidential election or a light railway.  How can we call a country a modern country, when 
there is no basic like water available to our people and our nation? How modern is this, in an 
era when things should be met with speed and intelligence at broadband speed, we have a 
meagre broadband speed.  And, I am proud today  of the statement made by hon. Minister 
Pravind  Jugnauth  about  the  changes  that  he  is  going  to  make  in  the  Telecommunication 
Industry and the Communication Industry and to revamp our Internet system.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it reminds me of Shakespeare’s Macbeth. Earlier today, we 
heard quite a lot about Shakespeare from my hon. friend, Minister Baboo - there were three 
witches. And there were three witches also during the electoral campaign:  Nandinee, Nita, 
and Pratibha. 

 

They asked:   

107 

(Interruptions) 

“When shall we three meet again?  In thunder, lightning, or in rainfall? 

When the hurly-burly’s done, when the battle is lost and won.” 

And sure, they met, again, when the battle was lost and won. We won, they lost!  

And yes, it was sunshine during the day, but when the result came, it was thunder, lightning, 
and  rainfall;  it  was  hurly-burly’s  in  Mauritius.    The  population  at  large  was  enjoying,  the 
mood of the country had changed; the mountains are green, the country is green as a whole!  
This is how we are going to lead this country, always flourishing, green, and we all have trust 
in our Leaders.  We have trust in Sir Anerood Jugnauth as the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, in 
hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, in hon. Pravind Jugnauth, in hon. Ivan Collendavelloo, and I know, 
and they have said that they are here in a transitional period.  They are not going to be here 
attached to these chairs like many others on the other side of the House have attempted to do, 
and are doing.  I am glad to hear that they are in a transitional period and they are going hand 
over at some point to the use of the country because we represent the future of this country.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on this note I propose to terminate.  This is only Act 1, scene 

1.  Act 1, Scene 2 will be during the Budget debate.  On this point I rest my case. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

 

(7.24 p.m.) 

Mr  G.  Lepoigneur  (Fifth  Member  of  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite  Rivière):  M.  le 
président,  je  voudrais  tout  d’abord  vous  féliciter  pour  votre  nomination  comme  Deputy 
Speaker et aussi je voudrais profiter de l’occasion pour féliciter Madame la présidente d’être 
la première femme à être élue à ce poste.  Je profite aussi de cette occasion pour exprimer 
mes remerciements à mon leader, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval pour la confiance qu’il a placé en 
moi pour représenter le PMSD au sein de l’Alliance Lepep dans la circonscription No. 20 qui, 
au  départ  est  reconnue  pour  une  circonscription  difficile.  Dans  la  plupart  des  cas,  cette 
circonscription a été dominée par le MMM. 

Je  voudrais  également  féliciter  notre  gouvernement  actuel  pour  la  mise  en  place 
rapide  de  certaines  promesses,  telles  que  l’augmentation  de  la  pension  de  vieillesse, 

 

108 

l’augmentation  salariale  et  l’éclaircissement  sur  certains  scandales.  Nous  avons  aussi  noté 
que  l’indice  de  confiance  est  passé  de  68  %  à  97%  grâce  aux  promesses  du  nouveau 
gouvernement.  Ayant  intégré  le  nouveau  gouvernement  comme  député  correctif,  je  suis 
satisfait de cette première performance, qui me permet d’apporter ma contribution au bien-
être  du  peuple  mauricien.  Je  l’ai  souvent  dit  dans  mes  meetings,  une  campagne  électorale 
débute  le  lendemain  des  résultats  des  élections.  Je  me  considère  donc  actuellement  en 
campagne électorale pour réaliser des actions en faveur du peuple mauricien. Cette campagne 
durera cinq ans et permettra au peuple de juger si elle a été convaincante.  

M. le président, je souhaiterais soulever certains aléas que j’ai pu constater lors de la 
campagne  électorale.  Certains  outils  utilisés  me  semblent  d’être  inadéquat  pour  séduire 
l’électorat mauricien. 

Selon  mon  constat,  j’ai  trouvé  inapproprié  l’utilisation  des  bases  pour  promouvoir 
chaque  partie  car  cela  représente  un  investissement  financier  trop  important  qui  n’est  pas 
nécessaire.  De  plus,  ces  bases  incitent  à  encourager  des  conflits  agressifs  entre  agents, 
encouragent  la  consommation  d’alcool  ou  des  produits  illégaux.  Je  pense  donc  que  notre 
gouvernement devrait introduire une loi, soit pour l’abolition ces bases ou la mise en place 
d’un règlement sur le nombre de bases et sur la manière dont elles seront utilisées.  

Je voudrais aussi mettre l’accent sur les banderoles et les oriflammes qui représentent 
aussi un important investissement financier. Je pense que nous devons ensemble introduire, 
encore une fois, un règlement sur l’utilisation de ces matériaux visuels. Je pense qu’il faut 
limiter  l’utilisation  de  ces  oriflammes  et  banderoles  qui  devraient  être  utilisées  dans  des 
endroits spécifiques, c’est-à-dire, lors des meetings ou des réunions uniquement. Par la suite, 
nous devrons encourager la réutilisation de ces matériaux visuels pour les futures réunions et 
meetings et de ce fait mettre en avant l’importance de l’eco-friendly. 

De cette manière, les fonds ultilisés pour ces matériaux seront réduits et peuvent être 
utilisés  pour  des  actions  telles  que  le  combat  contre  la  pauvreté,  l’amélioration  de 
l’environnement et bien d’autres. 

Une  preuve  que  l’utilisation  des  bases,  d’oriflammes  et  de  banderoles  n’a  servi  à 
grand-chose  est  la  victoire  de  l’Alliance  Lepep.  En  effet,  le  pays  a  été  submergé  par  les 
oriflammes  rouge  et  mauve  sans  compter  le  grand  nombre  de  bases  et  de  banderoles  avec 
l’annonce préméditée des résultats annonçant un 3/0, que je qualifie d’une arrogance de la 
part de l’Alliance de l’Avenir et de l’Unité. Cela a prouvé que ce peuple admirable n’est pas 

 

109 

aussi imbécile et bourrique qu’un certain a voulu faire croire. Notre peuple ne s’est pas laissé 
berné et influencé par ces visuels qui voulaient faire croire d’un 60-0 en faveur de l’Alliance 
de l’Avenir et de l’Unité. Je pense que si l’Alliance  Lepep avait eu encore deux semaines 
pour terminer notre campagne où nos meilleurs agents étaient les acteurs de notre clip ‘Viré 
Mam’, cela aurait été un 60-0 en faveur de l’Alliance Lepep. 

M. le président, je voudrais maintenant mettre l’emphase sur ma circonscription No. 
20, circonscription dont j’ai l’honneur de servir et pour laquelle je suis fier de relever le défi, 
de  la    reconstruire  et  d’offrir  une  vie  meilleure  à  ces  habitants,  en  collaboration  avec  mes 
colistiers, l’honorable Alain Aliphon et l’honorable Anil Gayan. 

Aujourd’hui, j’ai mis à la disposition des habitants de cette circonscription un bureau 
où nous récoltons leurs doléances afin de les écouter, les orienter dans la bonne direction et 
de mettre en place des actions et leur permettre de vivre dans un environnement agréable. 

Suivants  ces  premières  actions,  j’ai  constaté  un  manque  de  développement  dans  la 

circonscription No. 20 durant ces 30 dernières années. 

Les problèmes majeurs ressortis sont les suivants – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

l’extrémité de la pauvreté dans certains endroits ; 

l’état délabré des maisons ; 

la consommation excessive des produits illicites ; 

la distribution d’eau ; 

le manque d’infrastructure, et 

le nombre important de chômeurs. 

M. le président, je pense que notre gouvernement devra rattraper ces 30 ans de disette 

et je me permets de développer ces différents points. 

La pauvreté dans les différents quartiers est à déplorer. Nous sommes en 2015, vous 
n’allez pas me croire, M. le président, si je vous dis qu’il y a des personnes qui n’ont pas des 
toilettes  ou  des  salles  de  bain  chez  eux.  Il  existe  des  personnes  qui  arrivent  vers  le  20  de 
chaque mois, qui n’ont pas de nourriture alors qu’il y en a d’autres qui ont plus de R 220 
millions dans leurs coffres. 

110 

 
M. le président, la circonscription No. 20 a été majoritairement gérée par l’opposition. 
Ayant  pour  cette  fois  trois  députés  du  gouvernement  dans  cette  circonscription,  je  pense 
qu’ensemble nous arriverons à combattre cette pauvreté.  

Une  des  solutions  que  je  trouve  adéquate  est  la  sensibilisation  des  mauriciens,  des 
entreprises  gouvernementales  et  non  gouvernementales  afin  qu’ils  prennent  conscience  de 
l’exercice de cette pauvreté. De ce fait, je fais un appel aux différents acteurs afin de faire 
participer  à  l’éradication  de  la  pauvreté  soit  en  contributions  financières,  donations  ou 
sponsorship. 

En  ce  qu’il  s’agit  des  maisons  délabrées,  beaucoup  de  personnes  vivent  dans  des 
maisons qui, selon moi, sont inhabitables. C’est-à-dire que certains toits sont sur le point de 
s’écrouler, le manque de sanitaire qui relève d’un manque d’hygiène, l’absence d’électricité 
et d’eau, ou encore des maisons qui en temps pluvieux ou cycloniques sont immergées d’eau. 
Ce sont pour moi des situations urgentes où nous devons venir en aide à ces personnes. 

Cette situation que je qualifie d’invivable entraine ces habitants à la consommation de 

drogues, ou encore au vol ou de pouvoir s’approprier de quoi vivre. 

Pour  remédier  à  ces  trois  premiers  points,  je  pense  qu’une  collaboration  avec  le 
ministère  du  Logement,  de  l’Intégration  sociale  et  des  Finances  est  primordiale.  En  effet, 
comme nous prévoyons de bâtir 10,000 logements pendant ces 5 ans, ce serait bien de prévoir 
une bonne partie de ces logements pour cette circonscription. 

Il  serait  aussi  intéressant  de  prévoir  un  budget  pour  aider  à  la  rénovation  de  ces 
maisons délabrées. Ainsi, il y aura une diminution du nombre de réfugiés dans nos centres 
sociaux lors des pluies torrentielles et des temps cycloniques. Par la même occasion, les coûts 
encourus par les centres de refuge seront réduits. 

Pour  venir  sur  la  santé,  je  sollicite  aussi  notre  ministre  de  la  Santé,  qui  est  mon 
colistier, afin de ne pas oublier, dans son projet, une medi-clinique à Coromandel car cela a 
été une demande lors de la campagne. 

Actuellement,  une  de  nos  promesses,  en  l’occurrence  la  décentralisation  de  la  
Méthadone,  a  été  réalisée.  Pour  continuer  sur  cette  bonne  lancée,  il faudra  travailler  sur  la 
réouverture de la clinique présente dans la cour du centre de réhabilitation à Beau Bassin afin 
de permettre aux patients de bénéficier un traitement adéquat. Ayant personnellement visité 
ces locaux, j’estime que cet endroit est idéal pour offrir un traitement complet aux patients. A 

 

111 

ce jour, il existe des patients qui suivent des traitements de plus de 8 ans. Je considère cela 
anormal car ce traitement aurait dû être temporaire. 

M.  le  président,  un  fléau  qui  ronge  cette  circonscription  est  le  problème  d’eau.  En 
effet, les habitants n’ont pas de connexion d’eau et c’est un des problèmes qui fait souvent 
sonner notre portable. Fort heureusement, il y a notre cher Mamade Bundoo que je suis fier 
de citer aujourd’hui car il m’a bien aidé à résoudre des problèmes temporairement et avec 
beaucoup de réactivité. Les quartiers de la Police de Montréal sont aussi très concernés par ce 
gros problème d’eau. Il y a aussi d’autres problèmes tels que: la cour des quarters qui est 
dans le noir total, un problème d’environnement et un manque de terrain de jeux pour les 
enfants des policiers. Ces quarters sont occupés par environ 280 familles et ces problèmes 
datent depuis plusieurs années. 

M. le président, nous avons également fait un constat sur les infrastructures sportives 
qui  sont  actuellement  dans  un  état  lamentable  et  qui  sont  même  quasi  inexistantes  dans 
certaines  régions.  Je  pense  qu’une  rénovation  et  la  construction  de  ces  infrastructures 
s’imposent.  A  titre  d’exemple,  il  y  a  plus  de  6,000  habitants  à  Coromandel,  nous  avons 
constaté qu’il n’y a pas de terrain de football. A Beau Bassin, le volleyball féminin représente 
50% de la ligue nationale, mais il n’y a pas de gymnase où ces joueuses puissent s’entrainer 
correctement.  Le  manque  d’infrastructure  sportive  en  salle  dans  la  région  de  Beau  Bassin, 
Coromandel,  Petite  Rivière,  Canot,  Gros  Cailloux  et  Albion  se  fait  sentir  auprès  de  ces 
habitants.  J’espère  qu’avec  notre  nouveau  gouvernement,  nous  arriverons  à  redonner  cette 
circonscription ses lettres de noblesse car malgré ce manque d’infrastructures, il y a un bon 
nombre d’athlètes de niveau national qui viennent de cette circonscription. 

Je souhaiterais donc travailler en collaboration avec le ministre de la Jeunesse et des 
sports afin qu’ensemble, nous travaillons pour promouvoir l’importance du sport au sein de 
cette circonscription. 

M.  le  président,  au  sein  de  cette  circonscription,  nous  avons  l’honneur  d’avoir  des 
diplômés dans les régions défavorisées. Malheureusement, il y a des cas où les candidatures 
de ces diplômés sont rejetées en se basant simplement sur leurs adresses. Comme mentionné 
dans notre programme électoral, nous allons faire primer la méritocratie afin de mettre fin à 
cette discrimination et ainsi de permettre à ces diplômés de pénétrer dans le monde du travail 
dans le secteur gouvernemental ou privé.  

112 

 
Je  pense  qu’il  serait  aussi  intéressant  d’équiper  les  centres  de  jeunesse  d’un  réseau 
internet et des ordinateurs pour permettre aux étudiants et aux entrepreneurs qui n’ont pas les 
moyens, d’en tirer profit, et que ces centres soient ouverts jusqu’à 19h ou 20h. 

Je souhaite rencontrer les différents ministres de notre gouvernement pour discuter de 

la manière dont ils peuvent nous aider dans ma circonscription. 

Pour  terminer,  je  voudrais  féliciter  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  pour 
son  courage  d’avoir  abandonné  le  château  de  Réduit  pour  venir  prêter  main  forte  afin  de 
mettre fin à la dictature. 

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Husnoo! 

 

(7.34 p.m.) 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, hon. 
Members, I would, first of all, take this opportunity to thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  
for giving me the chance to address this august Assembly. 

It is a matter of pride for me to address this Assembly as the new Minister of Local 

Government. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  may  I  congratulate  you  as  the  youngest  Deputy  Speaker, 
first,  and  please  convey  my  congratulations  to  Madam  Speaker  for  being  the  first  lady 
Speaker as well. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  allow me now to speak about a few subjects which are of 
major concern to this newly elected Government and, some its objectives before I pass on 
over to some important and key points relating to my Ministry. 

I am confident that the Government Programme, Achieving Meaningful Change, will 
be  an  inspiration  for  our  fellow  citizens  and  will  really  bring  a  change  to  the  lives  of  our 
fellow countrymen. 

I firmly believe that this programme will turn Mauritius into a global reference. And 
we, as Ministers, parliamentarians and guardians of the reputation, safety and image of the 
country, are determined to strive for a better Mauritius which will enable our people to lead a 
better and more prosperous life. 

113 

 
The  objective  of  this  Government,  may  I  recall,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,    is  to 
transform  the  island  of  Mauritius  into  a  forward  looking,  environmentally  sustainable, 
economically vibrant and innovative country with modern infrastructure, global connectivity, 
high skills and technology. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  fighting  corruption  is  one  of  the  major  priorities  of  this 
Government. C’est notre cheval de bataille. On Sunday 08 February 2015, the population of 
Mauritius was stunned and shocked by what they actually saw on the evening news. When 
the safe and the suitcases were opened, bundles of notes of Rs2000, Rs1000 and Rs500 just 
came out tumbling out of the safe. The suitcases were packed with millions of dollars. This 
will mark this generation for a long time to come and even the future generation. As the scene 
went viral on the net, people overseas, in Europe and the USA could not believe what they 
just  saw  after  what  they  knew  of  Mauritius.  On  that  particular  night,  the  reputation  of 
Mauritius took a severe battering. How come that Mauritius which has such a good reputation 
of good governance and is a reference for not just in Africa but in the world, how come we 
have reached this level? The police and the CID are doing their investigation. I am not going 
to dwell on this. 

What we should do is to ask ourselves: what are we going to do to prevent these kinds 
of  things  from  happening  again.  All  right-minded  Mauritians  are  asking  themselves  this 
question: what can be done? What should be done to redress this situation and prevent the 
ruling elite from giving such a blow again to the reputation of Mauritius? 

To start, I think, we need to have a look at the Government Programme which was 
read by the President of the Republic on 27 January 2015. This Programme demonstrates the 
determination of this present Government to fight the scourge of corruption well before we 
came  in  office.  In  the  very  introduction  of  the  Government  Programme,  it  reads  that  the 
Government is committed to conducting business on the principle of discipline, transparency, 
accountability and exemplary governance. 

Furthermore, it says the Government is going to work hard to free our society from 
the  shackles  of  widespread  corruption,  favouritism,  nepotism,  mafia  and  political 
interference. This is in the very introduction of the Government Programme. To show that it 
means  business,  to  show  that  it  has  zero  tolerance  against  fraud  and  corruption,  the 
Government has set up a Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms. I think this is the first time that we have such a Ministry in Mauritius. A Ministry 

 

114 

which  has  been  given  the  full  power  to  combat  all  sorts  of  corruption,  be  it  economic  or 
otherwise, which has plagued our country recently.  

If  we  want  our  citizens  to  have  faith  and  trust  in  what  the  Government  is  doing, 
tourists  to  respect  Mauritius  and  foreign  investors  to  come  and  invest  in  our  country,  we 
cannot do otherwise. We have to show them we mean business and this Government is going 
to do what it takes to combat corruption in all its forms. 

On page 34 of the Government Programme, paragraph 246 reads the Government has 

a mandate for change and will relentlessly fight fraud, corruption and financial crime.  

Furthermore, paragraph 248 states that  

“Government will eradicate fraud, corruption, malpractices and irregularities 
in all aspects of public life and restore our national values. To this end, a new 
Declaration of Assets Act for Members of Parliament and high ranking public 
officers and a Financing of Political Parties Act will be enacted. A new Code 
of  Conduct  will  be  introduced  for  all  Members  of  Parliament  and  public 
officers.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government has set the standard very high and,  I am 
sure of that, with the determination of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 
this  Government  will  be  able  to  control  this  scourge  of  bribery  and  corruption  and  that 
Mauritius will regain the status and reputation it once held on the world stage. 

Before going on to the Local Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to 
mention  a  few  words  about  another  key  aspect  of  the  Government  Programme.  It  is  the 
overarching policy of this Government to fight against poverty. For me there are two major 
aspects: fighting corruption and fighting poverty. I wish to highlight that social justice as well 
as  the  improvement  in  the  purchasing  power  of  our  citizens  are  on  the  forefront  of  our 
programme. 

The Government has the means to lead and to win this battle and it will be done with 
the participation of the population at large. Before coming into Government, l’Alliance Lepep 
came with a number of measures to help the poor in its electoral manifesto. And these include 
–  

• 

to  increase  the  monthly  old-aged  pension,  basic  widows  pension  and  basic 
invalidity pension to Rs5000; 

 

• 

• 

• 

115 

to provide ‘un repas chaud’ to all the students of primary schools; 

the abolition of fees for SC and HSC examinations, and 

the construction of over 2000 social housing units every year during the next 
five years. 

As  soon  as  we  came  in  office,  this  Government  honoured  its  promise.  All  these 
measures were put in action. The Government also came with a uniform salary compensation 
of Rs600 to all workers and now as you know, the Ministry of Housing and Lands is working 
very hard to realise the  construction of the 2000 social housing units across the island for 
people who are living in extreme poverty. This Government does not just talk, but it walks 
the talk as well. A Marshall plan will be elaborated to combat poverty and social exclusion. 

I wish to bring to the House that in the two months we have been in Government, 

many measures have been taken and many more are in the pipeline. They are namely – 

• 

• 

• 

the  new  legislation  to  protect  the  elderly,  women,  children  and  physically 
handicapped; 

a special supporting care will be given to elderly persons with disabilities and 
those leaving alone, and 

new legislation will be enacted in respect of charitable organisations. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  you  would  notice  this  Government  does  not  intend  to 
worsen the life of the poor nor does it intend to make the rich wealthier, but rather, to work 
together with the population to give a helping hand to our fellow citizens who are in extreme 
difficulty,  and  help  them  out  of  the  trap  of  poverty.  As  I  said,  we  promised  it,  we  have 
already put some of these policies in action and we will consolidate them in the months and 
years ahead. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  now,  if  you  would  allow  me  to  say  a  few  words  on  my 
Ministry. As mentioned on page 39 of the Government Programme, we will amend the Local 
Government  Act  to  consolidate  democracy  at  the  local  level  and  to  promote  better 
participation of local councillors in the management of community affairs. 

A Ministerial Committee has been set up under the chairmanship of the Deputy Prime 
Minister and we are working on the Local Government Act. Pretty soon, we will be coming 
with  major  changes  in  this  Act,  as  you  know  the  Local  Government  Act  2011  is  very 

 

116 

undemocratic. Any councillor who disagrees with his group or party can be expelled and he 
or she will automatically lose his or her seat.  

At  present,  we  have  so  many  of  these  cases  in  Court.  Is  it  fair  that  because  you 
disagree  with  your  party  you  lose  your  seat?  Is  it  democratic,  Sir?  Is  it  constitutional?  I 
wonder! We have so many of these cases, especially at the village level and I am sure you 
will agree with me, to say the least, this is very unfair. 

Let me state, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that we have an opportunity to remove some of 
these roadblocks that have been holding us back, and this is an occasion for us to set this 
sector on a new path for the years to come. I am confident that this will certainly mark the 
beginning of a new relationship between the State and the Local Government. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  bring  to  the  House  that  the  changing  nature  of 
Government over time is characterised by change in service delivery and responding to the 
community needs. There have been and there are still raging and passionate debates on local 
democracy in Mauritius and all over the world. Nearly every citizen of this country has his 
own views of local democracy and nearly every citizen seems to have a model of democracy 
in mind. 

We shall definitely not  reinvent the wheel when we will debate the model of local 
democracy  in  Mauritius,  but  we  will  definitely  attempt  at  finding  a  model  of  democracy, 
which, we hope in the present time, would best suit the aspirations of our population and the 
local communities. 

We will also promote better participation of the councillors in the management of the 

affairs of the Village, District and Municipal Councils. 

We have started a discussion on how to increase local democracy, but we all agree 
with more rights and freedom, there are also more responsibilities that go with it as well. We 
have to be careful. Rights and responsibilities go hand-in-hand. I was a municipal councillor 
in Port Louis from 2001 to 2005 and I know what I am talking about. 

In response to the quest of local communities for more decision-making power and 
more  authority  to  local  councillors,  the  central  Government  will  definitely  allow  more 
authority and autonomy to local bodies. 

However, I repeat accrued authority and decision-making power to local communities 

with invariably called forth enhanced responsibility and improved accountability process.  

 
Enhancing local democracy is not only  a quantitative process, Mr Deputy Speaker, 

117 

Sir, it is much more a qualitative process. 

Allow me to explain. What matters in an advanced democracy is not the number of 
layers of decision-making wherein local councillors are called upon to participate. But what 
is important is the level of decision-making process they participate into. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  another  concept  I  shall  introduce  is  of  concern  to  a 
sustainable local democracy. Sustainable in terms of the resources the local authorities are 
able  to  command  and  sustainable  also,  in  term  of  the  level  of  service  which  the  local 
communities are willing and able to provide. 

Another  key  aspect  which  encompasses  sustainability  is  in  relation  to  financial 

sustainability. This is an important and determinant factor, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Local  authorities  have  definitely  got  to  progress  to  higher  levels  of  independence. 
Independence means also financial independence. My views are that local authorities should 
be given the means and the tools to improve their finances and become less and less reliant 
on central Government funding. 

I  also  acknowledge  that  prudence  will  have  to  be  exercised  so  that  financial 
independence is in keeping with the duty of accountability. Moreover, financial independence 
will also need to be in keeping with the notion of the sovereignty of the State. 

Local  authorities  will  be  encouraged  to  implement  self-supporting  development 

projects in order to improve their financial situation. 

My Ministry will work together with all the District and Municipal Councils in their 

tasks of raising more revenue at their level. 

On a different note, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, with a view to improving proximity to 
the  citizens,  the  portal  of  Local  Authorities  will  be  enhanced  and  electronic  and  mobile 
payment facilities will become a reality in the new future. 

Furthermore,  as  the  Government  is  moving  towards  a  major  transformation  for 
bringing  in  more  efficiency  and  ensuring  optimum  use  of  the  resources  available,  it  is 
imperative for the local authorities to follow the example. 

In this context, efforts will have to be made by local authorities in collaboration with 
my  Ministry  for  the  implementation  of  projects  which  capitalise  on  the  use  of  innovative 
technologies  -  which  was  mentioned  by  hon.  Minister  Pravind  Jugnauth,  earlier  –  which 

 

118 

would  undoubtedly  aimed  at  bringing  in  more  efficiency  in  the  day-to-day  running  of  the 
local authorities. For example, this will definitely improve the service provided by the local 
council and prevent the citizen from queuing for hours on end just to pay their bills.  

This year we are going to look - as my colleague asked earlier - at the two national 
monuments which are the theatre of Port  Louis and Plaza. In Port  Louis, we will start the 
renovation  work  whilst  at  Rose  Hill,  the  second  phase  of  the  restoration  of  plaza  will  be 
started. The restoration of the Hôtel de Ville de Curepipe and the construction of Forum are 
also on our agenda. 

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, on a different note, another subject, I would like to mention 
the  problem  of  hawkers.  As  you  are  aware,  this  problem  has  been  discussed  for  years.  I 
appreciate it is a major problem in all the cities, but it is much more acute in the City of Port 
Louis.  I  have  had  meetings  with  the  different  stakeholders,  namely,  the  Market  Traders 
Association, the New Wing Market Traders, Municipal Councils, the police and the hawkers 
as well. Obviously, everybody will have to earn a living, but we have to be fair to each and 
every one. 

This  is  why,  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  we  are  very  adamant  to  implement  a 
sustainable solution to this problem in the most humane possible manner. Just in the City of 
Port Louis, we have about 1,200 hawkers. As I mentioned, in a PQ a couple of weeks ago, we 
are looking into the ways and means of how we can accommodate these hawkers in the best 
interest of everybody. We have identified a couple of sites in Port Louis, at la gare du nord 
and gare du sud.  Pretty soon, we hope to start the work on these two sites. 

Last but not least, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am going to say a few words on the Fire 
and Rescue Services. As you are aware, the men and women at the Fire Services are doing a 
marvellous job. Every time we are in trouble, they are there to help us. Be it a fire outbreak, 
flooding  or  road  traffic  accident,  they  are  usually  there  promptly  to  give  us  the  first  aid. 
That’s why I feel we have to improve the service more, in terms, of manpower, emergency 
vehicles and improving training to cope with the different calamities. 

Moreover, with a change in global weather pattern in the future, the Fire Services will 
be called to deliver a wide range of non-fire functions crucial to the community safety. To 
that effect, provision has been made in the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services Act, for the 
establishment  of  the  Fire  Service  Training  Academy,  which  is  intended  to  design  the 
Academy for its future development into an International Training Centre for countries in the 

 

119 

Indian Ocean and the SADC region. I shall recall that a plot of land has been vested in the 
Ministry of Local Government for this project. 

Another aspect relates to the Fire Safety Exhibition and Safety Awareness Campaigns 
which will be organised as frequently as possible with an aim of preparing our citizens to deal 
with unforeseen circumstances. 

Finally, many projects including the construction of a Fire Academy and Fire Station 
in the different regions of the island namely, Rose Belle, Goodlands, Montagne Blanche are 
on the agenda of my Ministry. As Minister, I am keen to ensure that all sections of the Fire 
Services  are  well  placed  and  adept  in  dealing  with  this  change.  One  thing  that  will  not 
change, however, is that volunteers are an essential part of our Fire Services. 

And with this, allow me, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, to state that, as we reflect on our 
achievements to date, we equally recognise the need for change, and a willingness to roll up 
our sleeves and work together to build a better future for our country. 

I am sure, with this Government, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, we 
will live up to it to the expectations of the citizen of Mauritius where we shall create a fairer 
Mauritius  which  will  give  hope  to  everybody  be  it  to  the  unemployed  youth,  the  single 
mother or the sick and the old. They can rest assured that they have a Government who cares. 

As the famous motto of Liverpool Football Club states, I quote – 

“You’ll never walk alone.” 

 I would like to say to the poor people in Mauritius, with Sir Anerood Jugnauth at the 

helm, and with such a programme, ‘zotte népli pou mars tousel’. 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and hon. Members for your kind attention. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Aliphon! 

 

(7.56 p.m.) 

Mr A. Aliphon (Third Member for Beau Bassin & Petite  Rivière): Monsieur le 
président, permettez-moi de copier mes collègues députés et d’abord de féliciter, Madame la 
Speaker,  pour  sa  nomination  comme  la  première  femme  Speaker,  de  notre  île  Maurice 
moderne. 

120 

 
Je voudrais aussi réitérer mes félicitations à vous M. Duval, junior, et dire que l’île 
Maurice pousse vers la vraie modernité. Il faudrait aussi étendre ces félicitations à l’ensemble 
des  dirigeants  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  pour  leur  confiance  et  d’avoir  su  choisir  cette  nouvelle 
équipe,  et  surtout  admirer  le  courage  de  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  de  venir  relever  ce  défi 
monstre de diriger cette île Maurice en perdition, quand tout le camp adverse nous donnait 
pour battu avant le 10 décembre. Grâce à leur clairvoyance, les élections du 10 décembre ont 
permis à tous les mauriciens de tout bord, de connaître les dessous insoupçonnables des ex-
dirigeants du pays. Comme nous, comme vous, nous l’entendons, les mauriciens commentent 
le résultat, non pas comme une correction donnée au gouvernement sortant mais comme une 
condamnation  pour  mauvaise  conduite  aux  ex-dirigeants  de  la  modernité.  Pourtant, 
l’Opposition disait, criait à qui voulait l’entendre, que problèmes il n’y en avait pas, ou il n’y 
en avait plus, avec la fameuse parole ou le slogan ‘blier’. 

Et là, je demanderai à mes amis de l’Opposition de ne pas venir jouer la carte de la 

victime, car comme dit le dicton – 

‘Quand vous approuvez et soutenez des menteurs et des tricheurs, vous n’êtes 
pas des victimes, mais vous devenez surtout des complices’.  

Mais  je  suis  toutefois  heureux  de  voir  que  les  quelques  membres  restant,  de  l’Opposition 
actuelle, semblent tourner le dos à l’ex-Premier ministre et, ou du moins, sont gênés par les 
événements. Ils sont surpris, c’est vrai, ou emmerdés. 

Donc, je vais leur lancer une invitation comme mes collègues l’ont fait tout à l’heure: 

‘Quitt parti là, ale ailleurs ; virer mam pas peur!’ 

Comme  moi,  comme  nous,  le  peuple  mauricien  n’a  pas  voulu  être  complice  des 
menteurs et des tricheurs.  Ils ont voté pour le changement, ce qui rend encore plus belle la 
victoire du 10 décembre. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, il ne faudrait pas passer sous silence le dynamisme que cette 
nouvelle  majorité  a  fait  preuve  et  qui  continuera  à  aller  dans  ce  sens  et  c’est  cela  que  les 
mauriciens appelleront la vraie modernité. La population mauricienne intelligente qu’elle est, 
que  nous  sommes,  avons  choisi  un  gouvernement  propre  qui  means  business.  Depuis  son 
installation à la tête du pays nous avons su, sous les directives de Sir Anerood Jugnauth que 
les  promesses  et  engagements  seront  honorés.  En  trois  mois  -  pas  encore  100  jours  -  au 
moment où je vous parle, ce gouvernement a su donner  la reconnaissance qui se doit à ses 
aînés,  augmentation,  ou  encore  permettre  aux  mauriciens  de  continuer  d’envoyer    leurs 

 

121 

enfants  à  l’école  avec  le  paiement  des  fees  du  SC  and  du  HSC.  J’ose  espérer  que  chaque 
mauricien prenne connaissance de ce projet de loi. 

Dans le chapitre de la santé, dès notre arrivée au pouvoir nous avons, dans le respect 
le plus total, solutionné de gros problèmes dans la délivrance de méthadone.  Mon collègue 
en  a  parlé  avant  moi.  En  régionalisant  le  service,  maintenant  malades  et  habitants  sortent 
gagnants et cohabitent sereinement et sérieusement. Depuis quelque temps, les Health Care 
Centres  sont  disponibles  24hrs  sur  24  grâce  à  notre  ministre  de  la  Santé  et  cela  va 
certainement aller en s’améliorant.  

En ce qui concerne le sport - malheureusement, mon ami l’honorable Quirin n’est pas 
là - je voudrais, sans vouloir défendre le ministre du Sport, simplement parler des problèmes 
des centres de jeunesse.  Il était dans le gouvernement passé, qu’a-t-il fait, lui? Concernant le 
JOI, il était dans le gouvernement, qu’a-t-il fait lui? 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! 

Mr Aliphon: Rappelez-vous et souvenez-vous que nous sommes au pouvoir depuis 
seulement 83 jours et à moins de cinq mois des Jeux des îles de l’Océan Indien. On ne pourra 
rien changer maintenant, arrive qui arrive mais je souhaite que les sportifs courageux qu’ils 
sont, défendront les couleurs de l’ile Maurice comme ils le peuvent et je les félicite pour ça. 
Si pendant ces quelques jours seulement au pouvoir nous ti capav finn guet devant et avancer 
sans scandale, nous serions bien loin aujourd’hui.  

En  83  jours  exactement  autant  de  dossiers  ont  été  levés  et qui  font  mal  aux 
mauriciens.  Pour  cela,  rappelez-vous,  lorsque  vous  quitterez  cette  terre  vous  n’emporterez 
rien de ce que vous avez reçu, mais uniquement ce que vous aurez donné. Donc, à qui de 
droit  mett  chapeau  là!  Ce  ne  sera  certainement  pas  à  ce  gouvernement-là  qu’il  faudra  le 
mettre. En 100 jours, nous aurions retrouvé la vitesse de croisière que l’île Maurice mérite et 
que nous aurons perdue depuis une décennie.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, les scandales, parlons-en! Mon ami l’honorable Bhagwan a 
parlé  l’autre  jour  du  City  Power.  Je  suis  heureux  de  dire  que  j’étais  parmi  les  premières 
personnes à avoir organisé la première réunion contre le City Power à Albion en invitant les 

 

122 

gens  de  la  région  de  Pointe  Aux  Sables,  de  Roches  Brunes,  de  Mont  Roches  et  de  Petite 
Rivière. J’ai ensuite passé la main à des plus costauds que moi pour continuer la lutte et, à ce 
jour, toutes les régions restent contre ce projet et aujourd’hui plus que jamais. Cependant, je 
remercie l’honorable Bhagwan de nous avoir soutenus sur le projet, mais voilà il ne faut pas 
oublier que l’honorable Bhagwan était colistier, il était partie prenante dans le gouvernement 
sortant avant le 10 décembre. Il aurait dû dans sa coalition avec ce gouvernement faire rejeter 
le dossier City Power. Pourquoi ne l’a-t-il pas fait? J’ose ici citer – 

‘Nothing works unless you do the job’. 

Il aurait dû le savoir.  Too easy now to have the good job to ask us to stop City Power 
project. Let me thank him for the advice, but I am dead sure that in the new Government - 
which  I  form  part  –  we  should  know  how  and  what  to  do  to  stop  the  project  et  faire  que 
Maurice reste une ile verte et durable.  

M.  le  président,  parlons  du  développement.  Comme  mon  ami  le  PPS,  l’honorable  
Boissezon, et comme mon ami l’honorable Lepoigneur l’ont dit, je demanderai que, lors du 
prochain budget le Premier ministre, de même que le ministre des Finances aient un regard 
spécial à une ville oubliée depuis 30 ans, Bassin/Petite Rivière.  Il faut le signaler, c’est sous 
la bannière de notre Premier ministre Sir Anerood Jugnauth que le District Council de Rivière 
Noire a vu le jour en 1992 et depuis nous sommes les oubliés. Ces régions n’ont connu aucun 
développement  sérieux,  et  je  souhaiterais  énumérer  en  gros  les  développements  urgents  à 
faire –  avec mon  ami l’honorable Dayal - à Hermitage, stopper le  glissement de terrain et 
faire des drains.  

L’honorable Quirin a parlé de Chebel. Oui, c’est vrai, à Chebel on a fait des travaux 
avec empressement avant les élections et, aujourd’hui où vous passez il y a des trous qui se 
forment  à  Chebel,  et  c’est  malheureux.  C’était  pour  gagner 
les  élections,  mais 
malheureusement ils ont perdu.  

Notre joli patrimoine, le bazar de Beau Bassin avec à côté la station de police, la place 
des taxis, la poste et le Jardin Bijoux. Pourquoi pas une modernisation qui changerait le look 
de ce centre-ville oublié? À Coromandel, mon ami l’a dit, un terrain de foot. À Belle Etoile, 
pourquoi pas un Health Care Centre qui n’existe pas dans cette région. 

Et maintenant pour Barkly - je regrette que mon ami l’honorable Quirin ne soit pas là. 
Il a parlé du bon fonctionnement de la municipalité de Beau Bassin/Rose Hill. Laissez-moi 
vous  dire  les  amis,  Beau  Bassin/Rose  Hill  a  fait  construire  une  foire  qui,  à  ce  jour,  reste 

 

123 

inexploitée, inutilisée, du gâchis, enn vrai la foire qu’il faut réveiller et cela a été un projet de 
la municipalité de Beau Bassin/Rose Hill. 

La blonde Albion, mon ami Mahen l’a dit tout à l’heure-là, le Macarena party.  Et 
c’est  vrai,  cette  région  est  devenue  un  village  en  1992  sous  le  leadership  de  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth.    Depuis  30  ans,  lors  de  chaque  grande  pluie  le  pont  disparaît  sous  les  eaux  et 
pourtant depuis 30 ans nous avons des députés et des grandes personnalités de l’île Maurice 
qui  empruntent  ce  pont  chaque  jour  et,  à  ce  jour,  rien  n’a  été  fait.    Il  est  temps  que  nous 
entreprenions assez rapidement le rehaussement de ce pont.  

Et quid d’avoir une poste digne de ce nom où habitants et touristes pourraient trouver 
leur  compte  sans  avoir  à  aller  -  tenez-vous  bien  -  chez  le  petit  copain  de  l’ex-Premier 
ministre, dont la boutique sert de poste, modernité oblige, essayons d’avoir une poste digne 
de ce nom. 

Finalement, M. le président, quid de Petite Rivière, l’évêque de Port-Louis - là je le 
rejoindrai  -  qui  a  proposé  au  Premier  ministre  la  volonté  de  l’église  pour  aider  dans  des 
projets visant au bien-être de la famille, logement social, je ne pourrai terminer sans être la 
voix des pauvres de la région qui chaque jour vont au bureau de la sécurité sociale pour être 
aidé  dans  leur  misère  et  qui  subissent  l’humiliation  du  système  et  de  l’environnement 
dégradant du bureau, il est temps de revoir la chose. 

M. le président, pour terminer je voudrais rejoindre un des députés qui tout à l’heure 
avait remercié sa femme et sa famille. Je tiens à le suivre, à le citer, c’est vrai, il faudrait 
remercier  notre  famille,  à  tout  un  chacun  qui  subisse  nos  humeurs  de  politiciens.  Merci  à 
vous et à eux. 

 Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to conclude, my wish is to express my sincere devotion to 
the Leader of the House, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, to all my colleagues and I want to express to 
all Mauritians these words full of hope - 

« Si petit soit ton boulot, sois-en fier, fais le avec courage, et espère ta famille 
en dépend.» 

We, as a caring Government, should help you to feel better in a near future. 

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Teeluckdharry! 

 

 
(8.08 p.m.) 

124 

Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  &  Triolet):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow me to join my friends to congratulate you for your appointment as 
well as Madam Speaker to her post. Allow me the opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, Q. C. who has bestowed on me the honour and privilege to 
form part of this House and to address this House this evening.  

We have before us the itinerary, which we have to follow for the forthcoming five 
years ahead of us. We are not des passéistes, but we have lessons to learn from the past. What 
happened during the past decade, how the affairs of this country were being conducted during 
the past nine years? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 10 December 2014 will be remembered in history. It will be 
a date to be remembered on the same scale as the abolition of slavery, the end of indentured 
labour  in  Mauritius,  the  accession  of  this  country  to  independence,  the  accession  of  this 
country to the status of Republic. I say so, because 10 December 2014 represents the date 
when the people of Mauritius made this pacific revolution of the people. L’Alliance Lepep 
represents a pacific revolution. 

(Interruptions) 

Politicians have been governing the affairs of this country. They have been learning lessons, 
strategies, and tricks from manuals. I understand there is such a manual called “The Prince” 
written by Niccolò Machiavelli. Machiavelli has said that for a Prince to achieve power or for 
a Prince to rule longer and longer, what he has to do; he has to betray his ally and he has to 
befriend  his  enemies  so  that  he  can  rule  longer  or  so  that  he  can  achieve  power.  This  is 
exactly what the two former political leaders who intended to set up the alliance of l’Unité et 
la Modernité so as to govern this country, what they have done. They betrayed their friend 
and they contracted an alliance with their enemies, but the verdict was in the hands of the 
tribunal of the people.  

The people were fed up of lies, strategies, demagogy, stratagems, devious means to 
fool the people. The people had two choices; they preferred the choice showed to us by the 
Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  History  of  this  country  has  witnessed,  each  time  that  this 
country, this nation was in difficulty, au bord de la crise, au bord du marasme économique, a 
man came forward in the person of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, to 

 

125 

save his fellow countrymen and to save this nation. Be it in 1982 or 1983, be it in 2000 or be 
it in 2014.  

Sir Anerood Jugnauth, QC, has taught this country and the whole world that politics is 
a discipline. Myself, my friend hon. Callichurn, and my friend hon. Ramkaun, we had a task 
that was not easy in Constituency No. 5.  

(Interruptions) 

That is, the second largest constituency. 

(Interruptions) 

It  was  the  second  largest  constituency,  but  the  constituency  with  the  highest  number  of 
voters. It was the constituency of the former Prime Minister who had been in power for 14 
years:  1995  to  2000,  2005  up  to  2014,  almost  fifteen  years.  I  regretfully  say  that  this 
constituency  is  one  of  the  most  neglected  constituency  with  large  poches  de  pauvreté. 
Persons do not have the basic needs; we are talking of water supply, electricity supply, where 
several members of one family have to sleep on a single bed. This is the constituency of the 
former Prime Minister. What has he been doing over the years? He said he will change the 
life of people in hundred days. He said he will make us rich. Many promises, salary increase 
for workers, so many promises and all the promises were only sounds and furies. 

We have a difficult task, myself and my two friends when we look back three to four 
months ago, but, fortunately, we were not single soldiers because we had along our side a 
man, a one-man army, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who came in our constituency one week before 
elections on three consecutive occasions. We won indeed an overwhelming victory. 

Today, I must say that – magnanimes, nous sommes dans le combat modeste, nous 
sommes dans la victoire because the work has started as from 11 December 2014. Serious 
work  has  started  and  the  change  is  plus  que  palpable  in  all  fields  of  activities.  There  is 
change.  Change is coming forward.  We have seen how the police force was operating in the 
past and we have seen how the police force has been doing their job as from the start of this 
year.  Even the counsel of the former Prime Minister had to concede and to apologise to the 
police  because  the  police  were  doing  their  job  in  full  independence.    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister made it clear to the hon. Leader of the Opposition, at the very first PNQ, that the 
police is an independent institution.  It is doing  its job.  And we are happy today that the 
police are arresting suspects on the basis of overwhelming prima facie evidence. Gone are the 
days when the police were arresting innocent political leaders. I have in mind my leader, hon. 

 

126 

Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth,  arrested  just  on  flimsy  allegations.  Police  were  being  used  as 
puppets  and  mercenaries  by  the  parties  in  power  and  political  leaders.  Let  alone  honest 
political leaders, even honest citizens, human rights activists and even human rights lawyers 
were not spared.  

I can still remember the day when my friend, hon. Rutnah, was arrested manu militari 
by the police force. What was his crime! His crime was he accepted to be my junior to defend 
an  innocent  man  before  the  Assizes  Court.   We had  a  system  where  the  police  was  given 
blank cheque,  was  given full discretion to go  and arrest  even innocents and to torture and 
extort  confessions  and  to  make  a  mockery  of  justice.  We  had  institutions,  prosecuting 
authorities turning a blind eye to human rights. We can say today that for the past nine years 
under the Labour Government, the flag of democracy, the flag of human rights, democratic 
values, Republican principles were made to fly at half-mast. I say so because we have seen 
how freedom of expression were being tampered with.  Journalists were arrested and jailed, 
why?  Because  he  wrote  an  article  on  Roches  Noires  Gate?    He  was  arrested.  They  used 
another pretext that he committed a Contempt of Court. Two highest institutions of the land 
colluding to persecute an innocent journalist. These words are not from me, these words are 
from the Privy Council where it has been stated in clear words that there was no Contempt of 
Court at all, but what is worst; Counsel who represented the innocent journalists were told to 
shut  their  mouths.  They  could  not  even  represent  their  clients.    They  were  bullied  by 
institutions, Human rights liberty, liberty of the citizen.   

We have another instance where the citizen’s liberty was attacked by the introduction 
of  a  smart  card,  the  Identity  Card  Gate.  We  all  know  today  about  the  Identity  Card  Gate.  
This card represents a danger.  We have seen how my hon. friend said “broadband speed”, 
but we could see how at lightning speed the former Prime Minister legislated, on the single 
day, with Certificate of Urgency, First Reading, Second Reading, Third Reading and the Bill 
was voted. The hon. Leader of Opposition then, Mr Alan Ganoo said: I did not have time to 
read the Bill. Why?  Why was there a hurry to bypass the Legislation, the provisions of the 
Public Procurement Act? Why was there a need to bypass three tenders which were much 
less, at least one fourth of the tender to which company the project was allocated?  And we 
know  that  this  card  was  the  first  step,  a  surveillance  state.    The  second  step  was  the 
institution, the proposed institution of a second Republic and how to enslave the people of 
this country.  The movement of each individual would have been tracked down by  a card 
with  a  smart  integrated  chip  together  with  a  RF  ID,  that  is,  at  whatever  point  he  would 

 

127 

approach a camera, it could be read where this person has been, his movement could have 
been monitored.   

The  Deputy  Speaker:  I  am  sorry,  hon.  Teeluckdharry,  are  you  mentioning  a  case 

which is, right now, before a Court of justice! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Teeluckdharry: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I  take note of the observation of my 
hon. friend and I would propose to move on.  We have seen from the Roches Noires Gate to 
River Walk Gate, what was happening in this country.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to say that, today, I am happy the way the police 
is conducting its affairs and how other institutions are functioning.  I am also happy to learn 
that  there  is  the  possibility  of  instituting  a  Miscarriage  of  Justice  Tribunal  because  we  all 
know that no human system, no human justice is infallible.  We have the case of Amicale 
Four. Though I am personally involved at some stage, my friend hon Rutnah as well, we all 
wish  that  like  other  civilised  institutions  and  in  other  civilised  countries,  we  do  have  a 
Miscarriage of Justice Tribunal.  I am happy to learn the other day from the Attorney General 
that there will be reforms in the Judiciary.  We have this problem occurring again and again; 
delays in writing judgments.  A great man, Martin Luther King, had said that Justice delayed 
is worse than injustice.  Myself and my colleagues of the bar, besides our clients, have been 
waiting for judgements of the Court for nine years, ten years, and sometimes twelve years.  
This is indeed scandalous.  We have today before us a programme, a Government Programme 
of almost 300 measures.  I would say that this Government, l’Alliance Lepep, represent the 
voice  of  the  people.    Hon.  Members  of  this  Government  have  not  come  here  to  acquire 
coffers  or  to  fill  those  coffers  with  millions  of  rupees.    We  have  come  here  to  serve  the 
nation.   

At  the  end  of  my  speech,  I  remember  my  late  mentor,  Professor  Frank  Richard.    I 
remember  this  quotation  from  Hamlet  of  William  Shakespeare  and  I  propose  to  end  my 
speech with it. 

This Government “will suit the action to the word, the word to the action.” 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

 

 
(8.27 p.m.) 

128 

Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE): Mr  Deputy 
Speaker Sir, let me join my other hon. friends to congratulate you on your appointment and I 
would wish that you convey my best wishes to Madam Speaker for her appointment as well 
and we are confident that you will do your job up to the level expected from you. 

I am grateful to be given the opportunity to make my maiden speech in the House in 
such an important debate. I am deeply humbled to stand here in this august Assembly. It is a 
great honour to represent the Constituency No. 10 Montagne Blanche & Grand River South 
East.  From the bottom of my heart, I thank the good people of my constituency for electing 
me and my two colleagues, hon. Bholah and hon. Tarolah. 

I have been here throughout the debate and there have been some excellent maiden 
speeches.  I  congratulate  all  those  who  have  spoken  so  far,  especially  hon.  Rutnah  for  his 
radical speech. There is, indeed, a fresh spark of hope for the future of this House. 

At this point in time, I should like to pay genuine and sincere tribute to the skill and 
extraordinary  ability  and  wisdom  of  the  Leader  of  the  House,  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth who was instrumental to the overwhelming victory of l’Alliance Lepep during the 
last election. He saved this country from being a totalitarian State which the Labour-MMM 
Alliance wanted to install. I feel confident in saying that without the leadership he showed, 
we  would  not  have  been  here,  today.  The  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  is  admired  by 
Members  from  both  sides  of  the  House  for  his  courage  and  determination.  His  sense  of 
patriotism is just magnificent. The Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth is not just a man of action, 
but a man of sound judgment. I do not think age is a barrier for him as he has always gone 
about his work with a certain youthful vigour. The Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth is a larger 
than life person. His record of dedicated service to the nation now well into the sixth decade 
is both remarkable and a genuine inspiration to the nation. It is a great privilege and also an 
enormous pleasure to be part of a House with such a legendary personality. 

I take this opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth and  my  Leader, 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth, for having believed in me and allowed me to serve my country, my 
motherland. Hon. Pravind Jugnauth has laboured to make the MSM the party it is today, a 
party  with  a  largest  number  of  seats  in  this  House  and  it  cannot  be  over  emphasised  that 
l’Alliance Lepep won a crushing victory over the l’Alliance de l’Unité et de la Modernité and 
that much to their surprise. 

129 

 
This  unprecedented  verdict  was  a  serious  warning  shot  from  the  electorate.  That  is 
why  those  of  us  engaged  in  politics  have  to  do  more  to  connect  with  people  and  make 
meaningful offers in terms of policies. There is no justification from the benches opposite to 
be overconfident, as some have a deficit of credibility which they will never ever surmount. 
The Labour Party has failed to listen and to take action to address concern. They have often 
over-promised and under delivered. 

Given my background as a qualified accountant and practising for over 20 years, it is, 
but natural that my comments will focus mainly on the economic chapter and the economic 
proposals contained in the governmental programme. His Excellency’s speech has outlined 
many measures in Government Programme 2015-2019 for which proper scrutiny will keep us 
fully occupied. These measures all reflect long-term thinking. 

This  House  needs  to  be  constantly  refreshed  with  new  thinking,  approaches  and 
experience if it is to continue to be effective. There is varied expertise in this House and that, 
of course, is one of the strengths of this House, the way in which a range of expertise and 
knowledge  is  used,  not just  to  hold  Government  to  account  through  debate  and  legislative 
scrutiny, but to take evidence, deliberate and then contribute to public policy. 

Precisely,  with  regard  to  the  economy,  the  situation  we  inherited  from  the  last 
Government was that Mauritius has been at the bottom of the league. Indeed, there are some 
huge decisions facing our nation which will determine our place in the world, most notably 
the  rebuilding  of  the  economy.  For  no  Government  has  a  greater  responsibility  than  its 
stewardship  over  the  public  finances.  I  was  very  pleased  to  see  the  emphasis  in  His 
Excellency’s speech on stability and security of the economy. The long-term economic plan 
is all about raising living standards for everyone in our country. But to do that, we have to 
tackle the country’s economic problems head on. We cannot duck the difficult decisions even 
when they come at a political price. 

The previous Government has left a heavy legacy and it is an undeniable fact that our 
economy today is in a dramatic situation. For years now, Mauritius has been going off the 
rail. We have been struggling to maintain a growth of around 3%. There is something wrong 
with a growth of 3%. If we grow at the rate of 3% a year, in real terms the per capita income 
will double in 20 years. Essentially, we are thus sacrificing a whole generation.  

130 

 
Let us look at the emerging economies around the world, for example, China. For 30 
years, China has grown by 10% and  India for five or six years at a rate of 9% and for 20 
years, has grown at an average of 6%. 

Mauritius should not be satisfied by a 12 billion dollar economy, that should even not 
place it in the top of a 300-list of fortune 500 corporations in terms of its output. It should be 
an 18 billion economy. It is underperforming by, at least, 50%. 50% makes a big difference. 
Everybody has to be a bit more ambitious. If we look at island economies like Singapore, it 
has now a per capita income level of nearly 60,000 USD compared to approximately only 
10,000 USD for Mauritius. 

In 1960, Singapore per capita income was only twice that of Mauritius. Today, it is 
more than six times bigger. Our performance leaves a lot to be desired. As a nation, we buy 
more goods and services than we sell. The high deficit in our balance of trade account nearly 
Rs80 billion is a major source of vulnerability for the country. Mauritius has to export almost 
the size of its GDP. Hong Kong and Singapore do even better because their export exceeds 
the respective GDP. To balance the books, the previous Government has been increasing the 
national debt and selling off our best land to foreigners. This is clearly unsustainable. 

Public sector debt including debt of Central Government and public enterprises stood 
at nearly 60% of GDP in 2013. The gross external debt of the country increased by Rs10.5 
billion in a single year to reach Rs60.6 billion at the end of 2013. 

Our ability to deliver on job creation depends on investment. Unfortunately, national 
savings level continues to decline year after year. This increases our dependence on foreign 
capital flows that tend to be volatile in a current shaky global economic landscape. The low 
savings  ratio  deserves  consideration  since  it  creates  a  resource  gap,  thus  obstructing  the 
materialisation of planned investment. Such a picture largely corroborates our apprehension 
of the macroeconomic outlook of the country. We better think where we go from here. 

The  positive  intention  contained  in  the  governmental  programme  to  stimulate 
investment and rekindle economic growth is laudable. Low levels of private investment in the 
country are a reflection of capital market failures. Overreliance on bank finance along with 
problems of banks concentration and short termism are constraining firm growth, especially 
of dynamic and innovative SMEs. Only yesterday, the Minister of Finance drew the attention 
regarding  the  role  which  banks  have  to  play  to  propel  the  growth  rate  in  the  country  and 
support the SMEs. 

131 

 
My speech today will focus precisely on the role of banks. Banks have a crucial role 
in  the  economy.  Banks  provide,  amongst  other  things,  a  safe  store  for  deposits,  credit  for 
individuals  and  businesses  and  the  infrastructure  for  payments  transactions  within  the 
economy. It is essential to enable the industry better to serve the needs of the real economy.  

However,  banks  have  failed  in  many  respects.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  recently 
published  a  survey  on  the  banking  sector  and  banking  services  entitled  ‘Banking  Your 
Future’.  This  document  is  very  revealing  about  the  profound  resentment  of  customers  and 
public  at  large.  The  fees  and  charges  of  banks  are  considered  as  exorbitant  and,  in  some 
cases,  extortionate.  The  main  line  of  my  argument  is  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  an 
unprecedented global experiment in monetary policy.  

It is unfortunate that it is so little understood by the public that money is created by 
the banks every time they make a loan.  In  effect, the banks have a virtual monopoly over 
domestic credit creation so they determine how money is allocated across the economy. That 
has  led  to  the  vast  majority  of  money  being  channelled  into  property  markets  and  the 
financial services sector. It is only a comparatively small amount which is lent to businesses 
and to consumer credit.  

This has a real impact on GDP and economic growth. The conclusion is unavoidable, 
we cannot continue with a system in which so little of the money created by banks is used for 
the  purposes  of  economic  growth  and  value  creation  in  which,  instead,  the  overwhelming 
majority of the money created inflates property prices, pushing up the cost of living.  

In a nutshell, the banks have too much power. They have greatly abused it. First, they 
have  been  granted  enormous  privileges  since  they  can  create  wealth  simply  by  writing  an 
accounting entry on a register. They decide who uses that wealth and for what purpose. They 
have used their power of credit creation hugely to favour property and consumption lending 
over  business  investment  because  the  returns  are  higher  and  more  secure.  Thus,  the  banks 
maximise their own interests but not the national interest. 

Would Parliament ever have voted to delegate power to create money to those banks? 
I think the answer is unambiguously ‘no’! The question that needs to be put is how we should 
achieve  the  switch  from  unbridled  consumerism  to  a  framework  of  productive  investment 
capable of generating a successful and sustainable manufacturing and industrial base that can 
securely underpin Mauritius living standards. 

132 

 
The  purpose  of  accountability  to  the  treasury  committee  would  be  to  enable 
Parliament to fully explore the manner in which the Monetary Policy Committee is working. 
The money will be lent to banks with the requirement that the funds are used for productive 
purposes,  whereas  lending  for  speculative  purposes,  for  example,  to  purchase  pre-existing 
assets, either financial or propriety, would not be allowed. 

Profound cultural change in banks should be achieved. Poor standard in banking is the 
consequence of the flagrant disregard of numerous sensible codes that exist already. Banks 
should know that they are given a licence to provide banking facilities to the public. Using 
banking  facilities  is  a  right  not  a  privilege.  Banks  should  be  accessible  to  all  customers, 
irrespective of the financial circumstances. 

The  functioning  of  the  MCIB  should  also  be  reviewed  to  avoid  more  hardship  on 
deprived customers. The banking and financial services sector landscape should not create a 
climate of box ticking of the kind that we saw so far. We need in our regulation to exercise 
judgement rather than just process. 

My last point, which I think is very important, is that sovereign money redresses a 
major democratic deficit. Under the current system a few board members across the largest 
banks make decision that shape the entire Mauritian economy even though these individuals 
have no obligation or mandate to consider the needs of the society or the economy as a whole 
or  are  not  accountable  in  any  way  to  the  public.  It  is  for  the  maximisation  of  their  own 
interest, not the national interest. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to make a short but quick comment about the 
role of the State in shaping our economy. The first economic miracle may be attributed to the 
active role of the State in shaping the Mauritian economy. The role of the State is extremely 
important  in  as  much  as  we  do  not  have  a  very  dynamic  and  pioneering  private  sector. 
Looking back at the historical development of our country, most of the economic pillars have 
been initiated by the State, from tourism, EPZ, offshore sector to that of the Freeport and the 
Cyber city.  In achieving these objectives, the State pursued highly interventionist financial 
and  industrial  policies  in  order  to  ensure  that  capital  flowed  to  strategically  important 
industries and firms. 

The recent laissez-faire approach has resulted in our private sector investing in only 
those  sectors  where  there  are  quick  and  easy  wins  and  neglecting  other  productive  sectors 
which  can  add  to  the  growth  in  the  longer  run,  for  example  the  SME  sector.  Our  country 

 

133 

needs  a  balanced  economy  with  a  strong  base  in  service  sectors  as  well  as  industry  and 
manufacturing.  The  strategy  for  jobless  growth  is  too  costly  for  our  economy  and  our 
country.  

In all countries, the State plays some role in shaping the structure and output of the 
economy. In States that were late in industrialisation, the State itself led the industrialisation 
process,  that  is,  it  took  on  developmental  functions.  The  role  of  the  State  in  the 
industrialisation  process  had  been  extremely  decisive  in  the  economic  miracle  of  some 
countries such as Japan and South Korea, just to mention these two.  

Precisely,  the  role  of  the  developmental  State  is  to  play  an  active  role  in  guiding 
economic development and using resources of the country to meet the needs of the people. 
The State needs strategic organisational and technical capacity to play its developmental role. 
Institutions  and  policies  are  needed  to  sustain  economic  growth  in  the  dynamic  world 
economy. After years of inadequate investment in skills, infrastructure innovation, there are 
long-standing structural weaknesses in the economy all rooted in a failure to achieve stable 
planning, strategic visions and a consensus on the right policy framework to support growth. 

If  we  are  to  bring  prosperity,  this  will  require  providing  the  right  condition  for 
investment  in  skills,  infrastructure  and  innovation.  This  will  not  happen  without  creating 
institutions that are built to last and that diminish rather than exacerbate policy uncertainty. 
We  need  institutions  that  can  help  to  develop  and  deliver  a  better  industrial  strategy.  I 
propose  the  creation  of  an  Independent  National  Growth  Council  which  brings  together 
expertise  across  all  disciplines  to  review  relevant  evidence  and  to  recommend  growth 
enhancing  policy  reforms  that  could  be  subject  to  rigourous  evaluation.  Investment  in 
equipment and new ideas are crucial engines of growth.  Fostering a supportive environment 
for investment and innovation is central to having a dynamic and productive economy. 

I  also  propose  the  Government  to  consider  setting  up  of  an  Infrastructure  Planning 
Commission together with the infrastructure bank which can unblock project and share the 
gains from development. This will dramatically reduce the policy instability that has led the 
country’s infrastructure to be poor in comparison to other countries. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before I conclude, I would like to make two comments on 
two important public services sector which have big influence on the livelihood of common 
people. Talking about education, it is important that we ask ourselves the question: “What 

 

134 

kind of education do our children need?” Should we continue to cram their heads with facts 
and figures that are just a click away on a smart phone? 

If we aspire to have a knowledge-based economy, then we must create knowledge and 
not just learn it. We must nourish our children’s national curiosity and coach them to think 
creatively,  think  critically  and,  most  of  all,  think  for  themselves.  They  will  need  to 
collaborate together to be competitive in a connected world. Are our schools, teachers and 
curricula up to the task? Good academic result alone is not a guarantee of success in life. Our 
children  also  need  to  learn  life  skills  and  moral  values.  Successive  Governments  have 
wavered over reform. Now, we need a revolution. Our future depends on it. 

Regarding, the healthcare; when we are working on the improvement of health care, 
what  matters  is  not  just  what  occurs  in  an  acute  hospital;  it  is  not  just  about  what  can  be 
measured  and  put  on  the  website  as  an  indicator.  It  is  about  things  such  as  quality  and 
perhaps,  more  importantly,  a  word  that  I  never  hear  often  enough  in  political  discourse: 
dignity. We cannot measure the patient’s dignity, but we know when they have lost it. Once 
again, I urge Government to put dignity at the heart of all they do in healthcare. 

To conclude, debate in this House will no doubt be lively and, at times, fractious, but 
while our beliefs may differ and despite what the cynics would have  you to believe, what 
unites us here in this House is a desire to do the very best for our country. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Gobin: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, after hearing such inspiring speeches tonight and 

looking at the late hour, I can only move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Jahangeer rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Tuesday 03 March 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

 
Question put and agreed to. 

135 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 8.47 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 03 March 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

