          No. 44 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY 11 DECEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

END OF YEAR MESSAGE 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 44 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 11 December 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

     The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office – 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills. (In Original) – 

(i)  The Captive Insurance Bill (No. XXXII of 2015); and 

(ii) The Additional Remuneration (2016) Bill (No. XXXIII of 2015). 

B.    Ministry of Housing and Lands – 

The Annual Report and the audited Financial Statements of the Town and 
Country Planning Board for the year ended 31 December 2014. 

C.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

 

(a)  The Annual Report 2013 of the Employees Welfare Fund. 

(b)  The Annual Report of the Board of Investment for the year ended 31 

December 2014. 

(c)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 
Build  Mauritius  Fund  for  the  year  ended  31  December  2014.  (In 
Original) 

(d)  The Annual Report 2014 of the Mauritius Revenue Authority. 

 

 

 

D.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

 

 

 

8 

(a)  The  Food  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice  No. 

229 of 2015) 

(b)  The  Pharmacy  (Restriction  on  Use  of  Stilbenes,  Stilbene  Derivative, 
their Salts and Esters and Thyrostatic Substances in Animal Production 
or Aquaculture Products) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 
231 of 2015)  

 

E.    Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International 

Trade - 

The  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of  International  Child  Abduction 
(Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 232 
of 2015)  

 

 

F.    Ministry of  Agro–Industry and Food Security – 

The Annual Report of the Irrigation Authority for the years 2011, 2012 and 
2013.  

G.    Ministry of Arts and Culture – 

 

The Annual Report of the Chinese Speaking Union for the years 2013 and 
2014. 

 

H.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

(a)  The Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) (Amendment of 

Schedule) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 234 of 2015) 

 

 

 

 

9 

(b)  The Consumer Protection (Control of Retail Selling Price of Imported 
Live Goat and Sheep) Regulations 2015.  (Government Notice No. 235 
of 2015)  

(c)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  33)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 236 of 2015) 

(d)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  34)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 237 of 2015) 

 

I. 

  Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and 

 

 

Beach Management 
(a)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 

National Environment Fund for the year ended 31 December 2014. 

(b)  The Environment Protection (Banning of Plastic Bags) (Amendment) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 233 of 2015)  

 

J.    Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms – 

  The Annual Report 2014 of the Public Officers’ Welfare Council. 

 

K.    Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training – 

  The  Catering  and  Tourism 

Industries  Remuneration 

(Amendment) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 230 of 2015)  

 

 

 

 

10 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS - PRESIDENT – LAWS & APPOINTMENTS 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  exercise  by  the  President  of  his 
functions and following the advice given by the Acting Solicitor General on 03 December 
2015 to Government who endorsed and acted thereupon in the Assembly on the same day, he 
will state if, either – 

(a) 

(b) 

all the laws and appointments made to date by the President in contradiction 
therewith will be reviewed and amended; or 

amendments  to  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  will  be 
introduced in the Assembly to give to the President the power to appoint as 
provided for in a number of Acts of Parliament. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, for the purpose of replying to part (a) of the 
Private  Notice  Question,  it  is  apposite  to  refer  to  the  advice  tendered  by  the  Attorney-
General’s Office, on 03 December 2015.  

I quote paragraphs 2 and 4 of the advice - 

“2. 
You may wish to note that section 64(1) of the Constitution 
contains an umbrella provision to the effect that ‘In the exercise of 
its functions, the President shall act in accordance with the advice of 
Cabinet  or  of  a  Minister  acting  under  the  general  authority  of  the 
Cabinet’. 

4. 
Accordingly,  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting 
Bill  being  an  ordinary  law,  its  provision  cannot  override  section 
64(1) of the Constitution which is the supreme law of Mauritius.” 

Madam Speaker, the advice tendered by the Attorney-General’s Office should be read 
together with the other documents referred to therein, namely, previous advice tendered by 
the  Attorney  General’s  Office  on  the  interpretation  and  implication  of  section  64  of  the 
Constitution,  as  well  as  the  judgment  in  the  case  of  Dayal  v  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius (1998 MR 4). 

 

Read together, the advice means – 

11 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Parliament can properly enact a law that empowers the President to appoint a 
person  to  a  statutory  office  after  consultation  with  the  Prime  Minister,  a 
Minister or the Leader of the Opposition; 

but, even though that law says, that the President of the Republic must merely 
consult the Prime Minister, a Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, it does 
not  empower  the  President  to  make  an  appointment  contrary  to  the  wish  or 
advice of the Prime Minister or a Minister, as the case may be, because section 
64(1) of the Constitution limits the cases where the President can act against 
the advice of  or without consultation with the Prime Minister or a Minister, to 
cases where the Constitution itself says that the President shall act in his own 
deliberate judgment or shall act on the advice of, or after consultation with, a 
person or authority other than Cabinet, and 

as  regards  the  amendment  initially  proposed  to  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity  Reporting  Bill,  namely,  appointment  by  the  President  of  the 
Republic,  after  consultation  with  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, the effect of section 64(1) of the Constitution is that, in reality, 
whatever may be the desire of the President or the Leader of the Opposition 
regarding the identity of the person to be appointed, the President would be 
bound to make an appointment as he is advised to do by the Prime Minister; 
hence  the  advice  of  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  to  the  effect  that  section 
64(1) of the Constitution, in the event of conflicting intentions of the President 
and the Prime Minister regarding the identity of the person to be appointed, 
would  have  overridden  the  amendments  initially  proposed  to  the  Good 
Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.  Thus, it will always be the Prime 
Minister’s intention or wish, or his advice to the President, which will prevail 
as regards who should be appointed. 

Madam Speaker, I also wish to refer the House to the case of Dayal v The President of 
the Republic of Mauritius (1998 MR 4) where the former Chief Justice, Honourable A. G. 
Pillay whose expertise in interpreting our Constitution is well-known, stated as follows, and I 
quote - 

 

12 

“The position would be different, in our opinion, in the case of acts 
ostensibly performed by the first respondent under the Constitution 
or any other law but which are in reality performed by some other 
person  or  authority  i.e.  acts  performed  by  the  first  respondent  in 
accordance with the advice of some other person or authority where 
he is bound to comply with the advice given - vide section 64(1) of 
the Constitution”. 

It is clear that the Court was highlighting the overriding effect of section 64(1) of the 

Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, for all the reasons stated above, Government decided not to proceed 
with the amendment proposed by the hon. Leader of the Opposition to the Good Governance 
and Integrity Reporting Bill and to proceed as it did. 

 

In the circumstances, the question of reviewing or amending the laws does not arise. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question  relating  to  amending  the 
Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius to  give to the President the  power to appoint  as 
provided for in a number of Acts of Parliament, this also does not arise in the light of what I 
have stated earlier. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  giving  an 
interpretation of the interpretation that the Solicitor General had  given.   Will he not agree 
with me though in spite of what he has just said that the advice given by the Ag. Solicitor 
General was clear at paragraph 4 - which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister carefully refrains from 
quoting - and it is said - 

 “Accordingly, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill being an ordinary 
law,  its  provisions  cannot  overwrite  section  64(1)  of  the  Constitution,  which  is  the 
Supreme Court of Mauritius”. 

The whole point, being given that, as hon. Collendavelloo had pointed out, in that ordinary 
law, as it is called by the Ag. Sollicitor General, it was said that you cannot approve a law - 
not an appointment - which is in contradiction with the Constitution. 

Now, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me - and the Supreme Court will 
decide in due course - that there is a number of laws where what is provided for, as the Ag. 
Sollicitor General has said, is in contradiction with the supreme law of Mauritius, that is, the 

 

13 

President is given the power to appoint responsible people after consultation with the Prime 
Minister  and  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  and  this  has  been  ruled  by  the  Ag.  Sollicitor 
General as being in contradiction with the supreme law of Mauritius? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, of course, he will not agree.  But, in the meantime, is 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that what is taking place is that until the Supreme Court 
has a chance to give a ruling on that - because the advice of the Ag. Sollicitor General is clear 
and now the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is contradicting that advice. Of course, it will go to the 
Supreme Court!  But is it a healthy situation? Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister where 
those  in  office  are  there,  according  to  the  advice  of  the  Ag.  Sollicitor  General,  in 
contravention, in violation of the Constitution, I will be asked to give my opinion in cases 
which,  according  to  the  Ag.  Sollicitor  General,  are  in  contravention,  in  violation  of  the 
Constitution? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  am  contravening  nothing.  Even  in  certain  legislations,  it  is 
provided that the President shall consult before appointment is made or at the end of the day 
it is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to advise the President. 

Mr Bérenger: What a situation we are in, Madam Speaker, where we received clear 
advice from the Ag. Sollicitor General! Clear advice! If I can quote the No. 4 in Government, 
he said that, for quite some time, he has had doubts about the constitutionality of all the Acts 
of  Parliament  which  give  the  power  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  to  appoint  after 
consultation with the hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition. If I can just 
be given time to find where it is. Therefore, in spite of that, he is now contradicting both what 
the  Ag.  Sollicitor  General  said  and  what  his  No.  4  said  in  Parliament.    He  is  now 
contradicting all this and he finds that a normal situation! 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  must  say  that  I  do  not  agree  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: I found the page where the Adviser to the Government on legal matters 

made his speech – 

“I have always had doubts about the constitutionality of simple Acts of Parliament”.  

Not appointments!  

14 

 
 “I have always had doubts about the constitutionality of simple Acts of Parliament 
which stated that the President shall appoint (...)”. 

So,  we  leave  it  to  the  Supreme  Court  and  I  hope  the  sooner.  I  wonder  how  the 
President of the Republic feels these days, but I will wait for the first time that she consults 
me and the Supreme Court will decide. 

The Prime Minister: We will wait for a decision of the Court. 

Madam Speaker: Does the hon. Leader of the Oppostion have other questions? 

Mr Bérenger: No. 

Madam  Speaker:  Please,  hon.  Ganoo,  I  am  sorry!    The  last  question  usually  rests 

with the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  

Mr  Ganoo:  This  is  a  constitutional  debate.  This  is  a  question  pertaining  to  the 

Constitution, and I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition can come back afterwards. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, I have already given my ruling.  I said that the last 

question usually rests with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time – 

(a) 

(b) 

The Captive Insurance Bill (No. XXXII of 2015) 

The Additional Remuneration (2016) Bill (No. XXXIII of 2015) 

Second Reading 

                               THE CAPTIVE INSURANCE BILL 

                                           (NO. XXXII OF 2015) 

 
Order for Second Reading read. 

 

(3.20 p.m) 

15 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam 
Speaker, the financial services sector is a key pillar of our economy and contributes to 10.4% 
of  GDP.  The  main  drivers  of  our  Financial  Services  industry  are  Global  Business,  the 
Insurance  sector,  and  Capital  Markets  amongst  others.  Insurance,  as  a  subsector  of  this 
industry, contributes to approximately 3% of GDP. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  already  has  a  well-developed  domestic  insurance  sector 
offering life insurance, general insurance, reinsurance and private pension products. At the 
end  of  last  month,  our  domestic  insurance  industry  comprised  of  15  General  and  8  Long 
Term insurance companies, with an asset base of over MUR Rs100 billion. 

Madam Speaker, the idea of introducing Captive Insurance in Mauritius was first put 
forward in the Budget 2014 by the then Minister of Finance, now DPM, hon. X.L. Duval, 
who had retained the services of March Consultants in this respect. 

With  the  new  initiatives  and  vision  implemented  by  my  Ministry  dedicated  to 
Financial  Services  coupled  with  a  renewed  ‘Financial  Services  Consultative  Council’ 
(‘FSCC’)  and  a  re-activated  and  innovative  ‘Financial  Services  Promotion  Agency’ 
(‘FSPA’),  we  are witnessing  growing interests from multinationals and other corporates in 
our  jurisdiction.  These  interests  have  already  materialised  in  real  tangible  investments  of 
substance, which will now create high value paid jobs. 

Madam Speaker, in 2015, major international flagships such as Old Mutual, which is 
an international investment, savings and insurance group, has already set up in Mauritius to 
provide reinsurance brokerage solutions to the African continent.  Its regional office is now 
based in Ebène and is already employing our young professionals. 

Similarly, Cooper Gay Swett & Crawford, the fifth largest reinsurance broker in the 
world,  were  exploring  potential  jurisdictions  to  set  up  their  regional  base  to  underwrite 
reinsurance  contracts  in  Africa.  We  convinced  them  to  set  up  their  regional  office  in 
Mauritius. They have started their operations two months ago and have advertised in the local 
newspaper  to  recruit  our  young  graduates.  Only  yesterday,  Madam  Speaker,  Gordon 
Newman, their CEO, based in London, gave an interview in L’Express newspaper where he 
stated, and I quote - 

16 

 
 « En  quoi  Maurice  est-il  l’option  stratégique  et  jusqu’où  peut-il  prétendre  se 
positionner dans ce secteur ? » 

He answered as follows – 

« Du point de vue du courtage de réassurance, Maurice est probablement la meilleure 
option  que  nous  avons  comme  porte  d’entrée  en  Afrique.  Il  y  a  un  flux  naturel  de 
business  africain  vers  Maurice.  Nous  voulons  être  dans  ce  flot  et  y  apporter  nos 
expertises. » 

Also, to the question as to the growth of the Insurance Sector in Africa, he stated – 

« Il est en pleine croissance et se développera davantage quand les marchés seront 
plus flexibles et quand il y aura une augmentation dans les tarifs. Nous croyons en 
l’avenir  de  Maurice  dans  l’industrie  des  assurances.  Ce  pays  a  le  potentiel  pour 
offrir des services de courtage de réassurance de classe mondiale. » 

Madam Speaker, following meetings held with the CEO of Lloyds Group in the UK, 
Mrs  Inga  Beale,  a  team  was  sent  from  London  to  Mauritius  to  explore the  possibilities  of 
setting up base over here to expand their activities on the African continent. In September 
2015,  ‘Lloyds  UK’  teamed  up  with  ‘AXA’  to  open  their  regional  office  in  Mauritius  to 
underwrite insurance and reinsurance risks in Africa. The newly formed company has been 
duly licenced by the FSC and is starting operations in four weeks’ time. 

Also, Madam Speaker, Aton GMBH and Care Ratings are further examples of major 
corporates based in Germany and India with whom we had meetings earlier this year and they 
have subsequently been licensed by the FSC and are now operating their regional offices in 
Mauritius for their operations in Africa.  

Madam Speaker, we are also encouraging domestic insurance companies to broaden 
their horizons and enlarge their economic space by expanding their operations by setting up 
African based subsidiaries. 

Global operators have continuously been telling us how in the past, policymakers and 
legislators,  have  not  provided  the  conducive  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  for  them  to 
move  up  the  value  chain  and  provide  adequate  space  for  the  development  of  new 
sophisticated service offerings. Madam Speaker, we intend to correct this with this proposed 
Captive Insurance Bill, which will contribute to the growth of our financial services sector.  

 

17 

Madam  Speaker,  in  its  most  basic  form,  a  captive  insurance  is  a  company  which 
insures the risk of its parent company and other affiliates within the same group structure. So, 
for example, a major conglomerate based in Europe can, instead of insuring its risks exposure 
with an external insurer in Europe, decide to set up its own insurance company in Mauritius, 
to insure its own group risks, that is, to have its own ‘captive insurance’ in our jurisdiction. It 
will  thus,  have  direct  access  with  reinsurance  markets,  in  Mauritius  or  elsewhere,  by 
operating from Mauritius. In the process, the conglomerate will save substantial annual costs 
on  insurance  for  its  whole  Group  of  companies  and  retain  the  benefits  which  would  have 
otherwise accrued to external commercial insurers. 

The present Bill provides for the introduction of Pure Captives, where the corporate 
insures itself and mitigates the risks through re-insurance. Pure captives pose little threat to 
the financial system as third parties are not exposed.  

Captives, Madam Speaker, are therefore a type of self-insurance and is an alternative 
form of risk management that is becoming a more practical and popular means through which 
companies can protect themselves financially, whilst having more control over how they are 
insured,  and  how  corporate  risks  are  being  spread,  which  would  otherwise  be  much  less 
flexible under a normal insurance arrangement. 

The introduction of captive insurance through a distinct legislation in Mauritius, will 
also  open  our  doors  to  major  reinsurers,  which  will  be  beneficial  to  stimulate  the  level  of 
activity in this sector, whilst at the same time contributing to the good repute of Mauritius as 
being a financial destination of choice for global investors. 

Madam Speaker, Captives are generally used by multinationals, wealthy individuals 
or property owners for several reasons, such as to ensure a cost-effective transfer of risks, 
protection  from  unpredictability  in  the  insurance  market,  and  opportunities  to  retain 
underwriting profits for further investments.  

Madam  Speaker,  Captive  Insurance  is  not  a  novelty,  but  the  absence  of  a  distinct 
legislation, has stifled its growth in Mauritius, as it was being done through a back door using 
what is known as Protected Cell Companies. It is worth mentioning that some local operators 
in the Insurance sector, did express some concerns with the FSC that they may be at risk of 
losing  business  with  respect  to  their  corporate  clients,  but  this  was  not  a  well-founded 
argument  as  no  such  risks  could  materialise  in  Mauritius  according  to  the  regulator,  as 
captive  insurance  would  not  take  away  business  from  the  existing  local  insurers.  Instead, 

 

18 

captives  will  create  the  opportunity  to  bring  dynamism,  impetus  and  increased  level  of 
activity to our insurance sector and the economy as a whole.  

Madam Speaker, with captive insurance as a new product offering, we will attract a 
number  of  new  operators  to  our  jurisdiction  which  will  include  multinationals,  regional 
corporate  groups, as  well as wealthy families, looking to develop alternative forms of risk 
management through self-insurance.   

I must also say that while we open our doors to the users of captive insurance, we are 
also  attracting  significant  interests  from  major  world  class  captive  insurance  management 
companies  who  wish  to  set  up  in  Mauritius.    My  Ministry  has  been  in  discussion  with  a 
number of large global captive insurance management companies, including ‘Palm Captive’, 
a global captive management company, with a portfolio of hundreds of captives, which will 
also  provide  services  including:  underwriting;  issuance  of  policy  wordings;  provision  of 
proper  transfer  pricing  documentation;  analysis  of  appropriate  risk  retention  levels; 
consideration of reinsurance requirements and development of new and profitable products 
for the portfolio.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  benefits  of  captive  insurance  is  not  restricted  to  what  I  have 
mentioned. It is important to look at its ripple benefits too.  This will encourage more front 
office  activities  to  take  place  locally,  including:  reinsurance;  active  portfolio  management 
services;  and  investment  advisory  services.  All  of  this  will  generate  substantial  new  job 
opportunities for our young professionals. Our young graduates are thriving to move up the 
value chain from the traditional back office jobs to more challenging and skilled work and 
this is exactly what the Captive Insurance Bill will provide for, Madam Speaker, and with its 
introduction, Mauritius will lead the way to become the ‘Captive hub' for Africa.  

Before we come on to the proposed Bill, it is important for us to understand that the 
Insurance  Act  2005  does  not  differentiate  in  its  requirements  between  Captives  and  other 
types of insurance.  For that reason, Mauritius has witnessed negligible growth in Captives 
until now, unlike other jurisdictions, notwithstanding that there has been a global growth in 
the  number  of  Captives  formed.  Hence,  the  need  for  a  specific  legislation  to  Captive 
Insurance, with a distinct regulatory regime. 

The  current  Insurance  Act  2005  provides  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  broader 
insurance  industry.  However,  there  has  been  much  innovation  in  the  design  of  legislative 
frameworks for captive insurance in other jurisdictions and we cannot remain insensible to 

 

19 

this if we want to make Mauritius a truly vibrant financial services centre. This goes to the 
extent that, notwithstanding the many other benefits that Mauritius has to offer, Mauritius is 
not currently perceived as an attractive captive domicile as compared to other jurisdictions. 
This  lacuna  as  well  as  opportunity  has  prompted  the  need  for  a  review  of  the  captive 
insurance framework in Mauritius. Additionally, the current framework for the regulation and 
supervision of captive insurance business will continuously be improved, in as much as the 
new legislation on Captives takes into account international best practices.  

Before  introducing  this  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  the  FSC  assessed  the  impact  that 
captives could potentially have on our economy. There is a realistic opportunity for Mauritius 
to house at least 350 captives over the next five years. This will invariably open the doors for 
more than 1,500 direct jobs in this particular segment, which is in addition to what is already 
on offer in the financial services sector.  

Madam Speaker, in order to make captive insurance a success in Mauritius, we are not 
only providing for a clear regulatory regime, but we are also providing for fiscal incentives 
for  multinationals  to  set  up  their  captives  in  Mauritius.  This  will  have  the  benefit  both 
onshore and offshore operators who will benefit from that. Unlike the GBL regime, we are 
integrating  the  offshore  and  onshore  product  offering  and  there  will  be  no  ring  fencing  of 
regimes when it comes to captives. This is a big step forward to address the issue of harmful 
tax practice, which has lately been the subject of debate within the European Union. This Bill 
provides  for  a  consequential  amendment  to  the  Income  Tax  Act  which  provides  for  a  tax 
holiday  for  a  period  not  exceeding  10  years  from  the  commencement  of  the  Act  for  all 
captives. 

Madam Speaker, as the regulators for non-banking activities, the FSC will license and 
regulate all captive insurance business specified in the Schedule to this Bill. The regulatory 
powers of the FSC under the Financial Services Act will be applicable with regard to captive 
insurance  and  the  FSC  will  also  have  a  regulatory  oversight  on  the  governance  and 
investment policy of captive insurers. What we are trying to do is simple, Madam Speaker. 
We  don’t  want  to  end  up  in  the  same  situation  of  overdependence  with  tax  treaties.  The 
regulatory oversight of the FSC on governance and investment policy of captives will ensure 
that only genuine captives with substance are set up in Mauritius.  

Madam  Speaker,  every  captive  insurer  licensed  under  the  Act  will  be  required  to 
have  a  captive  agent,  whose  appointment  will  require  the  approval  of  the  FSC.  Only  an 

 

20 

actuary,  an  insurance  manager,  a  law  practitioner,  a  management  company,  a  public 
accountant or such other person as may be prescribed will be able to act as captive insurance 
agent.  

The  rationale  is  to  ensure  that  persons  acting  as  captive  insurance  agents  are 
professionals or regulated entities and most importantly, we are providing for captive insurers 
to set up operations of substance in our jurisdiction. 

Madam Speaker, the development and promotion of captive insurance in Mauritius is 
in line with the Government’s objectives to diversify our financial services sector offering 
and  enhance  transparency  and  substance  to  create  high  value  jobs  for  our  young 
professionals. 

Madam Speaker, the development and promotion of captive insurance in Mauritius is 
in line with the Government’s objectives to diversify our financial services sector offering 
and  enhance  transparency  and  substance  to  create  high  value  jobs  for  our  young 
professionals. 

The  captive  insurance  industry  in  Mauritius  can  become  an  industry  on  its  own, 
contributing  to  the  growth  and  development  of  the  financial  services  industry.  With  the 
introduction of the Captive Insurance Bill, we are moving a major step forward to become the 
leading jurisdiction for captives in the region.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Callychurn rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(3.33 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, this 
Captive Insurance Bill could not have been introduced at a more appropriate time. It fills in a 
vacuum  and  consolidates  our  financial  sector.  Both  the  Government  and  the  Minister, 
therefore, deserve the appreciation of the nation and the business community for the timely 
addition of yet another legislation in our financial services sector. 

This legislation is wide-ranging and provides the framework to regulate the captive 
insurance activity, as the Minister has just told us, and evidently, such positive steps send the 
right signal to the international community and is, therefore, a plus for our economy. 

21 

 
Madam  Speaker,  insurance  is  a  contract  that  transfers  risk  to  another  entity  and 
insurance  company.  Captive  insurance  assists  in  risk  transfer.  It  issues  policies,  collects 
premiums and pays claims, but it does not offer insurance to the public. 

The  present  legislation  will  help  to  accelerate  this  new  financial  service  product 
through tax incentives, accounting and legal framework. My understanding of this relatively 
new  economic  and  financial  activity  is  that  it  is  an  additional  transaction  in  the  insurance 
business production chain aimed at making the sector more robust and at reducing the risk of 
an overrun in apparent insurance companies. 

Specifically, the captive insurance company, by definition, provides a risk mitigation 
economic and legal arrangement to support the parent company if the latter is unable to find 
an outside company to insure business risk. It is formed primarily to underwrite the risk of its 
parent  or  affiliated  groups.  Wholly  owned  by  its  policyholders  from  a  strict  definitional 
perspective and control by its insured’s, it purports to insure the risk of all its owners and the 
insured’s benefit from the captive insurers’ underwriting profits. Of course, it goes without 
saying that the parent company would examine carefully the premiums it would pay to the 
captive insurance firm taking into account affordability, range of coverage and if it is better 
than provided by outside reinsurance companies. 

Madam Speaker, I have gone through the present legislation as best as I could have 
and it has the merit of providing a comprehensive legal framework, including the incentives 
typically provided under the broad concept of financial services sector and which has made 
the financial sector a leading sector as well as the main engine to attain a high income status. 
In general, the parent company would consider tax incentives from the creation of a captive 
insurance which depends on the classification of insurance. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  legislation  provides  all  the  ingredients  to  host  the  captive 
insurance  making  Mauritius  known  internationally  as  a  captive  domicile  with  special 
enabling facilities. 

One of the merits of the legislation is the provision of spreading risk and shifting risk 
from the parent company to another company. This implicitly provides security and certainty, 
enabling  the  transmission  of  business  expansion  to  progress  smoothly  while,  at  the  same 
time,  facilitating  the  task  of  risk  takers  through  a  cloak  of  greater  financial  comfort. 
Obviously,  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  financial  benefits  accruing  by  creating  a  separate 
identity in the provision of insurance services.  It shields the parent in the event the parent 

 

22 

company  faces  a  bunching  problem  of  demands,  but  this  would  vary  from  company  to 
company depending on the size and the financial strength. The likelihood of a large private 
insurer facing bankruptcy by a single event is attenuated through a diversified pool of risks. 
On  the  other  hand,  parent  companies  should  carefully  weigh  the  additional  cost  arising  in 
setting a captive insurance company. 

Our  legislation,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  makes  provision  to  diminish  these  risks  and 
exploits new vistas for growth through a well-lubricated system of surveillance, screening, 
checks  and  balances.  For  instance,  the  Bill  stipulates  the  need  to  have,  at  least,  one  local 
Director, which, at the same time, permits the creation of high income jobs. The need for a 
legislation  to  provide  the  framework  through  growth  in  a  disciplined  manner  and  guide 
operators with what is permitted and with what is not permitted cannot be better argued. 

This Bill also sends good signals to the international community. The more so, as the 
insurance sector is an expanding business; many businessmen, local or international, as well 
as Government officers, regulators or policy-makers, often toil in different markets, but lose 
perspective  on  reality,  on  the  nitty-gritty  of  operations.  It  is  a  gross  oversimplification, 
Madam  Speaker,  to  assume  that  everyone  we  come  across  even  in  the  sector  has  a  basic 
understanding  of  the  various  alternative  risks,  financing  techniques,  technicalities  and 
implications.  The  modern  financial  services  sector  provides  daunting  challenges,  even  for 
those familiar with the sector and this legislation has the merit of providing the guidelines in 
a holistic manner. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  such  kind  of  comprehensive  legislation,  I  suppose  we  stand 
protected  against  mischief  on  the  international  front  because  we  are  equipped  and  have 
tangible assets to show to the world because, at the end of the day, we are targeting foreign 
companies.  We  are  no  longer  at  a  local  watering  hole,  but  we  have  to  survive  in  ocean. 
Obviously, with more than two decades of international exposure, we are sure that there are 
local businessmen in the sector who would like to take advantage from setting up a captive. 
The legislation provides the information required how to go about relating the captive and 
this is an essential step towards enhancing the country’s image as an international financial 
centre. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  lucrative  business  and  only  this  week  the  media  made 
mention of a visit, of a leading UK insurance company exploring the possibility of setting its 
parent company in Mauritius. I hope this is a harbinger of good news and there is little doubt 

 

23 

that this legislation will accelerate the process and incite other prospective businessmen to 
locate  in  Mauritius.  If  this  trend  continues,  it  is  equally  vital  that  side-by-side  with  this 
legislation,  we  should  also  readily  have  available  a  pool  of  human  capital  resources  to 
support our efforts to tap the international openings for the provision of high level education. 

Mauritius  faces  tremendous  challenge  to  raise  our  educational  standard.  Captive 
insurance  deals  with  “expected  losses”  for  each  line  of  coverage:  accidents,  workers’ 
compensation,  etc.  An  actuary,  Madam  Speaker,  determines  expected  losses  based  on  a 
firm’s historical loss amounts and pay-out characteristics. This requires high level of training. 
The study of actuarial science is not only demanding in terms of intellectual ability, but also 
takes long years of training with high failure casualties. We need to respond to this type of 
market to make the insurance and captive insurance sector an international success and take 
full advantage of the sector. Given the global exposure of the financial activities, the need for 
deep specialised knowledge for appraisal, monitoring, compliance, surveillance and analysis, 
both  before  licensing  and  post-licensing  at  the  regulatory  level,  on  the  one  hand,  and  for 
operations,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  be  over  emphasised.  The  type  and  nature  of 
professionals  are  mentioned  in  Part  III  of  the  Bill  and  encompass  a  wide  range  of 
competence. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  can  no  longer  content  ourselves  with  universities,  with 
international  ranking  in  the  region  of  4,000  and  7,000.  We  are  called  upon  to  play  the 
equivalent of Real Madrid, Arsenal or Manchester United in the financial services sector. Our 
universities  must  rise  to  the  circumstances.  They  are  intrinsically  linked  to  the  financial 
services sector.  With a share of 10.3% of GDP and growing at annual average exceeding 5%, 
this sector will be called upon to conquer Africa. As the Minister mentioned, Mauritius will 
compete  and  must  compete  and  must  challenge  established  performances  of  the  calibre  of 
Bermuda, the most well-known and largest offshore domicile. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services  and  Good  Governance  has 
brought one missile to the country. We need to join efforts to use the financial services sector 
to take Africa by assault and now is the opportunity especially in Nigeria and Ghana. It is 
time also to target the Portuguese axis with Brazil, Angola and Mozambique, two of which 
are already SADC countries. We have an arsenal of legislation that few countries elsewhere 
can boast of, Madam Speaker. Now, this Captive Insurance Bill will come as another added 
value in this legal weaponry that we have.  

24 

 
All  these  legislations  are  excellent  incentives  and  a  legal  weapon  to  explore  the 
emerging  markets.  The  permissible  classes  of  captive  insurance  business  as  spelt  out  in 
section 8 of the Bill are very clear and a priori do not appear to lend itself to confusion or 
misinterpretation.  As  in  other  financial  services  legislation,  the  management  procedures 
including board procedures are laid out clearly in Part III and the holders of key professional 
positions  as  well  as  those  debarred  from  holding  responsible  positions  are  spelt  out.  In 
addition, emphasis is laid out on governance issues, integrity, skill, knowledge, competence 
and  experience,  all  the  ingredients  which  are  prerequisites  for  respected  and  successful 
economic  activity.  Also,  much  emphasis  is  placed  on  submission  of  audited  reports  with 
specified time frame. 

Madam Speaker, with proper monitoring all these arrangements should help to keep 
pace  with  global  changes  or  eliminate  any  constraint  or  abuse  in  light  of  the  future 
operational experience. Madam Speaker, there are nearly 6,000 captives operating worldwide 
and the figures keep increasing. This sector has gained widespread acceptance only since a 
few decades ago although I have been given to understand it has existed for years and years. 
The first one was set up in the Bahamas during the 1960s. The most popular domiciles for 
captive  insurance  historically  are  Bermuda,  the  Cayman  Islands,  Barbados,  Malta, 
Luxembourg, Ireland and Singapore. Today, the US also provides facilities to domicile some 
1,000 captives compared with 3000 in the Caribbean, 1,200 in Europe and the rest in Asia. 

As the hon. Minister told us, there are various types of captive insurance and we have 
concentrated on pure captives. These variations are flourished and one of the challenges is to 
respond to the demand by ensuring a flexible approach to the legislation and to put in place a 
flexible  regulatory  management  so  as  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  governance  and 
compliance on the one hand and trended changes and growth on the other hand. The types of 
captive will continue to evolve, Madam Speaker, and proliferate to address the growing need 
for alternative transfer. 

Before I conclude, I would wish good luck to this Bill, Madam Speaker, and hope that 

it will help to bolster our financial services sector. I have done. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bholah! 

 

 

 

 (3.46 p.m.) 

25 

The Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives (Mr S. Bholah): Madam 
Speaker,  allow  me,  at  the  outset,  to  thank  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance and Institutional Reforms for bringing this piece of legislation to the House. In 
fact,  it  comes  at  an  opportune  time,  adding  a  new  set  of  products  to  the  already  growing 
Mauritian financial sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius,  commonly  known  as  the  star  and  key  of  the  Indian 
Ocean,  has  been  the  hub  for  trade  and  commerce  for  very  long.  Now  the  country  is 
establishing itself as a symbol of excellence in the financial world. When Independence was 
granted to us Alexander de Smith, the Constitutional Commissioner for Mauritius in the 60s, 
was of the view that Mauritius would not survive and that sooner or later over population 
would become the bane of the newly independent State. 

Mauritius was left to its fate in the wake of its independence. The country was hugely 
dependent on the agricultural sector which was the primary source of income of the nation 
State.  Economic  progress  has  for  long  been  stunted  and  the  prevalence  of  cyclones 
determined the fate of our country on a yearly basis. There is, however, one characteristic that 
is intrinsic to our genes, that of resilience in the face of adversity. 

It took a team of brilliant professionals to turn around the destiny of this island nation. 
The  miracle  économique  came  to  exist.  The  secondary  sector  came  to  a  boom  and  rife 
unemployment was tackled instantly. The textile sector as well as the tourism sector slowly 
paved  way  for  the  emergence  of  the  tertiary  sector  in  which  finance  came  to  contribute  a 
major chunk to the revenues in Mauritius. And, then, one would have been tempted to say 
that bad days do not stay forever. However, as a wise man once stated, good days do not stay 
forever as well. 

Madam Speaker, the Mauritian financial sector was developed against the backdrop of 
the liberalisation of the Indian economy. Slowly the Indian populace started seeing Mauritius 
as the villain in the scenario. Assaults were abound, be it through the alleged introduction of 
the  Direct  Tax  Code,  commonly  known  as  the  DTC  in  India  or  through  the  proposed 
onslaught  brought  by  the  (GAAR)  General  Anti-Avoidance  Rule  or  the  specific  Anti-
Avoidance Rule. Mauritius has been red flagged in certain quarters in India.  

Now the threat that faces Mauritius is the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) as 
well as the various cases like Vodafone, although isolated, do not help. However, Mauritius 

 

26 

has been very resilient in the face of such adversity. Therefore, there is a general consensus as 
the Mauritian offshore sector is called to be more competitive. 

Let me introduce this House to the issues caused by  BEPS.  In practice, the OECD 
countries were faced with the attempts by many entities trying to benefit from double non-
taxation. The OECD countries had to face the music of less taxation income and there was 
considerable loss, as per their own sayings, in terms of tax revenue. There might therefore be 
steps taken by several countries to implement such measures into their own laws. One of such 
countries  is  India,  the  importer  of  most  of  our  outbound  investments.  Mauritius  had  a 
significant advantage with risk being reduced to in no time. The DTTA might be thing of the 
past in no time, Madam Speaker. 

How, therefore, would one expect to compete along those lines? The DTTA might be 
rendered nugatory and ineffective and this is a danger faced by almost all of us. Mauritius is, 
therefore, called to introduce such measures so as to diversify. Again, good days do not stay 
forever and Mauritius cannot rest on its past laurels.  

With the advent of the BEPS, taxation would no longer be as much of an advantage 
and Mauritius will be called to be highly competitive as compared to the other jurisdictions. 
The commitment of this Government to the people is clear, that is, it has a clear mandate to 
change and innovate for the benefit of the people. Employment creation was and remains one 
of the needs of the people. The offshore sector employs many individuals and time has come 
to safeguard the offshore sector and its employment as well as create new employment. 

Therefore, coming back to the issue of competitiveness, if Mauritius is to survive it 
will  have  to  introduce  new  instruments  and  products  so  as  to  compete  with  other 
jurisdictions. Suffice it to say that Mauritius was among the most recent to adopt the Limited 
Partnership  Act  and  the  Foundation  Act.  However,  the  Captive  Insurance  Bill  has  to  be 
introduced in good time.  

A captive insurance is an innovative product. Previously the level of compliance on 
an  insurance  company  was  so  high  that  many  companies  were  practically  prohibited  from 
entering  the  market.  Many  companies  had  even  shown  interest  in  setting  up  captives; 
however, they were duly discouraged by the amount of compliance and the varying levels of 
requirement for the setting up of such an entity. 

Mauritius cannot compete in this day and age if it does not become a user-friendly or 
business friendly jurisdiction. This is not to say that Mauritius should be too lenient only to 

 

27 

attract investment or it should go into cheap marketing only to attract investment. Mauritius 
is being called upon to be a jurisdiction of substance and not of form only. 

Madam Speaker, it was clear the previous Insurance Act did not place Mauritius at a 

competitive advantage in the world in relation to captive insurance.  

The case of Bermuda and Taiwan and the already flexible captive insurance laws are 
advanced.  Marketing Mauritius as a captive destination might take a bit of time. However, 
once the structure is there, the function starts the platform that Mauritius provides and the 
replication that Mauritius can use to fall back upon. We need to be careful about one thing. 
We maintain a relatively better position in the African subcontinent. However, the offshore 
jurisdictions  of  several  countries  and  the  drive  from  countries  like  Kenya  may  cause  an 
impediment  to  what  we  used  to  call  the  Tiger  of  the  Indian  Ocean.  We  still  maintain  our 
position among the African Nations, ranked among the highest in the number of professionals 
in  the  financial  sector,  if  not  the  highest  of  them  all.  But  we  need  to  keep  improving  and 
innovating  so  as  to  preserve  our  relevance  in  the  African  spectrum.  Our  captive  insurance 
laws will allow us to compete on this side of the world.  

While we can aspire to be as developed as the other captive insurance jurisdictions 
throughout the world, this Act will set us on the track and increase our competitive edge. The 
bringing  of  innovation  also  creates  the  need  to  have  sufficiently  qualified  professionals  as 
rightly pointed out by hon. Ganoo. Initially, the country may not be equipped with the right 
professionals - I emphasise “may not”. It may as well have several such professionals, but 
this is not the point here. The point is that while it may not have the right professionals, the 
advent of captive insurance might create a whole new industry of insurance and reinsurance 
business. New professionals might be attracted to this country, and our own human capital 
working for international conglomerates will be attracted. The pool of professionals will be 
automatically improved. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to say that this Act has been long-awaited to 
say the least, and the Act reflects the aspiration of Mauritius as a financial sector more than 
perhaps a tax jurisdiction. Mauritius has always been perceived as a financial centre. May this 
Bill  act  to  the  plethora  of  instruments  needed  to  make  our  jurisdiction  the  best  of  all  the 
financial  sectors  and  survive  the  onslaught  of  international  competitiveness.  The  future  is 
bright. Challenges  are high.  But rest assured rough seas make the best sailors, and we  are 

 

28 

ready to sail through the testing times with heads held high and determination and resolution 
guiding us.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (3.55 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  
Madam Speaker, in an interview which appeared in ‘L’Express’ of 08 December, earlier this 
week, referring to the debates on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, the hon. 
Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance stated and I quote as follows - 

«Je suis content du travail accompli et de la façon dont nous avons mené le débat en 
public  en  rencontrant  les  différents  partenaires.  Ce  serait  bien  que  toutes  les  lois 
puissent être débattues de la sorte.» 

Yet,  Madam  Speaker,  the  very  same  Minister  is  coming  today  with  this  Bill  on  Captive 
Insurance. And when did hon. Members get a copy of this Bill? Only on Tuesday morning, 
only four days ago! It is a highly technical Bill and hon. Members have only four days to 
read, dissect, prepare  and debate this national  Bill, a Bill of very  great importance  for the 
offshore sector. Is this good governance? Is this the way to treat Parliament? Is this the way 
to treat hon. Members of this Assembly? And to add insult to injury, Madam Speaker, only 
last  night  we  were  given  proposed  amendment  that  would  be  moved  at  committee  stage. 
What was the urgency, Madam Speaker? Why rush this Bill? Why give hon. Members only 
four  days?  I  am  sure  that  a  lot  of  hon.  Members  have  not  had  time  to  even  consult 
stakeholders  to  see  whether  this  Bill  is  appropriate  for  the  country  or  not.  In  the 
circumstances, how can we exercise our voting rights?  

This is not the first time that this Bill is being proposed. As the hon. Minister rightly 
pointed out as far back as 2013, when the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, 
was  the  Minister  of  Finance  under  the  Labour  Party  Government,  already  announced  that 
there would be a captive insurance. Then in March 2014, at the Annual General Meeting of 
the Insurers Association of Mauritius, the then Chief Executive of the FSC, Ms Clairette Ah-
Hen stated and I quote – 

“We have submitted our proposed draft Bill to the Ministry/our policymakers to take 
it forward and to fruition and  I am sure we will learn more  about it in the coming 
weeks.” 

29 

 
That was as far back as March 2014. The Bill is already at the Ministry of Finance. In 
August 2014, the  Insurers Association of Mauritius submits their comments.  In September 
2014,  the  Association  of  Trust  and  Management  Companies  submits  their  comments.  In 
December, there is a change in Government, there is a new Minister. The new Minister does 
not  have  any  more  consultation  with  the  insurance  sector,  does  not  have  any  more 
consultation with the Association of Trust and Management Companies, and now in the last 
minute,  we  are  rushing  with  this  Bill.  I  say  it  with  a  lot  of  sadness  and  regret,  Madam 
Speaker,  because  if  the  hon.  Minister  had  adopted  the  same  attitude  which  he  did  when 
dealing with the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill and hold consultations with 
Members of the Opposition also, we could have made certain constructive comments which 
he could have either addressed in his speech or even come with amendments. So, I hope that 
going forward, there would be more of a consultation process so that, as was rightly pointed 
out by the hon. Minister, ce serait bien que toutes les lois puissent être débattues de la sorte, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, we are debating this Captive Insurance. What is Captive Insurance?  
In  its  pure  form,  Captive  Insurance  is  simply  an  insurance  which  is  wholly  owned  by  its 
owners.  The  primary  purpose  of  the  insurance  is  to  insure  the  owner’s  risk  and  then  the 
owner benefits from the profit made by this insurance company.  In simple terms, instead of a 
person going to a commercial insurer and getting an insurance to insure his risk, the captive, 
that  is,  the  owner  sets  up  his  own  insurance  company  and  that  insurance  company  does 
nothing else than insure his own risk. Now, why would he do that? There are lots of reasons. 
The main reason is cost. It works out cheaper for big multinationals, for big companies to 
have  their  own  insurance  companies  and  have  lower  costs  than  those  traditional  insurance 
companies. But there is also non-cost consideration. There are certain companies involved in 
certain  industries  which  require  specific  types  of  insurance  cover  which  are  not  generally 
available. For example, you may have a company which wants to insure against political risk. 
If they are investigating in certain African countries and that may not be readily available or 
too  expensive.  Similarly,  you  may  have  a  company  which  wants  to  insure  against 
environmental risk because they are in the mining sector or in the oil industry. So, there are 
lots of reasons why you can have a captive insurance, and in Mauritius we have already been 
licensing captive insurance. We have been doing it since MOBAA days, back in the nineties, 
we had regulations then. And even under the Insurance Act of 2005, there is provision for 

 

30 

external  insurers  which  will  include  captive  insurance.  But  we  have  never  had  a  Bill 
specifically addressed to captive insurance, and this is why today this lacuna is being filled. 

Madam Speaker, we have different types of captive. What I have just described is 
pure captive where you insure your own risk. But there is also industry-wide captive which is 
very common in the US and in Europe, where a number of players in the same industry, for 
example, aviation, oil and gas, they together and set up an insurance company, which is going 
to  insure  their  risk.  This  is  industry-wide  captive.  There  is  also  rental  captive,  which  is 
specifically  formed  to  provide  captive  facilities  to  unrelated  bodies.  There  is  third-party 
captive, which is captive writing third-party risk. An example of a captive writing third-party 
risk, Madam Speaker, would be the Toyota car maker. Toyota offers extended car warranty 
on  its  cars  and  reinsured  these  risks  at  a  captive.  So,  there  are  lots  of  scopes  for  having 
different types of captives.  

Yet,  this  Bill  limits  captive  to  pure  captive  insurance.  Schedule  2  to  the  Act  only 
mentions  one  type  of  Captive  Insurance  which  is  a  pure  Captive  Insurance  and,  in  my 
opinion, Madam Speaker, this is a major shortcoming and a major disappointment because if 
we  want  to  be  leader  in  the  Captive  Insurance  Sector,  we  want  to  attract  captive  business 
especially from African-based companies, yet we are only prepared to license pure captive. 
We are not even prepared to go industry wide captives when there is a definite market for that 
because a lot of companies in Mozambique have found gas, for example and they would be 
interested to insure all their gas related risks.  

So,  we  are  doing  away  with  business  and  I  don’t  know  what  is  the  policy  behind 
limiting  captive  insurance  to  only  pure  captive.  So,  I  ask  myself,  Madam  Speaker,  is  it 
because we lack the necessary expertise and competence? But then is it the message that we 
want to send to those considering setting up captive insurance in Mauritius. That we are not 
equipped  to  license  captive  insurers  other  than  pure  captive.  The  sad  part  of  it,  Madam 
Speaker, is that this is probably true because I don’t know of any expert in captive insurance 
which is currently working at the regulator at the Financial Services Commission and I know 
that none has been recruited since this Government has taken office.  

In fact, what am I talking about?  We don’t even have a full-fledged Chief Executive 
Officer since Madam Clairette Ah-Hen had left. We have only someone on contractual basis 
and this does not look serious, Madam Speaker, when  you are  going out there and selling 
Mauritius as a well-regulated captive insurance jurisdiction. So, before we go out marketing 

 

31 

ourselves as a jurisdiction of excellence for captive insurance, the very least that we should 
do, Madam Speaker, is to ensure that we have people with the right expertise at the level of 
the FSC to regulate the sector. 

Madam Speaker, this legislation is still badly bruised after the collapse of the British 
American Insurance and we will carry the after effect, les séquelles of the collapse of BAI for 
many years to come. The hon. Minister of Financial Services himself, on many occasions, has 
blamed the Financial Services Commission as  regulator for failing to act promptly to stop 
what he had called a Ponzi scheme. Now, we are going ahead with a new Captive Insurance 
Bill with the very same people at the FSC except for its CEO. So, what guarantee do we have 
that the FSC now is well equipped to properly monitor Captive Insurance Sector. This is very 
relevant, Madam Speaker, because captive insurance is not being limited to foreign captive 
insurers.  Even  Mauritians,  big  companies  can  apply  for  a  licence  to  provide  captive 
insurance. Of course, the Insurers Association of Mauritius, no doubt wanting to protect its 
own  turf  has  strongly  objected  to  allowing  local  business  to  set  up  a  captive  insurance 
company and benefit from insurance arbitrage. 

But, unlike what the hon. Minister has just said - I do believe that the local insurance 
business will be affected by allowing locals to set up their own captive insurance. But I don’t 
hold a brief for them, Madam Speaker, and I am certainly not saying that we should not allow 
local businesses from setting up captives. In fact, I believe that if we allow local businesses to 
set up captives, there would be increased competition and this will result in lower premiums 
for the benefit of consumers. But we should ensure, at the same time, Madam Speaker, that 
there is business creation as opposed to business diversion. We should ensure that this captive 
industry is going to generate growth and not just shift all the existing insurance work from the 
traditional  local  insurers  to  a  new  captive  insurance  because  if  ever  it  happens,  the  worse 
scenario is that you may have financial difficulties, financial effect, financial consequences 
on the local insurers and they may even result in employees being laid off. 

One trade-off would have been, Madam Speaker, to allow local insurance companies 
to provide rental captives or to allow local insurance companies to provide third-party captive 
insurance. But as I have stated before, the Bill only covers pure captive insurance and I hope 
this  is  one  aspect  where  the  hon.  Minister  going  forward  can  look  to  the  possibility  of 
extending the application of this Act to third parties and rental captives. 

32 

 
Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  now  to  come  to  the  type  of  insurance  which  may  be 
offered by a captive. From the definition of general insurance business, we note that long-
term insurance business is excluded. Again, why? Why do we exclude long-term business? 
One of the main attractions of big companies with thousands of employees to go captive is 
precisely to be able to underwrite, to be able to write insurance, life insurance policy for their 
employees.  That  is  a  major  attraction.  Yet,  by  excluding  long-term  insurance,  are  we  now 
shooting  ourselves  in  the  foot  and  become  less  attractive  compared  to  other  jurisdictions 
which allow captive to provide life insurance to employees? Again, why are we driving away 
business? Is this a measure to protect our local insurers? If this is the case, then we could 
have limited it to allowing foreign captive insurers to provide life insurance and prohibiting 
local captive from doing it. But to exclude long-term insurance, life insurance, I think it is 
very bad for business if we want to sell Mauritius as a captive business. 

Then there is Section 8, sub section (2) of the Bill which provides that – 

“No captive insurer shall provide, on a direct basis, any insurance purporting to cover 
risks in respect of which there is a compulsory insurance requirement under any other 
enactment”. 

The  purpose  of  this  Section  8,  sub  section  (2)  is  to  exclude  the  provisions  of 
compulsory insurance, for example, the case of motor vehicles third-party insurance. So, a 
captive not being able to provide motor vehicles insurance, would not be able to have other 
compulsory  insurances  which  are  supplied  by  law.  Again,  why?  If  you  have  a  company 
which has a fleet of cars, why can’t it be a captive? Why exclude motor insurance? Now, the 
Insurers  Association,  on  the  other  hand,  went  even  further  and  said  –“if  you  are  going  to 
exclude  motor  vehicles  then  you  might  also  exclude  insurance  over  any  assets  located  in 
Mauritius because this is the case right now under the Regulations of 2007”. 

Again,  Madam  Speaker,  I  fail  to  understand  the  rationale,  why  at  a  time  when  we 
want to sell captives, we are limiting it into who can do the captive? We are limiting it hence 
to what product the captive can offer. 

Madam Speaker, there is another point I would like to make and that is with the use of 
the  Protected  Cell  Company.  Section  20,  sub  section  (4),  purports  to  amend  the  Protected 
Cell  Company  to  allow  it  to  set  up  a  captive  insurance.  We  are  all  for,  but  then  the 
amendment goes on to state that this is limited to only companies - Protected Cell Companies 
which hold a category one global business license. So, why again limit it to companies which 

 

33 

hold a category one for business license? The way the tax treatment is drafted, there is no 
way anyone would want to set up a PCC as a GBC one, because a GBC one is taxed at 3% 
whereas the income of a captive would be exempt from income tax. So, they are not going to 
use a GBC one, they would prefer to use the normal captive and not pay tax. So, why then 
limit the use of PCC only category one global business asset. We should have extended it to 
all PCCs, all captives should be able to use that. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  object  of  the  Bill  clearly  provides,  this  Bill  is  only 
establishing  a  framework  for  the  licensing  regulation  and  supervision  of  captive  insurance 
business. We will actually need to wait for the Financial Services Commission to come up 
with the necessary rules and regulations under Section 18 of the Bill, to effectively regulate 
captive insurance business. So, we will have to wait for the regulations. The regulation, in 
particular, will no doubt set out the minimum capital requirement and this is very important 
because for local insurance companies - if my memory serves me right - there is a minimum 
capital requirement of Rs25 m. So, if we use the same capital requirement, obviously, our 
captive insurance will not be attractive for foreigners to come to Mauritius. So, we will have 
to wait for the regulation. 

The  FSC  will  also  make  regulations  about  the  solvency  requirement.  Again,  if  the 
solvency test is too strict, we would be driving away business, but at the same time, if it is too 
loose, then we would be exposed unduly to risk.  So, the FSC will have to strike the right 
balance when coming with the FSC.   I hope that, before they come up with the necessary 
rules and regulations, the FSC will hold consultations with all stakeholders, all the insurance 
players, the management companies, so that we can have a consensus around the solvency 
requirement and capital requirement. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  a  final  aspect  of  this  Bill  which  I  would  like  to  address 
before  resuming  my  seat  and  this  is  in  relation  to  section  3(2)  of  the  Bill,  which  reads  as 
follows - 

“The  Minister  may,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Commission,  provide,  by 
regulations,  for  any  provision  of  this  Act  to  apply  to  a  captive  insurer  with 
modifications,  adaptations  and  limitations  and  on  terms  and  conditions  not 
inconsistent with this Act.” 

So, why, Madam Speaker, do we need to give discretionary powers to the Minister to 
exempt any captive insurer from any provision of this Act?  Haven’t we learnt our lesson?  

 

34 

Have we already forgotten about BAI?  The hon. Minister himself has spoken about political 
interference.  The  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  when  he  was  in 
Parliament,  defended  BAI,  and  now  we  are  giving  powers  to  the  Minister  to  exempt,  to 
interfere with the Act and exempt captive insurance from any provisions of this Act.  Is that 
good governance? Is that the way going forward?  And there are no objective criteria; under 
what circumstances the Minister can do that.  It is only after consultation with the Financial 
Services Commission. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  high  time  that  we  leave  regulatory  matters  in  the  hands  of 
regulators;  it  is  high  time  that  we  stop  this  bad  habit  of  politicians  trying  to  control 
everything.  We are coming with a fresh Bill, a fresh product.  Let us also have a fresh start in 
the way we regulate the financial sector in this country. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

(4.15 p.m.) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I would like first and foremost to express my thanks 
to all the hon. Members who have given their views on this Bill.  I would like to particularly 
thank hon. Ganoo for his encouraging words.  I believe that he has had sufficient time to have 
a look at the  Bill and he has  come up with a very  good  analysis as to  the reasons behind 
introducing the Captive Insurance Bill in Mauritius and also as to how it is going to really 
give us the opportunity to develop the financial services sector with an additional tool, and 
also how we intend to use captive insurance in terms of our Africa strategy, as to how we 
want to develop Mauritius as a captive insurance hub.  I very much believe that he has had 
sufficient time to have a look at that, contrary to my hon. friend, Mr Uteem. 

At  the  very  outset,  I  would  like  also  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  when  we  were 
debating the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill, we had given six weeks between 
the First Reading and the Second Reading, so that debates could take place, but still, we were 
told by hon. Uteem that this was not sufficient time, and they wanted it to go to next year. 

Now, when we have this law - there is no controversy which arises in this law; we all 
know that captive insurance is a good thing for Mauritius and it is going to help our country 
develop - we are being told that this is being rushed through. It is not being rushed through, 
Madam Speaker.  Hon. Ganoo, himself, has been able to understand all the concepts and he 

 

35 

has explained to this House how he believes that this is something which is going to work for 
Mauritius. 

One of the reasons why we had to go quickly with this, Madam Speaker, is because 
we  have  had  a  lot  of  demand  from  multinationals  -  I  have  stated  that  in  my  speech.    I 
mentioned about Palm Captive, which intends to bring quite a number.  It is a management 
company which brings captives with it, and we are talking about hundreds of captives which 
can  be  set  up  in  Mauritius  very  quickly.    I  have  also  explained  in  my  speech  in  terms  of 
Lloyds and the meetings we have had, AXA; we have talked about Old Mutual.  These are all 
companies which are expressing their interest. 

If  we  were  not  to  do  that  now,  we  would  have  to  wait  for  Parliament  probably  to 
resume in March and we would have missed out so many opportunities for these companies 
to come and set up over here.  As I said, it is a very technical piece of legislation, I do agree, 
but it is not complex at all.  What the Bill basically means is that the FSC will licence, will 
regulate this particular sector, the Captive Insurance Sector, and the Bill basically details the 
provisions as to how it is done and what are the conditions for licensing and so on, and then 
the regulatory aspects. 

When  it  comes  to  one  important  issue  that  hon.  Ganoo  has  raised  in  relation  to 
capacity building, this is a real issue, Madam Speaker, because what we have seen in the past, 
in the last 10 to 15 years in Mauritius, especially with the global business sector, is that a lot 
of  back  office  operation  was  being  done  in  Mauritius  where  companies  are  being  formed, 
administration  work  is  being  done,  licences  are  applied  from  the  FSC,  and  then  financial 
summaries are being filed.  So, it was more in terms of administrative work, clerical work, 
even though jobs in the offshore sector were generating sufficient wages and salaries for the 
young professionals who have come back from abroad after having studied or those from the 
University of Mauritius, to have a good lifestyle.  But what it has also done is it has prevented 
them  to  move  up  the  value  chain  and  to  go  towards  that  level  of  sophistication  which  is 
required. 

Now, when we are developing the Financial Services Sector and taking it to the next 
level, we have a problem because we need to get people to be trained very quickly and to 
understand  the  level  of  sophistication.  So,  a  valid  point  has  been  raised  by  hon.  Ganoo  in 
relation to capacity building and training.  This is one of the reasons why we are setting up 
the  Financial  Services  Institute,  Madam  Speaker,  and  the  Financial  Services  Institute  will 

 

36 

actually  do  that.  We  are  teaming  up  with  the  operators  in  the  sector  and  all  these  huge 
insurance companies which have come, and we  have had meetings with them, discussions 
with them.  This is one of the issues that we have raised.  We said ‘when you are going to set 
up in Mauritius, please tell us how do you intend to assist the young graduates in Mauritius 
who are going to be able to get that kind of technology transfer and skills transfer, so that 
they  can  move  into  the  job  market  very  quickly’,  and  we  have  agreed  that  there  will  be, 
between the FSI and those companies, a joint team which will basically be providing such 
training, and this will be done in the Ministry of Financial Services where there is a floor for 
the Financial Services Institute. So, we have thought about that. 

I also agree with hon. Ganoo when he says that we are no longer swimming in a pool, 
we are actually swimming in the ocean.  But, in the ocean, Madam Speaker, there are lots of 
sharks  as  well.    I  listened  to  hon.  Uteem  and  he  was  asking  why  we  are  doing  only  pure 
captives, why we are not moving towards third-party captives. That’s the reason: we don’t 
want the sharks to come in.  That’s why. Pure captives pose very little risk for the sector, but 
when you look at other types of captives, it increases the risk factor because then there are 
third-party risks which are involved. 

With regard to pure captives, if we take the case of a multinational which has decided 
to set up its captive insurance company in Mauritius, where it is insuring all the risks of its 
companies  operating  in  a  different  jurisdiction  in  this  captive  insurance  company  in 
Mauritius, there is no risk because it is self-insurance, whereas if you open it up and you let 
all sorts of third-party captives come into play, then, basically, you will have to have other 
risk mitigating factors which are put in place, and we are not ready for that. This is why this 
Bill, in this Schedule, we are providing only for pure captives at this stage. We must be able 
to walk before we can run.  But run we shall, at some point in time, and then we will amend 
the  law  and  bring  that  in.    This  is  one  of  the  reasons,  to  answer  another  question  of  hon. 
Uteem about section 3, subsection 2, why the Minister has the power to make regulations, 
because to introduce new aspects in terms of modifications, in terms of what is happening in 
the captive insurance world, you must be able to act fast. 

This is a dynamic process. It is not like any industry where you start something and 
then  for  10/15  years,  you  are  going  to  remain  in  a  static  environment.  No,  it  changes.  If 
Guernsey, Bermuda or Singapore or any other jusidiction are modifying what they are doing 
so  that  they  can  attract  those  investments  quickly  into  their  jurisidiction,  we  will  have  to 
respond. And that’s why in a law, the Minister is given the power to make regulations so that 

 

37 

these issues can be addressed. All this sort of fear and apprehension, we have had so much 
which has been said about fear and apprehension when the Good Governance and Integrity 
Bill was being debated last week. This is captive insurance, Madam Speaker, there is no risk. 
In  fact,  there  are  opportunities  and  if  we  can  act  quickly  as  a  jurisdiction,  then  we  will 
certainly have a competitive advantage on other countries and this is why you have section 
3(2). There is no sinister motive. We should stop seeing devils and phantoms everywhere. 

Madam Speaker, in relation to one important issue raised by my hon. friend Bholah, 
BEPS  is  definitely  an  issue.  When  this  Government  took  office  and  the  newly  formed 
Ministry  for  Financial  Services  was  created,  we  had  to  look  at  the  overall  situation  in  the 
financial services industry and, of course, Double Tax Treaties was one issue. We dealt with 
that with South Africa, we have dealt with the Indian one and the process is ongoing but, at 
international  level,  there  are  other  things  happening  which  we  can’t  control.  The  G20,  the 
Minister of Finance has met; base erosion profit shifting is an issue. 

With regard to captive insurance, what my hon. friend Bholah has been stating is that 
it might become an impediment if we end up in a situation of Double Non-Taxation. But this 
is not going to happen. We are looking at a situation here, where we are creating substance 
and we will, of course, be attentive to what is happening at the international level and if there 
are any requirements which come out of BEPS Action 6 Final Report, then we will have to 
adjust very quickly. This is why, again, section 3 (2) allows the Minister to make regulations 
so that you can adjust for these things. 

The other issue which has been mentioned is in terms of the local insurance players 
by  my  friend,  hon.  Uteem.  Now,  he  first  says  that  local  insurers  have  not  been  consulted. 
That  is  not  true!  The  FSC  did  consult  all  the  relevant  insurance  companies,  including  the 
association of insurers and it was done in a participative approach, just like we did with the 
Good Governance Integrity Reporting Bill where we took the debate out there; the FSC as 
regulator has been consulting and debating with the relevant players because this is a highly 
technical piece of legislation. 

Now, the other issue was in relation to life insurance not being on offer, on captive 
insurance  and  also  motor  insurance.  But  this  is  a  contradiction  on  the  part  of  hon.  Uteem 
because, on the one hand, he is saying when we go ahead with captive insurance, we will give 
some big companies the possibility of not insuring with an external insurance in Mauritius 
and  they  can  set  up  their  own  captive  insurance  company  and  they  will  insure  with 

 

38 

themselves.  This  is  not  possible.  Let  me  say  that  firstly,  Madam  Speaker.  Why?  Because 
when  you insure with  yourself,  you need to have a reinsurer because everything has to be 
reinsured  and if it is small in terms of  a level of activity, then basically, no reinsurer will 
come and take that on board. That is why only multinationals and big corporates are doing it. 
In  Mauritius,  we  do  not  have  these  huge  groups  which  can  afford  to  do  that.  But  the 
contradiction is when he says: “why don’t we extend it to life insurance and also to motor 
insurance”. But if you were to do that, and these corporates were to be able to set up their 
own  captives  in  Mauritius,  then  it  would  eat  into  what  Mauritius  Union  already  has  as  a 
market, SICOM has as a market, Swan has as a market, National Insurance Co. Ltd. now has 
as  a  market.  Life  insurance  is  already  being  done  in  Mauritius  by  existing  insurance 
companies. We are not creating a system where we want business of existing companies to go 
away. We are creating a system where we are attracting investors from abroad to come and 
use Mauritius as a platform to do business in Africa and these are the huge multi-nationals, 
the  conglomerates  from  overseas.  I  have  already  mentioned  AXA,  Llloyds,  Palm  Captive, 
Old Mutual and so on. So, this is far from being an issue with regard to this law. 

With relation to competing at the highest level, I believe we are doing that, Madam 
Speaker.  Not  only  have  we  developed  the  insurance  sector  very  quick  -  my  friend,  hon. 
Uteem mentioned the BAI scandal. Only yesterday I had a meeting with the IMF delegation 
which  is  in  Mauritius  and  IMF  actually  came  up  with  a  report  in  2008  on  BAI  and  then, 
subsequently,  in  2012.  The  representatives  of  the  IMF  who  visited  my  office  yesterday, 
amongst other things, which were discussed, they told me: “We can’t understand how your 
Government  has  been  able  to  deal  with  this  issue  in  four  months  and  if  ever  there  is  a 
methodology which has been utilised to be able to deal with such a huge scandal which could 
have caused – and that’s their word, not my word – a revolution in a country, then we would 
want to know how Mauritius has been able to deal with that with what kind of methodology.” 
And I started by saying, Madam Speaker ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker, if you interact properly with the right people, 

you will get the right comments. 

More imporantly, when they asked that question… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

39 

Mr Bhadain: When they asked what methodology was applied, Madam Speaker, the 
answer, the truthful answer was: “We didn’t have a methodology. What we did was we took 
the right decisions at the right time and, at the end of the day, we had to be courageous. True 
it is that we had to take certain risks, but we calculated those risks and we found the solutions 
to be able to help 200,000 families in Mauritius and also the investors in the Bank, because 
the bank and the insurance company is still operating today.” And they told us that they are 
going to look into that so that this model which has been used in Mauritius is going to be 
implemented wherever there is a financial crisis now in terms of how we have dealt with that. 
So, that is BAI. 

Now, we have also done quite a number of other things, Madam Speaker. Apart from 
the insurance sector, apart from BAI and everything else we have done,  which I have already 
mentioned in my speech, on the stock exchange side, we have moved very quickly. We have 
signed  MoUs  with  Johannesburg Stock  Exchange  to  do  cross-listing  in  Mauritius,  primary 
listing in Mauritius, secondary listing in Johannesburg. Companies have already come like 
Coreshares, for instance, which are primarily listed on our Stock Exchange and then on the 
Johannesburg Stock Exchange. With the National Stock Exchange of India, we are going to 
set  up  the  first  African  Currency  Derivative  Markets,  here,  in  Mauritius.  All  the  African 
currencies can be hedged against the USD in Mauritius on our Stock Exchange, hand in hand, 
with the National Stock Exchange of India. We have signed an MoU with Nasdaq Dubai. We 
are setting up a commodities exchange in Mauritius. 

All of that is providing the right conducive environment for us to come with further 
developments in the financial services sector and insurance companies with multi-nationals 
which we are  going to be attracting with this law;  this Captive Insurance Bill is going to 
benefit from the development which is happening on the Stock Exchange as well. Plus, we 
are dealing with the Double Tax Treaty (DTA) with India, plus we are looking at ways and 
means of improving the offerings of the global business companies in Mauritius as well. The 
Financial Services Sector represents 10.4% of GDP. It is the second largest industry in our 
country and I take it as a challenge to take that figure up to 15%. 

With these words I commend this Bill to the House. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

40 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE CAPTIVE INSURANCE BILL 

(NO. XXXII OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 19 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 20 (Consequential amendments) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Chairperson, I move that in clause 20 subclause (2) be deleted 

and replaced by the following subclause -  

“(2)  The Income Tax Act is amended, in the Second Schedule, in Part II, in 

Sub-part C, by adding the following new item –  

28. 
Income  derived  by  a  person  licensed  under  the  Captive 
Insurance Act 2015 during a period not exceeding 10  years from the 
coming  into  operation  of  the  Act  or  such  other  period  as  may  be 
prescribed.” 

Amendment agreed to. 
Clause 20, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clause 21 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
The Schedule was agreed to. 
The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Captive Insurance Bill (No. XXXII of 2015) was 

read a third time and passed. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.35 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.13 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

41 

Second Reading 

THE ADDITIONAL REMUNERATION (2016) BILL 

(NO. XXXIII OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn):  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Additional  Remuneration  (2016)  Bill  (No 
XXXIII of 2015) be read a second time. 

The object of this Bill is to provide for the payment of an Additional Remuneration as 
from 01 January 2016 to employees of the private sector as a measure of compensation for 
the increase in the cost of living for the year 2015.  

The  quantum  of  salary  compensation  for  year  2016  has  been  decided  following 
discussions  with  both  workers’  and  employers’  organisations  at  the  level  of  a  Tripartite 
Committee chaired by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, hon. Seetanah 
Lutchmeenaraidoo. 

The  payment  of  salary  compensation  is  a  legitimate  right  enshrined  in  our  social 
fabric.    Since  1978,  successive  Governments  have  upheld  this  practice  of  compensating 
workers for loss in purchasing power.  This august Assembly has been called upon to vote, 
approve,  legislate  and  to  ensure  that  our  fellow  workers  are  fully  compensated.    I  shall 
therefore tread on the same path and seek your concurrence. 

Today, we  are celebrating the  first anniversary  of this Government.   I stand before 
you as a Minister responsible for the welfare of workers and as such, I am duty-bound to pay 
homage  to  all  workers,  present  and  past,  sons  of  the  soil  and  workers  from  other  lands 
without whose contribution this nation would not have been what it is today. 

These  same  workers,  many  of  them  for  the  very  first  time  in  their  lives,  on  10 
December last year had a tryst with destiny.  They sent a message that they should not be 
taken for a ride, not to be taken as an acquired vote bank.  They believed that this time they 
must  be  different;  that  their  voice  could  make  the  difference.  And  we,  on  this  side  of  the 
House, stand guided by these voices and promises we made. 

Our people had dreams and voted us to fulfil them, to bring hope for the future, to 

bring a degree of comfort and happiness to the needy, the downtrodden and the vulnerable. 

42 

 
We  knew  that  the  road  would  be  long,  the  climb  would  be  steep,  but  we  kept  our 
promises.  We promised to shed the burden of the poor, the old, the orphans and we did so.  
We had promised to raise the universal old age pension by nearly 50% to Rs5,000.  We did it 
without increasing the tax burden.  Social benefits were also increased accordingly. We took 
these measures not to score political points or for the sake of compassion, but to uphold our 
commitments to the people. 

The  payment  of  salary  compensation  is  a  legitimate  social  right  and  an  important 
instrument of social justice as well as poverty alleviation. This Government is committed to 
improve  the  living  conditions  of  the  population  and  has  embarked  on  a  major  economic 
reform to transform Mauritius into a high income economy.  In this process, eradication of 
poverty  is  high  on  the  Government’s  agenda.  To  this  end,  a  Marshall  Plan  is  being 
implemented.  

In proposing the salary compensation for 2016, we are guided by the same concern of 
improving  purchasing  power  and  alleviating  poverty.  We,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  deep 
down in our spirit would have wished that a much bigger effort should be made especially for 
those at the lower rungs of the ladder.  We sincerely explored all ways and means. 

In the circumstances, any responsible Government is bound to take a larger view of 
the economy, look at the challenges ahead and avoid jeopardise the long term interests of the 
nation.  A bigger compensation would have impacted negatively on job creation and would 
have given a wrong signal to much needed investments. We do have at heart the plight of 
thousands of workers who sweat every day in all spheres of economic life, but we also have 
to  strike  the  right  balance  not  to  jeopardise  investment,  economic  growth,  protect 
employment, as well as to ensure the survival of SMEs.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to 
provide the compensation that the unions have asked for and at the same time ensure that all 
jobs are maintained. 

But fortunately we can preserve the jobs and compensate reasonably. We have set the 
right equilibrium.  The inflation rate is at 1.3% as reported by Statistics Mauritius and in a 
spirit  of  national  solidarity,  we  are  providing  workers  earning  up  to  Rs10,000,  a 
compensation of Rs250, i.e. up to 2.5%, nearly double the inflation rate. 

Madam Speaker, we shall, through other measures, pursue our policy of social justice 
and improvement of purchasing power.  Salary compensation is not the only tool to address 
the issue of loss of purchasing power. 

43 

 
Our  pro-poor  policy  of  providing  free  potable  water  to  consumers  whose  water 
consumption does not exceed six cubic metres monthly will benefit 63,858 households and 
not less than 150,000 citizens. The same policy will benefit also 11,725 consumers connected 
to the wastewater network. 

The policy of low electricity tariff  rate will benefit 70,000 households and not less 
than  150,000  citizens.    On  this  item  alone,  a  household  will  save  on  an  average  Rs133 
monthly. 

This Government has maintained the subsidy on Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) to 
households which is equivalent to a contribution of Rs500 per household. Subsidy on rice, 
flour and Liquefied Petroleum Gas stands at Rs810 m. annually. 

Government has also maintained the Youth Employment Programme and for the last 
eleven  months,  some  4,500  youths  have  been  placed  in  private  companies  under  the  said 
programme. The programme has been extended to the public sector and a further 1000 young 
persons are being placed in the public sector.  These measures again will alleviate the burden 
of households having unemployed adults. 

Madam  Speaker,  over  and  above,  the  best  way  to  improve  purchasing  power  and 
alleviate poverty is to increase household income.  The measures I have just enumerated will 
contribute to this end.  The numerous projects announced in the Budget stand as testimony to 
our  endeavour  to  create  meaningful  jobs  which  will  also  improve  household  purchasing 
power and alleviate poverty. 

Madam Speaker, improving purchasing power cannot be a one-off affair.  We shall 
continue  to  review  policies  to  design  actions  targeting  to  improve  purchasing  power.    I 
reckon that it is a difficult task, but we have the will and with the support of the House we 
shall succeed. We are consistent in our approach, anyway. 

Madam Speaker, you will remember that the first legislation that was passed by the 
Government  aimed  at  awarding  uniform  salary  compensation  to  all  workers,  be  it  in  the 
private  or  public  sector.  This  time  also,  the  salary  compensation  will  be  extended  to  the 
employees of the public sector and payment of the salary compensation will be by way of an 
administrative arrangement by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

Once enacted, the Additional Remuneration Bill (2016) will impose a legal obligation 
on all employers in the private sector, whether they are in the formal or informal sector, to 
pay  the  prescribed  minimum  compensation  to  their  employees.    I  am,  in  the  same  breath, 

 

44 

Madam Speaker, making a special appeal to those enterprises which can afford to pay more, 
to do so in a gesture of solidarity.  We stand guided by one of the leading business magnates 
Sir Richard Branson who had this to say - I quote “your employees are your company’s real 
competitive advantage.  They are the one making the magic happen – so long as their needs 
are being met.  He went on to say, I quote “if you look after your staff they will look after 
your customers.  It’s that simple”.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

(5.24 p.m.) 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I think it is éloquent that the poor hon. Minister has 
delivered his speech in the absence of both the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of 
Finance and of the whole front bench in general, but specially in the absence of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance. Later on, I shall raise a fundamental point which 
should, I hope - if he turns up in the meantime - be of special interest to the hon. Minister of 
Finance. But it is shocking! It is éloquent this absence. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  put  a  PNQ  on  the  compensation  salariale  on  02  December  and 
contrary to what the hon. Minister of Finance said, I  believe it is not true to say as he said 
that anyway the tripartite was going to meet. There was going to be a compensation salariale 
and  so  on!  Wrong!  I  know  that  the  private  sector  was  informed  that  there  would  be  no 
compensation salariale this year because inflation has increased by only so much. 

There  was  going  to  be  no  tripartite  meeting,  there  was  going  to  be  no  wage 
compensation this year until Government received a letter signed by all the trade unions on 
26 November. In the absence of the hon. Minister of Finance, the hon. Minister of Labour did 
his duty, did his work and the matter was taken up in Cabinet and surprise, surprise a date 
was announced not only for the tripartite meeting but for the House to meet, to vote on a Bill 
in the absence of the Minister of Finance. He came back and he had to join the bandwagon. 
Our problem especially this year is that, Madam Speaker, during the electoral campaign and 
since  the  electoral  campaign,  expectations  have  been  raised  sky-high.  It  is  the  fault  of 
Government.    Expectations  have  been  raised  during  the  electoral  campaign  and  since  sky-
high. Now we had what was proposed and there was a flare up when Government - I did not 
hear the hon. Minister of Labour make any reference to the ‘first offer’ of Government: a sum 
of Rs150 across-the-board imposé brutalement in a so-called tripartite. The hon. Minister of 
Finance is not with us - announced Rs150 across-the-board. 

45 

 
We all know on every occasion this Government says:  we always give more to those 
at the lowest rung of the ladder and it is a practice. It has been like that for years and not only 
in the case of the wage compensation, but for electricity bills. For years, everything has been 
secured rightly so in favour of the lowest paid, of those at the lowest rung of the economic 
ladder. Why this time the hon. Minister of Finance comes along Rs150 across-the-board: take 
it or leave it? There was a tollé that arose and therefore the offer was amended. I understand 
that the hon. Minister makes no reference at all to this prior offer of Rs150. Now, even the 
amended  version  has  been  found  unsatisfactory  by  the  trade  unions,  Madam  Speaker.  I 
listened carefully to what the hon. Minister said, he gave a long list of measures in favour of 
those lowest paid with low revenues and so on. I listened carefully and I heard him say that 
this wage compensation is being given to the wage earners/employees - his very words ‘to 
compensate  for  loss  of  purchasing  power  due  to  inflation’.  Of  course,  loss  of  purchasing 
power due to inflation affects everybody including les pensionnés, les veuves, les orphelins, 
les  handicapés  more  than  anybody  else  because  they  are  the  lowest  of  the  lowest  on  the 
economic ladder. 

I listened carefully and I say again I find it shocking that the hon. Minister of Finance 
is not present. There has not been any mention of what is going to happen to the pensionnés, 
veuves,  orphelins,  handicapés.  Those  at  the  bottom  part  of  the  salaries  ladder  have  been 
granted  Rs250  up  to  Rs10,000.  We  know  how  much  les  veuves,  pensionnés,  orphelins, 
handicapés  earn,  much  less  than  Rs10,000  and  yet  not  a  word  from  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance, not a word from the hon. Minister of Labour as to what is going to happen to les 
pensionnés, veuves, orphelins, handicapés and so on. It is shocking. 

La même logique demande que ces R 250 soient accordées aux pensionnés, veuves, 
orphelins.  La  même  logique!  Government  has  found  it  necessary  although  a  wage 
compensation of Rs600 was granted a year ago, Government has found it necessary to grant a 
wage compensation of Rs250 to the lowest paid up to Rs10,000. The same logic must apply 
to  les  pensionnés,  veuves,  orphelins  and  so  on.  La  même  logique!  If,  after  a  Rs600  wage 
compensation a year ago, in spite of that wage compensation, Government has agreed under 
pressure to grant a wage compensation of Rs250 to those at the lowest part of the ladder, the 
same logic must apply. A year ago, old age pensions were increased to so much, a year ago 
the same logic what the hon. Minister said – ‘to compensate for loss of purchasing power due 
to inflation’, this affects,  hurts les pensionnés, les veuves, les orphelins more than anybody 

 

46 

else  and  they  deserve  more  than  anybody  else  to  have  les  allocations  sociales  de  veuves, 
orphelins, handicapés increased by Rs250 per month. 

Especially  so,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  are  told  for  the  lowest  paid  amongst  the 
employees,  it  cannot  be  increased  by  more.  So,  we  are  told  because  of  its  impact  on 
employment  and  especially  on  the  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises,  but  in  the  case  of  the 
pensionnés, veuves, orphelins it does not even apply. We are talking of people who receive 
allocations  sociales  from  the  budget,  from  the  Government.  Of  course,  it  will  have  a 
budgetary impact, everything that we do, has a budgetary impact.  But even that argument 
that is used not to grant a wage compensation bigger than what has been granted to the lowest 
paid, even that, Madam Speaker, does not apply at all to les pensionnés, veuves, orphelins.  

So, I was hoping that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, out of due 
respect to the ‘ti dimounes’ of this country, would be present, would listen to us and he is 
supposed to speak.  Today, he will stand up and say: yes, les pensionnés, veuves, orphelins, 
handicapés, all these allocations sociales will be raised by the Rs250 that the lowest paid 
amongst the employees are benefiting from. It is shocking that not only is he absent, not only 
is the hon. Prime Minister absent, maybe he will come later on, I hope he comes and gives 
that guarantee to the House, today before we break.  

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know if he is in Dubai or where, but I hope that he will make up for his absence until 
now  and  that  he  will  come  and  give  the  guarantee  to  les  pensionnés,  veuves,  orphelins, 
handicapés that, yes, what the Leader of the Opposition is saying is right and the same logic 
must  apply  to  les  pensionnés,  veuves,  orphelins,  then  to  the  lowest  paid  amongst  the 
employees.  

Madam Speaker, it is a sad day, we are breaking up today.  This is the last Bill that we 
are  considering.    We  are  supposed  to  have  not  only  consideration  but  respect  for  the  ‘ti 
dimounes’ of this country and it is a very sad day that we are going to end our debate in the 
absence  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  I 
don’t know if the hon. Minister who has forgotten any reference to les pensionnés, veuves, 
handicapés and so on in his long list of social measures taken by Government, whether he is 
entitled  in  the  absence  of  the  Ministers  concerned  -  the  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development - to react positively to what I am saying, but it is very 
sad. It is very sad that this very important piece of legislation for les ‘ti dimounes’ in general, 

 

47 

with its impact on les pensionnés, veuves, orphelins, is being debated in the absence of both 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development and the Prime Minister. I hope we get 
that  guarantee  before  we  part  for  Christmas  and  for  the  New  Year  that  the  pensionnés, 
veuves, orphelins, handicapés will benefit from those Rs250 monthly. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

 (5.35 p.m.) 

Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes):  Madam 
Speaker, it is judicious that Government revised its earlier stand and came out with a more 
equitable offer though insufficient. Unfortunately, it left the impression of being weak and 
lacking  in  constancy  in  spite  of  its  numerical  strength.  The  revised  revision  in  the 
compensation for those earning less than Rs10,000 by Rs250 transcends the money value of 
the offer.  It affects society  and the Government will be well advised to take heed that the 
Mauritian nation manifests increasingly signs of inequality.  

Since  the  mid-1990s,  the  Gini  coefficient  has  kept  increasing  under  successive 
Governments.  Here  was  an  opportunity  for  Government  to  use  the  wage  and  salary 
compensation mechanism review to reverse the trend. A society that is conspicuously divided 
by large wage differences eventually manifests signs of unrest and envy. So, a slightest spark 
may lead to riots, lost days and damage to property. This is not new and we had lived such 
dark scenes at the close of the last century.  

Mauritius is calling for a fairer and more equitable society, and politicians are called 
upon for deeper reflections on the type and nature of future society we want to create. The 
writings are on the wall and this Government created precedence, it created hopes.  On the 
eve  of  the  elections,  it  made  significant  promises  of  transformation,  of  better  lives  and  to 
reverse social and  economic trends that started  more than  a decade earlier. Government is 
addressing many of the problems, especially social and economic problems, in a superficial 
manner rather than addressing them at their roots. Why the people are wild? Government had 
made them used to  a significant increase in  early January without  giving much thought to 
budgetary  repercussions  and  debt.  Public  debt  which  was  just  on  the  rule  of  firm  ratio  of 
60%, currently exceeds 64%, and this is dangerous for internal economic equilibrium. Was it 
a political bribery? Was it a measure to raise the popularity of Government and create a short-
lived  euphoria?  We  need  and  deserve  measures  with  a  more  pronounced  purpose  of 

 

48 

seriousness. Having created such precedent, the people have built legitimate expectations of 
reasonable if not high compensations and the Government did not show the needed flair for 
effective management of the situation until social pressures started building up, and it had to 
yield to that pressure. This does not send the right signals.  

The lower income bracket obviously deserves more than the current compensation, if 
we have hearts, if we are realistic and if we want to avert a social explosion. In the words of 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, we are sitting on a volcano that 
can erupt any time and fair salary compensation is a vehicle to buy social peace. A look at the 
figures published by the Statistics Mauritius reveals unfair and deteriorating rewards for the 
factors of production over time. The share of labour pay in GDP has dropped from over 43% 
to  some  39%  while  that  of  capital  increased  to  almost  60%  over  the  last  decade. 
Notwithstanding  that  capital  needs  to  be  competitive  on  the  world  market,  it  is  no  less 
imperative  that  this  is  not  allowed  to  be  made  to  the  detriment  of  labour.  The  revised 
compensation which will touch some 262,000 wage earners, representing some 47% of the 
total labour force is, therefore, a wise and positive step in the fight to alleviate poverty. For 
some who often find themselves living from hand to mouth, small as this sum may be in the 
eyes of the high income earners, the Rs250 are a real uplift.  

It is true that Government’s policy, recently, had some mitigating effects with regard 
to  access  to  water  and  electricity.  However,  here  too,  it  has  to  be  mentioned  for  sake  of 
accuracy that the Government ran a campaign promising to reduce water and electricity for 
the  whole  country  across  the  board.  It  has  not  kept  its  promise.  On  the  contrary,  with  the 
plummeting price of oil, it ought to have improved over its promises; instead, it continues to 
charge  unjustified  taxes  and  charges  on  all  the  population  which  exasperates  the  whole 
country. The benefits from low oil prices on the world market have not trickled down to the 
population and as such its effect on poverty is minimal.  

Government has justified its offer of compensation on the ground that inflation is 
only  1.3%.  As  such,  it  could  have  done  without  any  compensation  as  compensation  is 
effected usually after inflation exceeds 4.5%. However, the consumer price index on which 
inflation is measured may need to be revised or, at least, a different index created to reflect 
more accurately how it impacts on the lowest quantise of wage earners. Inflation has to be 
measured on the basis of a basket of goods that the average household buys. It appears that 
this basket has been diluted with the arrival of foreign affluent households.  

 

49 

The cost of living in the West of the country is visibly higher than elsewhere. The pattern of 
expenditure may have undergone some changes with the basket of consumption increasingly 
reflecting goods not purchased by people on lower income bracket and which may not have 
undergone significant increases owing to declining commodity prices on the world market. In 
contrast, food items, vegetables account as high as 40% of the income earners in the lower 
bracket. They represent 27% in the CPI consumption basket. 

When  we  look  at  changes  in  prices,  it  is  this  item  that  has  increased  substantially 
while other items have barely changed, which explains the low inflation. These items have 
negligible impact on the income of the upper quintiles. The low-income earners are heavily 
hit. At the same time, thousands of foreign workers who earn low-income do not participate 
in  the  exercise  as  they  do  not  form  part  of  the  Household  Budget  Survey.  Had  they  been 
included, this could have influenced the weight attributed to this item and caused inflation to 
be  higher  than  currently  recorded!  It  is  to  be  noted  that  we  have  about  30,000  to  35,000 
foreign  workers.  The  poorest  quintile  of  the  population  earns  5.4%  of  wealth  generated,  a 
figure that had dropped from 6.7% a decade ago. In contrast, the richest quintile earns over 
47%, a figure that has been rising during the last decade. 

While there are various vehicles to correct and reverse the trend, wage compensation 
is one of the most effective. It is true that the impoverishment of the poorest quintile reflects a 
world trend, but this is no reason that a serious Government, with the welfare of the people at 
heart, can allow this trend to persist without seriously addressing the issue. 

The  compensation  exercise  was  a  golden  opportunity  to  address  the  poverty  trap. 
Instead of taking the bull by the horn, the Minister of Finance created a temporary psychosis, 
dilly-dallied  and  went  for  superfluous  consultations.  Things  that  are  obvious  and 
straightforward should be addressed promptly without leaving any ceremony. 

I would venture requesting Government to initiate action for a deep study that focuses 
on poverty alleviation through an essential needs analysis, incorporating guidelines for salary 
compensation with the objective of evolving towards a fairer and more equitable society. 

Moreover, owing to the social and economic pressure, high transport cost and rising 
cost  to  host  family  visitors,  family  and  relatives  relationship  are  experiencing  shorter 
interaction.  Instead,  some  of  these  interactions  are  being  replaced  today  by  Facebook, 
Internet,  Mobile  Phones  which  are  no  longer  a  luxury,  but  these  have  a  money  cost  and 
impact  heavily  on  the  budget  of  low-income  earners,  but  remains  relatively  cheaper 

 

50 

compared to other means of social interaction. These two have to be fully integrated in the 
Household Survey and updated. 

Family values are an integral part of society and must not be allowed to disintegrate. 
Wealth and income attract and unite families. A decent wage matters much in holding society 
together. Although it is equally important not to dish out money unless justified by the true 
value of work, a decent salary compensation is, therefore, vital, and should constitute a form, 
the rung of a ladder to reverse the widening impoverishment trend. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(5.47 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is interesting to listen to the hon. Minister of Labour and I 
find it quite interesting to find the officers of the Ministry of Labour all present here whom I 
recognise and I salute. They are, as usual, doing an excellent job and I am sure that the actual 
Minister  of  Labour  would  agree  that  his  officers  and  the  civil  servants  of  that  particular 
Ministry are excellent officers and I commend them for their excellent job. 

However,  I  have  had  the  opportunity,  Madam  Speaker,  of  coming  to  this  august 
Assembly on many occasions and presenting the Additional Remuneration Bills. Each and 
every time that an Additional Remuneration Bill is to be brought to the National Assembly, 
there  is  the  meeting  which  is  looked  forward  to  by  all  trade  unions.  It  is  not  necessarily 
looked forward to by employers or employers’ organisations. Certain Ministers do not look 
forward to having those tripartite meetings, but the tradition is something that is real, that at 
each end of the year, we need to address this whole issue of salary compensation and I myself 
did look forward, together with my then officers when I was still Minister of Labour, to that 
particular meeting. 

What I do recall and I have the impression that no one has really talked about it in the 
press and no Member of Government has addressed his minds to it, is that whenever there is a 
tripartite meeting, there are two meetings. The first one is where the hon. Minister of Finance 
together  with  the  Minister  of  Labour  and  the  other  Ministers  of  important  sectors  of  the 
economy meet, meet with the unions, meet with the employers. When there is this meeting, 
Government invites unions of employers and employees to come up with their proposals in a 

 

51 

Technical Committee which is chaired by an officer of the Ministry of Finance, co-chaired by 
another officer of the Ministry of Labour. 

It seems as though, this year, after a very, very long time, there has been no Technical 
Committee that was set up. My question is, Madam Speaker, pourquoi, la raison, j’aimerais 
savoir, j’aimerais connaître, j’aimerais obtenir une réponse à ces questions et, à travers moi, 
les mauriciens, les mauriciennes aimeraient savoir, les syndicalistes aimeraient savoir, les 
travailleurs de ce pays aimeraient savoir, pourquoi, le pourquoi, that this Government has 
decided to go ahead with salary compensation masquerade - I call it - without even having a 
Technical Committee. Every single year, there is a Technical Committee that is co-chaired, as 
I have said it, by both Ministries, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Labour. 

The  hon.Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Soodhun,  knows  that  very  well.  He  is  an 

experienced Minister who has also been Minister of Labour… 

…and trade unionist. True! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

It reminds me of the unchanged melody. 

But now, how come we do not have this Technical Committee? Why is it? I heard 
the  hon.  Minister  talk  about  the  Tripartite  Committee  while  he  intervened.  Tripartism  is 
something, the name itself indicates, does not mean that it is only Government that decides. 
Tripartism means that all parties, the three parties: the Government, the employers and the 
employees, the representatives meet, there is discussion, then there is consensus, a decision is 
taken. This, one of the mechanisms is what we call a Technical Committee.  

Madame la présidente, pour la première fois in contemporary negotiations at the level 
of salary compensation issues, there has been no Technical Committee. At no time has there 
been  one.  There  have  been  three  meetings  -  that  is  the  first  -  and  not  a  single  Technical 
Committee. Why is there a Technical Committee? Precisely to listen to the trade unionists, to 
find out what their input is, what are their requirements, what are the various issues in various 
sectors of the economy, what are the needs of workers de différents secteurs, what are the 
issues that they would like to raise, what is the rate of inflation, listen to the representatives of 
the Statistics Office Mauritius and then listen to the employers, what the employers have to 

 

52 

say, and then get together, write a report and give it to the Ministers of Labour and Finance. 
Then, the Ministers take it to Cabinet and Cabinet decides. 

Mais cette fois-ci, il n’y a pas eu tout ça.  Ce qu’il y a eu en fait, c’est que le ministre 
du Travail, qui est un très bon ami, et malheureusement aujourd’hui je suis triste quand je 
note qu’il a simplement oublié de mentionner deux tristes épisodes. Premièrement, l’absence 
totale de ce comité technique, sans explication plausible ou possible et, deuxièmement, il ne 
mentionne pas, dans son allocution, comment se fait-il qu’on soit arrivé à un chiffre de R 
150.  Et R 150, il fait l’impasse là-dessus! Pourquoi est-ce qu’il fait l’impasse sur ces tristes 
épisodes ? Parce que c’était en fait, Madame la présidente, ce que le Cabinet ministériel avait 
approuvé. En fait, ce que le Cabinet ministériel avait dit était excellent comme suggestion à la 
compensation. R 150! Chaque ministre de ce Cabinet, présidé par nul autre que Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, Premier ministre - absent - était la personne qui avait dit que c’était la meilleure 
des choses. On a même entendu, Madame la présidente, le ministre des Finances dire à une 
syndicaliste, qui était en larmes, que c’était tout à fait normal et qu’il ne fallait même pas 
s’attendre à une compensation, parce que le taux d’inflation était de 1.2 %; pas plus! Alors, 
en d’autres mots, le fait que la somme de R 150 était proposée était une décision collective, 
supported by the whole Government. 

How  come  it  was  totally  supported  at  one  point  in  time,  without  any  Technical 
Committee  again?  It  was  supported;  it  was  defended,  it  was  substantiated!  It  was  also 
defended by not one Minister, not two, but several Ministers of this Government. And all of a 
sudden,  lo  and  behold,  a  week-end  came;  a  Saturday  and  a  Sunday!  It  gave  them  time  to 
reflect that ‘oh, no!  The Rs150 was not good’; whatever they had decided in Cabinet was not 
good! 

So, for the first time, they decide ‘no, we are going to review it, because we have a 
Plan Marshall.’ They did not have it on Friday, but they had it on Monday. Why was not the 
Plan Marshall in their minds a few days before?  Why was not the Plan Marshall - what is in 
this Government Programme - in their minds at the time of taking the decision in Cabinet? 
Why wasn’t it in their minds? How come it came all of a sudden to their minds because they 
had to have a session spéciale du Cabinet ministériel? What cropped up all of a sudden for 
them  to  realise  what  they  did  not  realise?  What  happened  for  them  all  of  a  sudden  to 
remember what they had so easily forgotten? 

(Interruptions) 

 

What? 

53 

Madam Speaker, we are going to have people who are going to stand up after me and 
say ‘well, when  you were Minister of  Labour,  what did  you do?’ When  I was Minister of 
Labour,  there  was  always  a  Technical  Committee.  You  will  remember,  Madam  Speaker, 
because you were in the same Cabinet I was. You will remember it.  Each and every Member 
there! I had the honour of being in a Cabinet with the Leader of the MSM, and he was the 
Minister  of  Finance.  We  shared  the  Committee  together.  We  had  a  Technical  Committee. 
That was done. Today, he is not Minister of Finance.  Someone else is, and he is absent. That 
Minister  of  Finance  should  have  ensured  that  there  was  a  Technical  Committee.    Hon. 
Pravind Jugnauth ensured that there was  a Technical Committee.  Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo 
did not! That is the difference! 

So, my advice to the Leader of the MSM… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I am speaking the truth! This is historical fact!  When he was there as 
Minister of Finance, there was  a Technical Committee. When hon. Duval was there, there 
were  Technical  Committees.  Hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  drowns  the  fish,  forgets  about  the 
Technical Committee.  He should be fired! That is what should happen to him, because I can 
make  the  difference  between  someone  who  really  believes  in  tripartism and  someone  who 
does not believe in tripartism! We can see the difference. My experience, Madam Speaker, is 
only based on what I lived through. I worked with certain Ministers of Finance and it was an 
honour for me to do so. 

(Interruptions) 

I am not one who changes my mind depending on which side of the House I am. I am not 
someone who will change … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

 
Mr Mohamed: I am not someone who will change my position simply because of the 

54 

GPS position being different. 

Oh, no!  He does not mean that! 

(Interruptions) 

But,  then,  the  hon.  -  in  absentia  -  Lutchmeenaraidoo  forgot  about  the  Technical 
Committee. I am sure that a lot of Members here were not even aware that there was the need 
for  one.  I  am  sure  that  a  lot  Members  of  Parliament  here  ne  réalisaient  même  pas,  mais 
réalisent  aujourd’hui  qu’en  fait  il  était  nécessaire,  voire  impératif,  d’avoir  ce  comité 
technique.  Comment se fait-il alors qu’ils ont pu arriver à un chiffre? Un chiffre that they 
took it upon themselves; those Ministers.  

On Friday, there was no Plan Marshall.  On Monday, all of a sudden, it came up as an 
excuse to explain the lacuna in the operative manual of Government.  An excuse to come and 
explain the manquement in the work of Government.  What manquement? Il n’y a pas d’autre 
comité technique! Il n’y a pas de Plan Marshall ! On décide comme on veut ! 

 Mais, there is another element, which the hon. Minister of Labour forgets to mention.  
Il oublie de nous dire, Madame la présidente, qu’il n’y avait même pas de planification dans 
l’agenda des travaux parlementaires. On n’était même pas supposé se voir aujourd’hui ! On 
n’était même pas supposé se rencontrer aujourd’hui, Madame la présidente! On n’était même 
pas supposé être là ! On était supposé être en vacances!  Est-ce que vous savez, Madame la 
présidente, combien d’honorables membres de l’autre côté de la Chambre ont dû renvoyer 
leurs vacances, simplement parce qu’à la dernière minute le gouvernement a réalisé que ‘oh! 
on a oublié la compensation salariale!’? 

Oh, oui ! Le chiffre … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please ! 

Mr Mohamed: Le Chief Whip, lui-même, sait de quoi je parle! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order ! 

Mr Mohamed: Les membres de la presse savent de quoi je parle! 

 

55 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 (Interruptions) 

Order!  Hon. Jhugroo! We will never finish the debates otherwise! 

Mr Mohamed: It is indeed interesting, Madam Speaker, that we are here today, one 
year,  jour  pour  jour.  And  one  year,  jour  pour  jour,  I  come  up  and  tell  Members  of 
Government,  Madam  Speaker,  in  your  presence,  that  they  forgot  what  tripartism  is  about.  
One year later on, they forgot ce qu’est le tripartisme. 

(Interruptions) 

You  see,  Madam  Speaker,  you  will  always  have  people  who  will  come  up  with  stupid 
remarks! 

(Interruptions) 

You will always have people that come up with rubbish! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order in the House, please? 

Mr  Mohamed:  And  the  reason  why  they  cannot  come  up  with  more  intelligent 
remarks is because there is no defense to forgetting what tripartism is all about.  Nothing!  I 
say those words and I am inventing nothing!  I am inventing nothing!  I am just telling you 
what the facts and history say.   

Each and every time when I was Minister of Labour, and before me hon. Chaumière - 
and I would like to listen to them criticise hon. Chaumière who is now at the Prime Minister’s 
Office - and hon. Bunwaree, there was what we call a Technical Committee.  I would like to 
get an explanation on that.  Each and every time! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, I hear hon. Rutnah saying: ‘Kifer’; why do we need a Technical Committee? Oh 
my God, this is shocking! In other words, saying, but why did hon. Pravind Jugnauth have to 
organise  a  Technical  Committee,  when  he  did,  he  was  not  right.  On  ne  défend  pas 
l’indéfendable, s’il vous plaît ! My God!  

(Interruptions) 

 

56 

Second  element!  During  this  masquerade,  Madam  Speaker,  of  meeting  with  the  Trade 
Unions, there was an interesting event that happened, there was the now Minister of Labour, 
Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  saying  that,  soon,  to  a  question  put  by  a 
member  of  the  Trade  Unions  -  there  was  a  question  put  to  him  saying:  ‘what  about  the 
National Minimum Wage?’ And he said: ‘We are coming up with it’. Then again, he did not 
even have an opportunity of saying much because the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  monopolised  everything  as  he  is  used  to.  He  is  used  to  doing  it.  He 
monopolised everything, covered up completely what he had to say because it is his job, it is 
his responsibility. And I feel for him, because the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development took over, monopolised as he usually does.  Mais, au fait, like an elephant in a 
shop of crystal, he walked around, knocked everything over, forget about the Committee, but 
then, what about the National Minimum Wage? This, to report! 

(Interruptions) 

Oh, there he is! So, with your permission, Madam Speaker, may I start again? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please, do not repeat what you have said already! 

Come now with another argument! 

Mr Mohamed: Since, Madam Speaker, you have asked me not to start over again, 
maybe  I  will  briefly  go  over  what  I  have  said,  because  in  those  days,  I  remember,  hon. 
Jhugroo, when  good things were being said against the Opposition, he said: ‘Dire encore! 
Dire encore!’ 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I will not allow repetition! 

Mr  Mohamed:  So,  now  with  regard  to  ‘The  Minimum  Wage  Fixing  Challenge  in 
Mauritius’, a Report prepared by the ILO - and the hon. Minister is aware of it - ready ever 
since September 2014.  And this document has a chapter on precisely what must be done in 
order to set up the whole path, the course is chartered there. Everything is in that Report that 
is  made  public  ever  since  September  2014.  I  read  dans  le  Programme  électoral  du 
gouvernement, l’alliance gouvernementale - avant les  élections - that the first priority, the 
twelve priorities of Government will be what? One of them: a National Minimum Wage!  A 
National Minimum Wage will be introduced within the first three months of Government!  
Three months! We are one year down the road. 

 

57 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Callichurn: On a point of order! At no stage in my speech did I raise the issue of 
National Minimum Wage. The hon. Member is debating on something which I did not even 
mention. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  please  proceed!  You  can  make  your 

remarks on that, we will see what your arguments are. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Well, I am sure that the hon. Minister wanted me to take my breath 
and continue, that’s why he kindly raised an issue for me to just continue and I will continue 
now. I am sure that the hon. Minister did not raise it in his intervention, but why I believe it is 
of relevance, Madam Speaker, is because it concerns wage fixing policy and the policy of 
Government  today  is  relevant  to  discuss  the  wage  fixing  mechanism  of  this  Government, 
because  this  is  this  Government  today  when  we  are  talking  about  compensation,  salary 
compensation; it is this Government that promised the electorates, before the elections, that 
they would come up with a minimum wage fixing legislation within three months,  as soon as 
they take Government.  Three months! Six months later on, nothing is done!  Nine months 
later on, nothing is done; 12 months later on, nothing is done, and I have just heard that we 
are going to be resuming sometime in March. So, it will be many more months, and we will 
still not see what is the national minimum wage fixing challenge for Mauritius. It is there. I 
am not the one, Madam Speaker, that said in my Programme électoral que ce sera dans trois 
mois une priorité de l’alliance gouvernementale. Ce n’est pas moi qui ai dit cela. Ce n’est 
pas moi qui ai écrit ce Programme, ce sont eux, les membres du gouvernement qui ont vendu 
ce Programme. They marketed that Programme in order to get elected  and, today,  I say it 
without any doubt, it is treason on the part of Government to have promised three months 
down the road, but not done. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr  Mohamed:  As  I  said  to  you,  Madam  Speaker,  what  is  really  bad  and  what  is 
really sad, but is to be expected, you know, whenever you go and have arguments that are 
based on facts, that are based on documents, that are based on historical statistics, you are 

 

58 

going  to  always  have  people  that  are  going  to  come  up  and  launch  lowly  attacks  against 
people making those averments because they cannot rise to the occasion. They cannot rise to 
the occasion because they are used to walking down below in the dark. This is what they are 
all about.  

Madam  Speaker,  during  this  whole  debate,  not  today,  but  during  this  masquerade, 
which was led by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development - A masquerade! 
Because I will not go into it again, mais pour la première fois dans 10 ans, au moins il va 
avoir l’occasion d’entendre parce qu’il n’était pas là - il n’y a pas eu de comité technique et 
un comité technique doit être chaired by two of them. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, you still make the point! I have said you 
have made the point.  Please, don’t repeat  yourself. We will never finish with the debates 
otherwise. 

Mr Mohamed: There was a criticism made by the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations, Employment and Training against the National Remuneration Board.  There was 
this criticism made and that criticism was that the National Remuneration Board has had so 
many Remuneration Orders referred to them ever since 2013 and has still not come up with 
the work, the recommendations, and he criticised them last week pour la lenteur. He did do 
that and it was reported in the Press.  

Let me  remind the House that, true it is, there  are many Remuneration Orders that 
have  been  referred  for  full  review  and  those  Remuneration  Orders,  nine  of  them,  were 
referred  for  full  review  and  conditions  of  employment,  precisely  because  the  salaries  that 
were practised thereunder were too on the low side, below 6,500, and those are Remuneration 
Orders that I had referred when I was Minister of Labour. The then Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, now Deputy Prime Minister had promised 
to  the  Trade  Unionists  during  Tripartite  Meeting,  that  he  would  give  extra  funding  and 
assistance  to  the  National  Remuneration  Board  in  order  for  them  to  complete  their  work. 
What  has  happened  to  that  extra  funding?  That  is  my  question.  How  do  we  expect  the 
National Remuneration Board to come up with the work faster in order to help those people 
who  are  suffering  with  low  salaries,  if  the  assistance  that  was  promised  and  implemented 
when we were in Government no longer exists? When I was in Government, hon. Xavier-Luc 
Duval ensured as Minister of Finance and Economic Development that there was, what we 
called Service to Mauritius, people were sent, extra workforce, human resource were sent to 

 

59 

the National Remuneration Board in order to ensure that they have more staff qualified to 
come  up  with  results  faster,  results-oriented  and  faster,  efficiency.  That  was  through  the 
excellent help and support of hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, then Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development. Now - and that is the truth - unfortunately, the NRB is being criticised because 
they have not finished the work, but, at no time, is the funding given to them, the staff given 
to them, the proper mechanisms and means are not given to them in order to ensure that they 
can come up with results faster.  

Let us look at the list of Remuneration Orders referred to the NRB for review.  

(Interruptions) 

Am I going to be interrupted every time? 

Mr Rutnah: There is a point of order, Madam Speaker. The hon. Member is going 

completely out of subject.  

(Interruptions) 

No,  either  it  is  a  point  of  order  or  it  is  not  a  point  of  order.  The  hon.  Member  is  going 
completely out of subject. We are, today, debating the Additional Remuneration Bill and all 
the contention about NRB is out of subject. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  please  proceed  with  your  speech,  but 
please be brief on that. You know that we are debating the Additional Remuneration Bill, that 
you should not go outside the scope of this Bill. Please, be brief on the NRB! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  maybe  the  hon.  Member  is  not  aware  that  the 
National Remuneration Board is also connected to a mechanism for calculation of salary and 
compensation.  What  the  hon.  Member  is  not  aware  of  is  that  whenever  there  is  this 
Additional Remuneration Bill, there is also supposed to be amendments to the Remuneration 
Orders  that  will  have  to  be  prepared  and  the  Minister  will  have  to  sign  these  regulations. 
Maybe, you were not aware. Maybe, now, I can let you know. Maybe, you have to learn at all 
ages.  Anyhow!  So,  since  you  have  been  turned  down  as  far  as  your  point  of  order  is 
concerned, I’ll continue and I thank you, Madam. 

Now, this issue of the National Remuneration Board is clear. It is very clear! A lot of 
those  issues  have  been  referred  to,  but  what  the  National  Remuneration  Board  needs  and 
what the public functionaries need, what civil servants need, is not to be criticised. What the 

 

60 

civil servants require, is simply the support and encouragement on the part of Government. 
C’est  pareil,  tout  comme  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances,  l’honorable  Xavier  Duval  avait 
donné son soutien, non seulement en termes de mots, mais en termes réels. Il s’était assuré 
que la ressource humaine était présente et était dirigée vers cet organisme qui est le National 
Remuneration Board. Mais, le présent ministre des Finances, j’aimerais, moi, savoir - parce 
que je sais qu’il va intervenir tout à l’heure - ce qu’il a fait depuis janvier pour s’assurer que 
le nombre de personnes qui travaillent à la NRB, le nombre d’experts qui travaillent à la 
NRB, le nombre d’équipements à la NRB, des facilités à la NRB puissent être augmentées 
pour  s’assurer  que    le  salaire  de  base  des  gens  de  ce  pays,  qui  sont  concernés  par  le 
Additional Remuneration is increased. Nothing! Nothing was done! 

Madam  Speaker,  as  I  have  said,  I  have  read  with  interest  a  speech  that  was 

pronounced in this august Assembly in 2013. I read the speech and it is in Hansard – 

“This depreciation (…).” 

Here, a Member of this august Assembly talks about the depreciation of the rupee that has a 
negative impact on prices and consumers generally. It was for the Additional Remuneration 
Bill of 2013. In that particular Bill, that hon. Member said, I quote – 

“This depreciation, not only has a negative impact on prices and consumers generally, 
but it has helped, at the same (…).” 

Madam Speaker: Can we know, you are quoting whom, please? 

Mr  Mohamed:  Hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth!  I  was  going  to  just  keep  that  for  the  last 

minute.  You just spoilt my whole thing. 

“(…)  time,  to  fill  the  coffers  of  the  fat  cats  and  the  private  sector  and  then, 
consequently, again, the population was fleeced.” 

I was just looking today at what the USD was vis-à-vis the rupee. My God, it is what? 39 or 
so? 

Almost Rs39? 

(Interruptions) 

So, I am wondering right now and it is quite amazing. I mean, whatever hon. Pravind 

Jugnauth said in those days, is also applicable today. I could simply have said… 

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

Simple! I could simply have said, Madam. I could simply refer to his own words and say: this 
depreciation  not  only  has  a  negative  impact  on  prices  because  the  fact  remains  that  this 
Government can come and tell us whatever they want about 1.2% inflation. The old people, 
troisième âge, getting their Rs5,000, they, outside, are knowing how much – yes, you have 
given them – but how much? What are the prices of commodities out there today? What is it 
costing  them  today?  Prices  of  consumer  goods  have  increased.  Why?  Because  is  it  a 
deliberate policy of the Central Bank or somewhere the Government to ensure that vis-à-vis 
the dollar, there is, indeed, un laisser-aller? In other words, the depreciation, the floating of 
the  rupee,  just  like  that,  and  simply  prices  have  taken  l’ascenseur.  And  today,  that  is  the 
reality, same as hon. Jugnauth had stated in his address. It is exactly what I can say today has 
happened. So, if this was relevant when he said it, it is relevant today. 

So, my humble view, Madam Speaker, is all those issues: prices, consumer goods, le 
coût  de  la  vie  could  have  been  listened  to,  addressed  by  Government  at  a  Technical 
Committee. But, finally, we have, here, a Government that has decided; over three days, their 
stand has changed. All of a sudden, it was discovered that there was a Marshall Plan. All of a 
sudden,  it  was  decided  that  they  were  going  to  increase  it.  But  what  is  unfair,  as  rightly 
pointed  out  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  never  has  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance 
during his televised address, nor has the hon. Minister of Labour whom I do not lay the blame 
at his feet. I cannot lay the blame at his feet. I will not because he is not to blame. The hon. 
Minister of Finance is the one who should, at some stage, have pronounced himself on the 
issues of social aid. The hon. Minister talked about it. He talked about the price of electricity, 
he talked about the pension, he talked about all other social aid, he talked about other benefits 
from Social Security. But how come this year we hear nothing about it? 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition was right. He refers to something which is real. 
The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  a  fait  aussi  une  autre  impasse.  First  one,  Comité  technique. 
Now,  all  the  old  age  pensioners  are  forgotten,  the  orphans  are  forgotten,  the  widows  are 
forgotten. How come nothing was said about those people at the lower rung of the ladder who 
really  need  this  money?  Nothing  was  said!  And,  what  they  put  in  their  Government 
Programme? What  do  they  put  there?  That  they  will  take  care  of  all  those  who  are  at  the 
lower rung of the ladder. They will take care. Gouvernement Lepep, be fine blier le pep! This 
is what they have said. But then, again, after I have sat down, they will say: “Well, you know, 
there is the coffers.” They will say: “What did you do?” What they have kept on looking after 
12  months,  they  will  keep  on  looking  in  the  rear  view  mirror,  but  no  Government  has 

 

62 

succeeded  in  running  a  country  and  being  successful  at  running  a  country  with  its  eyes 
constantly fixed in the rear view mirror, because it has forgotten that it has to look forward in 
order to prepare for the generations to come. What they have done has caused treason to the 
generations to come because they have forgotten the downtrodden, they have forgotten the 
widows,  they  have  forgotten  the  pensioners,  they  have  forgotten  the  orphans,  they  have 
forgotten  the  right  of  the  trade  unionists  to  sit  down  and  talk  about  the  real  meaning  of 
tripartism. This is, indeed, one year on after the elections and it is a sad day for democracy. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

 (6.21 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, it is really unfortunate. I have been listening to the hon. Members on 
the other side of the House. I believe that the priorities have wrongly been addressed. The 
challenges facing this country, especially, at a time when we are debating on this Additional 
Remuneration  Bill,  I  was  expecting  a  more  serious  debate  on  this  issue  of  additional 
remuneration. 

Madam  Speaker,  today,  the  real  challenge  facing  our  country  is  this  issue  of 
productivity which is directly connected to any compensation, additional remuneration that 
we want to give to the workers. 

Madam Speaker, I have gone through the previous debates in this august Assembly 
on  the  Additional  Remuneration  Bill  and  the  arguments  for  or  against  any  proposal  for 
additional remuneration have always aroused much passion on the quantum. For the budget 
that is being allocated or the amount of compensation being given to workers, the Opposition 
is often requesting for an additional increase while the party in Government is pleading the 
prevailing tight economic situation and inflation. This has been the case over the years and 
years. 

However,  this  Government,  Madam  Speaker,  is  also  committed  to  addressing  this 
important issue of productivity. I believe this is the challenge for this country as patriots and 
having at heart the welfare of our citizens and the country at large. The issue of a minimum 

 

63 

wage or additional remuneration cannot be addressed in isolation without consideration being 
given to the important issue of unit labour cost. 

Madam Speaker, in July this year in her speech, Mrs Janet Yellen, Chairman of the 

Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System underlined and I quote –  

is  productivity  growth.  Over 

 “The  most  important  factor  determining  continued  advances  in  living 
standards 
in 
productivity are necessary to support rising household incomes. We do know 
that  productivity  ultimately  depends  on  many  factors, 
including  our 
workforce's knowledge  and skills along with the quantity  and quality of the 
capital equipment, technology, and infrastructure that they have to work with.” 

time,  sustained 

increases 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  high  time  for  everybody,  whether  the  people  in  the  private 
sector  or  those  in  the  Government,  to  understand  that  we  need  better  productivity  without 
which no sustainable growth can be possible. It is in this regard that there is an urgent need to 
address,  at  least,  four  issues  in  the  months  to  come  whenever  we  speak  of  giving  more 
compensation to workers in general.  

One, a culture of discipline at work: there should be no compromise on discipline, and 
for those institutions in the public sector where there is persistent inefficiency at work and 
ineffectiveness  in  decision-taking,  this  Government  will  take  bold  measures  to  ensure  that 
there  is  leadership  and  that  the  human  resources  component  is  optimised  with  a  view  to 
maximising on output. 

Second, an in-depth assessment and review of the role of the National Productivity 
and  Competitiveness  Council:  I  fail  to  understand  the  mission  of  such  an  important 
organisation  today  in  our  country.  MCB  Focus  in  its  issue  dated  June  2015  and  the  latest 
report of the Bank of Mauritius elaborate extensively on the need to stress on productivity. 
But, I have, unfortunately, not seen much initiative on the part of the NPCC. I, therefore, call 
for an urgent restructuring of the institution with a view to ensuring that it understands its 
priorities and comes up  with concrete proposals  and measures  geared towards boosting up 
productivity in the country. 

Third, I propose that the public-private platform set up by the Prime Minister should 
consider  the  setting  up  of  a  National  Wage  Council  in  the  long  run  along  with  the 
collaboration  and  support  of  the  trade  unions.  A  National  Wage  Council  can  become  a 
permanent forum meeting regularly to advise Government on productivity, inflation, income 

 

64 

stability  of  employees  and  make  recommendations  on  wage  increases  on  an  annual  basis. 
This I believe will reduce considerably the amount of pressure on all stakeholders at the end 
of every financial year for a revision on salary. 

Fourth,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  also  a  need  to  understand  the  direct  correlation 
between the issue of innovation, technology and productivity. The issue of unit labour cost, 
Madam Speaker, will never be adequately addressed if we fail to provide the workers with 
appropriate tools and equipment and create an environment conducive to the empowerment 
development and propensity to generate maximum return. 

Madam Speaker, I have stressed on the above four factors because I strongly believe 
that  it  is  high  time  for  us  to  understand  that  the  competitiveness  of  our  economy  relies 
heavily, if not entirely, on the productivity of our human resources and the unit labour cost 
component. Madam Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the MCB Focus in its June edition refers 
to this issue of productivity and let me quote what, again, they have been elaborating on. I 
quote –  

“The external context ever more underscores the significance for Mauritius to 
comprehensively combat its structural inefficiencies with a view to achieving 
strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  thereby  further  strengthening 
nationwide wealth generation, stepping up employment creation, and boosting 
the average living standards of the population. Achieving such an ambition, 
therefore, calls for the espousal of an all-encompassing and bold set of policy 
measures, a key feature being sustained productivity advancements insofar as 
they are viewed as one of the main drivers of long-term growth.” 

Madam Speaker, any Government, under the able leadership of our Prime Minister, 
Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  has  never  failed  in  its  commitment  to  ensure  that  there  is  the 
generation of adequate growth through hard work and discipline prior to the distribution of 
wealth. This has been the case during the 80s and early 90s, but also between 2000 and 2005. 
This Government has just completed its first year in office and along with our Prime Minister 
we have once again embarked on the same mission, that is – 

(i) 

inculcate a culture of hard work and discipline among the working population 
and  ensure  that  there  is  a  culture  of  transparency  and  good  governance 
prevailing in the recruitment process both in the public and the private sectors; 

 
(ii) 

65 

consolidate the existing sectors of the economy where traditionally the country 
has been performing extremely well and has had an edge on others. This is 
how… 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Rughoobur  please,  just  do  not  broaden  the  scope  of  the 

debate! 

Mr Rughoobur: Yes, Madam Speaker, I have been talking about this whole issue of 
how  productivity  is  extremely  important  once  we  connect  it  to  this  issue  of  additional 
remuneration. So, I was talking about this culture of discipline which is important to come to 
this  productivity  issue  and  I  have  been  also  speaking  about  the  need  to  consolidate  the 
existing sectors of the economy where we have been performing well in the past.  

Madam Speaker, we also have to emphasise on the need for training and attracting, 
retaining  a  pool  of  highly  skilled  professionals  that  the  country  will  require  to  fulfil  the 
expectation and requirements of our services sector. Madam Speaker, I have absolute faith in 
the citizens of this country. We have achieved a lot since Independence and, as mentioned 
earlier,  under  his  able  leadership,  our  Prime  Minister  has  stepped  forth  this  country  and  I 
therefore remain positive about the vision. I have to see my countrymen be proud of at least 
one thing: they are satisfied that they have given their optimum in the position they have been 
serving the country for every single cent earned. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(6.31 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam  Speaker,  I 
have been, very often in the past, taking part in the debates in this House when the Additional 
Remuneration Bill has been proposed to the House. Most of the time I have adopted the same 
attitude,  I  have  been  consistent  in  my  approach  and  I  am  today  going  to  stick  to  my 
philosophy  of  looking  at  things  when  Bills  pertaining  to  labour  relations  or  additional 
remuneration or compensation come before this House to be debated. 

I  have  in  the  past,  together  with  my  colleagues  in  the  party  to  which  I  belonged, 
always stressed the necessity, Madam Speaker, to preserve the social stability of our country 
by keeping in mind that the tripartite negotiations are sacred.  For many, many long  years, 

 

66 

tripartite  negotiations  have  taken  place  in  this  country.  They  have  been  enshrined  in  our 
system. They are here to stay. They have become an essential part in Mauritian economic life. 
They have, in fact, become a centrepiece of our economic life. This exercise of annual wage 
compensation is, in fact, the price that we have to pay for sustained social stability in this 
country, and the mere thought of downgrading it or even doing away with it - as, in fact, at 
one time the Labour Government, during the years 2005 - 2015 wanted to do away with it - 
will tantamount to provoking a lot of social unrest in this country. I will repeat what I have 
said in the past and I am still of the same opinion with regard to what I have said concerning 
the tripartite negotiations, Madam Speaker. 

Year in and year out we are called upon to vote, as I have just said, for this Additional 
Remuneration Bill. What looks, Madam Speaker, like a straightforward and simple exercise, 
carries  with  it  a  lot  of  emotional  charges.  This  is  understandable  because  this  exercise 
necessitates intense interaction between the representatives of the different social strata of our 
society, leading most of the time invariably to a lot of acrimony - as we have just seen this 
year, this lady trade unionist crying - and at times even to social mistrust. In our case today, 
Madam Speaker, Government justified its initial proposition of proposing only Rs150 to the 
trade union organisation based on the argument that the inflation in the current year has been 
to the level of 1.3%. This is true. It is a fact that such a low inflationary rate has not been 
experienced in Mauritius for the last 28 years and this can be verified statistically.  

Nevertheless, as have been said before me, the trade unions involved in the tripartite 
negotiations expressed their distress, their dismay in the face of Government’s position and 
decision  on  this  matter.  Subsequently,  rose  the  outcry  of  the  trade  unionists  and  this  was 
supported by different quarters in the  country.  Government had to do some firefighting.  It 
reconsidered its offer. It came up with new proposals which are now contained in the Bill 
which is before this House. I am happy, Madam Speaker, that on this side of this House, we 
address our voice and express our support to the trade unionists in their legitimate and just 
claim. In the last press conference that we organised, I went as far as requesting that, I quote 
– 

“Government should have gone an extra mile for workers at the bottom of the income 
ladder.” 

 

67 

I think Government was right, judicious to reconsider its initial position and to increase the 
additional remuneration.  By so doing, Government wisely eased the tensions and defused the 
situation which could have deteriorated and led to social unrest. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, Government’s decision was right not only because this 
increase will help those at the bottom of the income ladder to catch up with the increase in 
cost  of  leaving,  but  also  because  Government  has  wisely  taken  the  decision  to  pacify  this 
social situation. In any way, the across-the-board’s offer of Rs150, Madam Speaker, would 
not have reduced the wage differential, which we know exists in the country between those at 
the bottom of the ladder and those at the top of the income ladder. 

Madam Speaker, the dissatisfaction of the trade unionists was, in fact, based on the 
following premises. Que le panier de la ménagère qui sert de référence à Statistics Mauritius 
pour déterminer le coût de la vie est passé de 2013 de R 24,815 pour atteindre cette année  R 
26,198.    En  dépit  de  la  compensation  uniforme  de  R  600    depuis  janvier  dernier,  chaque 
ménage,  donc,  a  souffert  d’une  éruption  qui  vaut  à  presque  R  800  par  mois.    Therefore, 
Madam Speaker, we have to keep in mind, firstly, that despite the compensation of Rs600 in 
January of this year, the purchasing power of the workers has kept eroding. What I call as just 
and legitimate outcry of the trade unionists at the initial proposals which was made to them.  

Then,  there  is  the  other  point  which  has  been  raised,  I  think,  by  my  friend,  hon. 
Ramano. When we look at the official statistics, Madam Speaker, for the first quarter - from 
January to March and for the second quarter - from March to June, we can see what are the 
items included in the basket. We can see, for example, prices of air tickets and Internet prices 
are included. Some items listed in this basket of commodities used by the CSO to calculate 
the CPI is, of course, not endorsed by the trade unionists. As being representative of a fair 
representation of consumption in Mauritius, they argue, Madam Speaker, that many items in 
this basket do not reflect the true consumption of those at the bottom of the income ladder. As 
I said a glaring example is the decrease in the price of air tickets or Internet connections in 
the second quarter. This, according to them, is not fair as those with less than Rs10,000 do 
not buy air tickets for private purposes on a regular basis. I think the hon. Minister should 
enlighten the House and offer some explanations as to whether this can be corrected in the 
future. 

When we are debating about additional remuneration, Madam Speaker, I think there 

are three issues which should be on the Table – 

68 

the question of the basket of commodities;  
the question of the remuneration orders, and  
the question of introduction of minimum wage.  

 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Of  course,  today  is  not  the  right  place,  time  and  forum  to  discuss  about  all  these 
issues, but they  are linked to the question of additional remuneration. The debate over the 
issue of additional remuneration, Madam Speaker, is first and foremost a debate about the 
dignity of workers and fairness in a market economy because we know, Madam Speaker, that 
the two main partners in our society, the workers and the employers in this country, do not 
have the same bargaining power for reasons that we all know. 

Therefore, during the first round of negotiations, Government had  argued or it was 
argued that additional remuneration could not be higher than Rs150 because inflation rate has 
fallen as low as to 1.3%. But this is not a very strong argument, Madam Speaker, because 
when we look at the records in the past, since 1982, 1983, up to last year, Madam Speaker, 
and I have the table, the statistics in my hand, so many times and, in fact, when we look at the 
inflation rate and the compensation that was granted, that was offered, most of the time, the 
compensation was same, the same level or was higher than the inflation rate. In 1983, 1984, 
for  example,  in  1985  and  1986,  in  1990,  1991,  in  1992,  1993,  the  inflation  was  2.9%, 
compensation was 5%. I can go on, so many examples, Madam Speaker, in 2002, 2003, for 
example, 2001, 2002 - 4.4 was the inflation rate and compensation was 5%, 2005, 2006, 5.6, 
and compensation was 6.2, I can go on and on, Madam Speaker. So, I don’t think it was a big 
‘cadeau’ that Government made to the workers of this country when Rs150 was offered, on 
the contrary, and I think even when the rate was increased, Madam Speaker.  

And this question of the Remuneration Orders. To a question put by somebody from 
the Opposition to the Minister of Labour, our hon. friend Mohamed in 2010, we were told, 
Madam Speaker, that, in fact, in our country 20%, 75,000 workers representing 20% of the 
labour  force  in  the  private  sector  are  not  governed  by  a  Remuneration  Order.  These 
employees  are  employed  mostly  in  the  information,  communication,  technology,  financial 
sectors,  seafood  sector  and  so  on,  banking,  insurance,  offshore,  there  are  many  of  these 
sectors,  Madam  Speaker,  where  the  workers  employed  therein  are  not  covered  by  a 
Remuneration Order and, as we know also, and this I read that from the communiqué which 
was issued by the hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development on 05 December 2015 
regarding the Remuneration Orders which have not been updated, Madam Speaker. 

 

69 

“Entre-temps le ministre du travail va se pencher sur les quelques 30 Remuneration 
Orders qui n’ont pas été réactualisés depuis plusieurs années.” 

This is an official communiqué de presse sur la compensation salariale pour l’année 
2016 dated, as I just said, on 05 December 2015, issued by the ministère des finances et du 
développement économique. So, for years now, so many Remuneration Orders have not been 
réactualisés,  Madam  Speaker.  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  about  Additional 
Remuneration Order, as I said, which is an essential part now of our economic life in this 
country. We have this mechanism by way of wage setting which is the Remuneration Order 
which is an institution in our country, the NRB, but in fact this should have been the focus of 
the Ministry and the Minister in the past and presently, Madam Speaker, and the Unions, the 
Trade Unionists have been raising this issue about why do we allow the Remuneration Orders 
not to be updated, actualisés for so long, Madam Speaker, and I, myself, personally in 2010, I 
asked a question to the then hon. Minister, our hon. friend, as to whether he would consider 
the advisability of legislating for the provision of a review of Remuneration Orders every five 
years as obtained in the public sector? That is, as the PRB used to do. Now, it is three years, 
but it used to be five years, every five years, Madam Speaker. So, why should not there be a 
law to legislate, to provide for the review of the ROs every five years, Madam Speaker, and 
the hon. Minister replied that although there is presently no legislation governing the review 
of ROs every five years, it is the practice of the NRB to review sectors which have not been 
reviewed for more than five years. I am sure the hon. Minister knows just like me that this is 
not the case. This is why we have so many ROs, I mean, not being updated for such a long 
time for so many years, Madam Speaker.  

So, I think the focus when we are discussing the fate of workers in this country, this 
question of remuneration order stands, Madam Speaker, in the forefront and this is an issue 
which should be looked into closely by the present Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 
Employment and Training and we should settle this issue of allowing ROs to remain outdated 
for so many years.  

On this question of minimum wage.  Again, this question has been raised in the past 
under  the  previous  Government.  The  hon.  Minister,  the  then  hon.  Minister  Mohamed, 
himself,  had  to  answer  questions  about  minimum  wage.  I  listened  to  him  carefully  today 
talking about minimum wage, about reminding this Government that, in fact, in its Electoral 
Programme,  manifesto,  it  is  true,  I  checked  that  also,  the  Lepep  Government,  l’Alliance 
Lepep did announce in its electoral manifesto that it will come up, propose a minimum wage 

 

70 

to the nation and, in fact, I saw that a Cabinet decision on 14 August of this year, there was a 
press communiqué after Cabinet meeting of 14 August 2015 where Government will institute 
a National Wage Council which will… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ganoo,  can  I  just,  please,  interrupt  you.  In  a  spirit  of 
democracy, I think I have given sufficient leeway to all orators to talk on the Remuneration 
Orders and to talk on the minimum wage. So, could you just, please, briefly mention what 
you have to say on the minimum wage without going into the details and come back to the 
essential of the Bill, please. 

Mr  Ganoo:  So,  I  was  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  perhaps  the  answer  to  hon. 
Mohamed’s  question,  but  Government  has  announced  that  it  has  set  up  this  committee,  a 
National Wage Council to look into the salary compensation and minimum wage. We shall 
wait. Because this is a very complex and difficult question, the question of minimum wage, 
Madam Speaker. True it is, it is a redistributive tool, it has its pros and its cons and it has its 
benefits and its cost, but we will see what will happen on this level, Madam Speaker. It is a 
very complex issue, there are various opinions which differ. But to come back to our salary 
compensation which is, in fact, a wage setting machinery in our country, we have, in fact, 
two  complementary  minimum  wage  support  systems  in  our  country:  this  annual  salary 
compensation system on which we are debating today, the annual salary compensation which 
is  a  cost  of  living  adjustment  mechanism  and  it  is  not  a  minimum  wage  increase  fixing 
system as such.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  salary  compensation  system  invariably  provides  that  the 
increase is higher for the lower wages and lower for the higher wages and it does focus on 
supporting  low  wages.  This  has  been  the  trend  all  the  time.  Our  second  wage  setting 
machinery is this Remuneration Order system. I have read some expert research opinion and, 
from the studies made in our country, Madam Speaker, it would seem that the Remuneration 
Order  adjustments  are  higher  than  the  salary  compensation  for  the  lowest  rates,  and  these 
adjustments made in the RO system play more in favour of those who earn lowest wages. 

So,  the  point  I  am  making,  Madam  Speaker,  is  I  think  we  should  look  at  the 
methodology  used  to  calculate  Remuneration  Orders,  enlarge  our  Remuneration  Orders  to 
cover more workers, use mechanisms which are already embedded in our system and make 
them more perfect and effective. The minimum wage will come when it will come, but we 
should  concentrate,  improve  what  we  have  already  in  our  system,  the  mechanism  that  we 

 

71 

have already in our system, that is, the Remuneration Order, make it perfect, and not allow it 
to  become  as  outdated  as  they  have  been  allowed  to  be,  as  I  have  just  pointed  out  in  my 
speech, Madam Speaker. 

Coming  to  this  question  of  tripartite  negotiations  and  this  question  of  the  National 
Wage  Council,  which  the  hon.  Minister  announced  on  14  August  2015,  I  think,  Madam 
Speaker,  this  Government  should  not  repeat  the  dreadful  experience  of  the  previous 
Government. The previous Government, at one time, set up a National Wage Council, which 
gave the deathblow more or less to tripartite negotiations. The setting-up, in those days, of 
this institution was looked upon as a deathblow to the tripartite negotiations, to this tradition 
in  Mauritius.  As  I  said,  the  tripartite  negotiations  have  already  been  a  source  of  social 
stability to our country, and I think Government should be very careful about trying to come 
up and prop up a new institution which will kill the spirit of the tripartite negotiations. 

Madam Speaker,  I shall end up by making one remark on the question of what the 
World Bank ‘Systematic Country Diagnosis’ of June 2015 said about l’appauvrissement de la 
classe moyenne and the link between this pauperisation of the middle class of our country 
with the question of salary compensation. 

« (…)  L’un  des  aspects  les  plus  accablants  de  ce  diagnostic  -  du  World  Bank, 
Madame la présidente - de l’économie était l’appauvrissement de la population, en 
particulier de la classe moyenne et surtout du groupe de 40% se trouvant au bas de 
l’échelle socio-économique. » 

I have a table with me. I tried to find out, from the bottom up to 40%, who were those 
concerned,  and  when  I  looked  at  the  figures,  Madam  Speaker,  it  was  those  earning  up  to 
Rs15,000; from zéro to R 15,000.  In fact, jusqu’à R 5,000, c’est 4.2% - c’est le poids of this 
category in the masse salariale -; jusqu’à R 5,000, c’est 4.2%, R 5,000 à R 7,000, 5.9%, R 
7,000 à R 9,000, 9.7%, ceux earning R 9,000 à R 11,000 represent 9.6%.  When we add all 
this,  it  becomes  to  approximately  44%,  that  is,  up  to  those  earning  Rs15,000.    Rs15,000 
constitute  40%  de  la  masse  salariale.    Let  us  see  what  the  World  Bank  said  about  that, 
Madam Speaker – 

« La période allant de 2007 à 2012 confirme une dégradation du niveau de vie de la 
classe moyenne avec une nouvelle déterioration au cours de ces dernières années vu 
la morosité économique qui a prévalu. » 

La Banque mondiale ne s’arrête pas là. Elle ajoute – 

72 

 
“More  importantly,  income  growth  of  the  bottom  40  percent  of  the  population  has 
been  disappointing  and  increased  at  an  annual  rate  of  1.8  percent  compared  to  3.1 
percent for the population at large.” 

Donc,  la  Banque  mondiale  attire  l’attention  sur  le  fait  que  dans  la  conjoncture,  Madam 
Speaker, I quote – 

“The  middle  class  is  heavily  stretched  and  more  vulnerable.  The  middle  class  has 
shrunk during the last five  years and is increasingly vulnerable to falling back into 
poverty,  putting  growing  pressure  on  the  bottom  40  percent  of  the  population  to 
achieve  or  retain  their  middle  class  status.  Indeed,  the  most  important  driver  of 
poverty reduction is employment, and widening differences in salaries across quintiles 
are the main explanation for the surge in inequality”. 

So, this is the point I wanted to make also concerning the middle class. When we are 
talking about salary compensation, Madam Speaker, we just hope that there will be under this 
Government  and  in  the  future  a  stronger  partnership  between  the  working  class,  the  trade 
unions of this country and the other social strata; a sounder relationship between economic 
partners in our country which are befitting, in fact, in a democratic framework, and this can 
only ensure the proper development of our country. I have done. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! 

 (6.59 p.m.) 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madame la présidente, je souhaite avant tout présenter mes excuses d’avoir raté une partie 
des discussions de cette séance. 

Une forte délégation du FMI est actuellement à Maurice et prend, donc, beaucoup de 
mon temps. Mais, mes officiers ont quand même pris note des propositions qui ont été faites, 
des questions qui ont été posées, et j’espère, donc, pouvoir apporter une réponse là où je le 
pourrais. 

Pour comprendre notre approche sur la question de compensation salariale, il faut le 
situer  dans  le  cas  de  la  stratégie  de  ce  gouvernement.  Cette  stratégie  repose  sur  deux 
composants. 

73 

 
Premièrement,  le  Plan  Marshall  qui  a  été  lancé  par  le  Premier  ministre  lors  des 
dernières élections et qui est un engagement politique de ce gouvernement de faire disparaître 
la  grande  pauvreté  le  plus  vite  possible.  Ça  c’est  le  côté  Plan  Marshall,  et  puis  il  y  a 
évidemment le côté de production de richesse nationale et de partage. 

Sur  la  question  de  production  de  richesse  nationale  et  de  partage,  nous  avons  une 
cohérence qui n’a jamais changé et qui consiste de cette fameuse phrase : ‘que la paix sociale 
a un prix, et que le secteur privé doit apprendre à le payer, et que lorsqu’il y a création de 
richesse nationale, il y a aussi impérativement partage de cette richesse.’ Ce composant de 
production est impératif pour la création d’emplois, pour le développement national. Donc, il 
est difficile d’isoler les deux. 

C’est la raison pour laquelle durant les tripartites j’ai essayé de maintenir un équilibre 
entre l’impératif d’avoir un secteur privé vivant, vivace, profitable et entrainant l’économie 
du développement, et de l’autre côté tenir compte du fait de l’ambition des syndicats. J’étais 
moi-même  syndicaliste  dans  le  passé,  je  comprends  parfaitement,  donc,  l’impératif  des 
syndicalistes  à  se  battre  pour  l’amélioration  du  pouvoir  d’achat.  Les  deux,  je  pense  se 
complètent. 

J’avais  dit,  au  début  des  discussions,  ‘essayons  de  voir  notre  pays  comme  un,  la 
nation comme une et que - pour utiliser une image - nous sommes tous sur le même bateau - 
privé,  public,  syndicat  -  et  que  le  jour  où  le  bateau  coule,  tout  le  monde  coulera.’  Donc, 
quelque part - pour arriver à, non un consensus - j’avais proposé qu’on arrive à un compromis 
qui  puisse  permettre  au  secteur  privé  de  développer  et  qui  puisse  permettre  aussi  au 
gouvernement de poursuivre de l’avant sa stratégie d’un plus grand partage de la richesse et 
surtout d’une protection de ceux au bas de l’échelle. Je pense que c’est cette philosophie qui 
nous  a  guidés,  et  mes  amis  de  l’Opposition  également,  avec  qui  j’ai  travaillé  pendant  de 
longues  années,  ont  aussi  partagé  cette  notion  de  partage  dans  le  développement  et  cette 
notion de protection des gens au bas de l’échelle. 

Ce principe de République à deux vitesses va bien plus qu’un concept, on parle de 5,7 
% de taux de croissance économique d’une île Maurice qui va pouvoir émerger de la trappe 
de la classe moyenne, donc, je me suis posé la question: ‘Est-ce que notre pays peut continuer 
pendant longtemps à avoir une classe possédante, those who have, et une classe qui n’a pas, 
those  who  have  not?’  Ou  bien,  est-ce  que  nous  devons  chercher  un  compromis  qui  puisse 
nous permettre, en 5 ou 10 ans au maximum, à arriver  à un niveau de  développement qui 

 

74 

puisse nous permettre - et là, je réponds à l’honorable Ganoo lorsqu’il parle de la disparition 
de la classe moyenne.  La stratégie qu’on suit actuellement va nous permettre d’élargir cette 
classe  moyenne  et  de  faire  de  sorte  que,  ceux  qui  sont  au  bas  de  l’échelle,  graduellement 
rejoignent cette classe moyenne, donc deviennent beaucoup plus importants. Donc, c’est un 
composant stratégique qu’on ne peut pas ignorer. Il ne peut pas y avoir de développement à 
long terme sans une classe moyenne solide et qui puisse participer au développement.  

Donc, à partir de ces discussions, je crois que l’honorable Shakeel Mohamed a posé la 
question,  à savoir s’il y a eu une rencontre du comité technique lors des négociations. Je dois 
dire que le calcul de l’inflation chaque année est décidé par Statistics Mauritius, une instance 
suprême, qui est reconnue et par le privé, le public et les syndicats. Et j’avais, donc, posé la 
question à ceux présents, s’ils acceptaient le chiffre proposé par Statistics Mauritius qui était 
d’un taux d’inflation de 1,3% au 31 décembre, ou s’il y avait désaccord.  J’étais disposé, avec 
mon collègue, à passer au niveau du comité technique pour laisser discuter et arriver donc à 
un consensus sur le taux d’inflation; il n’y a pas eu de discussion. Les syndicats ont dit: ‘Non. 
On  fait  confiance  à  Statistics  Mauritius.    On  accepte,  donc,  que  le  chiffre  de  1,3%  soit 
correct’. 

Je vais, ici, peut-être répondre à la question de l’honorable Shakeel Mohamed qui a 
soulevé, avec raison, la question du coût de la vie, de la dépréciation du dollar. Je sais qu’il 
est  surtout  homme  de  loi,  donc,  qu’il  n’est  pas  nécessairement  économiste,  mais  le  dollar 
américain… 

(Interruptions) 

Non,  je  le  note  seulement.  Je  ne  suis  pas  homme  de  loi,  donc,  je  ne  connais  pas  ce  qu’il 
connaît ! Pourquoi le taux d’inflation a chuté au plus bas depuis 28 ans, malgré le fait que le 
dollar effectivement a connu une forte appréciation au niveau mondial? Donc, malgré le fait 
que le taux d’échange du dollar ait augmenté, comment expliquer le fait que les prix n’ont 
pas  augmenté?  Et  la  réponse  est  simple:  déflation.    Beaucoup  d’économistes  m’ont  mal 
compris  depuis  des  années  lorsque  j’ai  dit  que  toute  l’inondation  du  système  économique 
avec  l’argent  facile  ne  peut  pas  faire  repartir  la  machine  économique  et  qu’il  fallait  donc 
accepter que nous entrions - j’avais dit ça en 2007 - dans une phase de forte déflation des 
prix.  Et  on  commence  maintenant  depuis  l’an  dernier  à  connaître  ce  que  c’est  que  la 
déflation. 

 
La déflation c’est lorsque les prix chutent. Je prends un exemple, le prix d’un baril de 

75 

pétrole, qui avait atteint 150 dollars, est tombé, hier, à 36.40 dollars.  

Une baisse massive ! Au fait, tous les commodities actuellement sont en chute libre. Ce qui 
implique,  donc,  logiquement,  que  plus  loin  il  y  a  une  baisse  de  la  demande  de  produits 
intermédiaires, ce qui indique aussi une crise économique plus loin. Donc, la déflation est un 
phénomène dont les banques centrales ont peur. Déflation veut dire qu’il y a récession, pire 
que récession. J’avais dit ça avant: on fait ce qu’on veut, la planète va entrer dans une phase 
de  déflation.    Cela  veut  dire  que  les  prix  ne  vont  pas  augmenter  malgré  toute  l’injection 
d’argent facile qui a été mis dans des économies de la planète. 

Vous avez deux indicateurs qui nous donnent une projection de ce qu’il adviendra à 
l’île Maurice et à la planète l’an prochain. Nous avons, premièrement, l’index qui est le CRB 
Index et, deuxièmement, nous avons le Baltic Dry Index. Le Baltic Dry Index parle de fret sec 
de  marchandises.  Le  Baltic  Dry  Index  qui  était  à  10,000  en  2007  est  tombé  aujourd’hui  à 
moins de 500. C’est-à-dire, les ports de cette planète sont remplis de fret de cargo sans cargo. 
Le coût de fret de marchandises quittant la Chine pour aller en Europe a chuté de 35 % en 
deux semaines. Les gens ne suivent pas ces événements.  

Le Commodities Research Bureau Index (CRB) a subi exactement la même chose et 
est tombé plus bas que la crise de 2008. On parle de 2008, 2009 - grande crise économique et 
financière – mais, non ! The CRB Index is lower today qu’en 2008! Le Baltic Dry Index est 
plus  bas  aujourd’hui  qu’en  2008.  Cela  veut  dire  que  la  planète  Terre  est  entrée  dans  une 
phase  de  forte  déflation.  Il  est  possible  -  j’avais  dit  cela  à  un  moment  au  Leader  de 
l’Opposition, que, malgré le fait qu’on parle d’inflation, je pense finir l’année avec un taux 
d’inflation de 1,5 %. On a fait mieux ! 

Donc,  il  faut  comprendre  que  ce  n’est  pas  nous,  c’est  un  phénomène  mondial  et 
deflation is not good news for the planet. Not for us either ! Mais c’est comme ça et l’une des 
conséquences maintenant c’est que ce taux d’inflation influence le taux de compensation! La 
réunion tripartite ne se rencontre pas pour augmenter les salaires ou pour voir les conditions 
de  travail.  La  réunion  tripartite  se  tient  uniquement  pour  compenser  la  perte  du  pouvoir 
d’achat des travailleurs. C’est tout ! Donc, notre rôle est de dire quel est le taux d’inflation, 
les syndicats acceptent, le privé accepte et on dit, maintenant, trouvons une solution, et notre 
approche doit être cohérente.  

76 

 
Le Premier ministre l’a dit depuis les élections, nous allons faire le maximum pour 
rehausser le pouvoir d’achat des plus vulnérables. Ce n’est pas seulement une parole, c’est 
une  parole  qui  a  été  mise  à  exécution  d’une  façon  extraordinaire.  Sur  le  plan  budgétaire, 
Madame la présidente, il est facile de parler d’une augmentation conséquente de la pension 
de vieillesse. Je rappelle que ces différentes pensions touchent 225,000 personnes à Maurice, 
chaque famille Mauricienne. Donc, lorsque nous avions annoncé que la pension de vieillesse 
allait être augmentée de R3,623 à R5,000, je comprends que le gouvernement d’alors avait dit 
que c’était impossible, qu’une telle augmentation ne pourra se faire sans une augmentation de 
la TVA. C’est de l’histoire. Mais je rappelle que, même dans la tête des penseurs de l’ancien 
gouvernement, c’était chose impossible, que ça ne pouvait se faire sans une augmentation de 
la TVA.  Nous l’avons fait! Non seulement nous l’avons fait, mais à peine un changement de 
gouvernement  le  10,  le  11  décembre  j’avais  rassemblé,  avant  même  d’être  ministre,  des 
officiers des finances pour pouvoir payer cette augmentation de pension pour la fête de Noël. 

Il est vrai que la poste  a dû travailler  overtime, que le ministère des Finances a dû 
travailler  overtime  et  que  mon  collègue,  le  ministre  de  la  Sécurité  sociale  a  dû  travailler 
overtime, mais on l’a fait ! On l’a fait  en 15 jours, on a réussi à payer à toute l’île Maurice, 
ceux qui bénéficiaient de la pension de vieillesse, de la pension de veuve, des orphelins et des 
handicapés, tous, au 24 décembre, avaient reçu cette augmentation conséquente. 

En janvier, le taux d’inflation était de 3,2 %, et l’ancien gouvernement avait proposé 
une compensation de R 400 mais nous avons dit, non, faisons le maximum pour que l’argent 
qu’on a aille au maximum à ceux qui en ont le plus besoin. Mathématique très simple, R 600 
pour quelqu’un qui touche R 100,000, avec raison, il vous dira : ‘Même pas capav aster ène 
pizza are sa !’ Mais R 600 entre les mains d’une femme, d’un homme de la zone franche ou 
d’une personne qui touche R 6,000 à R 8,000, c’est beaucoup d’argent ! R 600 sur R 6000 
c’est 10%! Et c’était ça l’objectif du gouvernement: d’alléger la souffrance nationale. On a 
commencé avec les 245,000 bénéficiaires de pension de vieillesse. On l’a étendu à tous les 
travailleurs  de  ce  pays,  Rs600  across  the  board!    Ces  deux  items  ont  coûté  à  l’État  R  7 
milliards – R 7 milliards! - et a augmenté le budget de mon collègue de 40%. Ça ressemble à 
une  mission  impossible  et  on  l’a  fait.  On  a  continué  dans  ce  processus  donc  d’une 
amélioration du pouvoir d’achat de ceux au bas de l’échelle à Maurice. Mon collègue qui est 
ici, le ministre du Commerce, a récemment baissé le prix de l’agneau, du bœuf et du mouton 
et également des produits pétroliers. Mon collègue, le Vice-Premier ministre et ministre de 
l’énergie,  qui  est  à  ma  droite  évidemment,  est  venu  avec  un  social  rate  pour  l’électricité. 

 

77 

C’est  du  jamais  vu.  Et  la  décision  du  Vice-Premier  ministre  va  faire  bénéficier  70,000 
ménages sur leur bill d’électricité. Ce ne sont pas des petites décisions.  

Nous avons aussi pris la décision que les six premiers mètres cubes de consommation 
des messages en termes d’eau seront gratuits. On l’a fait. Oui ou non! On l’a fait non pas pour 
marquer des points.  Je ne suis pas là, Madame  la présidente, pour marquer des points, je 
m’en fous. Je suis là pour servir le pays et servir surtout la nation. Je le fais et je pense que 
j’aurai été ici ou là, je l’aurais fait toujours. C’est une question d’approche philosophique. 
C’est une question de concept de vie.  

Donc, arrivé à la dernière compensation, 1.3% de taux d’inflation!  Et ce n’était pas 
facile de prendre une décision parce que j’ai un budget qui est presque insoutenable. Je vous 
le dis à tout le monde ici. Nous avons augmenté les dépenses publiques de R 7 milliards  avec 
les deux décisions touchant les pensions et la compensation. Je suis venu avec un budget que 
même mes collègues parfois doutaient. Nous avons fait le dernier budget un no tax budget 
malgré  ceci.  Qui  l’aurait  fait?  Nous  faisons  de  la  gymnastique;  certains  vont  le  dire,  non. 
Nous sommes en train de pratiquer une gestion rigoureuse.  

Maintenant, venons ajouter à ceci, la décision touchant la compensation. R 250 à ceux 
au bas de l’échelle, dont ceux qui touchent un maximum de R 10,000 par mois. Je dois ici 
saluer  le  secteur  privé.  Lorsque  les  syndicats  ont  résisté  et  refusé  et  je  comprends  la 
compensation de R 150 qui malgré tout est supérieure au taux d’inflation de 1,3%, c’est du R 
130 au maximum. Mais ayant  écouté mes amis, les syndicats, j’ai discuté avec le Premier 
ministre et il m’a dit : «Voyons si le secteur privé pourrait faire un effort.» Je vous parle de 
l’histoire. Dimanche soir, j’ai demandé à Dev Manraj d’entrer en contact avec la fédération, 
avec la nouvelle centrale qui a regroupé donc JEC, MEF et Business Mauritius. On l’a fait 
dimanche. Lundi, j’ai vu le Premier ministre et lundi midi, j’ai rencontré le secteur privé et ils 
ont  dit  quelque  chose  de  merveilleux.  Ils  ont  dit  qu’ils  sont  disposés  à  jouer  la  carte  du 
gouvernement  de  la  vision  2030.  Ils  ont  dit  que  ça  va  coûter  cher,  ça  va  même  être  très 
difficile pour les PMEs, mais ils acceptaient donc le principe d’une compensation de R 250 
jusqu’à R 10,000. Ce n’est pas beaucoup pour le secteur public. Secteur public, vous le savez 
bien, avec le PRB et tout, les employés sont protégés et donc il y a très peu d’officiers du 
public  qui  ont  été  concernés.  Mais,  par  contre,  dans  le  secteur  privé,  on  a  touché  262,000 
personnes.  Je  crois  que  mon  collègue  avait  raison  de  soulever  la  question  de  ces  fameux 
National Remuneration Orders qui dorment dans les tiroirs de l’ancien gouvernement depuis 
des  années.  Qu’est-ce  qu’ils  ont  fait  avec ?  Et  pourtant  il  faut  trouver  quelque  part  une 

 

78 

solution où le PRB du gouvernement soit compensé par l’équivalent dans le privé à travers 
donc le NRB à travers des remuneration orders, mais qui soient revus régulièrement. Je suis 
pour ça. Et mon collègue l’a dit. Il travaille là-dessus, il travaille aussi sur le minimum vital. 

Donc, pour revenir à la compensation, à partir de l’acceptation du secteur privé, que je 
tiens  absolument  à  remercier,  nous  avons  pu  donc  rencontrer  le  même  après-midi  les 
syndicats  avec  mes  collègues  ministres  et  on  leur  a  dit :  ‘okay,  c’est  bon,  secteur  public 
comme secteur privé, la compensation soit de R 250 jusqu’à 10 000 roupies malgré le fait que 
le taux d’inflation soit très faible.’ Ceci va coûter à l’économie R 1,8 milliards. Vous allez me 
dire que c’est facile, ce n’est pas facile. Ce pays, depuis que je suis ministre des Finances, 
nous entrons dans une phase de forte turbulence en 2016 non parce que nous ne sommes pas 
des  bons  gestionnaires,  mais  parce  que  nous  allons  hériter  d’une  situation  mondiale 
extrêmement volatile dont l’une des conséquences est la phase de déflation et plus loin une 
rechute de la crise financière.  

Donc, comme ministre des Finances, mon rôle est aussi de voir à ce qu’on prépare 
l’avenir. Et là je dois vous dire que 2016/2017 seront deux années pas faciles. Le pays, nous 
serons comme un avion qui essaie de décoller avec des vents contraires très forts. C’est la 
raison pour laquelle je fais appel à la nation de comprendre que nous faisons le maximum 
pour la paix sociale, mais en même temps il y a un prix à payer. Parce que le prix budgétaire, 
le prix économique est très fort alors que nous savons très bien que nous entrons dans une 
phase de turbulence au niveau de l’économie. 

Maintenant, il  y a le Leader de l’opposition qui a posé une question fondamentale. 
C’est vrai. Je m’attendais à ce que la question soit posée avec la compensation. Qu’est-ce qui 
va se passer pour ceux qui sont des bénéficiaires d’aide sociale, pension de vieillesse, pension 
de  veuve,  pension  d’orphelin,  handicapé  et  tout?  Je  vous  donne  quelques  chiffres.    Nous 
avons donc 184,500 bénéficiaires de pensions de vieillesse. Nous avons d’autres bénéficiaires 
45,800.  Nous  avons  donc  presque  225,000  personnes  qui  sont  concernées  par  la  décision 
qu’on  doit  prendre.  Quelle  décision?  Est-ce  que  l’État  -  le  gouvernement  -  a  le  moyen  de 
payer  à  ces  225,000  personnes  qui  méritent?  Je  ne  suis  pas  là  pour  vous  dire  qu’ils  ne 
méritent pas. Nous sommes au contraire, if we can do the impossible, we will do it. Mais la 
question se pose. Est-ce que nous avons les moyens d’absorber un coût - et je vous donne les 
chiffres  -  une  augmentation  donc  des  pensions  de  vieillesse,  de  veuves,  d’orphelins  et  des 
handicapés  par  R  250  à  partir  du  1er  janvier  coûtera  à  l’État  R  748,475,000.  Je  pose  la 

 

79 

question à toute la Chambre. Lorsqu’on dépense, il y a toujours la comptabilité de base, on 
peut donner ce qu’on a.  

Je dois dire ici que cette question a poussé à beaucoup de réflexions au niveau de mes 
collègues qui sont ici, au niveau de ma collègue, la ministre de la Sécurité Sociale qui a dit: 
‘what next?’ Parce que finalement si on dit non, on passera pour des méchants. On dira qu’on 
est sans cœur. Si on dit non, mais peut-être, on dit oui, mais on ne sait pas où on en est ou 
bien si je dis que je n’ai pas dit thème budgétaire pour cette compensation. Je ne l’ai pas. 
C’est vrai. Quoi qu’on décide aujourd’hui, si on décide de donner quoi que ce soit, j’aurais à 
venir au Parlement avec un ESC, parce qu’on n’a pas fait de provision budgétaire pour une 
augmentation de ces pensions.  

Et c’est là peut-être qui fait la différence parce qu’après les consultations, avec mes 
collègues d’ici, j’ai dit : ‘Let us be fair!’ Ça va coûter cher. Je dois informer la Chambre que 
nous avons pris la décision d’augmenter la pension de vieillesse, de veuves et d’orphelins par 
R  250  à  partir  de  janvier  2016.  Ce  sera  fait.  Je  suis  sûr  que  toute  la  Chambre  sera  ravie 
comme nous avons tous finalement une vieille maman ou un vieux papa ou bien quelqu’un 
qui  reçoit  des  pensions.  Je  dois,  en  même  temps,  préciser  que  nous  sommes  en  train 
d’augmenter les dépenses sociales.  

(Interruptions) 

Au fait, mon collègue aura peut-être le budget ministériel le plus important dépassant même 
l’éducation. C’est pour vous dire à quel point nous donnons de l’importance au social, mais 
évidemment cette décision a été prise de façon rationnelle. Evidemment, j’aurais à venir à la 
rentrée  parlementaire  avec  un  ESC  afin  de  faire  approuver  par  la  Chambre  cette  dépense 
supplémentaire  de  R  748,475,000  qui  sera  donc  le  coût  de  l’augmentation  des  différentes 
pensions de R 250 à partir de janvier 2016. 

Voilà  un  peu  donc  la  philosophie  qui  nous  a  guidés.  Je  ne  pense  pas  qu’il  y  ait 
divergence dans cette Chambre au niveau des membres. Nous sommes tous mauriciens. Nous 
sommes tous humains. Je pense que la stratégie qu’on suit, même si elle coûte très cher, est 
peut-être la seule qui puisse donner au pays cette paix sociale et permettre une transition dans 
la sérénité dans le moyen et long terme. 

Voilà donc, sur ces paroles, Madame la présidente, je tiens à seconder totalement la 
motion de mon collègue, le ministre du travail sur la question du National Remuneration Bill. 

Merci. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

 (7.23 p.m.) 

80 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, one  year, one  year has  gone by  and  what a  contrast! What a contrast!  Last  year, 
same time, smile on everybody’s face, Trade Unionists, happy. 

(Interruptions) 

Last week, tears, every one of us saw the tears in the eyes of the Trade Unionists. It is not me. 
I did not cry. The Trade Unionists cried. Why did they cry? Because this Government told 
them that they would be getting only Rs150 and this Government told them that this is not 
negotiable. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is quoted for having 
said - 

« Je suis triste de dire que nous ne pouvons pas revenir sur cette décision. »   

Unilateral decision of Cabinet: Rs150. So, today when I hear the hon. Minister of Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training; when I hear the hon. Minister Finance and 
Economic Development, why did you not last week tell these poor Trade Unionists, tell these 
poor workers that we can and we will give you Rs250? Why? Why last week you had to tell 
them: you will get only Rs150 and that also, we are very generous because this is more than 
the 1.3% inflation? Why? This is what we call a caring Government? Last year, you called 
porte-parole de 
yourself, 
la Confédération syndicale des travailleurs du secteur privé, said -  

l’Alliance 

Chuttoo, 

Lepep, 

this 

year 

Reaz 

«Nous sommes très déçus. A partir zordi zot népli gouvernement Lepep!’» 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, this is what Trade Unionists are saying. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Uteem: This is what workers of this country are saying. These are those who felt 
betrayed.  Betrayed!  I  won’t  use  the  word  ‘treason’  but  they  are  betrayed,  because  this 
Government was elected on the basis of false promise that they were going to take people out 
of  the  poverty  trap.  That  was  the  mandate  of  this  Government.  They  would  be  having  a 
second economic miracle and everybody is still waiting. 

(Interruptions) 

 

81 

Yes, ‘pé vini’, it is coming, it is coming, in the meantime, you can keep dying of hunger, you 
can keep dying of poverty. 

Come to Tranquebar and see the level of poverty that they are living in. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Silence, please! Silence! 

Mr Uteem: Come to Tranquebar and you will see. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, il n’a fallu qu’une année pour que les masques tombent.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Uteem:  Les  masques  tombent.  On  retrouve  le  fier  ministre,  l’honorable 
Lutchmeenaraidoo, qu’on a connu dans les années 80, le porte-parole du secteur privé. Il était 
le seul à défendre bec et ongles ses Rs150. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No. Hon. Uteem, please, you can’t say that he was the porte-parole 

of le secteur privé. No. 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you can’t talk to me on this tone! I won’t allow this!  

(Interruptions) 

I won’t allow this! 

I won’t allow this! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

But you can’t talk to me on this tone! I won’t allow this. I have told him - hon. Uteem - that 
he  cannot  say  this.  He  cannot  say  that  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  was  the  porte-parole  du 
secteur privé.  

 

82 

(Interruptions) 

Now, he cannot say this and this is my ruling. 

(Interruptions) 

I won’t allow him! 

Mr Uteem: So, we have it on Hansard that I can’t say that the hon. Minister is the 

porte-parole of the secteur privé, that is the ruling. We can’t say. 

Madam Speaker: I have told you to refrain from saying this.  

Refrain from saying this. Okay. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am not protecting anybody and I won’t allow you to say 
this! 

No! You cannot say this!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

You cannot say this and if you insist on saying that I am protecting the Government, then I 
will order you out! 

Then, I will order you out! 

Now, please continue! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Berenger: It is a fair comment.  

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, after the Tripartite… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please!  

(Interruptions) 

 

83 

Order! If you want to continue with your speech… 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! I am on my feet! Order!  

Hon. Rutnah, please!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Can I bring some order in this House otherwise, I will have to suspend the session! 

Order, please! Hon. Ameer Meea! Please, order! Hon. Rutnah, order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, order! 

Mr Bérenger: Have you heard what he has said! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, I will make a humble request to 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition, remember we are going to be on holiday, please… 

(Interruptions) 

No. You should not do that. This is the end of the… 

(Interruptions) 

You should not do that. You are the pioneer in this House. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Hon. Baloomoody! Order! I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

Okay! Hon. Uteem, if you want to continue! 

(Interruptions) 

Order  I  had  said.  Order,  please!  Hon.  Uteem,  if  you  want  to  continue  with  your  speech, 
please do so calmly. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Uteem, would you continue now? 

84 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Yes. Repeat what you said.  

Mr  Uteem:  At  the  Tripartite  Meeting  between  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, the Trade Unionists and the representative of the private sector, the 
Trade Unionists walked out. He stayed there with the people from the private sector because 
he defends the private sector. I say it, I will continue saying it and this is the vintage hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo that we have known in the eighties.  

(Interruptions) 

…and  was  it  not  for  the  Trade  Unionists,  was  it  not  for  the  outcry,  was  it  not  for  people 
coming on radio, even all the so-called independent people telling you that.… 

(Interruptions) 

…telling  you  that  you  can  pay,  you  would  never  have  gone  back.  This  is  the  truth.  The 
Government could have paid Rs250. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, order! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  Last  year,  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  quote  what  the  hon.  Minister  said 

about Tripartite. 

‘Le  tripartisme  reste  une  instance  magique,  une  instance  essentielle  au 
fonctionnement de la démocratie. Vous avez d’un côté les syndicats, de l’autre 
les  employeurs  et  puis  le  gouvernement.  Et  le  gouvernement  a  ce  rôle  de 
médiateur  de  trouver  le  bon  milieu.  Le  bon  milieu  c’est  quoi?  Une 
compensation qui soit nécessaire pour les travailleurs mais aussi un niveau de 
compensation qui ne met pas en danger le secteur privé.’ 

And  yet,  when  Mr  Subron,  Trade  Unionist,  asked  him:  can  we,  the  Trade  Union,  make  a 
counterproposal? What does he say? He said -  

«Je suis triste de dire que nous ne pouvons pas revenir sur cette décision.»  

 

85 

So,  who  was  he  defending?  Was  he  defending  the  Trade  Unionists,  was  he  defending  the 
workers or was he unilaterally siding with the private sector? And this is no reason, there is 
no surprise that one of the Trade Unionists said -  

« Mo éna l’impression ou finn fer ène farce avec nous ! » 

They took us for a ride. This is what the hon. Minister did with all the Trade Unionists and 
this reminds me, Madam Speaker, of this despot who said: you know, in my country there is 
democracy, there is pure democracy, I allow everybody to talk and then, I decide. Exactly, 
the same thing, tripartite, you know, you come, you sit there, I, the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development decides Rs150 and that is it. You can’t discuss. If you are not happy, 
walk out. If you have to shed tears, shed tears.  

But I am happy. I am glad that other Ministers and Cabinet got to get him to better 
terms. I am glad and I am sure the hon. Minister of Labour, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and 
other Members of Cabinet manage to convince him that we have to hear the voice of those at 
the bottom of the ladder.  We have to see and to hear those who are suffering most and I am 
glad  that  -  I  am  not  saying  that  Rs250  is  sufficient,  but  at  least,  it  is  an  improvement  on 
Rs150 that was agreed and imposed by the hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo. 

Madam Speaker, what has happened last week in terms of fixing of compensation is 
very  serious  because  now  we  are  left  in  a  complete  dark  as  to  how  compensation  will  be 
fixed. Last year, at the same time and the same place, the hon. Minister of Labour stated – 

“With a view to protecting the most vulnerable and in a spirit of nation-building and 
its endeavour to foster social justice, this Government has decided the bold decision to 
grant (…) Rs600 across-the-board which is well over and above the inflation rate of 
3.3%” 

Last  year, there was  a clear statement  from the  hon. Minister that compensation would be 
paid which is well above inflation rate. Then, we had the Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo who said and I quote – 

« Evidemment,  on  ne  veut  pas  tuer  la  classe  moyenne,  mais  si  on  veut  vraiment 
empêcher que le pays sombre dans une crise sociale, moi je dis qu’il faut donner le 
maximum actuellement à ceux qui en ont le plus besoin. » 

Le maximum à ceux qui ont le plus besoin. Only Rs150, one year later!  

86 

 
« Nous  avons  vu  que,  finalement,  ce  chiffre  magique  de  Rs600  across  the  board 
privilégiait les gens au bas de l’échelle, ce qui explique pourquoi il y a le sourire.»  

That’s why I started by saying there was a smile.  

« Il y a le sourire aujourd’hui sur toutes les lèvres dans ce pays; sourire de satisfaction 
de comprendre qu’ils ont un gouvernement, qu’ils ont un ministre des Finances qui 
sait que, finalement, le VVIP restera toujours les gens les plus pauvres dans ce pays 
sans tuer ni affecter le secteur privé. »  

What a contrast, Madam Speaker!  Last year, the hon. Minister was talking about the VVIPs, 
those who are poor, those who are at the lower rung of the economic ladder. And today, the 
same  Minister  of  Finance  listened  to  only  the  private  sector  and  announced  Rs150.  What 
happened to all these VVIPs? Who has claimed back their rightful title to be the VVIP of the 
hon. Minister of Finance? 

Madam  Speaker,  I  was  very  troubled  by  the  total  absence  of  comments  from  this 
Government about pensioners. If it was not for the PNQ of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
we all know that we, probably, would not even have Tripartite Meetings. It is after the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition raised the question in a PNQ that it was announced publicly, for the 
first time, that the Tripartite Meetings were being held the following day, that was last week. 
I think we have to salute the hon. Leader of the Opposition for having done his homework 
because,  otherwise,  people  would  have  gone  on  holiday  and  just  forgotten  that  there  is 
compensation payable. And today, we have the same thing. 

Were  it  not  for  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  today,  saying:  what  is  going  to 
happen to widows, what is going to happen to the disabled, what is going to happen to the 
orphans, what is going to happen to people in receipt of universal pension, we would not have 
known! Because the hon. Minister of Labour never said anything about it in his speeches. He 
did not say anything! And when the hon. leader of the Opposition raised the question, I could 
see faces across the other side. They did not know what to do. 

(Interruptions) 

They had to go and call the Rt. hon. Prime Minister because the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was 
not  even  here.  They  had  to  go  and  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  what  to  do.  The  hon. 
Minister of Finance was not here.  

(Interruptions) 

 

87 

They  did  not  know  what  would  happen,  and  we  are  talking  about  a  so-called  caring 
Government! A caring Government who has completely forgotten about the old age, about 
the old pensioners, about the disabled, about the orphans! 

(Interruptions) 

As rightly pointed out by hon. Shakeel Mohamed, there is no Cabinet. No, today, we would 
have gone on holiday, people would have forgotten about the old people, they would have 
forgotten about the orphans, they would have forgotten about the disabled, were it not for the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition who rightly raised the issue.  Even then, as I said, the hon. 
Minister of Finance announced something without even going through Cabinet. He took it on 
himself, today, and I am glad he mentioned it because I know that there are lots of anxious 
people  outside  there  waiting  to  know  what  will  happen  to  their  pensions.  And  more 
importantly,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  about  vulnerable  people  who,  in  fact,  spend 
more than what is covered by the inflation rate, because these are people who spend a lot on 
medicines, on vitamins and on special equipment.  All these equipment and medicines are 
important, they are paid in USD and USD have appreciated. 

The hon. Minister of Finance did not see the pertinent point made by hon. Mohamed? 
What he was saying simply was that because the price of the dollar has appreciated vis-à-vis 
la roupie, our import has increased; therefore, we pay more when we go to buy these things. 
And the old people, the disabled pay even more than others because they have special needs 
and  their  special  needs  are  more  costly  than  the  ordinary  Mauritians.  Even  though  we  are 
happy that we have, at least, been able to get from the Government today, a commitment that 
they were going to give Rs250., we still think that if it is possible to make a special effort in 
terms of other incentives, removing certain duties in the Budget to come to further alleviate 
the  burden  on  the  increased  cost  of  living  of  the  most  vulnerable.  I  hope  that  the  hon. 
Minister will also do that on top of the compensation. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  finish  by  reiterating  the  question  that  I  asked  during  the 
PNQ  last  week.  I  asked  the  question  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  and  I  think  that  in  all  fairness,  we  need  to  have  an  answer  from  this 
Government. We all know that the financial year end for 2016 would be 30 June 2016. So, 
the  economic  year  will  start  again  on  01  July.  Will  the  workers  get  a  new  round  of 
compensation  after  01  July  2016?  If  they  don’t  get  it,  when  will  be  the  next  round  of 
compensation? Will it be in December 2016 or would they have to wait till July 2017?  It is 

 

88 

very important because we need to match the compensation with the financial year end both 
for  public  sector  accounting  purposes  and  the  private  sector  accounting  purposes.  It  is 
important to match those two accounting purposes. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Callichurn! 

(7.40 p.m.) 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I would like, first of all, to thank all hon. Members who have 
intervened in the debate which was quite hot and steamy. 

Let me answer to hon. Uteem. I repeat what I have said last year. This Government 
will leave no stone unturned to bridge the gap between the rich and the poor. With this great 
visionnaire,  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  at  the  head  of  this  Government,  a  second 
miracle  économique  is  bound  to  happen  although  there  exists  many  oiseaux  de  mauvais 
augure. 

Madam Speaker, one should not forget that on the very first day of this Government 
when we took power, we reviewed the decision of the previous Government of granting a 
salary compensation of Rs400 to those drawing up to Rs10,000. 

This  Government,  led  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  granted  a  salary 
compensation  of  Rs600  across  the  board  when  inflation  rate  was  only  3.3%.  This  is  our 
commitment, Madam Speaker, and we have the will to eliminate poverty. 

I shall now address the House on the issue of minimum wage. Much has been said in 
the House about the Bill. The minimum wage will become a reality as we have received a 
clear mandate from the  population on 10 December 2014. The draft  Bill, that is, the draft 
Minimum  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill  is  presently  being  vetted  by  the  Attorney-
General’s Office. All trade unions will be apprised of same once the Bill is finalised and I 
have the firm intention of bringing the Bill at the beginning of the next Parliamentary session, 
that is, in March 2016. 

On  this  side  of  the  House,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  no  arrogance  du  pouvoir. 
Although the quantum of Rs150 as salary compensation was decided by Cabinet, the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister felt that an additional effort should be made for all those at the lowest rung of 

 

89 

the  ladder.  I  am  thankful  to  him  and  I  am  also  thankful  to  the  private  sector  for  their 
comprehension in this effort of national solidarity and nation building.  

My  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
responded to hon. Shakeel Mohamed on why there was not a need for a technical committee. 
I should also say that when the issue was considered in a meeting between the trade unions 
and  the  employers,  I  was  there.    It  was  a  unanimous  decision  taken  that  no  technical 
committee is needed. Much has been said by hon. Mohamed. He went on lengthily to talk 
about the technical committee. This is the response to you when there is a dispute which has 
already been resolved, you should not try to resolve it. You have mentioned the NRB. You 
yourself… 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Minister, please address yourself to the Chair! 

Mr Callichurn: Yes. Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about the NRB. It is my 
concern too. Thirteen Remuneration Orders were sent to the NRB in 2013. Hon. Mohamed 
asked why we have not filled vacant positions at the NRB! Why additional staff has not been 
deployed at the NRB! What did he do from 2013 to 2014? What was done by the Labour 
Government to fill those positions so that NRB could work efficiently? 

(Interruptions) 

I can tell you, we are in the process of reviewing the labour legislation and the structure… 

(Interruptions) 

…of the NRB will be reviewed to create a wage fixing mechanism that will be efficient and 
responsive.  

Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please don’t interrupt!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, several other points that have been raised, be it by 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Uteem, hon. Ganoo and, last but not the least, by hon. 

 

90 

Mohamed. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has already dealt with 
those points.  With these words, Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No cross-talking, please! We are at Committee Stage! 

The Additional Remuneration (2016) Bill (No. XXXIII of 2015) was considered and 

agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please don’t interrupt me! 

On motion made and seconded, the Additional Remuneration (2016) Bill (No. XXXIII 

of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(7.50 p.m.) 

END OF YEAR MESSAGE  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, as the tradition beckons, before… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please! 

 
Mr Soodhun:…I move for adjournment, I would like to place on record the work we 

91 

have accomplished in this august Assembly this year.  

The first sitting of the National Assembly was held on 27 January for the Presidential 

Address whereby the Government Programme 2015-2019 was presented.  

As at today, we have had 44 sittings including one special sitting on 12 March on the 
occasion of the visit of His Excellency, Sri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of 
India and another sitting on 04 June for the election of Dr. Mrs Bibi Ameenah Firdaus Gurib-
Fakim, GCSK, CSK, as President of the Republic of Mauritius.  

Thirty three Bills have been introduced and adopted this year. Government replied to 
822 Parliamentary Questions requiring Oral Answers as well as 24 Parliamentary Questions 
requiring Written Answers.  

Furthermore,  Madam  Speaker,  Government  has  replied  to  33  Private  Notice 
Questions  from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  spent  long 
hours answering many detailed questions during the Committee of Supply of the Budget. 

Moreover,  Madam  Speaker,  in  line  with  Government’s  commitment  to  enhance 
Parliamentary  democracy  and  democracy  at  large,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  brought  a 
motion  for  the  setting  up  of  a  Select  Committee  to  look  into  the  modalities  of  live 
broadcasting of the proceedings of the House and matters ancillary thereto.  

There was unanimity on that motion and subsequently the House voted the motion to 
adopt the report of the Select Committee. We look forward to its implementation under your 
able speakership and guidance. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to express our deep appreciation to you for your acute 
sense of fairness and impartiality in presiding over the deliberations of the House and your 
spontaneous guidance whenever the need arose. 

We also thank all the Civil Servants who have assisted in the work of Parliament as 

well as the Police Officers who have always carried out their duties diligently. 

Madam Speaker, may I kindly request you, in the name of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
and  all  Members  of  the  House,  to  present  our  Christmas  and  New  Year  greetings  to  the 
President of the Republic and Mr Fakim as well as the Vice-President, Mrs Monique Ohsan-
Bellepeau. 

 
We  would  also like,  Madam  Speaker,  to  convey  to  you  our  best  wishes  and  to  Mr 

92 

Hanoomanjee and your family for a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 

Our best wishes also go to the hon. Leader of the Opposition and his family as well as 

the other hon. Members of the House and their family. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr  P. Bérenger): Of course, Madam  Speaker,  as 
usual, we join with the Ag. Prime Minister, in addressing our Season’s Greetings to you and 
your staff and to all the Members of the Assembly, but also to Madam the President of the 
Republic and the other personalities mentioned by hon. Soodhun. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  wish  to  associate  myself  with  the  Season’s 
Greetings expressed by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
to her Excellency the President of the Republic and Mr Fakim and to the Vice-President of 
the Republic. I will, with great pleasure, convey the message to them. In my own name and 
on behalf of the staff of the National Assembly, I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition for their kind words and good wishes. 

 I am pleased to extend my best wishes for a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year 
to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Lady Jugnauth, to the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, to the 
hon. Vice-Prime Ministers, to the hon. Ministers, the hon. Leader of the Opposition and to all 
hon. Members and their families. 

I also wish to thank the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk, all the members of the staff of the 
National Assembly, the Serjeant-at-Arms and his officers and all the Civil Servants who have 
assisted in the work of the Assembly,  and convey  to them and their  families my Season’s 
Greetings. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Madam 

Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn to Tuesday 29 March 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 
At 7.56 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 29 March 2016 at 11.30 

a.m. 

