 

1 

 

 

No. 20 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

FRIDAY 10 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION ( Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public)   

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 20 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 10 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.30 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

                                                            PAPERS LAID 
 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 
 

A.  Ministry of Housing and Lands -  
 

(a) 

The Cadastral Survey (Land Surveys) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 
(Government Notice No. 44 of 2015). 
The  Cadastral  Survey  (Land  Surveys  in  Rodrigues)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 45 of 2015). 
The Cadastral Land Survey (Registration of Memorandum of Survey 
and  Survey  Report  in  Rodrigues)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 46 0f 2015). 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

 

(b) 

 

B.  Ministry of Local Government - 
 

(a) 

The  District  Council  of  Savanne  (Fees  for  Classified  Trade) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 47 of 2015). 
The  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  (Markets)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 48 of 2015). 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

ROCHES NOIRES MEGA PROJECT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Roches  Noires 
Mega Project referred to in the 2015-16 Budget Speech, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain and give details thereof, indicating –  

(a) if an Environment Impact Assessment Licence and an Integrated Resort Scheme 

certificate have been delivered therefor;  

(b) the name of the owner and promoter thereof, indicating if he has been delivered 

with -  
(i) an authorisation to purchase the land concerned therewith; and  
(ii) registration as an investor, and 

(c) if the Department of Civil Aviation and the Prime Minister’s Office have objected 

thereto. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam  Speaker,  on  15  September  2005,  the  Board  of  Investment  received  an  application 
from  Roches  Noires  Resorts  and  Residence  Ltd  for  an  IRS  Certificate  for  an  integrated 
development, comprising of two hotels, a golf course, chalets, marina and golf villas, and a 
business park on freehold land of an extent of 352 Hectares at Roches Noires.  

The  application  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Élan  Group,  a  South  African 
enterprise  which  had  developed  several  integrated  property  development  projects  in  South 
Africa.  

The promoter proposed to acquire the plot of land from the local owners, Grand Lake 

Ltd, represented by the Fon Sing Group.  

After  all  Ministries  concerned  had  examined  the  project,  a  Letter  of  Comfort  was 
issued on 06 December 2005 to the promoter, in line with the then established procedures at 
the  Board  of  Investment  (BOI).  The  purpose  of  the  Letter  of  Comfort  was  to  enable  the 
promoters  to  commit  funds  to  finalise  the  detailed  Master  Plan  of  the  project  and  submit 
technical details to enable BOI to issue an Investment Certificate under the Integrated Resort 
Scheme. 

9 

 
On  09  October  2006,  BOI  was  informed  by  Élan  Group  that  Élan  Group  had 
withdrawn from the proposed IRS project and that the new promoters were a consortium led 
by Jean Marie Bain.  

On  30  April  2007,  BOI  issued  a  Letter  of  Intent  to  Roches  Noires  Resorts  and 

Residence Ltd based on a new Master Plan which included a marina. 

Concerning part (a) of the question, the Ministry of Environment issued, on 30 May 
2007, an EIA License for the project.   An IRS certificate was issued on 13 November 2007.  

As regards part (b) of the question, the land of 352 Hectares was originally owned by 
Grand  Lake  Ltd,  whose  main  shareholder  was  the  Fon  Sing  Group.  Two  other  small 
adjoining plots of 4.22 Hectares belonging to Société Yajna and 0.7 Hectare belonging to Mr 
S. Ghurburrun, were subsequently purchased and integrated in the project. So, the total extent 
of land for the project amounted to 358 Hectares. 

The  main  promoters  consist  of  a  consortium  led  by  Mr  Jean  Marie  Bain  with 

Cassiopee (Ile Maurice) Ltée as main shareholder. 

Concerning part (b) (i) of the question, on 30 October 2007, under the Non-Citizens 
(Property Restriction) Act, the BOI issued an authorisation to the IRS Company allowing it to 
acquire the 358 Hectares of land at Roches Noires.  

As regards part (b) (ii) of the question, the BOI had issued to Roches Noires Resorts 

and Residence Ltd, a Registration Certificate as investor on 30 October 2007.  

Madam Speaker, the IRS Company informed the BOI on 11 February 2010 - three 
years later - that it could not raise finance and service its loans due to financial difficulties 
and asked permission to sell 90 Hectares, from the 358 Hectares acquired in 2007, to local 
investors who want to carry out a residential morcellement. The Board of Investment rejected 
the request.   

On  03  May  2010,  Barclays  Bank,  holder  of  various  fixed/floating  charges  on  the 
assets of the IRS Company appointed Pricewaterhouse Coopers Ltd as Administrator of the 
IRS Company.  

 
Messrs  Bonieux  and  Lutchumun  were  appointed  in  March  and  April  2011,  as 

10 

‘Receivers and Managers’ of Roches Noires Resort and Residence Ltd. 

On 05 April 2012, the Board of Investment revoked the IRS certificate it had issued to 

the Company.  

Following a bid exercise the receiver-manager received a pre-sale agreement of the 

property with the YIHE Group from China on 04 September 2012.     

The  YIHE  Group,  established  in  1992,  has  been  involved  in  the  development  and 
operation of large scale master planned communities, luxury residential projects, hotels and 
property management and education industry in China. The company had invested in some 
40 projects in seven major cities across China.  

It has also property development projects in Sydney in Australia, and Boston and Los 

Angeles in the USA.  

The  YIHE  Group  incorporated  the  Island  Summer  Palace  Ltd  in  Mauritius  and 

submitted a business plan in respect of an IRS Certificate on 01 March 2013.   

The project is planned to be implemented in three phases.   

Phase  1  includes:  A  hotel  and  leisure  zone,  a  commercial  zone,  a  business  zone,  a 

convention centre and a waterfront residential area. 

Phase 2 includes: a golf course, golf villas and a club house.  

Phase 3 includes: low-rise residential units, a retirement village and an education hub.   

The project will require investments of some MUR 44 billion.   

I must inform the House that a delegation of the YIHE Group led by its Chairman, Mr 
He Jianliang arrived in Mauritius this morning to finalise discussions. We have proposed to 
the YIHE to go for a Smart City Concept rather than an IRS because we want to avoid the 
“Rich Ghetto” concept linked to IRS and RES.  

Concerning the environment aspects, of the 358 Hectares involved in the project, the 
wetlands and the barachois will be kept in their current state of natural habitat. Those account 
for some 100 Hectares of land. There will be no construction on those land areas and all the 

 

11 

endemic trees and plants will be preserved and  new endemic plants will be grown.  I have 
explained  this  issue  of  environment  because  there  are  objections  and,  rightly  so,  as  to  the 
non-protection of the environment there. Therefore, we have seen to it that the whole ecology 
and environment of this place be preserved totally. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  on  29  May  2013,  les  choses  se  gâtent  the 
Department of Civil Aviation informed the Board of Investment, that the proposed site falls 
within the area for the second runway and as such construction should not be allowed in the 
event of implementation of the northern airport project.  

 

This was clearly a pretext found by the former Government to stop this huge project, 
et les mauvaises langues prétendent que le campement de l’ancien Premier ministre qui est 
juste en face et c’est la raison réelle qui avait motivé, donc, the interdiction to go ahead with 
the project.  

So,  quite  recently,  this  year,  following  –  following  a  Cabinet  Paper,  we  went  to 
Cabinet – Cabinet discussions, the Department has reviewed its decision as no second runway 
is envisaged on this plot of land.  

So, Madam Speaker, this project dates back to 2005 and met with a lot of obstacles on 
its way. So, we are pleased to inform the House that we are on the point of finally kicking off 
the project with the delegation presently in Mauritius 

Mr Bérenger: This was presented as something new, one of the Smart Cities and so 
on, and what we learn now is that it is an IRS project, known project, going back to 2007, but 
marketed as a new Smart City and so on, in the Budget Speech. Can I ask the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, am I right in saying that an EIA certificate was granted 
to the owners at that point in time in May 2007 and an IRS certificate in November 2007? 
Am I right in saying that, in fact, the EIA certificate has lapsed and whether a new request 
has been put in and now, we have learned today that the IRS certificate has been revoked?  
So, can we know where matters stand as far as both are concerned, the EIA certificate and the 
IRS certificate? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: As far as I know, both have lapsed. In fact, the question of 
IRS, Madam Speaker,  we are not playing on words. Experience with  IRS, up to now, has 
shown  us  that  we  have  turned  the  country  into  areas,  what  I  call  real  rich  men’s  ghetto  - 
ghetto for the rich - in the sense that those areas are fenced and reserved for a small class of 

 

12 

people. We feel, in Government, that this type of approach to development is the wrong one 
because  we  are  isolating  from  the  country,  large  groups  of  people  who  are  buying  inside 
those  IRS,  and  this  explains  the  decision  why  we  have  decided  to  review  the  whole  IRS 
concept and RIA concept also and come forward with new proposals which will make those 
projects  more  integrated  in  the  social  environment  whereby  if  there  is  an  IRS  or  RIA  or 
anything, that people who are inside are not in boxes, first condition, and second, that the 
whole population should be in a position to buy, reside and live in those areas also. I think it 
is a beautiful concept, but we are coming out with it in one month - less than one month. The 
BOI  presently  is  working  on  a  new  version  of  IRS  which  will  be  more  integrated  in  the 
paysage, in the social environment and more integrated for a country that is multiracial and 
willing to live with others freely. That’s the IRS and RES. 

On the question of Smart Cities, this is a concept which is different. The concept is 
much bigger, much larger and we are here dealing with the development on 800 acres of land 
which is huge. So, we have not yet convinced the investors. I have met them this morning, 
the hon. Prime Minister met them this afternoon, we have not yet convinced them that the 
project should be converted into a Smart City, but they have agreed, in principle, to go for it. 
In  which  case,  I  would  be  very  happy  because  then  we  are  going  to  have  a  major 
development in Roches Noires which, accidentally, is my Constituency also and that of the 
hon. Prime Minister.  

So, as far as  I know, the EIA licence has lapsed, I asked my officer at the back to 

confirm and, as far as I know also, the IRS certificate also issued in 2007 has lapsed also. 

Mr Bérenger: Yesterday, we learnt that discussions are still ongoing with Jin Fei to 
get that thing going.  In principle, agreement has been obtained and today, we hear that, in 
principle, agreement has been obtained from the YIHE Group of companies. So, these two 
projects, amongst others, were announced when nothing is finalised yet.  

In this case, can the hon. Minister also confirm that - we are talking about a project 
that  goes  back  to  2005  and  2007;  an  IRS  project,  in  fact,  the  whole  thing  went  into 
receivership, as he has said, as from 2011 and the Chinese promoter, the YIHE Group, has 
come in for an IRS project? Now, he is being asked to change to a Smart City Project.  Will 
the hon. Minister confirm that, in fact, more than Rs1.5 billion are owned by the owners in 
bankruptcy, to two banks in Mauritius and what is going to happen as far as this new YIHE 
Group investor is concerned? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes.  Well,  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
would  love  to  know  that  I  received  a  letter  this  morning  that  following  the  reception  and 

 

13 

dinner  of  last  night,  that  the  Jin  Fei  group  has  agreed  to  our  request  and  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister made it through. In fact, Jin Fei has agreed that the 75 acres of land that they will 
keep will be under the lease agreement and will not be sold. This is very important. So, the 
plot of land will not be sold. Second, the 425 acres of land will be returned to the Ministry of 
Housing and Lands.  

I just want the House to note that those 425 acres are fully equipped land with roads, 
electricity, phone and I would value them at a minimum of Rs5 billion. So, I must say that we 
have  made  an  incredible  -  re-established  justice  where  there  was  injustice  for  the  small 
planters  -  and  second,  we  restituted  back  to  the  country,  425  acres  of  fully  equipped  land 
worth at least Rs5 billion. So, this is good news for the country and I am happy that it went 
through. 

As for the second aspect of the question, if we can, naturally approve a new IRS for 
the  group  but,  as  I  say,  then  we  run  the  risk  of  having  800  acres  of  closed  development 
reserved for the favoured few. I don’t want this. We don’t want this. We want a development 
where the whole nation will participate and where people can also buy - Mauritians and non-
resident Mauritians also. So, it is in the interest, I think, of one nation country that we go for 
development which is more integrated.  

I appreciate that this might take some time. It will take some time, but I have already 
this morning, the agreement, in principle, from the YIHE Group that they are agreeable to 
change their IRS to a full-fledged small Smart City. This is what they agreed to this morning. 
We are still under discussions and third, the hon. Leader of the Opposition put the question of 
the bankruptcy. PricewaterhouseCoopers, therefore, is the company that has taken over the 
lead. I need to say also that the one who went bankrupt, Mr Bain, has gone to Court three 
times objecting to the fact that this plot of land be taken over by the Chinese group. We put a 
condition  this  morning  with  the  group  that  they  will  have  to  bear  the  full  cost  of  any 
indemnity that might come out of a Court judgement established by Mr Bain in the process. 
So, we are now at a stage where Mr Bain might go to Court again, but where the promoter 
has accepted to take the full responsibility of whatever the outcome. So, I am covered at this 
level. We are covered also for the approval, in principle, of the Smart City to replace the IRS 
Project, and I think that things will move quite fast. That’s my feeling today. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, discussions are still on to change the requests from 
Government to  change from an  IRS project to a Smart City project and now we hear that 
there are plenty of trouble in Court. Can I know from the hon. Minister - this is a thing that 

 

14 

goes back to 2005-2007 - when does he expect the project in one form or the other to start 
and to be completed? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  no  magician.  This  project  has  been 
delayed since the Labour Government came to power in 2005. They have taken nine years 
and  have  done  nothing,  and  I  am  being  asked  to  give  a  date  when  the  project  will  be 
completed. It will be completed as soon as possible. 

Mr Bérenger:  Even start, the hon. Minister can’t say! Can I ask the hon. Minister not 
to  get  me  wrong!  I  am  not  pushing  for  an  IRS  project,  I  am  just  pointing  out  that  in  the 
Budget Speech this was presented as a Smart City project, new project, whereas it goes back 
to 2005-2007, bankrupt as an IRS project. I am not pushing for an IRS project or whatever. 
Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he understands that I don’t hold a brief on behalf of those 
people? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  fully  understand  the  soucis  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition. It is just that we are pushing through projects which have been sleeping in the 
drawers  of  the  former  Prime  Minister.  This  is  what  has  been  happening.  We  are  not 
inventing,  reinventing  nothing  and  we  have  promised  no  miracle.  We  are  just  saying  that 
those  files  have  been  kept  in  drawers  in  the  PM’s  office  against  the  development  of  the 
country. You know, this project was  going through in 2013. There was nothing to stop it. 
Then, suddenly the PMO said, “No, we have to stop the project because there is going to be – 
what - an airport there”.  We all know that there will be no airport in the North. Then they 
said: “No, there will be a second airstrip that will be completed further down once the airport 
is constructed”. Then, as I told the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the information leaking out 
- les mauvaises langues peut-être - is that the only reason why the project was rejected was 
because  the  campement  of  the  former  Prime  Minister  was  just  opposite.  We  stopped  the 
project, a development of 800 acres on the caprices d’un Premier ministre.  This is what we 
have  been  doing.  The  number  of  projects  which  have  been  stopped  like  this  is  incredible. 
Yesterday, Jin Fei - people now take it for granted that we have worked through and retrieved 
425 acres. That’s easy to say. Who did it? We did it! We worked it through. We negotiated. 
We pinched them.  There was arm-twisting  also, and we did it because  we had to decide.  
Yesterday, we had two meetings because there are two major projects now: one is at Médine 
which  has  been  stopped  because  of  secondary  reasons  -  no  real  big  reasons.  First,  is  the 
education hub and the hon. Minister of Education yesterday took the decision personally to 
remove any obstruction at that level. Second, there was un rail, the old railway system that 
went through the project and the project was stopped because of this. The Médine project 

 

15 

which is a multi-billion project was stopped because one silly officer thought that this road 
track is le patrimoine national. Would you believe it?  It is incredible what we have been 
doing  in  this  country  for  the  past  years.    Yesterday,  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Vice  Prime 
Minister  and  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  had  to  intervene  personally  to  ensure  that 
Médine compensates the Government for this railway track, but does not stop development 
because there is a railway track there. We have been proceeding like this since we have taken 
over in December. People might think this is easy. We are implementing projects which have 
been kept in drawers for long. There are also other new projects which are developing and we 
are working on them, but I need to reassure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that we are 
leaving no stone unturned to tell civil servants that they are not there to say no. Civil servants 
are there because they have to find solutions to problems. I told them yesterday and the day 
before  also  that  I  am  not  chairing  a  committee  to  listen  to  civil  servants  coming  to  the 
committee saying: ‘we can’t do this because of that’.  I said: “No. My question is this: you 
are paid from public funds to find solutions, not to come to me and say there are problems”. 
This  is  our  approach  presently.  This  is  the  approach  which  is  paying  because  those  same 
officers now are returning back to their desk, are taking the same files and are okaying those 
files. I don’t want to make any imputation or any insinuation, but a lot of money has been 
stopping those projects in the past. Lot of bad money! Whether it concerns Jin Fei or whether 
projects are blocked – I come and say: why have they blocked those projects? - waiting for 
money before implementing or approving! I put the question because we are here trying to 
practise  transparency.  We  are  here  for  that.    Sorry,  I  have  taken  some  more  time,  Madam 
Speaker. I wish to apologise. I think that this need to be taken within the global approach that 
we are having now, that we are just opening up old files and getting them new again. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has made a very serious allegation that, in fact, the 
Civil  Aviation,  which,  in  those  days,  was  under  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  has  objected 
because the previous Government used that as a pretext to stop the project whereas we know, 
right or wrong, that long-term the Civil Aviation has been arguing for years that we should 
keep that site in case there is need in five, ten, 20, 25 years for a second airport. Now, the 
hon. Minister is saying that this was a pretext. I repeat the Civil Aviation was under the Prime 
Minister’s Office. Can I know who was the Director of Civil Aviation when supposedly he 
came with that kind of pretext?  Who is the Director of Civil Aviation now? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  That’s a good question to which I don’t have the answer. I 

will just ask my officers.  

(Interruptions) 

16 

 
No,  I  don’t  have  the  answer.  But  for  the  airport,  maybe  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition would wish to know whether this development will stop a new airport project. 
No!  It  is  only  a  projected  second  airstrip  further  down  the  road,  once  the  airport  is 
constructed, that goes on this plot of land. So, even by approving that probably the second 
airstrip is being sacrificed, the plot reserved for the main airport has been kept. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I know, therefore, if there is disagreement on that, there is a very 
serious  allegation  that  it  was  a  pretext  from  the  previous  Government  and  that  now  the 
Director of the Civil Aviation has revoked that decision taken by  I don’t know whom.   If 
taken, can I put in a request that the correspondence between the Civil Aviation and whoever 
– Board of Investment or what have you - be laid on the Table of the Assembly as to when 
the objection was raised and when the objection has been lifted?  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  That’s  a  question  to  which  I  can’t  reply  as  Minister  of 
Finance, but if the hon. Leader of Opposition comes with a formal question, I am sure that the 
hon.  Minister  concerned  with  the Civil  Aviation  will  give  the  reply.    Let  me  just  add  one 
thing. I must say one thing that the same officers who have been resisting those former files 
from  those  major  projects  are  the  same  ones  approving  them  today.  I  have  to  admit  it, 
whether it be the Ministry of Environment, the  Ministry of Housing, the officers have not 
changed. We have changed them. This is the difference. We have changed them into being 
more proactive and taking decisions. Therefore, I would not impute motives on the former 
Director of Civil Aviation.  I don’t know who he is or who is the new one, but if the question 
needs to be answered, I would ask. 

Yes,  but  I  don’t  have  the  reply.  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  can  ask  a 

(Interruptions) 

substantive question.  

(Interruptions) 

It is secondary  at the same time.  I  would say that, in all the Departments we are 
working with, our civil servants have been traumatised under intense pressure and that we are 
now using the same officers, speaking to the same officers and we are encouraging them to 
change their views on life and they are changing.  I am happy with it.   

Mr  Bérenger:    That  is  certainly  a  pretext,  telling  me  that  I  need  to  put  a  formal 
question.  When the question is put now, first, to give us a copy of the correspondence and 
secondly, to tell us who was Director of Civil Aviation when the objection was put and who 
is now that the objection has been raised supposedly?  

17 

 
My last question, Madam Speaker, will be - I do not think there are others – can we 
have any kind of time frame; can we know when we will have an answer from the YIHE 
Group from Guangzhou; do we have any indication when they will provide with an answer to 
the request from Government that we drop the IRS Project and that they should come forward 
with the so-called Smart City Project? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, it might take some time, but then, for a project of this 
magnitude, we are speaking of Rs44 billion of investment, I would not mind waiting for two 
or three weeks or even more. The issue is that, do we want Roches Noires to become an IRS 
or do we want Roches Noires to become a Smart City? I am convinced that Roches Noires is 
much better equipped to become, for the north of the island, a Smart City. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

Question again proposed. 

 
(3.04 p.m.) 

18 

Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):  Madam 
Speaker, let me, first of all, congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and his whole team for 
the preparation and presentation of the Budget 2015-2016. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Budget  contains  a  list  of  measures.  For  sure,  I  am  not  an 
economist, but I have listened to the hon. Members, almost all of them. What I can conclude 
today is that there is unanimity that there are not thousands of options before us. But then, 
Madam  Speaker,  for  sure,  for  us  to  be  able  to  achieve  the  objectives  enumerated  in  the 
Budget, there are a series of factors, I believe, which will have to be addressed as a priority to 
be able to attain those same objectives in the coming year, in the coming years. One among 
them, Madam Speaker, I believe is leadership. 

Let  us  go  a  bit  down  memory  lane,  Madam  Speaker.  Not  too  far  away  in  history, 
couple of months back, only last year, when there was that split in the alliance between the 
MMM and the MSM. I think it is important that the youth of this country get inspired by the 
action of our hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. What he did when there was that 
split, when everybody in the country was saying - MSM 3%? The perception was that MSM 
was nil. But Madam Speaker, the lesson we learnt, the signal that the population sent, I think 
the  youth  of  this  country  should  get  inspired  by  it.  And,  Madam  Speaker,  me  personally, 
there are, at least, five important lessons that I have learnt and I would like to convey it to this 
House and to the youth of this country. Madam Speaker, a leader cannot compromise on its 
principles and values. This is one. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, as somebody put it so clearly and I quote that “in a battle 
when you lose wealth, you lose a lot; when you lose a dear friend, you lose still more, but 
when you lose courage, you lose everything.” 

Third, Madam Speaker, that humility is the best policy. Pas d’arrogance! 

Fourth,  Madam  Speaker,  reading  and  listening  to  theories  of  self-proclaimed  gurus 
like Robin Sharma is not enough to understand the true qualities of a leader. And, Madam 
Speaker, that everything is not possible in politics when we see what we witnessed during 
these last few months, Madam Speaker. I have been reading a bit on Lee Kuan Yew and, I 
think, there is a very interesting citation that I would like to share with the House.  Listen to 
what he said, Madam Speaker, maybe this can be a birthday gift to our Prime Minister today 
– 

 

19 

 “Even from my sick bed, even if you are going to lower me into the grave 

and I feel something is going wrong, I will get up.” 

Madam Speaker, during the last electoral campaign, l’Alliance Lepep made a pledge 
to the population that never again the Parliament in this country is going to remain closed for 
almost  a  year!  We  made  a  pledge  to  the  population  that  never  again  institutions  in  this 
country  would  come  to  such  a  stage  that  the  world  would  be  about  to  call  us  a  ‘banana 
republic’!  Madam Speaker, we made a pledge to the population that we will bring back hope 
on  our  citizens  and  the  youth  of  this  country.  We  also  made  a  pledge  to  the  population, 
Madam Speaker, that we will bring back leadership in this country. We have been walking 
the talk, Madam Speaker. Parliament is meeting regularly, almost every day. Leadership is 
back in this country, Madam Speaker, we have promised transparency and good governance. 
This is what is happening. The cleaning campaign is on. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  a  series  of  measures  after  the  election:  revision  in 
pensions,  revision  in  wages  and  exemptions  in  examinations  of  HSC  and  SC  fees,  but 
equally, Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, the clean-up campaign. All these measures, Madam 
Speaker, were not meant to win votes, because we should not forget that we are only at the 
beginning of our mandate. All these measures, Madam Speaker, are meant to win the heart of 
the people, because nobody knows it better than our hon. Prime Minister and even the hon. 
Minister of Finance that, Madam Speaker, for us to achieve this second economic miracle, it 
is  important  that  the  Government  and  the  population  of  the  country  look  in  the  same 
direction. That was not the case with the former Government, Madam Speaker.  This explains 
the  main  reason  why  the  former  Prime  Minister  and  his  team  were  booted  out  of  the 
Government. 

Madam Speaker, let me come, now, a bit to the measures that have been announced in 
the Budget. But once again, I have been looking very briefly at the few ingredients that made 
Singapore come out from a third world to a first world country. I find, at least, four while 
doing some research works.  There were, at least, these four factors that I would like to share 
with this House, and I believe that we are heading in the proper direction, Madam Speaker.  

Among those factors, the first one, Madam Speaker, was upholding the rule of law. 
When we speak of this whole issue of transparency, good governance, I still remember I met 
the  Minister  of  Finance  in  his  office  a  couple  of  days  back  before  the  presentation  of  the 
Budget and he told me one thing: if we are to win the battle of this second economic miracle, 

 

20 

there is only one factor that is going to enable us to do it and that is transparency and I am 
totally in tune and agreeable with what he said on that day. We need to uphold the rule of law 
and this is what we are doing. We need to have meritocracy and transparency at all levels and 
ensure that separation of powers is effective. 

Secondly,  Madam  Speaker,  competitiveness  of  our  people 

instead  of  only 
competitiveness of the nation - I think the priority is competitiveness of our people and I am 
extremely delighted to read in the Budget that the Minister of Finance has made, as proposed 
that young graduates - our youngsters - those who are today abroad have the possibility today 
after 10 years to come back to their country and build up that pool of experts that we badly 
need to face the challenges ahead. I will have to congratulate the Minister of Finance for this 
excellent  measure  which  is  far  looking  and  very  much  in  the  interest  of  this  country.  So, 
competitiveness of our people is extremely important and I believe we also have to ensure 
that we keep the people, the qualified experts that we have here and prevent brain drain.  

But, third, Madam Speaker, is also the question of image of our country. When we 
speak of branding of our country, we should not concentrate only on selling Mauritius as a 
tourist destination. Image is extremely important. I spoke of upholding the rule of law and 
competitiveness of our people. Third is the question of image, a full branding exercise of our 
country is extremely important and this is my proposal today - that we have to look at how 
we are going to sell our country. We cannot sell Mauritius only as a tourist destination. We 
need to sell it as a package and not only as a tourist destination. People can come here to 
invest, to stay, for stability reasons and for many other reasons, Madam Speaker. We need to 
concentrate on the image of our country and on how we are going to sell the country. 

Finally,  Madam  Speaker,  the  fourth  factor  that  has  contributed  in  transforming 
Singapore into a first world country has been its emphasis on sustainability. As I was telling a 
friend  the  other  day,  if  it  would  have  been  only  for  the  former  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure,  he  would  have  converted  the  Pamplemousses  garden  into  a  bus  terminal, 
Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I wish also to congratulate the Minister of Finance when we speak 
of sustainability for his measures relating to the CSR. But I am fully in tune with what my 
friend  hon.  Jhuboo  yesterday  stated  that  we  have  to  be  very  careful  on  this  issue  of CSR. 
What is my proposal, Madam Speaker? I believe that we cannot leave it to the private sector 
to decide the way they are going to use their funds to finance projects through the NGOs. I 
think my friend hon. Jhuboo on the other side proposed yesterday that we need to target. I 

 

21 

believe that if we are to fight this battle against poverty, let us take two areas for example, 
housing and education, and all the funds be challenged through maybe the Ministry of Social 
Integration  and  those  funds  be  diverted  for  specific  projects  to  fight  poverty.  I  believe  we 
need to ensure that we optimise on those funds that are made available to the Government 
and to the country at large. I believe it would be an excellent tool to fight poverty if they are 
properly channelled and optimised. 

Finally,  Madame  la  présidente,  let  me  come  to  ma  vision  pour  mon  pays.  In  my 
maiden  speech,  Madam  Speaker,  j’avais  mentionné  les  trois  axes  de  ma  vision  pour  mon 
pays.  J’avais  mentionné  l’importance  d’une  Ile  Maurice  libre  et,  aujourd’hui,  avec  ce 
gouvernement, Madam Speaker, on est fier et we can say that aujourd’hui ce pays respire la 
liberté.  Je  vais  aussi  parler  de  ma  vision  pour  une  Ile  Maurice  solidaire  et  avec  toutes  les 
mesures qui ont été annoncées dans le budget concernant la justice sociale, l’équité, Madam 
Speaker, je pense que le gouvernement  et le pays vont dans la bonne direction et c’est en 
phase avec la vision que j’avais personnellement pour mon pays. Finalement, j’avais aussi 
mentionné l’importance de la durabilité qui est le troisième axe de ma vision.  

Madam Speaker, a series of measures have been announced on sustainability as well, 
I am not going to come back to these measures. But, Madam Speaker, let me, before ending, 
make a humble appeal to all the Members of the House; our priority is Mauritius and we need 
to work together to ensure that we meet the four objectives together, whether it is Members 
on this side of the House or the other side. We need to work together hand-in-hand to ensure 
that the four objectives in this Budget are met. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, God bless Mauritius. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 (3.20 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I have had the pleasure of listening to many of 
the  hon.  Members  who  have  intervened  for  this  Budget  of  2015.  There  are  many  new 
Members who have addressed this august Assembly. There are a lot of Members who have 
come back even as Prime Minister to hear us in this august Assembly and former Ministers. 

I have had the pleasure of listening to a lot of  you even though when I was not in 
Mauritius, reading the press, watching the debates online and I would like to take advantage 
of  this  opportunity  I  am  given  here  today  to  say  thank  you  to  the  many  hundreds  and 
thousands of civil servants who, each and every year, toil away until late into the night, help 
every  single  Government  prepare  not  only  the  year’s  work  in  the  background  -  that  of 

 

22 

Government – but, specifically for every single Budget. I am of the view that there are some 
people who are the forgotten lot. There are some people who toil away and do the difficult 
jobs; officers of the Ministry of Finance, officers of every single Ministry and officers of a 
huge  Ministry  like  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  who  have  such  a  difficult  job  and  you, 
Madam Speaker, know it well. You have been there, you have toiled away in the past and you 
have shown that we have a civil service that we can count on and that do a fantastic job. Let 
me place that on record today! Let me also place on record the excellent job that not only you 
are doing, Madam Speaker, but that the officers, the Clerk of this august Assembly are also 
doing because those are things that seem to be forgotten. Those are things that seem to take 
another second seat, or even third, actually.  Because at a time like this, at the Budget time, 
politicians of all regimes that come forward like to hear themselves talking.  Basically, what 
they say, we have the impression that without a politician nothing can be done.  But, in actual 
fact, my view is that the teamwork that exists between a politician and the Civil Service is 
what is of utmost importance.  Without that, nothing works.   So, it is, therefore, important 
and a honour that I pay homage to those thousands of civil servants. 

I do not agree with what I heard the hon. Minister of Finance say today.  For me, it 
was a lack of respect earlier on in today’s session when I heard him, at the PNQ, say that the 
civil servants, once upon a time, did not agree, and now they agree, and that it is them who 
make them do the job right.  This is an attitude which I do not agree with because it shows a 
lack  of  respect  for  the  integrity  of  the  great  majority  of  civil  servants.    I  would  humbly 
request that such remarks are not made against civil servants whom we owe - every single 
Mauritian; women, men and children - a lot to. 

Madam Speaker, this message is for the youth; the young Members of Parliament who 
have come here.  I consider myself as part of them, the same group, even though I have been 
here for slightly longer.  It reminds me of time when we just won power in 2005, and I came 
here for the first Budget.  Hon. Soodhun was on the opposite side.  What did I say in my first 
speech?  What a wonderful Budget! We have really made it! We have done everything that 
the people want! We have really done something amazing!  My speech was so much critical 
about  the  previous  regime  between  2000  and  2005,  saying  that  they  have  done  nothing, 
whereas with this first Budget I congratulated the then hon. Rama Sithanen.  And then, in 
2010,  I congratulated hon. Jugnauth for his excellent Budget, and later on,  I congratulated 
hon. Xavier Duval for his excellent Budget. 

I was congratulating everyone. 

(Interruptions) 

23 

 
What I am trying to get at is a simple thing.  Young Members, you have dynamism, 
you have energy, you have the wish to serve your country.  Do not change.  Keep that going.  
Be steadfast.  Be strong and look forward.  But what I would like to share with you - In my 
shortest experience, allow me in my most humble way, to share that with you. You see, any 
Budget  for  any  regime,  is  but  a  declaration  of  intent.  Whether  it  was  Rama  Sithanen 
presenting  his  Budget  after 
it  was  hon.  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo only this year; whether it was hon. Duval or hon. Ringadoo in the 70s or 
whether it was hon. Bérenger, it was a declaration of intent. And, yes, it is and was actually 
early days for me to congratulate everyone in 2005, 2006 and 2007.  Now, with experience, 
I’ve stopped. 

the  victory  of  2005;  whether 

(Interruptions) 

No.    But  let  me  just  say  that  I  congratulate  this  Government  for  having  been  bold 
enough  to  try  to  come  up  with  things.    Everyone’s  intention  here  is  obviously  not  to  do 
wrong,  but  to  do  good.    Now,  will  the  Government  succeed,  Madam  Speaker?    That  is 
another set of questions. 

As far as I am concerned, I remember the days when we used to live in a system, and 
my party, the Labour Party, from 2005 until 2010, where we heard a lot of what hon. Jhugroo 
just said:  capitaine bon!  In those days, when he was with us, he also said it for the former 
Prime Minister actually.  He was the very one who said ‘capitaine bon’ to the former Prime 
Minister.  And, today, he is saying … 

(Interruptions) 

I thank him for his honesty.  He has just confessed, and he has made my task easier. 
Now, what do the youth out there wonder when they listen to us?  What do the youth 
out there think when they read our speeches, when they read Hansard; when they see hon. 
Jhugroo  for  a  few  months  congratulating  the  former  Prime  Minister;  when  they  see  hon. 
Duval for a few years - let’s say 90% of the mandate that he spent with us - congratulate the 
former Government and the former Prime Minister, and now say something else? 

(Interruptions) 

Oh, yes, we will get to that!  I will leave that for the hon. Member.  I will hear the 

hon. Member talking later on. 

What I am trying to say here is that if only we could all stop toeing any line, and we 
just toe only one thing: our conscience and the interest of the nation.  What I am trying to get 
at here is - I was reading a speech in the press, and that makes interesting reading - I am only 
looking at what we do as Members of Parliament.  I was reading that, in 2005, at the time 

 

24 

when prior to the former Government coming to power, the unemployment rate - and the hon. 
Minister of Labour most probably would be happy to hear that - in 2005, prior to the elections 
of December, was of 9.6%.  People in Mauritius say that people have a short memory.  And 
we go on and on and say that today’s unemployment rate is of such a figure that it makes it 
very  dangerous  for  every  single  person  in  this  country.    That  is  true!  It  is  a  high 
unemployment  rate  of  8%.    It  is.    But,  then,  what  we  seem  to  forget  is  what  the 
unemployment rate was  in 2005 at the time of the end of the mandate of an MSM/MMM 
government.  It was 9.6%.  Those are not my words.  I am reading.  That’s not my research I 
am  referring  to.    I  am  referring  to  a  man  who  looks  very  smart  in  a  photograph  and  who 
wears a beautiful tie, blue of colour: hon. Xavier Duval. 

In that article that I read in Le Défi, he goes outright on 29 April 2012 to explain how 
his bilan is a positive one as Minister of Finance; having won prizes on the African continent, 
which I commend him for.  Whatever he says here is a fact actually, but it is quite a pity that 
he is not here because I am sure he has got a lot of more things to do, as opposed to hon. 
Gayan who just seems to have vanished.  But I am going to get that later on as long as my 
ipad keeps on having batteries.  9.6%! 

Hon.  Duval,  in  2012,  who  sits  next  to  the  actual  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth, today, only a few years back - not five, not six, not seven - only two and half years 
back  and  even  less,  goes  on  to  say  que  la  croissance  était  à  2.7%,  soit  très  légèrement 
supérieure à son taux de 2002 qui était de 1.6%.  So, he is very critical about the bilan entre 
2000 et 2005.  This is history. 

What I am trying to get at here is because with a lot pride this young generation that 
we  have  in  this  august  Assembly,  with  reason  -  and  I  said  it:  stay  in  the  course,  do  not 
change, remain and be steadfast.  Wish for the second economic miracle.  Keep on fighting 
for it.  With all our prayers, I hope we succeed - as well as those who are moins jeunes are 
basing themselves on the précédent de Sir Anerood Jugnauth as leader of the party.  When he 
was Prime Minister, what did he leave behind?  What is his record?  And based on that – this 
is logical thinking – they are of the view that he has the ability to lead a new Government 
towards a new economic miracle.   But though  you  guys, the  youths, the new Members of 
Parliament are the only ones who believe that because Xavier-Luc Duval does not believe it. 

(Interruptions) 

 I’ll explain why he does not believe it and let me refer here … 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please refrain from saying that. 
Mr Mohamed: Sorry? 

25 

 
Madam Speaker: Please, refrain from saying that! 
Mr  Mohamed:  Ok,  sorry.  I  will  not  say  that  he  does  not  believe  it,  I  will  just 

demonstrate it. Now ... 

What did he say? He said, here –  

(Interruptions) 

« Plus de 30,000 personnes avaient été licenciées dans la zone franche sous 

son leadership…” 

Referring  here  to  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  qui  précise  que  le  pays  s’est  remis 

économiquement sous Navinchandra Ramgoolam ». 

So, here, this new Deputy Prime Minister, whom I agree with, was of the view – a 
view which I share, a view which for a few months hon. Jhugroo shared, for a few months 
hon.  Jugnauth  shared;  for  many,  many  months  hon.  X.L.  Duval  shared  –  that,  from  9.6% 
from the 90 or so thousands of people having lossed jobs, from 30,000 people having lossed 
jobs dans le secteur du textile, from 9.6% an economic growth of only 1.6 - un taux de 1.6.  
He is of the view that we have managed to overcome this hurdle, the difficulties that existed 
under  le  régime  de  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  Under  which  régime?  Under  Navinchandra 
Ramgoolam! Those are the words of the now Deputy Prime Minister; that is a fact. So, keep 
stead fast because there are not many people who share your views. 

(Interruptions) 

But  then,  again,  when  people  concentrate  too  much  on  turning  what  they  end  up 
with is a headache and, right now, what we have seen here is the beginning of a headache 
because it is quite clear that the new Minister of Finance has opposing views to the former 
Minister of Finance,  even when it comes to  a simple issue as to whether or not there is  a 
Ponzi  Scheme  in  the  British  American  Insurance  saga.  Simple  thing!  The  hon.  Prime 
Minister  has  been  very  clear,  he’s  been  steadfast,  he  has  been  consistent,  he  had  said 
something from the beginning to the end, he has not changed - that is consistency. Whereas 
the former Minister of Finance of the previous Government, as opposed to the new Minister 
of Finance, and I don’t mean hon. Jugnauth, I mean hon. Duval, he has been saying he cannot 
say there is a Ponzi Scheme. So, already itself not only is hon. X.L.Duval not in line with the 
thinking of the leader of this party, not in line with the thinking of the leader of the House, he 
is not in line with the thinking of the Minister of Finance of this Government! This is the 
mess in action. This is not democracy because if someone is not in line with the thinking of 
the  leader  of  the  alliance,  if  someone  is  not  in  line  with  the  thinking  of  the  Minister  of 

 

26 

Finance who are the frontbenchers of a Government, there is only one thing he must do if 
dignity is still there, it is to leave…  

 (Interruptions) 

When one has to decide on the issue of dignity, one has to stop and think. Instead 
what I hear when one refers to the very important question of believe or not believe, it is this 
desire to stick to one’s seat, this desire to be steadfast and to hold on to the seat that one has, 
but not to think again about les questions de principe.  

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Mohamed: I will go on … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 
Mr Mohamed: I can see that what I am saying is achieving its objective. What I am 
saying, Madam Speaker, is achieving its objective because I have hit a very sore point and the 
soreness  I  hear  it  now,  in  this  august  Assembly.    How  sore  the  point  is  and  how  I  have 
managed to aim right! Now, with regard to ‘Le Mauricien’ newspaper… 

(Interruptions) 

 If you wish I’ll put in that paper. I don’t even have to lire la fin because la fin is 
just a simple thing, he was consistent in those days. Now with regard to hon. Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, the Leader of the House, he, himself, in 2013, made statements to the press with 
regard to former Budgets. What I am trying to get at here is very simple. Once again, what do 
others out there think when they listen to us? Go from one direction to the other, from the 
other to another and then we just don’t know where to go and then we keep on telling round 
and round and it gives us a spinning headache! That is what I am trying to get at and this is 
not a criticism against anyone in Government, but even against the Government I belong to. 
Let me make it clear – and in myself as well.  

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Is that clear?  Myself as well! 
Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Mohamed: But, at least, I manage and I have the courage to do that. Now, let me 
say something else.  When I listened to the words and read the words of the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister in a press article in 2013, he says – 
“Il allègue que le grand argentier….” 

27 

 
And  here,  he  refers  to  hon.  X.L.  Duval  -  I  like  the  smile  which  I  see  on  hon. 
Jugnauth and that is the attitude I like.  This is a debate, we are just exchanging ideas and I 
love the smile that he comes up with because  most probably he exactly  knows what  I am 
getting at and that I manage to do that. That’s good - unless you are ickling him on the side 
there. 

So, what I get is that he says – 

« Il  allègue  que  le  grand  argentier  aurait  annoncé  des  chiffres  érronés 
lorsqu’il  a  abordé  le  dossier  sur  la  pauvreté.  Il  n’y  a  pas  2%    mais  10%  de 
mauriciens vivant dans l’extrème pauvreté et cette situation ne cesse de se dégrader, 
a-t-il dit,  sur le dossier du logement … » 

Sir Anerood Jugnauth goes on to criticise the former Government, consistently.  We 
just hear the silence right now, we don’t hear  Members of the PMSD  criticising  at all Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth  for  having  criticised  their  leader  because,  right  now,  le  silence  est 
révélateur parce que, quand on dit que quelqu’un a avancé des chiffres érronés, it is not a 
simple affair. 

The  Prime  Minister  of  this  country  is  a  man  of  experience,  he  has  occupied  many 
positions,  he  has  been  someone  who,  prior  to  this,  était  le  garant  de  la  Constitution  as 
President  of  the  Republic;  he  was  someone  who  was  even  at  the  independance  talks.  I 
remember he himself explained to me how he knew then my grandfather, Sir Abdul Razack 
Mohamed. So, he is a man of experience  and when he uses words like ‘le grand argentier 
vient de l’avant avec des chiffres erronés’, he measures the weight of every single letter and 
syllable of those words. He understands the importance of those words and this is not only a 
critical assessment, but it is a finding of guilt that he has passed here against le former grand 
argentier.  

So, what I hear now, PPS hon. Abbas Mamode say, is  precisely what I am getting 

(Interruptions) 

at, that, out there, people will see that …. 

(Interruptions) 

Well,  I  am  not  putting  anything  of  such  a  thing,  ‘tula’.  ‘Tula’  would  be  in  the 
singular.    What  I  am  trying  to  aim  at  is,  ‘tulae’  which  would  be  the  plural.  So,  this  is 
precisely what my reading showed us and what I must say is that, in those days, hon. Pravind 
Jugnauth  and    hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  spoke  the  same  words.  Even  in  an  article,  hon. 
Pravind Jugnauth said the same thing about the former Minister of Finance; he is the one who 

 

28 

followed up and said that les chiffres, en ce qui concerne l’emploi étaient érronés and the 
statistics that were being put forward by the former Minister of Finance étaient érronés. 

Now, in my humble view, … 

(Interruptions) 

If my hon. friend believes it is that, and if he takes it as a  compliment so it was 
meant as a compliment. Good! There is consistency there but, unfortunately, there is a big 
‘but’.  

(Interruptions) 

There is!  Just before I go into the main issues where I was going to try to as my 
hon. friend Jhuboo said yesterday, our aim - and all the other Members of the Labour Party 
have explained, here, in this august Assembly - here is not simply to come forward and to 
indicate to the Government where things are wrong and really make a big brouhaha, as they 
call it, make such a big mess out of it in order to show people what is wrong.  What we will 
simply try to do, is to concentrate on certain issues which, in my view, have to be addressed 
and I’ll only refer to those things as humble suggestions, and if in any way whatsoever, we 
manage  to  be  able  to  help  with  those  ideas  and  if  you  believe  in  your  discretion  as  a 
Government, Madam Speaker, that they believe it is good enough to take on board, please 
feel free, because it is in the name of the people that we do it and no one else’s.  

But, it is important before we move forward that we are to realise truths, because we 
cannot move forward if the basis of our equation, the basis and the formula that we are going 
to  use  to  move  forward  is  based  on  erroneous  facts.  Erroné,  as  hon.  Jugnauth,  the  Prime 
Minister rightly said whenever there is élément erroné, beware, even though  I  don’t agree 
with him that the chiffres were erronés, because those are the very figures that are being used 
today  by  his  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  So,  it  could  not  have  been 
erroné at the time of -  I was going to say Sir Gaëtan, but - hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, but it 
cannot now be erroné at the time of hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, it’s the same figures. 
The unemployment figure truly was 9.6% in 2005, truly, and it is true that when I heard the 
hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training when he last spoke, 
the quarterly figures for the last quarter of December 2014 show an unemployment rate of 
7.8% and, when I came into office myself in 2010, we are talking about a figure of 8.5%.  

So, the fact is we have to look at real statistics. We cannot try to pretend that we are 
going to find solutions to the problem of unemployment; we are going to try to bring new 
measures for training, when we try to look away from the truth and look at the real figures. 
The real figures dictate to us that there has been a drop in the unemployment rate. If we are to 

 

29 

talk about 2005 to 2010, we are going to say it was 9.6% in 2005 and it was almost 8% in 
2014. As we speak today, it is not more than 8% and if that is the case, the unemployment 
rate ever since we have been in power between 2005 and 2010 has gone down, but there are 
two other issues that were worrisome. The unemployment rate for women did also go down 
and,  here,  I  refer  to  statements  made  by  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, hon. Duval, who showed clearly that the unemployment rate of women went 
down when he was Minister of Finance, but the only unemployment rate that went up above 
the  25  points  was  the  unemployment  rate  for  those  who  are  the  youths,  described  in  our 
legislation as the youths, the less than 25. Those are the real issues and those youths, they do 
not want to go to work in industries like textile industries.  

Hon.  Showkutally  Soodhun  was  the  former  Minister  of  Labour  and  Industrial 
Relations and he will recall between 2000 and 2005 when he himself tried a new scheme in 
order to tackle this issue of loss of employment in the textile industry, le démantèlement of 
the preferential agreements that we had, that caused such a loss of employment. He tried the 
re-training and re-skilling scheme. I remember those days and that re-skilling scheme, it was 
done with an intention of ensuring that our textile factories, our seafood hub, the new call 
centres  going  to  come  up,  the  IT  sector,  that  people  could  re-train  and  go  to  the  sectors. 
Unfortunately, the intention was good, but the reality is that it did not take on; people did not 
put in the effort that was required to use the facilities given for re-training in those days. That 
is the truth and I, when I was Minister of Labour, I remember the good advice of my friend, 
hon. Soodhun, who clearly told me he had tried that in the past and what the new Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development is trying to do is precisely that, re-skilling. But, I cannot 
see a medical doctor who has not got a job trying to be re-skilled to work as an IT technician. 
I cannot see pilots waiting to work for Air Mauritius who cannot find a job at Air Mauritius 
being re-skilled to be a dentist. I cannot see people who are graduates who have trained to 
work in languages, they have to be re-skilled in Science. If that is what is going to be the 
objective of this present Government, my humble view, it will not work.  

(Interruptions) 

It will not work. When one looks at all other countries, let’s look at countries like 
Singapore, because, here, I am going to remember only yesterday - I believe it was yesterday 
- the speech, in this debate, of hon. Bashir Jahangeer and when he said that not only do we 
have to create jobs in our country, but we have to find ways and means of managing, giving 
jobs now, not tomorrow, now. I remember when I was Minister of Labour and I tried to go 
for bilateral agreements with regard to labour mobility, I remember I was helped on some of 

 

30 

those agreements by the then former Minister of Commerce, hon. Soodhun, I remember I was 
helped by many colleagues from the MSM who were in alliance with us in those days, to 
have bilateral agreements, be it with countries from the Middle East, countries from Canada, 
in Italy, and those are countries where Mauritians can go to earn a lot of foreign exchange, 
those are countries that Mauritians can go to, not to go for ever, but this is what is called 
labour  mobility,  circular  migration  for  them  to  eventually  come  back  to  our  country,  but 
richer, with more experience, with foreign exchange and the country could have progressed 
in the process. This is precisely what hon. Jahangeer was referring to when he said that the 
Gulf countries is a place where we could look into to send people. I remember when I was 
trying to do that, people said I was trying to send all youngsters away and not get them jobs 
in Mauritius. But, this is precisely what this Government is doing with this new Minister of 
Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  who  is  himself  continuing  to  send 
Mauritians on the same agreements to Italy, on the same agreements, through the NEF and 
other agencies, to Canada, the same agreements, these bilateral agreements are still working 
as we speak today and it is nothing new.  

So,  that’s  what  I  am  trying  to  explain.  We  should  not  simply  throw  stones  at  a 
measure that works. Remember the days when Sir Anerood Jugnauth was Prime Minister in 
1983.  Prior to Sir Anerood Jugnauth being Prime Minister in 1983, remember those days 
when so many Mauritians went to work in Saudi Arabia, went to work in Kuwait, went to 
work in the Gulf countries and how many of those Mauritians managed to make fortune and 
come back to Mauritius and settle down and really invest in their homeland. This was the 
model that was used in the days when Sir Anerood Jugnauth became Prime Minister for the 
first time, may be Members from his Government, the youths, may be, do not recall that, but 
this was the model that was used and this was the model that worked.  

So, that is why we are of the view that we have intelligent people, we have a lot of 
graduates, the fact remains, if we go on telling people we do not need foreign workers, the 
hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training can very well come 
and tell us how many letters has he not received from the export authorities, MEXA, how 
many letters and representations has he not already received from - you are surprised - the 
NEF, how many letters has he not received and representations, the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development from the Joint Economic Council, because they cannot meet export 
orders. Today, as we are speaking, hon. Soodhun knows it better than I do for having been 
that Minister of Labour and Employment, that if we do not have certain foreigners in certain 
sectors, we will not be able to achieve our export orders and our export-oriented industries 

 

31 

vont flancher. But, does it mean; if we remove them, Mauritians will get jobs? It does not 
mean that! This is not a simple equation. Some people may have thought, when they just took 
office that it was, but it is not that simple as an equation. Now, there is also an impression I 
get when I listen to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development; that he has an 
aversion for the number of foreigners that come to Mauritius. This is the impression  I  get 
when the hon. Minister says: “I am against gated communities”.  I believe that there are other 
ways of saying that because such few words could really damage the impression that people 
have  of  Mauritius;  foreigners  who  want  to  come  and  invest  here.  People  don’t  owe  us  a 
living. There are countries like Malta.  There are countries like Cyprus.  There are countries 
in South America, countries in the Bahamas islands where they offer residency to foreigners 
who come and inject foreign exchange, buy property, create employment.  We are a country 
which is competing on a daily basis to attract those foreigners. When you look at reports such 
as the HSBC report to find out where are there the most expatriates in the world.  

We also find from that report the issues that are taken into account, Madam Speaker, 
when deciding which country to move to: health service, the road network, water, education 
for children, law and order; whether they feel welcome are not; whether they are going to be 
able to live their own culture or not; whether they are going to be ostracised or not.  Why is it 
that Mauritius is far behind when it comes to other countries?  Why is it that when I read 
articles, I read one only from ‘The Telegraph’ dated February 2013:  Singapore, the title says: 
“Expatriates set to drive population growth”.    In other words when  you  look at Singapore 
which I recently mentioned, it has so many expatriates that it is to the benefit of the country 
that those expatriates with such skills are there.  Because let us not forget about one thing; 
when one talks about the first economic miracle under Sir Anerood Jugnauth, when one talks 
about free education under Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, when one adds those two together, 
what do you have?  You have an intelligent, capable population and you have more university 
graduates,  people  who  are  trained  and  you  have  less  people  who  want  to  go  and  do  low 
skilled  jobs.    This  is  one  of  the  consequences  of  economic  progress.  It  has  happened  in 
Singapore and it is happening in Mauritius, but we cannot play politics with such facts and 
simply  say:  “We  will  put  foreigners  out  and  give  Mauritians  jobs”.  This  creates  a  false 
impression  of  security.  What  I  invite  this  Government  to  do,  as  hon.  Ezra  Jhuboo  said 
yesterday: “Open up!” I fail to see why we are not opening up as we should. For instance, I 
hear the hon. Minister of Finance talk about Smart Cities and my question which I keep on 
asking my hon. friends around me here is: what exactly is smart about those cities? What is 
smart about it? The idea! Is it technology that will be put in there?  We have not heard of it.  

 

32 

Is it that it is going to have solar energy, fibre network? I don’t know what is smart about 
that! Basically, I hope so.  But what I am trying to get at here is a little idea that I have seen 
which I would like to share with you, Madam Speaker. It is basically to have what in other 
countries they have, which is called an IP box regime; intellectual property regime. When one 
looks at – hon. Pravind Jugnauth most probably exactly knows what  I am getting at – the 
research and development that is carried out in many countries in the world, it is one of the 
piliers des économies de certains pays; research and development.  Mauritius is at the bottom 
end  for  any  research  and  development.  We  do  not  invest  what  we  should  in  research  and 
development.  

When  we  talk  about  Smart  Cities,  what  I  also  would  like  to  say:  “Let  us  try  to  do 
something that is smart, to have a new legislation, a new tax regime with regard to research 
and development.  A new tax regime to bring, to attract people to come to those Smart Cities, 
to have incubators within Mauritius, to get them to invest through their private equity funds 
or other funds into research and development and to ensure that all the money that they will 
make, all the profits that they will make when they are in Mauritius is tax free.  When it is 
repatriated  to  double  taxation  avoidance  agreement,  be  it  royalties  or  other  dividends  are 
repatriated,  that  there  also  there  is  a  tax  advantage  when  it  is  repatriated  to  their  home 
country.” What I am trying to get at here is to do exactly what Singapore does because c’est 
un pilier de leur économie; to have an IP box scheme running in Mauritius which we don’t 
have. Because it makes no sense to simply have a Smart City because it would simply be an 
IRS by  a  glorified name.   It would simply be an ‘I’, ‘R’,  ‘S’ without the  gates.   It would 
simply be an RES called by another name, but if we try to come with some novel ideas such 
as the IP box scheme where intellectual property as a regime in Mauritius, that is tax friendly, 
that  is  investor  friendly,  that  has  got  a  new  tax  regime  to  encourage  people  to  come  to 
Mauritius; with millions and millions of dollars of multinationals to come to Mauritius for 
research  and  development  that  would  create  not  only  employment,  it  would  also  bring  in 
foreign direct investment.  That is an idea that I humbly propose to this Government. 

Another thing which  I  wanted to get at here and that is the crux of my intervention. 
Every single Government that has come with a budget, comes with good intent as I have said 
earlier  on.  Maybe  it  does  not  work,  may  be  part  of  it  works,  maybe  everything  works  or 
maybe nothing works. To start out with, let us give the benefit of the doubt to anyone that we 
start with good intent every single regime be it prior to independence or even after. There is 
one thing that no Government has had the courage to achieve.  There is one thing that no

 

33 

Government has had the courage to attempt because some people believe, Madam Speaker, 
that if we try to attempt what I am about to say, it would mean political suicide.  

I  am of the view as in  Georgia,  recently  I  was  in Geneva at the Africa CEO Forum 
where I was honoured to meet with the former Prime Minister of Georgia, Mr Nika Gilauri.  I 
met  with  the  former  Prime  Minister  of  Georgia  and  I  listened  to  him  very  clearly  and  he 
presented  a  paper  called  ‘Radical  Transformation  of  Public  Administration’.  Radical 
Transformation of Public Administration! I am happy that the hon. Minister of Civil Service 
is  here  listening.    I  am  here  happier  that  the  hon.  Rt.  Prime  Minister  is  always  present 
listening because this is at the centre of every development. What you need in a country is a 
public  administration  that  needs  to  be  reformed  en  profondeur.    No  Government  has 
attempted  to  do  that.    I  am  not  saying  here  that  this  in  any  way  shows  disrespect  to  civil 
servants. On the contrary, what I see here from the presentation of the former Prime Minister 
of Georgia; Georgia in 2003 was a low-income country. Georgia had an ineffective public 
sector.  Georgia  had  an  unfavourable  business  environment.  It  was  ranked  112th  next  to 
Mozambique.  It had a high corruption index. It was 124th next to Côte Ivoire and Uganda.  

After the President and Prime Minister, the new Government of Georgia, put in the 
one  thing  which  is  the  fundamental  radical  change  to  public  administration  to  the  civil 
service.    New  Zealand  has  done  it.  London  has  done  it.  We  are  still  stuck  with  the 
administration of the colonial days. We have not reformed because it is a situation that brings 
in political fear. Let us not do it because beware our country may progress, but we will not 
progress politically. It could be that all those, who are in the Civil Service, will no longer  
vote  for  us  if  ever  we  go  for  a  fundamental  change.  But  this  is  the  key  to  progress.    We 
cannot,  Madam  Speaker,  have  a  country  with  one  leg  representing  the  private  sector,  the 
other leg represents the public sector.  One runs on a performance-based agenda. One runs on 
a  productivity-based  agenda.  The  other  one  has  security  of  ten  years.  The  other  one  has 
guarantee of office. The other one is not productivity based. The other people are promoted 
on seniority.  

People should be promoted on ability in the private sector and in the public sector. 
The day that Mauritius will do what Georgia does. What has happened after they have created 
a building where all Civil Service has been brought there? They have reformed in-depth the 
Civil Service which no Government - I say it out loud - has had the courage to do, together 
with the Opposition. If the Government embarks upon that, at least, on this side of the House, 

 

34 

we will support this endeavour, because we are of the view that Mauritius has reached a stage 
of its development that we need to push it forward and not pull it down to the bottom. 

When we have two systems operating parallel, where you have one, as I explained, 
the private sector running on performance and ability and the public sector not running at all 
parallel to it, lagging behind, then is the recipe for slow economic growth in a single digit. If 
we want to achieve double digits, we can achieve it. And we here, solemnly, say: “we are not 
here,  putting  in  danger  anyone’s  jobs,  we  are  not  here,  asking  to  put  in  danger  anyone’s 
acquired rights, but what we are here asking for is for people to sacrifice oneself for the good 
of the many. 

We are asking people that we need to change, we need to récompenser ceux qui sont 
productifs. I know people from my former Ministry. The now Minister of Labour will know. 
There are excellent officers there, excellent people who perform there,  young officers who 
perform there, but they will have to wait to be promoted, they will have to get lesser salary, 
even  though  they  are  more  productive  than  those  who  have  been  there  and  they  are  the 
seniors. Hon. Soodhun knows that well. 

How do we address this issue? On a vraiment besoin d’une assise nationale to address 
the  issue  of  the  fundamental  radical  change  in  Civil  Service  Reform.  And  look  at  what 
Georgia has managed to achieve when they were there. From a low economic growth GDP, 
they have come to 4.6%. Public sector tax collection rate was in the single digit. It has gone 
up to 23.5%. With regard to world class business environment, it climbed 103 places in terms 
of ranking. 103 places! From 112 in 2003, today Georgia is 9th. As far as low corruption is 
concerned, Georgia was 124th, after the Civil Service Reform, it is today 51st, it gained 73 
places. Now, what I am trying to get out here is, today, when I look at Georgia, it is a model 
to be inspired by.  

Georgia today, the average waiting time for the citizen to obtain service from a public 
service  office  is  five  minutes,  the  most  that  he  has  to  wait,  even  for  the  application  of  a 
passport, is seven minutes. So, basically, what  I am trying to say here,  when one looks at 
those figures, Mauritius was doing better than what Georgia was doing in 2001. Mauritius is 
doing  better  today  than  Georgia  was  doing  when  things  were  really  wrong.  So,  we  can 
achieve what Georgia has achieved faster than Georgia has. It only takes us to put our minds 
together in order to achieve it. Imagine what this country could be when we start achieving 
double  digit  economic  growth!  Imagine  what  this  country  would  be  if  it  takes  only  five 

 

35 

minutes  for  someone  who  has  a  problem  at  the  water  service,  CWA  or  CEB.  That  it  is 
attended in five minutes! Imagine what this country would be when we start recognising la 
compétence des gens qui sont des fonctionnaires du service civil au lieu de les promouvoir, 
simply based, not on compétence, not on productivity, but on seniority! 

So, Madam Speaker, what I say here, people may take offence to, but my intent is the 
country and nothing else. It is to the advantage of the civil servants that we go for such a 
reform,  because  those  who  perform  will  find  themselves  better  off  and  the  country  will 
generate more richesses, the people will get more money and this country will be happier. So, 
is this, therefore, a time when we will start saying that this Government - following an idea 
that looks to be a dangerous idea to many, we could really take the risk and let us jump and 
take advantage of these  things, there could be  consensus where we will really  change this 
country. Let us go forward with it!  

Now, let me just say one last thing. I know I have taken a lot of time. Recently, I have 
talked about reform of the civil service. I believe that those are issues that can be attained 
pour le bien de tout un chacun. But, there are certain habits that we have to leave behind, 
there are certain habits that do not belong to 2015, there are certain habits that do not belong 
to this august Assembly, there are certain words that have to be condemned, there are certain 
practices that do not even belong to prehistoric Mauritius. I was very sad, Madam Speaker, 
when I was abroad and had to be shocked to read through my iPad - this is what Parliament 
has given us, a tool to being shocked. I was shocked, I was aghast, fell off my chair when I 
saw what hon. Gayan had stated about me recently in this august Assembly.  

I totally agree with hon. Members of Government - if I continue to mention the name 
and the content of such a speech, it would spoil what I have said up to now. It shows their 
disdain for what was said. It shows their solidarity for a new method of doing politics and for 
that reason I had chosen, therefore, to just ignore him, because it is not something that I will 
try to dirty myself and soil myself with. Therefore, following what I have just heard, I shall 
drop it. 

Let me, finally, say something which is of utmost importance also. Now, at the same 
forum  I  attended  when  I  met  with  the  former  Prime  Minister  of  Georgia,  we  had  the 
opportunity of listening  to le président de la Banque Africaine de Développement, we had 
managed to have lunch with him and we discussed on the way forward for Africa. Today, 
when I read some of the presentations that were made and I will gladly share it with friends 

 

36 

from all sides. We talked about Africa being the next Eldorado, we talked about the global 
democratic  shift  between  2013  et  2050,  l’Afrique  c’est  115%  –  that  will  be  the  shift.  The 
number  of  people  will  increase  whereas  other  countries  are  in  single  digits  or  just  double 
digits. The cities that are of utmost importance, and this is where I recommend that we should 
have some Ambassadors present, this is where we should have some work, our diplomatic 
representatives should be there to enhance our economic diplomacy. 

We should be, without any doubt, the countries where, according to the Africa CEO 
Forum et Jeune Afrique where people are investing heavily nowadays, the first one is Cairo, 
the second is Tunis, Johannesburg, Casablanca, Algiers, Accra, Nairobi, Lagos, Addis Ababa, 
Kampala. So, those are countries where I am sad, I do not see Mauritius therein. I am happy 
that, at least, I see where investment is going to and now my concern is how we could use 
this information to ensure that we have people investing in those countries, use Mauritius as a 
platform for investment therein. 

Thereby, we need to have more bilateral agreements, more agreements pertaining to 
taxation,  more  agreements  pertaining  to  something  which  was  dropped  by  the  former 
Government. And what was it? Labour mobility! Imagine a new product altogether! Instead 
of  having  only  a  Double  Taxation  Agreement  Convention,  imagine  that  Mauritius  has 
conventions with all those African countries on labour mobility! So much so that if someone 
wants to bring his Head Office in Mauritius from Europe and he wants from Mauritius to do 
business in any of those countries I just mentioned and we have labour mobility agreements 
with those countries I have just mentioned, he will not have to apply for a work permit in that 
country to move his staff to that country. Imagine how that would be an advantage! So, we 
could have another method of attracting investors to Mauritius, to have a plethora of labour 
mobility conventions with African States that would encourage people to come here, because 
it would facilitate labour mobility of their high qualified skilled staff to go to those countries 
without the need to get a work permit and they would enter, based on a convention that we 
could  enter  into  with  each  of  those  African  countries.  This  is  something  that  I  strongly 
recommend. Those are suggestions that I stand by and I am of the view that we can achieve 
progress and we will achieve progress.  

As I started out by saying, every budget is a declaration of intent and we are not here 
to, in any way, stop any Government or any person to work in the interest of the country. On 
the contrary, as you have seen, we have all suggested, we have all proposed, we have all been 
here  to  contribute  pour  le  progrès  du  pays  because,  as  I  have  always  said,  in  all  my 

 

37 

interventions: what comes first is the country and what comes second, I am not concerned 
about. 

So, let me therefore, once again, say that there are people with good intent on all sides 
of the House. I, in my last intervention on the issue of the Government Programme had asked 
that time has come for us to put the political campaign behind us. Time has come for us to 
unite as one people. Time has come for us to decide whether we are to take this new leap of 
faith for our economic success. Time has come for us where we are going to be tested. Let it 
not be the day, one day when it comes when our children will tell us: you were tried, you 
were tested, but you have failed. Let our children tell us: you were tried, you were tested and 
altogether you succeeded. 

Thank you very much. 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jugnauth! 
 
The Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Mr P. Jugnauth): 
Madam  Speaker,  as  I  stand  today,  before  this  august  Assembly  to  deliver  my  speech  as 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  in  the  context  of  the  2015-2016 
Budget,  I  have  the  deep  conviction  that  we  are  definitely  turning  the  page  of  one  of  the 
darkest moments of the history of our country. We are indeed turning the page of a reckless 
reign  endured  by  our  people,  our  institutions  and  businesses  in  the  last  nine  years  by  a 
Government which had gone completely astray and had lamentably failed to live up to the 
aspirations  of  the  people.  Nine  years!  I  must  say  nine  years  of  shameful  and  immoral 
leadership, blatant injustice to the deserving, repressive actions against common people, trade 
unions and political opponents, dilapidation of public funds, incompetence at so many levels, 
cronies  and  alike  predating  on  what  legitimately  belongs  to  the  population.  Without,  of 
course,  forgetting  the  Ponzi  schemes  masterminded  to  steal  people’s  money.  This  is  the 
picture of the type of public affairs management of the previous Government.  

Madam Speaker,  I am not saying that for everybody because obviously, there have 
been a handful of people who have been the fortunate ones. Most of our people have gone 
through very, very hard times. We have seen a whole country crippled and on the brink of 
social  and  economic  collapse.  We  had  almost  reached  a  point  of  no  return.  But,  on  10 
December  last  year,  the  verdict  of  the  people  has  resoundingly  clearly  chosen  between 
arrogance  and  humility,  between  decadence  and  righteousness,  between  greed  and 
selflessness. In the face of what was purported to be an unbeatable team, there stood a man 
having a deep sense of purpose and, above all, a true patriot who, with his team, swept out on 

 

38 

its way a rotten Government and gave hope to thousands of our people. This is why, Madam 
Speaker, I consider that above everything else, this Budget is about uplifting the very core 
values of what brings us together as a nation - a set of values that will give every one of us 
the dignity and pride to be a Mauritian.  

Madam Speaker,  as a responsible Government we could not accept that there is an 
economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well and the rest of the population is left at 
the mercy of a Government which has never been interested to listen to their plight. 

Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi,  parce  que  j’ai  eu  l’occasion  aujourd’hui  de 
répliquer  à  certains  membres  de  l’Opposition  qui  ont  tenté  de  faire  croire  à  travers  leurs 
interventions que le budget ne répond pas aux attentes de la population. L’honorable Quirin a 
dit et je cite –  

« (…) la montagne a finalement accouché d’une souris. » 

Et que 

« (…) le mot ‘lepep’ n’est qu’un leurre. » 

Et qu’il n’en fut rien en ce qui concerne le pouvoir d’achat.  
L’honorable Ameer Meea a parlé de ‘supercherie’ et moi je n’hésiterai pas à dire 
que  les  deux  honorables  membres  sont  tombés  dans  la  démagogie.  Je  vais  à  présent 
démontrer  que  contrairement  à  ce  qu’ils  ont  dit  et  que  certains  autres  membres  de 
l’Opposition  ont  dit,  la  population  a  été  le  souci  premier  du  premier  budget  de  ce 
gouvernement.  Nous  avons  soulagé  le  fardeau  du  peuple  dès  les  premiers  jours  de 
l’installation de ce gouvernement suivant les dernières élections générales. 

En augmentant la pension de vieillesse, la pension des veuves et des invalides à R 
5,000  nous  avons  mis  R  4,7  milliards  additionnelles  entre  les  mains  des  familles 
mauriciennes. Est-ce un leurre, Madame la présidente ? C’est une réalité. En accordant une 
compensation  salariale  de  R  600  across  the  board  à  tous  les  travailleurs  de  ce  pays,  nous 
avons mis R 4.3 milliards additionnelles entre les mains des familles mauriciennes. Est-ce un 
leurre ? Non, honorable Quirin! Vous être en train de faire un faux procès à ce gouvernement. 
Et  le  peuple  saura  comment  sanctionner  à  l’avenir  les  démagogues.  Sur  ces  deux  items 
seulement, la pension et la compensation salariale, R 9 milliards ! Je dis bien R 9 milliards 
vont être encaissées par les familles en termes de revenus additionnels. 

Madame la présidente, la décision annoncée dans le budget de donner  gratuitement 
six mètres cubes d’eau à chaque foyer mauricien concerne 323 254 abonnés de la CWA et en 
termes d’économie pour ces familles, cela représente R 200 millions annuellement. Ça c’est 
du concret et ce n’est certainement pas un leurre, encore moins de la supercherie. Je prends 

 

39 

un autre exemple, la décision d’accorder des subsides à 100% sur les frais d’examens à tous 
les étudiants du SC et de la HSC  coûtera R 310 millions à ce gouvernement. R 310 millions 
que les parents vont économiser! Vous allez me dire que c’est un leurre!  

Les subsides de R 240 millions annuellement que l’État va accorder à 3,000 diplômés 
chômeurs pour des cours de recyclage à l’université de Maurice afin qu’ils puissent trouver 
un emploi plus facilement constituent un autre acte de foi en faveur de la jeunesse qui a tant 
souffert par le manque de considération et d’opportunités sous le gouvernement travailliste. 

Encore une fois c’est du concret, et nous honorons les engagements que nous avons 
pris  avec  le  peuple.  Les  petits  planteurs  de  leur  côté  ont  bénéficié  d’une  mesure  de 
soulagement  face  à  la  baisse  drastique  de  leurs  revenus  sucriers.  Alors  que  l’ancien 
gouvernement avait fait une vague promesse de leur accorder R 2,000 de compensation sur 
chaque tonne de sucre, ce gouvernement est passé à l’action. Une compensation de R 3,400 
sera accordée et cela représente R 140 millions de contribution directe du gouvernement, over 
and above les R 200 millions que paiera le Sugar Insurance Fund Board. 

J’ai  entendu 

l’honorable  Uteem  et 

l’honorable  Quirin  dire  que 

jeunes 
communiquent  par  texte  gratuitement  à  travers  les  applications  comme  Viber,  Tango  and 
WhatsApp, et que, dans son opinion, la mesure budgétaire d’abolir la taxe de dix sous sur les 
SMS  est  un  coup  d’épée  dans  l’eau.  Ils  oublient  de  dire  cependant  que  cette  mesure  va 
remettre R 85 millions dans les poches des consommateurs. 

les 

Je prends un dernier exemple pour démontrer que ce gouvernement est effectivement 
un  gouvernement  du  peuple.  Savez-vous,  Madame  la  présidente,  qu’en  augmentant  de  R 
65,000 à R 115,000 les dons de l’État sous le Casting of Slabs Scheme et en rehaussant les 
seuils d’éligibilité, le gouvernement va décaisser au moins R 140 millions en plus au profit 
des  familles  au  bas  de  l’échelle  pour  porter  le  décaissement  annuel  à  presque  de  R  250 
millions ? 

Allez-vous me dire donc que ce budget ne soulage point la souffrance du peuple ? Je 
crois  que  certains  membres  de  l’opposition  sont  tellement  abasourdis  par  l’action 
gouvernementale qu’ils ont perdu leur latin. Comme je vous ai cité, chiffres à l’appui - il faut 
répéter peut-être : 

• 

• 
• 

R 9 milliards de revenus additionnels donc pour les familles sur la pension et 
la compensation salariale ; 
R 200 millions d’économie sur les factures d’eau ; 
R 310 millions de subsides - SC et HSC ; 

 

• 

40 

R 240 millions pour les jeunes diplômés chômeurs ; 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jugnauth: 

• 
• 

• 
• 

R 340 millions pour les petits planteurs ; 
R 250 millions de dons pour les familles à faible revenu pour couler la 
dalle ; 
R 85 millions d’économie sur les SMS, et  
sans oublier les économies que feront les ménages après la baisse du 
taux d’intérêt sur le hire purchase, de 19 % à 12 %. 

Voilà,  Madame  la  présidente,  quelques  exemples  pour  démontrer  comment  nous 
améliorons le pouvoir d’achat des familles de façon conséquente. C’est un effort colossal et 
nous en sommes fiers, parce que nous croyons dans un socialisme à visage humain, dans la 
justice sociale, et dans le partage équitable du gâteau national. 

Nous  sommes  plus  que  jamais  un  gouvernement  du  peuple  qui  travaille  pour  le 
peuple. Les Mauriciens savent que nous tenons à cœur leurs intérêts, et c’est la raison pour 
laquelle ils continuent à nous soutenir massivement en dépit de la campagne de l’opposition. 
En  parallèle,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  travail  de  nettoyage  que  nous  avons  commencé  se 
poursuit inexorablement. Nous sommes en train de nettoyer les écuries du régime travailliste. 
Laissez-moi dire quelques mots sur le présent scandale  - le scandale de la BAI - qui 
démontre  à  quel  point  certains  amis  du  Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam  ont  utilisé  leur 
proximité avec le pouvoir pour dévaliser des épargnants et des honnêtes citoyens. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comments, please! 
Mr  Jugnauth:  Ces  gens-là  pensaient  être  des  génies  de  la  magouille  à  l’échelle 
planétaire. Ils sont aujourd’hui à genoux parce qu’enfin les institutions régulatrices font leur 
travail  comme  il  se  doit,  sans  crainte,  et  en  toute  indépendance.  Je  trouve  cela  honteux  et 
irresponsable  de  la  part  de  certains  membres  de  l’opposition  de  venir  vouloir  attribuer  un 
quelconque motif de vengeance aux actions promptes et vigoureuses prises par les autorités, 
dont la Banque de Maurice, la Financial Services Commission et le gouvernement, parce que 
le  but  c’est  de  protéger  l’intégrité  de  notre  système  financier  ainsi  que  les  intérêts  des 
déposants de la banque et des policy holders de la compagnie d’assurance. 

41 

 
Des  accusations  gratuites  ont  été  faites  à  l’encontre  de  deux  de  mes  collègues 
ministres.  Certains  ont  parlé  de  menace,  de  terrorisme  psychologique  à  l’encontre  de  la 
famille Rawat. Tout cela n’est que fausseté. Je peux affirmer dans cette Chambre que mes 
deux  collègues  n’ont  jamais  parlé  à  Monsieur  Dawood  Rawat  dans  la  soirée  où  il  a 
volontairement proposé de vendre ses intérêts dans la BAI pour la somme symbolique d’une 
roupie. Il est important de souligner, Madame la présidente, que la structure de la BAI - et je 
dirai pour le moins monstrueusement complexe - est une panoplie de corporate vehicles qui 
ont été utilisés pour servir ses desseins obscurs. 

Lorsque d’autres vérités éclateront dans ce méga scandale, je n’ai aucun doute que la 
population comprendra mieux que les institutions et le gouvernement ont sauvegardé le pays 
d’un désastre financier d’une proportion inimaginable. Je peux dire aujourd’hui que l’élément 
catalyseur qui a déclenché l’engouement pour le Super Cash Gold Scheme de la BAI a été en 
fait la décision du gouvernement travailliste de taxer les intérêts sur les dépôts bancaires en 
2007. Une situation avait été créée où les gens, surtout ceux qui touchaient leur lump sum, ne 
voulaient pas placer leur argent en banque. D’autres ont soutiré leur argent de la banque - 
pour ne pas dire retiré, je dis soutiré pour mieux comprendre. Ils ont été amenés à investir 
dans  le  plan  de  la  BAI.  Et  la  question  que  je  me  pose  aujourd’hui :  y  a-t-il  eu  un  acte 
prémédité pour attirer les gens vers ce plan à fort taux d’intérêt ? 

J’allais moi-même dire un Ponzi Scheme. On est en train de faire grand cas si c’est un 
Ponzi  Scheme,  si  ce  n’est  pas  un  Ponzi  Scheme.  Laissez-moi  vous  dire,  Madame  la 
présidente, à ma connaissance - et peut-être je vais être corrigé par le chef de l’opposition - 
celui qui a le premier parlé de Ponzi Scheme concernant la BAI c’est le leader de l’opposition 
lors de la PNQ du 21 novembre 2013. A une question qu’il posait au ministre des Finances 
d’alors, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, et je cite – 

“Can I ask whether the definition that will be provided of what is a Ponzi 

Pyramid Scheme will include insurance companies (...)” 

Et il dit ceci - 

“- the case we are talking about -” 

The subject of this PNQ 

“and whether the definition of Ponzi Scheme (…).” 

Donc, je le dis comme un fait ce que le chef de l’opposition avait dit à l’époque. Il y 
a certains membres du MMM surtout qui sont en train de dire qu’on est en train de décrire ce 
système comme un Ponzi alors que ce n’en est pas un.  Alors je leur dirais de se référer à la 
PNQ du Leader de l’Opposition d’alors. L’honorable Uteem a fait lui aussi une déclaration à 

 

42 

la presse pour dire que les autorités ont agi à une vitesse incroyable, que c’était orchestré de 
la part du gouvernement, qu’on aurait dû attendre et donner du temps à la BAI pour remédier 
à la situation. L’honorable Uteem a peut-être oublié que lors de cette PNQ  il a lui-même 
posé une question supplémentaire, and I quote – 

« May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister why it has taken six years 
for  the  Financial  Services  Commission  to  come  up  with  that  regulation,  when  he 
would agree with me that having more than 10% invested in any related party is a 
threat?” 

Six years ! En 2013, l’honorable Uteem trouvait qu’on a trop attendu - six years ! – 
et qu’il fallait agir vite parce que c’est un threat.  En 2015, après huit ans, il trouve qu’on a 
agi trop vite, qu’on a orchestré,    Which is which? Et il trouve le moyen  pour critiquer les 
autorités, la FSC dans sa déclaration à la presse, alors que le leader de l’Opposition avait dit à 
cette époque, et je cite -  

« I wish to congratulate the FSC here. FSC took les taureaux par les cornes 
on 25 May 2013 and published regulations that say that no insurance company must 
hold more than 10% of its assets in all its related companies in aggregate”.  
Madame  la  présidente,  donc,  je  ne  comprends  pas  les  arguments  de  l’opposition 
MMM.  Et, encore une fois, l’honorable Uteem qui a vu qu’on est allé trop vite en besogne, 
clairement le gouvernement travailliste a sa part de responsabilité dans ce qui s’est tramé dès 
le départ, sans oublier que les wrongful doings ont été cautionné d’en haut. 

Ces gens là aussi ont le culot, aujourd’hui, de parler de vengeance politique. Ils ont 
déclenché le crime et, aujourd’hui, ils prétendent être les donneurs de leçons. Donc, le peuple 
a très vite compris ce jeu infect des politiciens de l’ancien régime. Madame la présidente, le 
leader  de  l’Opposition,  ainsi  que  d’autres  membres  de  l’Opposition  n’en  finissent  pas 
d’évoquer la rencontre que  mes deux collègues ministres et  moi-même avons eue avec les 
représentants  de  Dufry.  Mes  collègues  et  moi  nous  avons  été  victimes  d’une  campagne 
orchestrée pour faire croire que nous avions des motivations obscures. Or, notre seul souci, 
notre seule motivation était d’obtenir autant d’informations que possible pour faire la lumière 
sur le scandale de l’allocation du contrat à la Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd et je dois dire 
que les informations que nous avions reçues nous ont permis de découvrir subséquemment ce 
qui s’est véritablement passé. 

C’est un fait aujourd’hui que la maîtresse de l’ancien Premier ministre a touché des 
commissions de 100 millions de roupies à janvier 2015 sur le dos de la Mauritius Duty Free 
Paradise Ltd. Quant aux allégations faites par les deux représentants de Dufry, à travers un 

 

43 

affidavit,    elles  relèvent  clairement  d’une  stratégie  pour  faire  diversion  pour  essayer  de 
détourner l’attention de la population et d’essayer de noyer le poisson. D’ailleurs, j’ai dit - je 
ne  vais  pas  revenir  là-dessus  -  que  si  les  gens  ont  le  courage  de  venir  faire  en  public  ces 
mêmes  allégations,  je  prendrai  les  mesures  nécessaires.  Et  là,  puisque  le  Leader  de 
l’Opposition m’a pointé du doigt sur ce dossier, à savoir pourquoi nous - les trois ministres - 
avons été là-bas, laissez-moi dire que, en tant que citoyen, en tant que politicien, lui-même un 
membre de l’Assemblée nationale, le chef de l’Opposition, il a été Deputy Prime Minister, 
Premier ministre de ce pays, je lui pose la question: Pendant sa carrière, est-ce qu’il n’a pas 
rencontré des gens qui sont venus pour lui donner des informations concernant des scandales? 
Ou même conçernant des cas qui sont sujets à des enquêtes? Ou bien concernant des cas qui 
sont même en Cour?   Moi-mème je connais déjà plusieurs personnes. Alors, il ne faut pas 
faire  de  la  démagogie.  Je  lui  pose  trois  questions:  A  l’époque,  pourquoi  avait-il  rencontré 
Monsieur  Toorab  Bissesur,  qui,  lui-même  était  impliqué  dans  le  triple  assassinat  de  la  rue 
Gorah-Issac survenu en octobre 1996 ? Selon ses propres dires, lui-même il avait donné de 
l’argent à  Monsieur Toorab Bissesur pour aller à Madagascar. Quelle était la motivation pour 
agir de la sorte? 

Oui! What is good for the Leader of the Opposition is bad for others! C’est cela que 

(Interruptions) 

je retiens, Madame la présidente ! 

Madam Speaker: Order, order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order ! 

Mr Jugnauth: I am putting the questions. Don’t get excited! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Address the Chair, please! 
Mr Jugnauth: I am putting the questions! J’espère que le Chef de l’Opposition aura 
encore des réponses à donner à la nation dans cette affaire. Mais comme je dis, moi, je n’ai 
pas  le  droit  de  rencontrer  des  personnes  pour  obtenir  des  informations  afin  d’élucider  des 
malversations, mais lui, il peut.  

Madame la présidente, laissez-moi dire aussi, à l’époque où j’ai été arrêté par la CID 
concernant l’affaire de MITD,  en janvier 2011, j’ai donné un statement à la Police. Parmi, 
j’avais dénoncé le scandale de la MDFP. Je ne veux pas aller dans les détails de ce que j’ai dit 
concernant  mon  propre  témoignage  dans  l’affaire  de  MDFP.  D’ailleurs,  j’avais  donné  au 

 

44 

Leader de l’Opposition non seulement une copie de mon statement, mais tous les documents, 
toutes les preuves que j’avais donnés à la Police en janvier 2011. 

(Interruptions) 

2012, allons dire.  2012.  Et avec une liste de témoins. Le Leader de l’opposition a 
fait une critique pour dire pourquoi la police n’est pas venue prendre un statement avec les 
trois ministres. Mais à ce que je sache, je n’ai jamais entendu dire depuis mon statement à la 
CID, pourquoi la police n’est pas allée prendre un statement avec tous les témoins que j’ai 
mentionnés dans cette affaire. Jamais! Et pourquoi l’enquête n’a pas progressé? Est-ce que le 
chef de l’opposition était toujours le chef de l’opposition?  Pourquoi il n’a pas dit, à l’époque, 
il n’avait pas réclamé, pourquoi est-ce que l’enquête ne progresse pas? Et je vais plus loin, 
pourquoi il n’a pas posé une PNQ ici sur toutes les allégations que moi j’ai faites dans mon 
statement concernant l’affaire de MITD?  

(Interruptions) 

Qu’est-ce que je cause? Je cause que vous êtes en train de cause, causer. 

‘Ti pé cause, causer!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Et  je  me  souviens,  lorsque  l’honorable  Uteem,  l’honorable  Lesjongard  avaient  osé 
critiquer ‘Madame-là’, ils se sont fait taper sur les mains. Ils se sont fait taper sur les mains à 
une conférence de presse. 

(Interruptions) 
You will reply! You will have the chance to reply! 

Madam Speaker: Please, order! 

Order, please! No comments, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth: Toujours est-il que ‘ti l’esprit’ forme le gouvernement aujourd’hui et 

les grands esprits sont dans l’opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order ! 
Mr Jugnauth: Laissez-moi passer peut-être à l’honorable Mohamed. Tout à l’heure 
je  l’ai  écouté,  il  est  en  train  de  dire  -  c’est  bien,  il  a  fait  un  bon  discours,  et  il  avait  dit: 
‘Xavier-Luc  Duval,  à  ce  moment-là,  est  resté  dans  le  gouvernement,  pourquoi  n’est-il  pas 
parti,  etc.  Il  aurait  dû  démissionner’.  But,  you,  yourself,  hon.  Mohamed,  you  have  been 
having differences with the former Prime Minister on so many occasions. 

 

45 

Madam Speaker: Address the Chair, please! 
Mr Jugnauth: Yes, I am addressing the Chair, but I am mentioning the case of hon. 
Mohamed because he just said that hon. Duval has made certain comments on whether it is a 
Ponzi scheme or not; there are differences in Government, and so on and so forth. Alright! 
But, he, himself, he was in the former Government with the former Prime Minister and there 
have been, not differences, this is what? I don’t even call that a difference. 

There have been… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking! 
Mr Jugnauth: There have been violent exchanges. I don’t want to mention any. 

 (Interruptions) 

But, there have been violent exchanges and yet, he is remaining in the Government 

of Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam. Even the son of ‘Madame-là’ has told him off. 

And yet… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comments! No provocative remarks! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth: I better not carry on, because there are so many things that have been 
said which I thought, probably, required at least a reply, when I heard that there have been 
viles attaques, l’honorable Ameer Meea, je l’ai écouté l’autre jour, il disait que les membres 
du gouvernement ont fait des viles attaques sur les membres de l’opposition. 

Enfin, you said des viles attaques. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please allow the hon. Minister to talk! 
Mr Jugnauth: Je ne voudrais pas donner des exemples où il y a eu des viles attaques 

sur moi-même, sur les membres de ma famille. Mais bon, passons! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, let me say that the budget that has been presented by 
my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  in  fact,  gives  a  fresh 
orientation to the relationship between Government and the private sector. It is establishing a 

 

46 

collaborative approach to enable the construction of the nation based on justice, meritocracy 
and equity.  

The budget is highly ambitious and it has to be so, because we cannot remain trapped 
in a middle income economy with low productivity and low level of technology. That is why 
we  have  set  ourselves  a  target  of  5.3%  of  growth  and  5.7%  for  the  year  2016/2017.  And 
indeed, I agree that these are ambitious targets, but we are going to work hard. This is the 
aim. We are going to work hard towards achieving those targets and we are confident that 
they can be achieved as Government and the private sector intend to invest massively in a 
number  of  those  projects  that  have  been  mentioned.  It  is  high  time  to  establish  an 
entrepreneurial economy, une nation d’entrepreneurs that is self-reliant, outward-looking and 
driven by technology and innovation. 

Madam Speaker, this Government believes that a nation should be fully developed in 
all its dimensions: economic, political, social, spiritual, psychological and cultural, and the 
budget  provides  the  necessary  impetus  to  transform  the  SME  sector  into  major  engine  of 
growth and to transform Mauritius into an international city State. With the smart cities and 
technopoles endowed with world-class infrastructure for port, transport and communications. 
The ocean economy constitutes another pillar in our overall strategy and to boost all these 
new sectors, the budget has provided an attractive package of incentives for the Mauritian 
diaspora who have acquired the skills needed for our next phase of development and, here, 
we want to reverse the brain drain into brain gain.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  no  doubt  at  all  that  the  budget  paves  the  way  towards  a 
People’s  economy.  It  will  give  hope  and  confidence  to  thousands  of  small  and  medium 
enterprises which - let me remind those who did care to know - contribute more than 50% of 
the GDP of our economy and we are, through this budget, giving them the tools they need to 
go as far as their efforts will take them, and just imagine a Rs10 billion that will be made 
available over the next five years through a newly set up SME bank.  

I  have  no  doubt  that  we  will  bounce  back  and  reverse  the  tide  of  such  bleak  and 
deceiving economic growth that has haunted us for several years and that against a backdrop 
of  booming  and  more  prosperous  economic  development  of  neighbouring  countries  of  the 
African continent.  

Madam Speaker,  I would now like to turn to some of the measures that have been 
announced  concerning  my  Ministry.  But,  before  coming  to  those  measures,  I  am  however 
compelled to recall the precarious legacy that has been left in the field of information and 
communication  technology  during  the  past  nine  years  although  a  double-digit  growth  had 

 

47 

been noted during that corresponding period in several African countries such as Tanzania, 
Rwanda and Ethiopia.  

As  a  matter  of  fact,  ICT  indicators,  such  as,  growth  rate  has  sharply  declined  from 
22.7%  in  2004  to  reach  around  7%  in  2013.  GDP  contribution  of  the  ICT  sector  to  the 
economy  has  started  to  decline  by  2010  and  job  creation  almost  stalled  and  even  dropped 
between 2011 and 2012. Unmindful of this situation, we are more than committed to rolling 
back  this  decline  and  we  are  presently  working  hard  to  come  forward  with  a  five-year 
strategic  plan  for  the  sector  which  we  have  coined  the  making  of  a  smart  Mauritius.  The 
2015-2016 Budget has given us not only the financial means to start the journey towards a 
smart Mauritius, but it has also given us the tools and the motivation to unleash the boundless 
potential  creativity  and  inventiveness  that  need  to  be  tapped.  The  making  of  the  smart 
Mauritius  revolves  around  five  strategies,  that  is,  the  creation  of  a  second  cyber  city  and 
techno  parks;  revamping  and  upgrading  our 
the 
implementation of a National Innovation Programme; the creation of job opportunities and 
improving the employability of our  youth, and, finally, the positioning of our country as a 
regional ICT hub to tap the growing opportunities in Africa in the ICT sector. 

telecommunications 

infrastructure; 

Madam Speaker, in our quest to reshape an ailing economy, to create sustainable jobs 
opportunities for our youth and to improve the quality of life of our citizens, the creation of 
Smart Cities and Technopoles as announced in the Budget is, in fact, a refreshing projet de 
société.  As a matter of fact, a Smart City uses digital technologies to enhance performance 
and well-being; to reduce costs and resource consumption and to engage more effectively and 
actively with the citizens. In line with the policy of Government for the setting up of Smart 
Cities and Technopoles, the Government of India has kindly accepted to extend financial and 
technical assistance for the construction of a second cyber city as part of the line of credit 
which was secured during the recent visit of Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India to 
Mauritius in the context of the National Day celebrations. The second cyber city is, in fact, 
intended  to  host  high  value  added  ICT/BPO  services  such  as  data  and  disaster  recovery 
centres; provision of cloud computing services, and finance and accounting BPO activities. 

Madam Speaker, let me now turn to the budgetary measures on the area of innovation. 
In this digital world of the 21st century, our country’s social economic success and prosperity 
will invariably rely on the innovative use of science, technology and communication network. 
Government wants its people particularly the youth to win the race for the kinds of innovative 
products, services and tools that will unleash new jobs and improve the quality of life of our 
population. In this context, the Budget makes provision for the very first time ever of Rs125 

 

48 

m. allocation to operate a National Innovation Programme and I am pleased to inform hon. 
Members of the setting up of a National Innovation Committee at the level of my Ministry 
and  with  stakeholders  representing  different  sectors  of  our  economy  such  as  tourism, 
agriculture, industry amongst others.  

My  Ministry  will  soon  come  up  with  a  National  Innovation  Framework  which  will 
provide innovators the right platform to tap the resources that they need to showcase their 
creativity and inventiveness in every sphere of our daily life. I must here pay tribute to the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  for  his  vision  and  foresightedness  to  create,  for  the  first  time  ever,  a 
Ministry dedicated to the area of innovation besides that of technology and communication. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  announced  in  the  Budget,  Government  has  the  firm  intention  to 
acquire an additional international gateway to Mauritius by the setting up of third submarine 
fibre-optic  cable.  This  measure,  I  must  say,  has  received  very  positive  feedback  from 
ICT/BPO  operators  and  the  population  at  large.  An  additional  international  gateway  will 
substantially  increase  international  bandwidth  capacity;  improve  international  network 
resiliency; enable route diversity for enhanced internet connectivity and induce competition 
in the telecommunication sector. 

Additionally, existing local telecommunication operators will accelerate the overall of 
the  existing  inland  telecommunication  infrastructure  which  is  primarily  based  on  obsolete 
copper  wire  technology  to  state-of-the-art  fibre  optic  technology  and  these  measures  will 
bring,  in  fact,  a  significant  increase  in  internet  speed  ranging  from  10  to  100  times  to  be 
offered at a more affordable cost in the months to come.   

Furthermore,  with  a  view  to  bridge  the  digital  divide  and  create  a  conducive 
environment for innovation and information sharing, Government will, as announced in the 
Budget  Speech,  set  up  350  Wi-Fi  hotspots  across  the  island  with  free  broadband  internet 
connectivity. 

Madam Speaker the staggering rise of an employment is a deep concern to every one of 
us  and  it  is  hurting  mostly  women  and  the  youth  of  the  country.  Although  the  ICT/BPO 
sector has tremendous potential for job creation, yet barely anything has been achieved and, 
as a matter of fact, the ICT Academy which was set up in 2011 with huge investment by the 
previous  Government  had,  as  main  objective,  to  address  skills  mismatch  and  raise 
employability of our youth. However, it is with dismay that I have noted that this project has 
been an utter  failure as, up to now, not  a single person has been trained for the  ICT/BPO 
sector. 

 

49 

I am extremely pleased to note that, as part of my Ministry strategy of making a smart 
Mauritius, the 2015-2016 Budget makes provision of no less than Rs50 m. as part of the ICT 
Skills  Development  Programme  and  this  amount  will  serve  to  train  hundreds  of  people  to 
meet the demand for skilled manpower for the sustained development and expansion of the 
ICT/BPO sector. 

Madam Speaker, as part of my Ministry’s objective to position our country as an ICT 
hub and a gateway to Africa, I am pleased to note that the Board of Investment will be given 
a  new  impetus  in  terms  of  promotion  with  a  view  to  tap  new  opportunities  and  mainly 
strategically  positioning  our  country  as  a  safe,  secure  and  credible  investment  destination. 
The proposed posting of Trade and Investment Promotion Managers in strategic cities around 
the world including Pretoria will go a long way towards making of Mauritius the gateway to 
Africa particularly in the sectors of ICT.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  now  abundantly  clear  that,  following  the  presentation  of  the 
Budget, we are at the dawn of a new era which sets the path for sustained, equitable and all-
inclusive economic prosperity for our country. We shall, of course, leave no stone unturned 
in our resolve to ensure that we serve the people; not only those who have put their trust in 
this Government, but the whole nation and to create a truly smart Mauritius where the welfare 
of the nation will be at the very centre of every action we take.  

Let me, therefore, congratulate and thank the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development who has, even after 25 years of absence from this august Assembly, displayed 
an avant-garde mindset and a very dedicated and innovative approach to give to our country 
a new hope for a better future. Indeed, Madam Speaker, the Budget has enunciated many bold 
measures that will lay the foundation for the second economic miracle that is cherished by 
our hon. Prime Minister. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 5.01 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.38 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, after 
an  era  marked  by  a  period  of  low  growth,  high  unemployment,  low  savings  and 
unprecedented scandals, abuse, absence of good governance, ethical transgression and poor 

 

50 

implementation  of  several  lumpy  infrastructure  projects,  the  nation  looked  with  great 
expectation to the first Budget of this Government. 

This expectation was heightened by the several electoral promises and pledges made 
during  the  electoral  campaign  before  the  victory  of  the  new  Government  although  I  must 
concede that many of these pledges were made,  especially by those who were standing as 
candidates for the first time, somewhat sincerely or naively.  We have been discussing this 
Budget  for  nearly  three  weeks  in  this  House  and  the  proposals  are  being  fully  canvassed 
inside  and  outside  the  House.  The  different  segments  of  our  society  have  had  a  chance  to 
probe further into the different proposals of the Budget; the experts, the economists, the trade 
unionists, the stakeholders, have all added their voice to the debates. 

 And therefore, for me, as I stand today to comment on this Budget, I must say it is 
with  mixed  feelings,  Madam  Speaker,  that  I  welcome  the  Budget  proposals.  My  approach 
will not be to criticise just for the sake of criticism, but to offer constructive criticisms in the 
interest of the nation. One first comment that I will make is that this Budget contains a good 
mix  of  seemingly  development  measures  that  could  restore  confidence  and  social  justice 
through a series of measures to further better our welfare system.  The effect of this approach 
is the feel-good factor, a necessary condition in creating a climate of social stability and an 
enabling  environment  for  investment.    Unfortunately,  this  feel-good  factor  has  been  short 
lived. As I said just now, when the stakeholders had at leisure probed further in the different 
measures contained in the Budget, in some cases the bluff was called, in others the naked 
truth came to light barring other external events which occurred and shook the political scene 
and marked the desired effect of the Budget. 

I will, Madam Speaker, start with a few comments rapidly on the economic situation 
and the goals of sustained growth. I do not doubt the good intentions of the hon. Minister of 
Finance. I must say that this Government evidently benefits from a stroke of luck. Yet, I am 
not  sure  it  has  been  able  to  take  full  advantage  of  all  the  converging  factors  to  maximise 
benefits. Let me explain myself.  Indeed, global economic growth is picking up. Let us make 
no  mistake  about  it.  The  recent  growth  in  the  US  is  one  of  the  most  stable  factors.  The 
authorities  in  the  US  are  lifting  off  previous  quantitative  easing  to  be  replaced  by  a  more 
flexible approach. The main reason is that the US is approaching full employment in a non-
inflationary situation which is a rare economic phenomenon. But inflation would soon start to 
show its nasty nose and interest is likely to rise, if it has not risen. 

51 

 
In the euro zone, Madam Speaker, which was long hit by recession, the economy is 
recovering slowly with positive growth by the leading EU countries. Germany has exported 
more  commodities  outside  the  euro  zone  with  massive  inflows  in  US  dollars.  This  is  a 
positive  sign  in  return  for  us  with  probably  a  rise  in  German  tourist  arrivals  and  textile 
exports  from  Mauritius.  We  know  that  when  Germany  picks  up,  the  economic  health  of 
Europe strengthens. 

This is why, Madam Speaker, we fail to understand how Government will increase 
growth and generate new jobs.  The persistent low growth and the trendy high unemployment 
will continue if we do not take stronger remedial actions. Those proposed in the Budget are 
simply insufficient to achieve the goals set.  Have we missed the boat?  The Budget rightly 
says we are at the crossroad and face a bleak future.  But it does little to brighten the future, 
and I fear we will be condemned for another five years to an anaemic growth if we persist in 
his  direction.    Indeed,  Madam  Speaker,  do  we  have  to  wait  for  another  year,  for  the  next 
Budget?    We  know,  in  addition,  the  time  it  takes  for  the  different  reform  measures  to  be 
deployed to fully translate the measures into employment gains. 

With this new Government in place, priority should have been given to rapidly create 
jobs so that the unemployment rate declines by, at least, 1% in the short-term and by 1% each 
year. Nothing in this Budget permits us to be so optimistic.  In the present circumstances, I 
strongly  believe  that  strong  Government  intervention  was  the  preferred  option.  While  this 
was  at  one  time  a  disputed  approach,  several  economists  today  agree  that  Government 
intervention works if wisely done through proper planning and will bring the desired effect.  
The  South  Korean  approach  transformed  Korea’s  famine-prone  economy  into  a  high-tech 
economy. Narendra Modi’s strong intervention so much changed the economy structure of 
the State of Gujarat that economists around the world are starting to review their theory based 
exclusively on market forces. Have we, therefore, Madam Speaker, missed an opportunity to 
make the best when the sun is still shining? 

 
If we delay, there are serious risks for the high level of inefficiency and high social 
costs. As a population becomes used to unemployment and underemployment settling in the 
range  of  7.5%  to  8.5%,  loss  of  dignity,  loss  of  confidence,  loss  of  self-esteem  will  start 
haunting  them,  culminating  in  social  frustration  that  could  be  dangerous  to  society.    Not 
surprisingly, juvenile delinquency, sexual abuse, illicit activities, crimes, burglary and other 

 

52 

undesirable social behaviour typically associated with persistent high unemployment thrive in 
these circumstances. 

The  Government,  freshly  elected  with  such  a  clear  mandate,  has  a  moral  duty  to 
address this issue as a matter of urgency.  Failing which, Madam Speaker, our harmonious 
social fabric or worse, our growth engines, like tourism, maybe seriously exposed. 

Madam Speaker, the Budget exercise for this year has clearly shifted the percentage 
of which we normally invest in capital project to more current expenditure.  Of course, we 
understand that Government had to deliver on pre-electoral promise, especially increase in 
pension.    But,  when  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  talks  that  this  is  a  Budget  for  the  next 
generation,  unfortunately,  less  investment  in  capital  projects  does  not  point  toward  that 
direction.  That’s why to me this is not a transformational Budget. The Government had the 
opportunity, given the overwhelming mandate they got, to really have a few game changes to 
develop a new platform for growth, but unfortunately, this was not the case. 

My belief is that the hon. Minister started thinking about the direction of travel of the 
Budget from first deciding that this will be a no new tax Budget, and he worked backwards 
by then deciding what will be the maximum budget deficit and then he allocated resources.  
But,  I  think,  given  it  is  the  first  Budget  of  the  mandate,  he  could  have  been  bolder  and 
transformational.  Budgetary proposal is a question of choice.  And of course, funding new 
ideas is always an issue. My personal belief is that he could have asked the richer people of 
our society to make an additional contribution, even may for a couple of years, earmarking 
that money for special projects to build a more resilient Mauritius. 

Taxing dividends, taxing high engine cars or taxing corporates to raise, for example, 
more  than  1  billion  revenue  could  have  been  areas  where  money  could  have  been  raised.  
Unfortunately, the Rambo Government feared to tread along the steps of Robin Hood. 

Madam Speaker, the spectre of inflation.  For many years, the economy achieved low 
inflation.  Now this present Government has triggered an accelerated process of depreciation.  
I fear we may have opened another Pandora’s Box.  I ask myself if we have embarked on the 
right path.  Madam Speaker, the rupee has been allowed to depreciate for around 17% since 
January of this year.  Given the sustained level of deficit of our current account, maybe the 
rupee  was  kept  artificially  at  a  high  level  before,  and  a  readjustment  for  the  value  of  our 
currency was necessary to reflect the fundamentals of the economy to make sure the export 
industry is competitive. 

However, the depreciation that took place came too quick and in a very short span of 
time.    This  will  have  a  huge  and  a  sudden  impact  on  imported  goods  prices  with  the 

 

53 

consequences  that  it  will  have  on  especially  the  poor  people.    And  the  other  consequence 
which we know of will be the windfall VAT that Government will collect as a result of this 
depreciation of the rupee.  

Yet we talk about a no tax budget.  This is why, Madam Speaker, I put the question 
just now if we have embarked on the right path.  Have we studied enough the structure of our 
international trade?  Are we sure that by encouraging the depreciation of the rupee, we will 
achieve the goals set?  We are a mature middle-income country aspiring to enter the club of 
high-income countries.  One of our former Ministers of Finance had the dream to transform 
this country into a high-wage economy. This was a laudable initiative. But this Budget will 
result in reversing this objective and condemn us to a low-wage, low-tech economy. 

Who benefits from such depreciation?  The export enterprises, representing some 6% 
of GDP; the tourism sector, which represents another 5% to 6% of the economy?  But what 
happens  to  our  fuel  bill,  the  price  of  pharmaceutical  products,  imported  commodities  and 
processed  food?    What  happens  to  the  deficit  in  the  current  account  contract?  What  will 
happen to the price of equipment in our various manufacturing plants and the imports of raw 
materials?    What  about  the  price  of  fertilisers  which  is  already  crushing  our  already 
despairing small planters’ community?  Will the accelerated depreciation encourage exports?  
Even  if  it  does,  taking  into  account  the  high  proportion  of  foreign  labour  and  the  ageing 
workforce in our export-oriented enterprises, we may then ask ourselves if such depreciation 
will  positively  influence  job  creation.    Will  not  such  a  depreciation  of  such  magnitude 
discourage parents from sending their children to UK, to France or the US, thus impairing the 
quality  of  our  human  capital?    Depreciation  by  its  very  nature  can  further  impoverish  the 
population. 

Madam  Speaker,  trying  to  sharpen  competitiveness  is  an  excellent  goal,  but  this 
should  be  achieved  through  timely  delivery,  high  quality  standards  and  durability, 
innovations, designs and research and, above all, enhanced productivity.  

Finally,  depreciation  will  unleash  an  inflationary  spiral.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  that, 
under  the  present  circumstances,  inflation  will  remain  only  at  3%.  I  am  convinced  that 
Statistics Mauritius will soon revise its estimates and I will not be surprised if, by the end of 
this year, inflation will slightly rise and will reach about 5%. This Budget document states it 
is  a  no-tax  budget.  However,  if  inflation  rises,  it  will  mean  defrauding  savers  through  an 
inflation  tax  and  negative  interest  rates.  We  will  be  moving  inexorably  towards  higher 
impoverishment and higher public spending on social benefits while discouraging enterprises. 

 

54 

This is why it is vital Madam Speaker, to keep inflation at bay and, perhaps, this was the only 
positive economic legacy of the outgoing Government. 

The spectre of inflation is on our threshold. We are dreaming of the policies which 
were effective in the 1980s when we had abundant cheap labour and preferential market for 
low value products. The structure of our economy, Madam Speaker, has altered significantly 
and global conditions have changed. Let us not forget that.  

Having  commented  on  a  few  aspects  of  the  economic  situation,  Madam  Speaker,  I 
will  now  say  a  few  words  on  a  few  other  sectors  and  I  will  start  by  commenting  on  the 
situation in the utilities sector, firstly, on energy.  The other day, the Vice-Prime Minister, 
hon.  Collendavelloo,  in  the  course  of  one  of  his  speeches,  reminded  us  how  energy  is  so 
pivotal to the economic development of a nation.  

Indeed, this is why energy cannot be a partisan issue, although political parties have 
different policies on this crucial matter. Our energy policy rests on, firstly, security of supply 
and,  secondly,  on  the  lowest  cost  of  production.  Unfortunately,  the  Budget  Speech  hardly 
addresses this issue, except for a cursory reference in two paragraphs on renewable energy. 
But what we must know, Madam Speaker, is that many emerging economies such as South 
Africa,  India,  Egypt  and  Turkey  are  facing  power  shortages  to  fuel  their  economic 
development. We, in Mauritius, must draw the necessary lessons.  

The current situation on supply/demand of our power sector was highlighted in the 
recent PNQ of the Leader of the Opposition. The reply of the Vice-Prime Minister was very 
sketchy and I will try to illustrate how.  

Following  the  cancellation  of  the  CT  Power  Project  and  the  delay  of  the  St  Louis 
Project,  our  country  is,  indeed,  on  a  knife  edge  margin  on  its  supply  part  of  the 
supply/demand equation. The Vice-Prime Minister himself confirmed that the total capacity 
of the country is 592 MW. If we deduct 37 MW for the breakdown of the largest unit and 30 
MW for scheduled maintenance, the effective capacity would be 525 MW but, in fact, we all 
know,  Madam  Speaker,  we  should  have  deducted  60  MW  for  maintenance  as  it  has  been 
done during the past years. In fact, it has been the practice to deduct 60 MW especially as we 
are on an island. The real effective capacity would, therefore, have been 495 MW when we 
compare this to the peak load of 460 MW, plus the spinning reserve of 10%, requiring an 
operating  capacity  of  506  MW.    We  see  that  there  is  a  shortfall  of  minus  11  MW.  The 
country, therefore, cannot take this risk.  And the CEB, to say the least, Madam Speaker, has 
shown an irresponsible posture. Therefore, we are in urgent need to address the problem of 
the medium-term prospects for base load capacity.  

55 

 
The  choice  is  stark.  In  three  years,  we  shall  be  needing,  according  to  everyone,  at 
least, hundred megawatt. It is good to remind the House that the last addition to our base load 
capacity  was  the  30  MW  by  CTDS  and  the  70  MW  by  Savannah  and  both  of  these  two 
projects took place during the MSM/MMM Government between years 2000 and 2005. The 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  was  then  Prime  Minister  and  after  2003  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition became Prime Minister. I was then the Minister of Utilities. But the question we 
ask, therefore, is what will be our choice for the base load addition of 2018?  We are now 
nearly  mid-2015;  the  choice  has  to  be  made  now  as  it  takes  three  to  four  years  to  be 
operational. Unfortunately, I don’t know. I have read the different answers of the Vice-Prime 
Minister - a good friend - and he has been more or less silent on this matter. Therefore, we 
have no clue whatsoever and, in addition, we have to be cautious with the cost element.  

Regarding renewables, Madam Speaker, we know we speak a lot on renewables, but 
renewables  are  of  intermittent  use,  even  with  a  sophisticated  and  expensive  smart  grid 
system. Of course, we should encourage its development, but it will never supplement firm 
power with the currently available technology. 

To say a few words on renewables, Madam Speaker, because the hon. Minister has 
devoted two or three paragraphs in his Budget Speech, we must know that it was from 1990 
onwards that the extensive use of renewable energy by most countries started to gain ground. 
All of them know that the world started to be aware that the carbon footprint would be very 
costly and corrective measures had to be taken. We have to see what is happening around the 
world today and the bold decision taken by some countries to realise the seriousness of this 
issue. Germany will phase out its nuclear power station by 2025 and will reach 30% of its 
power from renewable sources by 2030. 

Australia will phase out its coal power station by  2035. The  United Arab Emirates 
will  have  50%  of  its  power  from  renewable  resources  by  2025.  California  will  have  zero 
carbon emission by 2030. South Africans are opting for renewable energy rather than coal 
power station. This is what is happening on the world front regarding renewables and for us, 
in Mauritius, we need to have an energy mix in our country with renewable energy coming 
preponderant within the next 20 years. It is only during the past 10 years on the global level 
that  we  have  witnessed  this  big  evolution  in  this  sector.  Technology  has  now  evolved, 
resulting  in  the  emergence  of  new  technology  which  has  brought  down  the  price  of 
renewables  and,  at  the  same  time,  diminished  considerably  the  carbon  footprint.  The  hon. 
Minister has referred in his Budget Speech, Madam Speaker, to the proposal of a Mauritius 
Renewable Energy Agency to be set up.  

 

56 

This is a good idea, but so many years have been wasted. I, myself, in 2008, when we 
were on the other side of the House, I have the PQs with me, Madam Speaker; I proposed, I 
remember, to the Labour Government to set up this Renewable Energy Authority and nothing 
was done. And, you know, what the hon. Minister answered when I proposed whether - the 
question  is  whether  he  will  state  if  Government  proposes  to  set  up  a  Renewable  Energy 
Authority, that was on 06 May 2008, the hon. Minister answers and says: ‘Government does 
not want to opt for an institutional solution whereby there will be a multiplicity of entities 
which would burden the process.’ Nothing has been done.  

I even proposed in 2008, Madam Speaker, I remember that Government should come 
up  with  a  Master  Plan  for  renewable  energy.  This  is  the  Budget  Speech  of  2008;  years 
wasted!    Although  it  has  been  years  that  we  have  pledged  to  shift  our  power  generation 
options  to  renewable  energy,  we  have  seen  but little  progress  in  that  sector,  and  when  we 
were  together  in  Government  from  2000  to  2005,  although  the  situation  was  completely 
different at that time, we started to install the first wind turbines in Rodrigues. We came up 
with a Utility Regulatory Act, it was the MSM-MMM Government, I was Minister then. We 
legislated and voted for the Utility Regulatory Authority Act. We changed the Electricity Act 
which was 75 years old, but this law has never been implemented, promulgated even, by the 
former  Government.  I  remember  we  signed  an  MoU  with  the  Indian  Government  for  the 
promotion and development of renewable energy. In fact, it was hon. Gayan who - I forgot 
whether he was Minister of External Affairs in the MSM-MMM Government - went to India 
and signed this Memorandum of Understanding.  

Years have gone by, Madam Speaker, and, in fact, although, as I said, we are aware of 
the limitations of renewable energy, but I think in line with what is happening in their world 
today,  we  have  a  duty  to  seriously  consider  the  promotion  of  renewable  energy  in  our 
country.  

Madam Speaker,  I will just say one word on water, just to express, and this would 
perhaps shock the House, can I call it like that la mesure phare du budget concerning water, 
was the 6 m³ free of charge to all families in this country. I would apologise to the House, but 
I do not agree with this measure. Why do you, hon. Prime Minister or myself or anybody, 
why do  we need to pay water less?   We, some categories of people,  I  am not saying the 
whole nation. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes.  We know there are rich people. You know, Madam Speaker, Mauritius is one 
of the countries in the world where the price of water is relatively very cheap. Now, we are 

 

57 

making people who can afford, who are wasting water en baignant leurs chiens, en lavant 
leur voiture, je ne sais pas quoi, piscine… 

(Interruptions) 

I agree with you, we should give not 6 m³, more cubic metres of water to those who 
are really poor, at the bottom of the ladder. I think an exercise could have been done, there is 
a social register, we know who are the poor people who have registered, we know qui sont 
ceux  qui  bénéficient  des  prestations  sociales.  Of  course,  it  would  have  been  a  difficult 
exercise, but it would have been fairer and hon. Pravind Jugnauth just said, he was right, you 
know this will cost the Exchequer R 250 million à R 275 million par an. This is my figures, I 
think you said Rs200 m, but, I have been told it is about Rs250 m., this measure of giving 
free  6  m³  to  everybody  in  this  country,  to  the  richest,  the  magnates,  the  princes  of  this 
country. But, why should we have done that. I agree with that measure totally, but I think we 
should have done some targeting. We should have discriminated and given more than 6 m³ to 
those who really can’t afford it. In fact, today, as you know, if you consume less than 10 m³ 
per month, there is a minimum charge of R 55 qu’on paye, if you consume less than 10 m³. 
So, therefore, I think, Madam Speaker, this proposal of 6 m³ indiscriminately free of charge 
to  everybody  should  have  been  aimed  at  poor  families,  old  couples,  indigent  families  and 
those who, as I said, deserve, in fact, more than 6 m³, but I think we should not have been so 
generous with people who did not need those 6 m³, Madam Speaker.  

I  will  make  a  second  point  now.  We  appreciate  the  announcement  made  by 
Government,  during  the  campaign,  I  remember,  and  after  campaigning  even  recently    ‘we 
will provide water 24 heures sur 24 à toute la population’. I think it is in the budget. 

(Interruptions) 

It is, of course! I am not ‘pressé’, I am happy if all our population can be provided 
with water 24 heures sur 24, mais il y a un problème dedans, Madam Speaker, and I will 
come to that problem. 

(Interruptions) 

‘Ivan pour faire li’, of  course.  I  am sorry,  Ivan  is not here because  I am sure he 
would have appreciated the point I am trying to make.  There is something - and the hon. 
Prime Minister knows that, the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows that, I am sure all those 
who have been serving in Cabinet know - which is called unaccounted for water, non-revenue 
water.  What  is  this,  Madam  Speaker?  It  is  this  the  term  generally  used  to  denote  the 
difference  between  the  volume  of  water  produced  and  the  volume  of  water  sold.  If  you 
produce so much, you must know when you sell so much how much money do you receive, 

 

58 

but  the  case  for  the  CWA  is  that  for  many  years  they  produced  so  much  and  they  do  not 
receive revenue for so much water. They receive revenue for that much water. This is called 
unaccounted for water; it is old pipes, commercial losses, theft, pilferage, for many reasons, 
but the point I am making, Madam Speaker, is that in 2000, I have, again, the figures with 
me, en 2000 et 2005 when we asked questions about leakages, the figures at that time were 
47%, 48%, 49%, in those days. In fact, I have even a PQ in 2010, that is, under the Labour 
Government, where the hon. Minister informed the House what percentage of water do we 
lose, is wasted; it was about 48% in 2010.  

But,  today,  Madam  Speaker,  the  figure  is  appalling.  In  2005,  when  we  left 
Government, it was 44.7%, en 2005, today it is 57% water that we are losing, unaccounted 
for water that we are producing in the reservoirs, but then we are collecting revenue for 100% 
minus 57%. Donc, we are losing 57% water today. Today, donc, the figures are 57%, Madam 
Speaker. So, this is indeed very, very alarming again. What need to have been done was not 
done; the pipes were not changed during the last 10 years, there was no investment, we heard 
of the Singaporeans coming to Mauritius, but they came and they are working here. 

Madam Speaker, unfortunately, it would seem that the situation has not been reversed; 
on the contrary, the situation has deteriorated. I have a document with me to show, Madam 
Speaker. In fact, there are six zones in the CWA: the Port Louis zone, the North zone, Mare 
aux Vacoas Upper, Mare aux Vacoas Lower, the East and the South.  The non-revenue water 
ignores these six zones which range from 68.8% to 56.5%.  In one case, it is 59.4% and when 
we do the average; this is why I came with the figure of 57% today. This is the figure, the 
percentage for unaccounted water, and this is why, rightly so, I see that Rs20 m. has been 
budgeted  for  the  next  eight  years  in  this  Budget  for  the  replacing  of  old  pipes.  As  I  said, 
Madam Speaker, in the case of only one zone, Mare aux Vacoas Upper only, it represents 
only 21% of water consumers in this country. The project will amount to Rs734 m. for only 
one zone out of the six  zones.   I  am told, at the end of the  works, the figure, which is at 
present 56%, will be reduced by only 10%, after having invested Rs734 m.  It is a difficult 
complex  task  and  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  conscious  of  the  situation  and  he  has 
announced that Rs20 m. will be budgeted for this difficult problem.  

Finally,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  just  to  say  one  word  on  wastewater  projects. 
Again,  a  few  measures  have  been  taken  about  the  future  projects.  Unfortunately,  the  hon. 
Minister is not here, I would have suggested to him to revive a project which is an important 
wastewater  project.  I  am  personally  concerned  because  it  is  a  project  concerning 
Constituency No. 14.  It is called the West Coast Sewerage Project. Hon. Members of this 

 

59 

House will remember, like hon. Bodha, we did the Grand’ Baie sewerage project en 2000-
2005. We did many other projects in the wastewater sector. The Plaine Wilhems trunk sewer 
project was launched by us between 2000-2005.   

As Grand’ Baie is a resort area, une station balnéaire, a village by the sea, we know 
how importantly urgent it was to implement this Grand’Baie sewerage project and, at the end 
of our mandate, in 2005, came this proposal to have a West Coast Sewerage Project: Flic en 
Flac, even from Bambous. Hon. Roopun, I am sure, will remember. In fact, I launched the 
project  a  few  months  before  election  took  place  in  2005.  After  we  were  ousted  from 
Government in 2005, this project was shelved and we have never seen and heard again of this 
project.  

(Interruptions) 

 
This is the truth!  I am not going to come here to lie. I am just regretting and I even 
asked questions from 2005 to the past Ministers: why can’t this project be revived?  Madam 
Speaker, I am not saying it for me; I don’t live in Flic en Flac. I have nothing to do with Flic 
en  Flac  personally,  but  it  is  an  important  village  where  there  are  many  tourists.  There  are 
many buildings and we know why we do urgently need such projects. It is for the protection 
of our lagoons in Flic en Flac.  It is one of the last beautiful lagoons that we have and I hope 
this  Government  will  diligently  come  up  and  implement  this  project  of  the  West  Coast 
Sewerage Project. 

Madam Speaker, I will now say a few words on the housing sector.  There are two or 
three points which I wish to make.  Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Soodhun again for 
the answer he gave, for the details he gave to this House because I remember again - I don’t 
want to harass the on-going Government, but this is a question also which has been asked 
many times in this House, but unfortunately the answer never came forward.   

Two weeks ago, hon. Soodun replied and gave all the details about the situation in the 
housing  sector,  that  is,  between  2006  and  2014,  how  many  units  were  built?    How  many 
household seekers are on the list of the NHDC today?  Presque 40,000 personnes, ménages 
où  chefs  de  familles  have  applied  for  a  unit  at  the  NHDC.    Out  of  these  roughly  40,000 
household  seekers    -  there  are,  in  fact,  39,573  household  seekers  -  Madam  Speaker,  87% 
draw  an  income  of  less  than  Rs15,000.  Therefore,  there  is  an  urgency  to  re-engineer  the 
whole process of social housing so that we may see in the coming years, new housing estates, 
logements sociaux un peu partout dans notre pays.  We have to clear the backlog and I know 
it  is  not  very  easy.    The  cost  of  construction  offsite,  onsite  infrastructure  and  so  on,  but  I 
make an appeal to the hon. Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Housing to look urgently 

 

60 

into it so that we may start solving housing crisis in our country. I am happy also about the 
Slab Casting Scheme.  

In fact, before the Budget I talked to the hon. Minister and I imparted to him my idea of 
coming up with a parliamentary question about the necessity to widen the net. Previously the 
limit was Rs8,500, but now it has been increased and so much the better. Now more families 
will be able to benefit from this scheme of slab casting.   

Last point I wish to make was on the asbestos houses.  Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, 
the Budget talks of public buildings only. There will be a scheme to get rid of asbestos in 
these public buildings, but I again appeal to the hon. Minister to come up with a scheme for 
those poor families who live in these asbestos houses in different housing estates. 

The last point I will make on the housing sector concerns the sale of State land in the 
CHA estates. This was a proposal which the previous Government came up with, but it was a 
proposal which we made in the Opposition. All of us! Then Government implemented the 
idea and decided to allow residents of CHA estates to purchase their plots of CHA State land.  
Unfortunately, on many CHA estates this has not been implemented because either the land is 
pas géométriques or the land still belongs to the sugar estates.  

When the houses were built after cyclones Alix and Carol in the 60s, the houses were 
built by the State without ever making the necessary transaction, that is, signing the deed of 
sale  so  that,  theoretically,  today,  on  paper,  the  land  still  belongs  to  the  sugar  estates.  Of 
course, Government cannot sell a plot of land which does not belong to it.  That is why the 
needful has to be done between Government and the different sugar estates. 

I  do  not  know  why  the  previous  Minister  never  succeeded  in  doing  this,  but  I  will 
appeal to the hon. Minister concerned. In my constituency, I know about four of the estates, 
namely, Case Noyale and Riambel, where these people still do not have their deed of sale. 
They  are  still  not  the  owners  of  the  land  although  the  law  has  been  changed  to  allow 
Government to sell the plots of land in CHA estates to the occupiers. I do not have the exact 
figures, but there are thousands of families who are still waiting for this sale to be effected 
between them and Government. 

Madam Speaker,  I have skipped two pages on tertiary education and CSR. I will say 

a few words on one pillar of our economy. 

(Interruptions) 

61 

 
Madam Speaker, there was a time when every five years we came with a new pillar 
of growth, nursed it and fortified it to grow. This is how we built the EPZ, the freeport, the 
offshore, the seafood hub, the financial sector and the ICT. For the last decade, we  - when I 
say  ‘we’,  I  mean  the  past  Government  and  everybody  in  the  the  country  -  have  dismally 
failed, and we must not repeat the same mistake. 

For over a decade, Madam Speaker, we have been talking of the blue revolution - not 
the PMSD revolution -  without any project of significance taking place.  Unfortunately, this 
Budget devotes barely a sentence to the ocean economy. It only states the port will become a 
key contributor to the ocean economy. The hon. Minister had expressed himself forcefully on 
this issue in the press. I do not know. I ask the question: does he believe in ocean energy, in 
air conditioning projects or in seabed mining? The ocean is our future, Madam Speaker, and 
we cannot ignore its immense potential. Is there a change in policy or are we abandoning the 
ocean ecomony? To me, this economy is the salvation of Mauritius. We must not lose our 
faith  in  this  potential  pillar  of  growth.  We  know  what  the  Seychelles  have  done.  Yet, 
paradoxically, the impression has been given that this is a Government priority. This is why I 
take  the  liberty,  Madam  Speaker,  to  appeal  again  to  Government  to  see  to  it  that the  blue 
economy becomes a reality. We know why!  

The traditional activities and the established marine activities include shipping, ship 
building, fishing activities, port facilties and handling. We also know the coastal tourism and 
leisure activities, craft building, equipment production for coastal tourism and nautical sports 
activities. The most important category, that is, the emerging ocean-based industries includes 
offshore  wind,  oil  and  gas  extraction  in  the  deep  sea,  marine  acquaculture,  marine 
biotechnology, seabed mining, ocean monitoring, control and surveillance. It is this area that 
requires  both  exploration  and  exploitation.  This  is  why,  Madam  Speaker,  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister to promote this sector and scale up Mauritius to the status of an enlightened nation. 
This  is  a  great  idea  for  a  little  nation  like  ours  and  I  am  sure  that  we  all  understand  the 
potential in this industry. 

Having  said  that,  I  would,  now,  say  a  few  words,  if  you  would  allow  me,  Madam 

Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

62 

 
Mr  Ganoo:…on  -  this  is  the  political  part  of  it  –  ethics,  good  governance, 
transparency, openness and meritocracy. Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
talking of meritocracy and transparency, and we felt all elated by his words. However, words 
are not enough. We want to see action. This Government has to carry out ideas it sold to the 
electorate. We have seen recenlty a number of advertisements for high level jobs. We hope 
that these advertisements calling for the best candidates are selected in the most transparent 
manner based on meritocracy. At the same time, we will not be fulfilling our duty if we close 
our eyes on some of the things currently taking place. These posts are funded from public 
funds and every citizen has a right to equal opportunity. 

The Government announced, during the campaign, that it will invite applications to 
fill vacancies at executive level. However, within weeks, it started violating what it told the 
population  and  the  electorate.  When  critics  started  to  rain,  there  was  a  volte-face  amidst 
confusion.  Government  then  explained  that  Chairman  would  be  nominated  but  Chief 
Executives would be chosen on the basis of competition, meritocrary, concepts that appear in 
the Budget Speech.  

My  appeal  is  that  we  should  not  send  the  wrong  signal,  especially  to  our  young 
population  who  are  plunged  in  a  swamp  of  frustration  and  despair.  It  is  never  too  late  to 
remedy the situation. These institutions which have proceeded by sheer nominations should 
put an end to it. In some cases, we have been told that advertisements have been made tailor-
made to fit the profile of specific candidates.  

I  am  convinced  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  would  wish  to  leave  a  legacy  of 
fairness to the nation. I must commend him for one of his actions which he did this week, 
Madam Speaker. I think most of us did not realise what happened this week during Question 
Time. There was an answer to the question put to the hon. Prime Minister which he gave to 
the House last week. The PQ dealt with the recruitment of Police officers. As far as I know – 
I have been in this House for sufficiently a long time – for the first time in this House, the 
answer was unprecedented. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister tabled a list of the names of all the 
recruits in the Police Force which took place recently.  

Again, I do not want to have a go at the previous Prime Minister. I had one. I can 
show  the  record  to  anybody  who  wishes  to  see  it.  I  did,  one  day,  asked  a  supplementary 
question to the then Prime Minister about recruitment of Police officers. Do you know what 
was the question? The question was - and I will make this suggestion to the Rt. hon. Prime 

 

63 

Minister – “why is not the name of all recruits of Police officers or civil servants, as soon as 
they  are  recruited  be  published  in  the  Government  Gazette?”    500  Police  officers  are 
recruited, we do not have to come to this House to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister questions, 
to  table  the  list  or  give  the  names.  It  is  automatically  gazetted  as  soon  as  the  exercise  of 
recruitment is over. So, I think, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister  has to be commended for that. I 
suggest that for all the new recruits, not only in the Police Force, but in the Civil Service, 
their names should be gazetted and this will implement a modern concept of transparency and 
openness  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  will  set  strong  foundations  for  any  future 
Government.  

We must do that also for the statutory bodies, parastatal bodies, just like we have a 
Disciplined Forces Service Commission, a Public Service Commission, a Local Government 
Service Commission, we should have a parastatal service commission, that is, a commission 
whose task will be to recruit all candidates wishing entering or who have applied for a job in 
all  our  parastatal  bodies  or  other  statutory  corporations.  Instead  of  the  Board  or  the  Chief 
Executive or the Chairman, it should be a board nominated, of course, by the Prime Minister 
in accordance with the President and so on, as it appears in our Constitution so that just like 
the  LGSC  we  have  a  service  commission  to  cater  for  all  our  parastatal  bodies  and  our 
statutory corporations. 

In  the  same  breath,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  again  commend  the  Prime 
Minister for the parliamentary committee he decided to set up concerning the Chagos issue. 
Although the Chagos issue, as we all know, transcends political divides or political parties, 
but this, I hope, will be a first step so that in the future, there is real consultation between 
Government and Opposition. We know that Government has been elected by the people, is 
the  majority,  has  been  given  a  mandate  to  rule  this  country,  but  in  an  open  democratic 
system, we know also that Government, very often, consults the Opposition on major issues. 
Let  this  be  a  first  step  for  further  better  coordination  liaison  and  consultation  between 
Government and Opposition. 

I wish to address, in the same vein, Madam Speaker, on an issue which baffles me and 
which  shook  all  of  us,  I  think,  as  Members  of  this  House  recently.  I  am  talking,  Madam 
Speaker, of what happened to a few Permanent Secretaries recently. They had to climb the 
stairs  of  the  Central  CID  for  Police  questioning  in  connection  with  cases  of  suspected 
irregularity or fraud  and corruption.  All of us,  I think, followed these  events with a lot of 

 

64 

interest  and  also  sometimes  sadness  and  we  saw  some  of  them  high-profile  Permanent 
Secretaries or the post above the Permanent Secretary… 

… Senior Chief Executive - all of them being called by the Central CID, Madam 

(Interruptions) 

Speaker.  

What reflections we do  on what happened in this case, Madam Speaker? Ministers 
have  a  strong  hold  on  the  Ministries  they  are  responsible  for  and  control,  especially  those 
Ministers  sometimes  tend  to  assume  more  powers  than  what  our  founding  fathers  in  our 
Constitution gave them. Politics attracts the person who is eager to change society to his own 
view.  The  Minister  is,  therefore,  naturally  tempted  to  take  actions  that  yield  results  in  the 
short term and this is what leads to the administration being subject to  political influence. 
Madam Speaker, it is generally agreed that the Minister and the civil servants each have their 
role  in  the  initiation,  formulation  and  execution  of  public  policies,  neither  can  and  should 
substitute  himself  for  the  other.  Modern  governance  is  based  on  the  premises  that  the 
separation  of  rules  and  functions  between  politics  and  administration.  The  Minister  is  le 
fonctionnaire  d’autorité  and  the  Permanent  Secretary  is  le  fonctionnaire  de  gestion.  This 
increases the quality and potential of either of them.  

Civil servants should be able to speak the truth to power as it is a vital ingredient, 
Madam Speaker, of professional ethics and moral integrity of not only civil servants, but the 
administrative  machinery  as  a  whole.  According  to  our  Constitution,  the  Minister  is 
responsible  for  the  good  administration  of  his  Ministry  within  the  confines  of  the 
Constitution. On the other hand, the Constitution also provides that a Ministry is under the 
responsibility of a Minister and shall be supervised by a Supervising Officer, Senior Chief 
Executive  or  the  Permanent  Secretary.  But,  between  the  political  and  administrative 
chambers is found in every Ministry, a grey area, and it is this grey area that political and 
administrative  influences  meet  and  confront  each  other.  Since  Ministers  share  the 
responsibility for upholding the values of the Civil Service, they too are required to behave 
according  to  the  highest  standards  of  constitutional  and  professional  conduct  in  their 
performance of the duties and to contribute to reduce the risk of politicizing the Civil Service.  
It is precisely, Madam Speaker, for this reason that in UK, the British Government 
has introduced a Ministerial Code which provides guidance to Ministers on how they should 
conduct  the  affairs  of  the  State  in  order  to  uphold  the  standards.  Madam  Speaker,  the 
introduction of such a code in Mauritius will not only help considerably in clarifying the grey 
area  that  characterizes  the  political  and  administration  interface,  but  it  will  also  contribute 

 

65 

significantly  in  enhancing  public  trust  in  Government.  Besides,  this  code  will  certainly 
dovetail the Civil Service Code and the Code on Good Corporate Governance. Of course, the 
Code for Ministers will not be a rulebook and it will certainly not be the role of the Secretary 
to the Cabinet to enforce it. Ministers are personally responsible for decisions, how to act and 
how to conduct themselves. Ministers remain in office as long as they retain the confidence 
of the Prime Minister. It is, therefore, the Prime Minister who is the ultimate judge of the 
standards  of  behaviour  expected  by  Ministers  and  the  appropriate  consequences  for  any 
breach of these standards. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  eventual  Code  for  Ministers  would  be  framed  against  the 
background  of  the  overarching  duty  of  Ministers  to  comply  with  the  law  to  uphold  the 
administration of justice and to protect the integrity of public life. In Mauritius, the Manual of 
Cabinet Proceedings is the only document provided to a Minister on his assumption to office. 
Young and first-time Ministers have to learn all the rest on their job. A Code for Ministers 
would, thus, not only be an immensely useful guide to all Ministers, but would significantly 
enhance transparency, public trust and confidence in Government. 

Having said this, let me ask the question whether the Permanent Secretary or other 
officials  would  be  sufficiently  protected  in  the  execution  of  their  duties  with  such  a 
Ministerial Code.… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  public  officers  cannot  plead  superior  orders  if  they  act  in 
 
contravention of statutory provisions or of rules of procedure if any decision they make is in 
breach of the laws of the land. The first principle, that should guide the public servants, is that 
they should do their work without fear and favour with an objectivity which is not always 
available to the Minister. The Minister and the officials are in close daily touch and it is not 
always  sufficiently  understood  that  the  Permanent  Secretary  is  not  the  Minister’s  personal 
secretary. He is the Permanent Secretary to the Government and accountable in many other 
ways than in the line authority of the Minister himself. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the worst thing that can happen to the administrators is to 
allow themselves to be  subordinated to a political Government through  political pressures, 
attempt  at  interference  or  even,  intimidation  with  threats  of  punishment,  if  they  are  not 
amenable to personal whims of politicians and Ministers. Therefore, the Permanent Secretary 
must decide.  

If he chooses to submit, he may find peace for the moment, but very soon he will find 
himself having to cope with opposite pressures.  But what if the Permanent Secretary decides 

 

66 

not  to  submit?    At  present,  the  only  recourse  that  he  has  is  to  report  the  matter  to  his 
hierarchy;  in  the  case  of  a  Permanent  Secretary  to  the  Secretary  to  Cabinet.    But  is  it 
sufficient?    I  would  venture  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this  course  of  action,  that  is, 
reporting the matter to the Secretary to Cabinet, does not give him sufficient protection and 
that  there  should  be  an  independent  institution  to  which  he  could  resort.  The  creation  of 
another  organisation  to  handle  such  issues,  disagreement  between  Ministers  and  public 
officials  would  undoubtedly  mean  additional  expenditure,  and  we  are  not  suggesting  that.  
But  may  I,  therefore,  suggest  that  the  statute  of  the  Public  Service  Appeal  Tribunal  be 
extended  to  incorporate  the  settling  of  such  matters.    I  believe  this  will  go  a  long  way  to 
preserve good constitutional Government and by the same token to prevent the queuing up of 
Permanent Secretaries in the corridors of the Central CID. 

Je termine en disant, Madame la présidente,… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!   Allow the hon. Member to complete his speech. 
Mr  Ganoo:  Madame  la  présidente,  depuis  deux  semaines  nous  nous  évertuons  à 
débattre du budget, de ses propositions, de leur impact, de leur pertinence sur l’économie de 
notre  pays.  La  présentation  d’un  budget  et  les  débats  qui  s’ensuivent  sont  un  moment 
important,  un  moment  capital  dans  l’histoire  d’un  pays.  Mais  en  vérité,  Madame  la 
présidente,  l’économie  est  tributaire  de  la  politique.  L’économie  est  le  concentré  de  la 
politique. Je m’explique. 

Les  effets  du  meilleur  budget  proposé  à  la  nation  ne  sont  que  limités  si  le  climat 
politique du pays n’est  pas propice et ne  favorise pas le développement et l’édification de 
l’économie de ce pays. 

The  destiny  of  a  nation  is  not  founded  only  on  economic  principles,  on  financial 

doctrines and measures. 

C’est  dans  ce  contexte  que  nous  devrions  appréhender  et  analyser  l’affaire  Bramer 
Bank et la saga de la BAI, et quelques récents événements survenus dans un passé récent, 
Madame la présidente. 

In  fact,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance,  when  he  was  answering  the  PNQ  last  time, 
informed the House and the public that the Leader of the Opposition has been in consultation 
with  him  on  this  issue.    We  all  agree  that  Bramer  Bank  went  against  some  regulations, 
ignored  instructions  to  comply  with  certain  banking  norms,  deviated  from  prudential 
management, failed to observe certain mandatory financial ratios and so on. I cannot speak 

 

67 

longer on that because I understand perhaps that there might be a case in court. But what I 
want to say, Madam Speaker, is that there has been recently in our country, unfortunately… 

I am finishing!  Don’t worry! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

There has been recently in this country events, Madam Speaker, before the Bramer 
incident, but specifically on the Bramer Bank saga, and as a result of these events, a general 
background  which  has  resulted  in  unclear,  blurred,  inappropriate  signals  being  sent  by 
Government to the financial community and international investors.  I am referring, Madam 
Speaker, to – 

• 
• 

the arrest and the search of a solicitor at the airport, and 
the  offer  of  the  SBM  to  acquire  interest  in  Bramer  Bank  without  any  clear 
assessment of the extent of damages. 

We  will  remember  that  the  SBM  came  back  on  its  decision.  Government’s 
commitment again without any assessment of liabilities being handled, hasty press coverage 
of events related to the scandal.  We heard about the retrieval of Rs1.3 billion by Government 
within  a  short  period  before  the  licence  revocation;  open  criticisms  of  the  FSC  by  certain 
Ministers saying that the FSC was inefficient.  This can have a very negative impact when 
dealing with India for our Double Taxation Agreement (DTA) bearing in mind that it is the 
FSC rules that govern our DTA.  The new bank is created in a few hours, owned by the State 
to take over the Bramer Bank, with a new CEO designate who is none other than the CEO of 
the now dead Bramer Bank, and the revocation of the revocation of the licence. 

Sur le fond le gouvernement a raison mais pas sur la forme.   This is the point I wish 
to make, Madam Speaker.  That is, the unclear signal that we should not be sending to the 
financial sector, to the foreign investors and to the business community.  We should be very 
careful.  This is why, Madam Speaker, we need take stock of this damage that might have 
been  done.  We  can’t  quantify  it.    But  we  need  to  take  stock  of  the  collateral  damage  that 
might have been inflicted on the image of Mauritius and to the financial sector in particular.  
Government needs to handle the situation with great care.  I am saying that because this is a 
genuine reflection. The perception of Government’s action, even if viewed with satisfaction, 
is seemed elsewhere in the international arena with suspicion. This is why I urge Government 
to handle the situation with extreme caution and dissipate any ill feelings not only to ensure 

 

68 

continued  harmony  in  our  country,  but  also  to  refrain  from  undermining  the  level  of 
confidence in the global financial community. 

Madam Speaker, the nation expected high quality, objective and entertaining debates. 

 (Interruptions) 

 

I am concluding. 
I  analysed  the  Budget  proposals  critically  not  for  the  sake  of  mere  criticism,  but 
because I have tried to open the eyes of those to whom the electorate has bestowed the sacred 
responsibility  of  policy  formulation  and  implementation.    As  a  responsible  citizen,  my 
démarche has been to adopt a fair approach so that the debates benefit from a better outcome. 
There  are  some  measures  which  are  progressive  in  this  Budget  and  highly 
satisfactory.  At the same time, I believe that this Government had a wonderful opportunity to 
create  a  Big  Bang  effect  through  a  huge  investment.  But  unfortunately,  it  missed  the 
opportunity.    This  is  why  I  am  afraid  the  Budget  will  not  have  a  major  impact  on 
socioeconomic affairs.  It is sad to say it.  The budget proposals are insufficient to bring our 
country back on the trajectory of high sustained and sustainable growth because some strong 
actions long overdue had not been taken. 

Nevertheless, I wish the Government good luck.  I have done. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

 (7.20 p.m.) 

The  Minister  for  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, let me congratulate hon. Alan Ganoo for his speech 
and the constructive contribution to the debate.  He is one of the last Mohicans of the 1982 
60-0  victory.    We  have  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  we  have  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, and we have also the hon. Minister of Ocean Economy. 

Madam  Speaker,  one  day  in  politics  is  a  long  day.    Today  is  10  April  and  this  is 
exactly four months when, at this time on 10 December, the people had already made their 
decision.  They had already made their choice and history was in the making.  I will come to 
what we achieved so far.  But what would have happened if there was not this cry for change 
and the change had not occurred? Where would we be today, four months after December 
2014? Just imagine where the country would have been!  We would have been, I am sure, 
still working on the Constitutional amendments; we would have been waiting for the date of a 
Presidential Election, we would have been waiting for a date for a by-election in the No. 5.  
And what would have happened is that, all that have happened over the whole of the 2014 
would have continued. Can we imagine the country, in 2014, when no decision was taken? 

 

69 

When  the  economy  was  on  an  automatic  mode,  when  we  know  what  happened  about  the 
politicking and, today, when we say that the growth rate - we can’t have a growth rate which 
is  better  than  last  year.  I  think  we  should  believe  in  ourselves,  we  can  make  it  because 
decisions will be taken. I am glad that hon. Ganoo spoke of the ‘Rambo Government’. It is a 
‘Rambo Government’! That’s the fundamental change, Madam Speaker, because hon. Ganoo 
spoke of mixed feelings, missed opportunities.  He spoke a lot about the nostalgia of 2000 
and 2005. A lot about that! Yes! But, Madam Speaker, in politics, he said  –  

“Budgets  are  not  only  about  estimates,  about  figures,  about  statistics  about 
measures, it is about faith”.  

Do  we  have  faith  in  ourselves?  Do  we  have  faith  in  the  Minister  of  Finance  to 
deliver? Do we have faith in our nation and do we have faith in our people? The Budget - you 
have  the  figures  you  have  the  measures,  but  do  we  have  the  capacity  to  deliver? Can  this 
Government and this team have the vision, the leadership, the resilience, the capacity to see 
that all these measures become what we want them to become, that is, reality? 

Madam Speaker, we must have faith in ourselves, first of all.  In 1983, there was one 
team which took this country from where it was to an economic miracle and to the making of 
modern Mauritius and that team was Sir Anerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister and the hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo  as  Minister  of  Finance.  That  team  delivered  in  spite  of  so  many 
difficulties. I still remember the 1983 Budget, the priorities were to correct the imbalances of 
the economy, the second one was to boost investment and to create jobs and the third one was 
to help the most vulnerable classes of our society. These were the three priorities of the 1983 
Budget, but then, in the given circumstances of 1983, with a split of the MMM, the birth of 
the  MSM,  what  was  the  criticism  which  was  levelled  from  the  Opposition?  They  never 
believed in it! They never believed we could make it, that’s why I am saying that, today, we 
have faith in ourselves that we can make it. This is the bonding factor of this team, this is 
what makes us a Government, an alliance, a team so that each Minister can deliver in his 
Ministry, give to the best of his ability so that we can altogether build this Mauritius we want 
to build and to achieve what the people wanted us to achieve when we were elected on 10 
December.  

In 1983, I remember, when we were launching the EPZ - the textile industries - hon. 

Jean Claude De L’Estrac said – 

“M. le président, nous sommes en train de faire de ce pays une nation de chemisiers”. 

70 

 
Because we were starting the textile industry! Ten years later, in 1993, he was the 
Minister of Industry of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, promoting the Mauritian added value in shirts. 
Why? Again, because we believed in it, we had faith in his Budget, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

We have faith in ourselves, this is my message today. Beyond the statistics, beyond 
the estimates because what happened on 10 December? Hon. Ganoo has painted a terrible 
picture of what happened in December. We also have been painting this picture, we know 
what happened to the country for 10 years and I chose the date of 10 today to say that it is 
only four months and, in four days, on 14 April, it will be only one year since the remake was 
unmade on 14 April; it was at Varusha Pirappu, that was the day! 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it is only four months and four days. That’s why I say in politics a day is long, 
Madam Speaker. And I come back to what I say, let us have faith in ourselves to deliver, let 
us have faith in the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth to deliver another second miracle. 

(Interruptions) 

I have heard some fiery speeches from the new comers at the National Assembly and 
they were passionate because they want to participate in this rebuilding of Mauritius. I have 
heard one of the most interesting speeches from hon. Koonjoo - even hon. Ganoo said so - 
about the hopes of the Ocean Economy. We have set up a Ministry for the Ocean Economy.  
It  is  because  we  have  faith  in  it;  we  believe  in  its  potential,  we  believe  that  we  have  an 
Exclusive Economic Zone of 2.7 million kilometres and we can make the most out of it. The 
other day, we discussed about the Convention, about the research that we can do as regards 
petroleum products, sea mining and to all that can be done in that area. We have faith also 
that  we  can  govern  this  country  better,  that  is  why  we  have  created  a  Ministry  of  Good 
Governance. The whole thing is about the way  you govern, it is about the role model  you 
have as a Prime Minister, it is about things that you can do as a Minister and things you can’t 
do. And when Sir Anerood Jugnauth is the Prime Minister, Ministers know what they can do 
and what they can’t do. MLAs know what they can do and what they can’t do. The sheer 
presence of Sir Anerood Jugnauth at the head of this team is another testimony that we can 
achieve what we are saying in this Budget.  Madam Speaker, we should also believe in the 
capacity  of  our  nation  because  what  they  said,  what  they  saw  and  what  they  did  on  10 
December show that they love this country and they believe that men and women who love 
this  country  can  work  for  them.  We  are  given  an  opportunity  to  serve  our  nation.  I  have 
always  said  we  should  always  remember  why  we  were  elected  on  10  December,  it  is  an 

 

71 

extraordinarily  miracle.  It  is  a  political  miracle  and  we  should  deliver  on  that.  We  should 
believe in our nation and what does our nation expect us. We have been cleaning the country; 
a  lot  has  been  said  about  all  this.  We  have  seen  the  scandals,  we  have  seen  unbelievable 
pictures and videos; we never thought this would happen in our country, but we have seen it 
happen. In regard to what we have done in four months, only four months, today, the billions 
we have given to the needy, to the most vulnerable segments of our society to have a better 
quality of life. Today, in Cabinet, it is announced, we are going to pay the full subsidy for 
30,000 students sitting for SC and HSC examinations. 

We will honour our pledge. Why?  Because Sir Anerood Jugnauth is a man of his 

(Interruptions) 

word! 

(Interruptions) 

And we have years to go.  Sometimes when I listen to our friends on the other side 
of the House, it is as if our programme for five years should have been in this budget. We 
cannot  do  that.  This  budget  is  the  laying  of  the  foundation  of  the  making  of  modern 
Mauritius. This is what we do. This is because we believe in ourselves and we believe in our 
nation, and we know what the nation expects us, we know that, we are cleaning the country; 
we have created a unique wave towards a better future. I remember hon. Ganoo said, I think 
that 33% of the votes came to us, he has made some calculations, but a few months later, we 
have heard that 80% of the people out there say that we are doing what has to be done. What 
does  that  mean?  We  are  doing  better  today,  four  months  later,  than  four  months  before. 
People believe in us. That is where our strengths lie; our strengths lie in the leadership, in the 
vision, in the teamwork and in our capacity to deliver. 

Madam Speaker, there have been a number of criticisms which have been made.  The 
hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  said  that  c’est  un  bluff;  hon.  Uteem  said  that  we  have  no 
ambition. But what is our ambition?  We want it or not, Madam Speaker, in the next month, 
people will expect us to do two things: employment, quality of life, purchasing power, and 
this budget is all about this. We have to be able to deliver on jobs; we have to be able to 
deliver as regards the purchasing power of our citizens. We are doing whatever we can for 
the poor and the needy. We have the Marshall Plan, I am not going to go into details into this, 
but when it comes to employment there are a number of sectors we have to revive. We have 
to  give  them  an  impetus.  I  will  take  just  the  construction  industry,  there  has  been  a  fall 
between 11% to 9%, and comme on dit en français, quand le bâtiment va tout va, quand le 
bâtiment ne va pas tout ne va pas. So, all the projects that we are coming up with, but it will 

 

72 

go also with a number of things that we have to change. I remember when my predecessor 
was sitting and he made speeches, he would make a list of all these projects, he knew all the 
number of millions by heart. He said this project is costing so much, this project is costing so 
much… 

(Interruptions) 

But why don’t the Mauritian people want to be in the construction industry; why are 
we  importing  labour?    Because  if  we  don’t  import  labour,  we  can’t  meet  the  deadlines! 
Again, why are we bringing Chinese lorries which are 10 years old to carry the soil when we 
are making roads. So, there are the fundamental changes that we have to bring in each sector 
just like this is a sector which is mine, but in a number of other sectors, my friend from the 
Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training has set up a committee to 
address the issue of employability. Why there is the mismatch and how we can address this 
issue of mismatch in the years to come, in the Smart Cities, in the sector of Innovation and 
Technology. A new Ministry again, so that we can have this new generation of people having 
a better income, having a better salary and moving towards a better future.  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  come  now  to  the  sector  of  the  Public  infrastructure.  This 
sector  has  invested  billions  and  billions  over  the  years  and  there  must  be  fundamental 
changes. I am going to take one example. The free bus transport for the students cost Rs800 
m.; for the elderly another Rs400 m., the public servants in Government and elsewhere, they 
cost us Rs660 m. So, in public transport the Government is spending Rs2 billion every year. 
Totally unaccountable, there is no accountability and I said the other day in the House, we 
don’t know which are the buses; we don’t know the drivers; we don’t know the conductors; 
we don’t know the number of students who are being carried out. There is no record and what 
is amazing, there is no contract between the NTA and the service providers since 2006, no 
contract, no responsibility, no obligation, the NTA has been a paying agent of Rs1.2 billion 
every year, without receipt.  

Now,  this  has  to  change,  and  we  have  to  make  the  changes.  There  should  be 
accountability. That’s why we said, we will reduce the number of students travelling in the 
bus, we will have a record of every bus, we will have the buzzer, we will have a conductor, 
because our children have to travel safely and there should be accountability, but I am asking 
also the institutions to have one dedicated officer who sees to it that the children, the students 
have taken the bus before the bus leaves the school yard and, at the same time, the CNT will 
have to shoulder its responsibility and we should see to it that most students, a majority of 

 

73 

students travel by the CNT, in the best buses and that then the money we are paying to that 
sector, most of the funds will go to the CNT.  

To come back to the CNT, today it has Rs450 m. of debts; it has buses of over 16 
years. You have about 400 people overstaffed and I have been told that buses which were 
sold  for  scrap,  they  would  enter  the  garage  of  the  buyer  with  new  tyres  and  two  or  three 
engines inside and spare parts for Rs60,000 or Rs80,000.  And there is a mafia as regards 
spare parts, fuel and tyres. So, we have to put order in all this so that the CNT becomes the 
most important instrument of land transport in this country with new buses, and if we buy 
100 new buses, Madam Speaker, we have 170 buses which are less than five years old, that is 
270 buses.  With 270 buses and four employees per bus, that’s 1,000 buses; we are going to 
train them. We are going to see to it that they offer a better service and it becomes a model 
for the country, and we are all about to gain in all this. 

Now,  we  have  decided  that  we  will  have  an  advertisement  for  the  post  of  General 
Manager.  We  will  see  to  it  that  we  have  somebody  who  can  be  the  Sarathi  of  the  third 
millennium. Hon. Rt. Prime Minister knows about all this. I think he inaugurated the 100th 
bus of the CNT - Isuzu.   

Let me now come to the Terre Rouge-Verdun.  How can we spend so much money 
and, at the same time, there is no accountability?  I am told here that, for a project of Rs4 
billion, the test had cost Rs400,000.  Tests were carried at one kilometre from one end to the 
other and, today, we have huge problems with the collapse. The first day I went there, it was 
a crack of about 10cm.  Today it is a crack of about 1 m 50cm over 150 metres over the six 
lanes.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  where  the  road  has  collapsed.    Then,  you  have  the  road 
where there were the cuts in the mountains. We have stopped the works because we have to 
see to it that the profiling, the design, the tests are done properly because we will have to 
make a road for the next 20-30 years, Madam Speaker.  I am also very happy about one thing: 
it took about four weeks to build a diversion of about 450 metres, a two-way so that now we 
can use the Terre Rouge-Verdun motorway as from 6 o’clock on Monday. 

(Interruptions) 

4,000  vehicles  are  going  to  take  that  road  and  I  am  sure  that  it  will  bring  some 
solace, relief to many of us because we all know that we are losing time, we are losing money 
with the congestion.   

 

74 

Madam Speaker, I have spoken about the Terre Rouge-Verdun. I have spoken about the 
CNT; let me talk very briefly about the penalty point system. The Bill is ready.  It will be 
presented to Cabinet next week and to Parliament in the weeks to come. I am convinced that 
we can have a system which is more humane; qui responsabilise les usagers de la route and 
which will be accountable, which will be very simple.  I want drivers just to know that on the 
motorway  it  is  80  and  110;  on  the  other  roads  it  is  60  and  80.    You  will  have  the  speed 
cameras; we are going to relocate some of them.  We removed some of them.  It will not be 
des pièges à camera and it will be seen from far.  I wanted to have it in orange, but I think it 
will be a bit… 

So, we are putting it in yellow. On the roads, you will have markings at 300 metres, 

(Interruptions) 

200 metres and 100 metres.  

(Interruptions) 

I hope this will work out.  We have to explain it to the people so that it becomes 
something that is user-friendly and people know that security, safety is as good for them than 
it is for the others.  This is for the penalty point system, Madam Speaker. 

When it comes to the decongestion programme, what had happened here? There was a 
decongestion programme which was presented by my predecessor which cost Rs30 billion.  
Rs30 billion PPP!  But it was a strange PPP.  In fact, Government was supposed to take a 
loan of Rs20 billion and give it to the private promoter, guarantee that loan and there would 
be a toll so that everybody has to pay.   

What  have  we  done?  We  have  reduced  the  scope  of  work  and  we  will  come  up  to 
Cabinet in the weeks to come with a new revised decongestion programme. We will see that 
all the designs get on the way they have to be done. We will be able in the near future to start 
a number of projects like the Ring Road Phase II, the Ring Road Phase III from Champ de 
Mars to Mer Rouge where Mer Rouge is going to be the outlet for the new port development 
and we will have the M1-A1-M1 over Sorèze so that when you come from Rose Hill, you can 
branch out at Sorèze either you go to the cyber city and to the new Smart Cities on your right 
or  you  take  the  tunnel  and  come  to  Port  Louis.  I  hope  that,  with  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun 
which would have been repaired by then, we will be able to be in a position where we have 
fluidity in traffic in the next 10 to 15 years because we want to build a new Mauritius with all 
these cyber cities, with all these Smart Cities, with the Highlands Administrative Centre and 
all the development that we are having.  

(Interruptions) 

75 

 
We are having a flyover at Phoenix. There is a lot to be done, Madam Speaker, and 
the  Budget  has  provided  for  this  year  all  the  consultancies  and  all  the  feasibilities.  If 
everything goes on as it should, we should be able to start works soon.  For example, if you 
are going to enter into Port Louis at Decaen where the Labour party quartier general is; you 
will not enter Port Louis at Place d’Armes because there is a glut at Place d’Armes. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, the most important thing - that is why I am saying that we should have 
faith in ourselves - is to see to it that each rupee is well spent. We cannot start a road, like the 
Terre Rouge-Verdun road, starting from Rs2 billion ending at Rs4 billion.  We cannot have a 
roundabout at Caudan starting at Rs75 m. ending up at Rs175 m. We cannot have the Ring 
Road Phase I costing Rs1.2 billion and it is now costing Rs200 m. because it collapsed. Let 
me give you another example; the NDU which is no longer under my purview, but under the 
purview of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. For five years, there is one company called Super 
Builders.  They got contracts to the tune of Rs1.2 billion.  
(Interruptions) 

Super  Builders!  We  don’t  know  them!  There  is  another  company  called  Best 

Contractors to the tune of Rs900 m. 

(Interruptions) 

I explain the other day in the House that the country was divided into four regions 
and it was always the same four main players. It was not a surprise - the question was put to 
me by hon. Rughoobur - that the greatest variation was in Flacq; the greatest budget of Rs600 
m.  was  in  Flacq  and  Colas  was  the  dedicated  contractor.    But  all  this  must  stop,  Madam 
Speaker! This is where we have to see to it that there is governance. The budget cannot say 
anything because the budget is an estimate. It is in the way we translate this budget in reality 
which matters.  It is in our capacity to deliver in all transparency, accountability and efficacy.  
That is where the team has to deliver and we are here to do that.  The Budget, c’est un acte de 
foi. As I said, the hon. Minister of Finance has addressed a number of issues.  I am not going 
to  address  the  macroeconomic  indicators.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  last  year  no  decision  was 
taken; no project was launched, but still we had a growth of three point something per cent 
and  if  this  year,  this  Government  has  the  dynamism,  the  decisiveness  and  the  will  to  go 
forward - the hon. Minister of Finance has put a number of Fast Tracks Committees to see to 
it that projects are on the right track and that the projects can be delivered in time.  I think 
that  those  projects  which  are  in  the  pipeline,  which  depend  on  one  permit,  one  licence 

 

76 

somewhere and with the fast-track and our ability and our determination, we will be able to 
have a number of projects which are starting in the months to come. 

Madam Speaker, there is a new buoyancy in the tourism industry. The hon. Deputy 

Prime Minister made a statement saying that this year is going to be a good year. 

(Interruptions) 

It shall! There is buoyancy in the IT industry. We have to see to it that we have had 
a  growth  in  the  financial  sector,  to  see  that  what  has  happened  these  last  days  does  not 
jeopardise that growth. We know that in the agriculture industry, we are going to have some 
problems. But things are set for us to achieve the objective that the hon. Minister of Finance 
has said he will. As I said, it is a question of whether we believe in ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, let me address a few other issues. It is a question of culture, the way 
you govern this country. It is a question of leadership. Madam Speaker, in 1964, Kenya had 
the same economic rating as Portugal. 50 years later, where is Kenya and where is Portugal? 
Zimbabwe  was  one  of  the  richest,  most  developed  countries  in  Africa  when  it  got 
independence. Where is Zimbabwe today? It all boils down to leadership. It all boils down to 
the one who decides to build a nation. And the difference is clear. We have seen what the 
former  Prime  Minister  has  done  to  this  country  and  we  have  seen  what  hon.  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth  has  done  to  this  country  in  the  past,  together  with  the  Minister  of  Finance,  hon. 
Lutchmeenaraidoo.  That  is  why  we  are  saying  that  everything  is  in  the  culture.  You  use 
political  power  to  do  what?  We  know  what  the  former  Prime  Minister  has  done?  When  I 
listened to him – we were sitting there, he was writing those beautiful speeches, well crafted, 
extraordinary words and he was threatening people.  He said: “Si ou envie faire business pas 
vine faire politic”. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha: We remember the way he was treating his colleagues and the speeches he 

made, the crafted words… 

(Interruptions) 

When we see  what was really happening,  I think even his former Ministers were 
flabbergasted. But everything is in the culture of power, the way you promise to the people 
and the way you deliver.   

77 

 
You will remember, Madam Speaker, we have the voodoo economics. We spoke, in 
those years, of special funds which were hiding, unspent expenditure, colourable devices, the 
arrogance,  shrouding  insignificant  economic  results  in  pompous  words.  We  were  told  that 
only  doctors  and  economists  could  become  Ministers  of  Finance.  And  we  spoke,  in  those 
years, of green shoots, we spoke of early harvest, we spoke of robust growth, bumper crop, 
but we are not going to talk about all this. We are going to deliver! Each Ministry and each 
sector of the economy are here to make the most and to see to it that we give the results that 
are expected from us. 

You  remember  those  days,  Madam  Speaker,  when  there  was  a  difference  between 
absolute poverty and relative poverty, insulting the dignity of the poor. But, we are not doing 
that. We have a plan. We are committed. Because this was one of the ideas we canvassed and 
we will see to it that in the housing sector, in the social security sector, in the education sector 
and  in  the  health  sector,  the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  our  society  have  the  better  share. 
Poverty  is  a  complex  issue.  My  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and 
Economic  Empowerment  is  not  here.  It  is  a  very  complex  issue.  Hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval 
addressed this issue in 2010. We have been addressing it. It is multi-faceted, it is complex, 
but we should be able to address each family, because each family has a poverty equation and 
we should be able to see to it that when it comes to social security, housing and education, we 
give them the support that they need, Madam Speaker. 

When I say it is about the culture of power, we have a culture of power. In fact, in 
Mauritius, you have the labour culture and you have the militant culture. Who is the one who 
has seen to it that the dream, the ideals and the principles of the militant family are respected 
and we achieve them? It is Sir Anerood Jugnauth! 

(Interruptions) 

We have achieved the militant dream from 1983 until they joined again in 1991. We 
achieved the political dream of making hon. Paul Bérenger the Prime Minister of the militant 
family and we are going again to continue, because we will continue with our same culture of 
power, that is, we use power in the best interest of our people. 

I will come and say one word about the Bramer Bank and the BAI saga. What does it 
show? Our friends are saying that dans le fond c’est bon, dans la forme ce n’est pas bon. The 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance and the Government took bold decisions, 
because they have to be taken, otherwise we would have seen a crisis of such magnitude that 

 

78 

it would have been a havoc for the whole financial system of Mauritius. We have been able to 
address the issue, take decisions and I think that we have saved what has to be saved. Let us 
see what happens. But Government will stand by those who have policies, who are clients 
and will stand in the interest of the people of Mauritius to safeguard the image of Mauritius 
as  a  financial  centre.  We  have  to  do  it,  because  when  we  see  how  a  financial  crisis  can 
destroy the credibility of a nation, of an economy. I think that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and 
the hon. Minister of Finance will see to it that this is done. In fact, today, we were briefed in 
Cabinet.  We  will  brief  the  hon.  Members  of  the  National  Assembly.  We  will  also  tell  the 
nation what we are doing and what has to be done in the best interest of the country. Why? 
Because there was a ‘laissez-faire’ culture! It is the ‘laissez-faire’ culture of the former Prime 
Minister which has brought the situation to where it is, just like it was… 

(Interruptions) 

‘laissez-faire’ in certain cases and ‘trop faire’ in other cases, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I come now to this culture of power and I talked about the militant. I 
will end on a note, Madam Speaker. What are our strengths? Our strength, Madam Speaker, 
is our capacity to take bold decisions, just like we have taken in the cases of Betamax, BAI 
and Bramer Bank, JinFei and just like my hon. colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister is taking 
decisions on the issue of State lands, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Neotown! Our strength is our capacity to take bold decisions. Our strength is our 
team spirit. This Alliance which was carved in only a few weeks, in fact, has bonded us all 
for this mandate, Madam Speaker. This team spirit, I have heard, I said, fiery speeches from 
the newcomers, I have heard the seasoned Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, 
Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands, hon. Koonjoo say his hope in this Budget. We have 
seen the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Duval when he saw the urgency of change and the call 
of a nation, he stood up and came with this in this Alliance… 

(Interruptions) 

…because there was an urgency for change, because in fact, as I explained, had it 
not been for the change, where we would be today? There would be a Presidential election, 
we don’t know the dates! 

(Interruptions) 

 
I  would  like  to  pay  tribute  to  the  leader  of  the  MSM  because  when  we  left 

79 

Government in July 2011 we never turned our back again! 
(Interruptions) 

In spite of all those who changed, les transfuges! They were looking at us as if to 

say “you are fools!” 

(Interruptions) 

They were looking at us in an arrogant manner, passing by. And, we stayed there 
because we believed that sincerity of purpose, resilience, will take us very far. I would like to 
pay  tribute  to  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  hon. 
Collendavelloo. Le soldat lalit militant est devenu un général… 

Le soldat lalit militant est devenu un général qui a ses propres troupes et il porte très 

 (Interruptions) 

haut les idéaux… 

Un  vrai  Militant !  Et  il  porte  très  haut  le  rêve,  les  idéaux  et  les  principes  de  la 

  (Interruptions) 

famille militante. Que nous sommes! 

Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I said our strength… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking, please! 
Mr Bodha: Our strength is our capacity to take decisions, our strength is our team 
spirit, our strength is our bond with the people of Mauritius. Nous sommes l’Alliance Lepep! 
And,  our  strength  is  also  the  fact  that  this  Budget  translates  a  dream,  a  vision  in  figures, 
statistics and estimates. But, we have to transform it into reality. When I see the Opposition, 
Madam Speaker, we know the Opposition is in disarray. The tremors of the earthquake of 10 
December and the after-shocks are still here! The after-shocks are still here! The turbulences 
are  still  here  and  deep-rooted!  We  don’t  know  what  is  going  to  happen.  Let  us  see  what 
happens!  When  it  comes  to  us,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  est  un  acte  de  foi,  it  is  a 
commitment, a promise, it is a sense of duty which falls on us and I am very happy to be here 
to stand up and speak on this Budget and to see to it that the hon. Prime Minister achieves 
what  he  wanted  his  legacy  -  a  land  of  meritocracy,  of  prosperity  where  we  will  all  live 
together, and we are all like a team to make this happen. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

80 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Duval! 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  debate  be  now 

adjourned. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to.  
Debates adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Wednesday 15 April 2015 at 10.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 7.47 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 15 April 2015 at 

10.30 a.m. 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

