 

1 

 

 

No. 17 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 07 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

            QUESTIONS (Oral) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

 BILLS (Public)           

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 17 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 07 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

7 

                                                       PAPERS LAID 

 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 

 
 

 

A. 
 

B. 
 

 

 

 

Office of the President 
The  41st  Annual  Report  of 
(In Original) 
Prime Minister’s Office – 
(a) 

the  Ombudsman  –  January 

to  December  2014.  

(b) 

Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Local  Government  (Amendment)  Bill 
(No. V of 2015). (In Original) 
The  Protection  of  Human  Rights  (Application  to  Human  Rights  Division  for 
Enquiry) (Prescribed Form) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 42 of 2015). 
 

 

 

C.  Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 
 

The National Identity Card (Extension of Validity Period) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 
(Government Notice No. 38 of 2015). 
D.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 
 

The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Beau/  Bassin  Rose  Hill  Chebel  Crematorium 
Regulation 2015 (Government Notice No. 36 of 2015). 
 
The Municipal Town Council of Beau Bassin/ Rose Hill (Fees for Classified Trades) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 37 of 2015). 
 

 

(b) 

(a) 

E.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 
 

(a) 

The  Hire  Purchase  and  Credit  Sale  (Charges)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 39 of 2015). 
The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods) (Amendment No. 5) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 40 of 2015). 
The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods) (Amendment No. 6) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 41 of 2015). 
The  Consumer  Protection  (Export  Control)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 43 of 2015). 

 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

8 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - ZAMBIAN PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE 

ON EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY – DELEGATION 

Madam Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I wish to inform the House that we have in our 
VIP  Gallery  today,  Members  of  the  Zambian  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Education, 
Science  and  Technology  who  are  on  a  study  visit  to  Mauritius.  In  my  own  name  and  on 
behalf of hon. Members, I extend a warm welcome to the delegation and wish them a fruitful 
study visit. 

Thank you. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BRAMER BANK & BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE (MAURITIUS) 
LTD – RECEIVERS & CONSERVATORS – APPOINTMENT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the revocation by the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  of  the  banking  licence  of  the  Bramer  Bank  and  the  appointment  of 
conservators  to  take  charge  of  the  British  American  Insurance  (Mauritius)  Ltd.  by  the 
Financial Services Commission, he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to – 

(i) 

the  number  of  employees,  depositors,  insurance  policyholders  and 
shareholders concerned therewith, and 

 (ii)  why  receivers  were  appointed  regarding  the  Bramer  Bank  and 
conservators were appointed regarding the British American Insurance 
(Mauritius) Ltd., and 

(b) 

state the measures being taken to protect – 

(i) 

the employees, the depositors and the pension policyholders concerned 
therewith, and 

(ii) 

the image of Mauritius as an international financial hub. 

9 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, at the very outset, I would like to state that 
we are dealing with a crisis of national proportion that goes well beyond party politics.  I kept 
the hon. Prime Minister fully informed from day one. He not only gave me his full support, 
but also decided that we should move immediately and not wait until the situation gets out of 
control.  

The Cabinet was also fully supportive of this approach as well as all Members of the 

National Assembly on the majority side.  

As it is a national issue, I also decided to brief the hon. Leader of the Opposition who 
was fully conscious of the ramifications of such a Ponzi Scheme and the earthquake effect 
that this crisis could have on our financial system and country at large. I wish to thank him 
for having understood the need for a non-partisan approach to deal with this crisis.  

I also wish to thank the media. I have personally shared with the Editors-in-Chief the 
unfolding of this crisis and its seriousness and they have played their role in an objective and 
responsible manner.  

Madam Speaker, before answering the question, I would like to briefly highlight the 
main events that led to the revocation of the banking licence of the Bramer Bank by the Bank 
of Mauritius.  

Following  its  last  on-site  examination  at  the  Bramer  Bank,  from  22  January  to  20 
February 2015, the Bank of Mauritius had noted a number of serious deficiencies which it 
conveyed to Bramer Bank on 27 February 2015.   

Bramer  Bank  had  failed  to  comply  with  statutory  requirements  and  a  number  of 
guidelines to ensure safety in banking. All these deficiencies could undermine the financial 
soundness and pose serious systemic risks to the domestic financial system. 

On  27  February  2015,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  required  Bramer  Bank  to  inject  fresh 
capital of Rs3.5 billion by 31 December 2015, in a phased manner.  This was to start with an 
initial capital injection of Rs350 m. by 31 March 2015.  

Concurrently, the Bank of Mauritius imposed a restriction on Bramer Bank in respect 
of the grant of new credit facilities to related parties.  This restriction was motivated by the 
need to preserve and protect the interests of depositors.   

10 

 
On 24 March 2015, Bramer Bank notified the Bank of Mauritius about the continuing 
pressure on its liquidity position.  The situation deteriorated further when Bramer Bank could 
not raise funds from the interbank market. 

Initially, it had been borrowing from the domestic interbank money market on an ad 

hoc basis.  But as from 23 January 2015, it had been borrowing on a daily basis.  

As banks scaled down their interbank lending to Bramer Bank, as from mid-February 
2015, the latter resorted to overnight credit facilities from the Bank of Mauritius.  It had been 
relying heavily and continuously, on a daily basis, since 06 March 2015 on overnight facility 
from the Central Bank as lender of last resort.    

Bramer Bank also failed to maintain the minimum cash reserve requirement as from 

05 March 2015. 

Bramer Bank also requested the Bank of Mauritius to provide it with a special line of 
credit of Rs1.0 billion to meet its persistent liquidity shortfall against security of immovable 
properties.  

As  such  a  move  would  further  increase  its  related  party  exposure,  and  because  the 
request  was  outside  the  scope  of  its  regulatory  authority,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  informed 
Bramer Bank, on 26 March 2015, that its request for the special line of credit could not be 
acceded to. 

On  27  March  2015,  Bramer  Bank  apprised  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  that  there  were 

massive withdrawals of deposits and that its liquidity situation had seriously deteriorated.  

Bramer  Bank  failed  to  comply,  by  the  deadline  of  31  March  2015,  with  the 

requirement of injecting a first instalment of fresh capital of Rs350 m.  

On  01  April  2015,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  took  note  of  the  leakage  of  an  internal 
confidential note, addressed to the senior management of Bramer Bank, in the public domain, 
which stated that – 

“The  Board  of  Directors  of  the  bank  has  decided  that  no  premature 

encashment of deposits shall be allowed with immediate effect”.  

This  leakage  further  amplified  the  loss  of  public  confidence  in  Bramer  Bank 
exposing it to a run on its deposits.  The Bank of Mauritius was receiving numerous phone 
calls from the public enquiring about the soundness of the bank. 

 
The  likelihood  of  the  liquidity  crisis  in  which  Bramer  Bank  was  trapped  became 

11 

increasingly evident.  The Bramer Bank was on the verge of collapse. 

In  the  light  of  information  to  the  effect  that  the  run  on  Bramer  Bank  had  started 
gathering momentum, the Bank of Mauritius, as the authority responsible for regulating the 
banking  sector,  decided  to  revoke  the  Banking  licence  of  Bramer  Bank  on  02  April  2015, 
under section 17 of the Banking Act 2004.  This decision had to be taken expeditiously to 
protect  the  interest  of  depositors  and  the  public  at  large.    This  was  in  line  with  Bank  of 
Mauritius duty to preserve and protect confidence in the stability of the financial system.  

On the same day, the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius appointed Messrs 
André Bonieux and Mushtaq Oosman as receivers pursuant to section 75 of the Banking Act 
2004.   

Following the financial difficulties faced by Bramer Bank which led to the cessation 
of its banking activities, a total of Rs5.25 billion of debentures held directly and indirectly by 
the BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. have consequently been impaired.  This caused the solvency margin 
of the insurer to be deficient. 

The  FSC  had,  therefore,  the  responsibility  to  safeguard  the  assets  of  the  BAI  and 
protect  the  policyholders.    It  did  so  by  appointing  Messrs  Mushtaq  Oosman  and  André 
Bonieux of PWH as Conservator of BAI, pursuant to section 106 of the Insurance Act 2005. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am informed that the situation is 

as follows concerning the Bramer Bank – 

•  401 employees 
•  50,524 depositors holding 64,403 accounts 
•  1,578  shareholders,  of  which  4  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  wholly  owned  by  the 
British American Investment (Mtius) Ltd and which held a total of 74 percent of 
Bramer Bank.  In addition, BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd held 5.3 percent of Bramer Bank 
through Bramer Property Fund Ltd.    

Madam Speaker, information now as regards the BAI, it has 407 full-time employees 
and 895 insurance agents and sales persons. The BAI has 159,458 policies, of which 24,175 
are  in  respect  of  Single  Premium  Endowment  Policies  –  “THE  NOTORIOUS  SUPER 
CASH-BACK  GOLD  SCHEME”  -  and  the  balance  of  135,283  are  Recurring  Premium 
Insurance and Pension Policies.  

12 

 
The  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  British  American 
Investment  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.    The  ultimate  holding  company  of  BAI  is  KLAD  Investment 
Corporation Ltd incorporated in Bahamas.  

 As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius that the 
basic reason for having recourse to Section 17 of the Banking Act 2004 and not Section 65 of 
the Act which refers to the appointment of a Conservator was guided by the consideration 
that the Bramer Bank was already facing a run on its deposits.  There were strong indications 
that  the  liquidity  crisis  that  the  Bramer  Bank  was  experiencing  had  heightened  and  its 
collapse  was  imminent.  The  risk  of  a  systemic  crisis  was  clear  and  present.  The  Bank  of 
Mauritius had no alternative, but to have recourse to Section 17 of the Act which stipulates 
that the Central Bank may in cases of urgency and in the public interest revoke a banking 
licence.  

In case the Bank of Mauritius had opted for conservatorship the Bramer Bank would 
have  still  been  subject  to  continuing  deposit  withdrawals.    Depositors’  interests  would 
certainly not have been safeguarded. 

Whereas in the case of the BAI (Insurance), the FSC had reasonable cause to believe 
that the solvency margin of the insurer is or is likely to be deficient.  It thus chose to appoint 
a Conservator under Section 106 of Insurance Act 2005. 

The Conservator has taken charge of the business of the insurer and all of its property, 
books,  records  and  effects  and  is  exercising  all  powers  necessary  to  preserve,  protect  and 
recover any of the assets of the insurer, collect all monies and debts due to it, assert causes of 
action belonging to the insurer.  

As regards part (c) of the question, following the decision of the Bank of Mauritius to 
revoke the banking licence of the Bramer Bank, Government took immediate steps to protect 
the clients and employees of the Bank. Government gave the assurance that deposits of all 
clients would be safeguarded and took the following actions - 

(i) 

(ii) 

 all  Bramer  Bank’s  customers  holding  a  debit  card  could  access  their  funds 
through ATMs of the bank as from Saturday 04 April 2015 in the afternoon; 
 a new entity, National Commercial Bank Ltd, has been set up to take over the 
assets and liabilities of Bramer Bank. Once the formalities of the transfer of 
assets and liabilities have been completed, the National Commercial Bank Ltd 
will be in a position to provide full banking services.   In the meantime, the 
receivers  have  been  authorised  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  provide  core 
banking services to the clients of Bramer Bank, with the managerial support of 

 

(iii) 

(iv) 

13 

the State Bank of Mauritius Ltd.  Thus all the branches of Bramer Bank are 
open to the public as from this morning, and  
the BOM will issue a new banking licence to the National Commercial Bank 
Ltd by the end of this week, and 
the National Commercial Bank Ltd will start full-scale banking operations at 
all  places  of  business  of  the  Bramer  Bank  once  the  formalities  have  been 
completed. 

Moreover, the staff of Bramer Bank, except for certain executives, was requested to 

report for duty as from Monday 06 April 2015. 

(i) 

Concerning, the BAI (Insurance) Government gave the assurance that interest of all 
recurring premium policyholders would be fully safeguarded and took the following actions - 
a new entity will be set up by Government to take over the 135,283 recurring 
insurance policies of BAI; 
all  employees  of  BAI,  except  the  top  management,  have  been  requested  to 
report for duty on Monday 06 April 2015. 

(ii) 

Moreover,  the  Conservator  has  issued  a  communiqué  addressed  to  clients  and 

employees of BAI dated 06 April 2015 informing them that - 

•  operations of BAI resume normally as from 06 April 2015; 
•  all health insurance products are honoured; 
•  all recurring premium products are maintained; 
•  all payments due under the above-mentioned policies are executed normally as from 

06 April 2015, and 

•  all  Super-Cash-Back  Gold  policies  are  not  covered  by  the  new  entity  –  we  are 

referring here to the 24,143 investors who invested Rs21.6 billion in this scam.  
Madam Speaker, with regard to the image of Mauritius as a financial hub, I have to 
underline that Mauritius will finally emerge out of this crisis as a stronger, cleaner and more 
credible financial centre, especially  in view of the prompt, effective and determined actions 
taken by Government and the regulatory bodies. 

Madam Speaker, the country was on the verge of a major social crisis on Saturday 
last.  The  strong  and  timely  decisions  taken  by  Government  and  the  national  solidarity 
expressed by the Opposition, the media and the nation at large has allowed us to avert a major 
social and financial crisis. Thank you. 

14 

 
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister made the difference between some 
135,000 ordinary - if I can call them that - insurance policyholders and some 24,000 that went 
through the notorious - as the Minister said - special scheme and so on. Do I take it that the 
absolute guarantee that the policyholders’ interest will be fully protected by Government and 
anybody  else  concern  applies  to  these  135,000  only,  and  what  is  going  to  happen  to  the 
others? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  guaranteed  the  135,000  and 
something  holders  of  insurance  policies,  that  is,  those  who  are  paying  regularly  their 
premium on a monthly basis; all those policies are totally covered. I must here emphasise, I 
am not talking of policyholders, but policies. Why? Because out of those 135,000 there are a 
few of them who have also invested in the Ponzi Scheme and those who have invested in that 
Ponzi Scheme will not be covered. This is for the 135,000 and something of policyholders. 
The  remainder,  that  is,  the  24,143  investors  who  believed  in  this  Super-Cash-Back-Gold 
Policy scam invested a total of Rs21.6 billion, is not covered by the Government guarantee. 
This  instead  will  be  dealt  with  by  the  Conservator,  Pricewaterhouse  Coopers,  Mr  Oosman 
and Mr Bonieux. 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  hon.  Minister  will  allow  me  to  disagree  with  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, that they used the liquidation process, revoking of the banking licence, instead of 
going through  conservators; and conservators could have stopped the activities of the bank to 
prevent any further run on the bank, but that is already a thing of the past. Can I know, on a 
point of clarification - I heard the Minister say that the branches of Bramer Bank, as from this 
morning, are functioning and so on. Who is functioning? The licence has been revoked; has 
the revocation been revoked? How are the Bramer Bank’s branches functioning? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: That is a great question because, in fact, we spent the full of 
Sunday  afternoon  and  yesterday  trying  to  find  a  solution.  In  fact,  there  was  a  transitional 
measure  which  was  necessary  in-between  the  revocation  of  the  banking  licence  and  the 
National  Commercial  Bank  moving  in.  Secondly,  we  had  to  give  one  week  of  time  for 
Bramer Bank’s Board of Directors to react, if any. So, we had a problem until Wednesday 
this week, that is, tomorrow.  So, the Bank of Mauritius very exceptionally, yesterday, issued 
a temporary banking licence for Bramer Bank which will lapse naturally on Wednesday, once 
the new banking licence is issued.  This is probably the only solution we had.  I need to say 
that we are moving at crisis speed.  Maybe, looking back further down the road, we might be 

 

15 

wiser, but for the time being I have no doubt that the team at the Bank of Mauritius, FSC, my 
Ministry - we worked until late last night - came to the only viable legal solution, and that 
was the transition period of two days. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  as  we  know,  the  law  provides  that  insurance 
companies  cannot  invest  more  than  10%  of  its  assets  in  its  related  companies,  and  I 
understand that they were way above 50%.  The issue was raised in 2013 in the House.  Can I 
know - what has happened has happened - what percentage was the BAI Insurance Company 
holding  in  terms  of  assets  in  its  related  companies?    Did  it  bring  it  down?    Was  there  a 
progress?  Or were we stuck with figures of over 50%? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  give  the  information.    As  at  31 
December 2014, BAI was involved with related parties up to 58%.  That is a huge percentage 
compared to the law that provided for a maximum of 10% of the BAI’s assets that could be 
invested  in  related  parties.    So,  we  are  very  far.    The  second  question:  has  the  situation 
improved? Yes, it has improved.  In 2009, it reached a peak of 85% … 

That’s incredible!  Shocking!   But that’s what happened. 

(Interruptions) 

It then moved down very gradually to 83%, then pushed up in 2011 to 85%; in 2012, it 
went down to 84%; in 2013, to 66%, and we are now, today, at around 58% of the total assets 
of BAI which are invested in related parties instead of 10%.  So, we were well before that in 
a dramatic situation. 

Mr Bérenger: The Government has given the total guarantee that the employment of 
all  employees  -  from  what  I  understood  and  heard  -  of  the  Bramer  Bank  would  be 
safeguarded.   Can I know whether they will be employees of SBM or defunct Bramer Bank 
or the new Bank that is going to be set up, and what is  going to happen to their  years of 
service? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: We are moving in a transition basis.  In fact, I must say one 
thing.  The CEO of Bramer, Mr Esmael, has been fully cooperative with Government in this 
transition period.  He is still there.  A management team from SBM has aslso moved in since 
yesterday.    So,  as  at  today,  we  have  the  CEO  of  Bramer  Bank  who  is  still  there,  plus  a 
management team from SBM who are helping and managing the branches. 

Mr Bérenger: I understand that a new bank is being set up.  Can I know what will be 
the involvement of the State Bank of Mauritius, which will put in money in the new bank, 
and which is going to take charge of all the toxic assets that will be found at Bramer Bank? 

 

16 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: There are two questions.  First, the State Bank of Mauritius 
was initially requested to take over the activities of Bramer.  But, then, the SBM is also a 
holding company quoted on the Stock Market of Mauritius, and we can’t just play with it. We 
realised,  therefore,  that  adding  this  amount  of  responsibility  on  SBM  could  not  be  in  the 
interest of the depositors. 

So, yesterday, you must have seen that there was a run on the SBM shares, and then it 
went back, fortunately, to the way it was.  But that’s just to show how investors are extremely 
sensitive on such issues.  So, we met on Saturday and took the decision with the Bank of 
Mauritius,  SBM,  FSC  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  of  creating  a  new  bank,  a  new  entity, 
which is the National Commercial Bank,  and which will be fully owned by Government - 
100%. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as the BAI Insurance Company and Group are concerned, now 
that Government has given a total guarantee that the interests of all the 135,000 policyholders 
will be fully supported, do we have an estimate what the exposure of Government will be?  
Do we have an estimate to help us in that direction, of the value of accumulated contributions 
that Government is now taking over in terms of responsibility? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  will  be  shocked  again.  
The  total  long-term  insurance  liabilities  of  BAI  amount  to  Rs25.8  billion.    Out  of  these, 
Rs21.6 billion are represented by the Ponzi Scheme itself.  So, we are left with Rs4.2 billion, 
which represent the total long-term insurance liabilities of the BAI.  This is something which 
we can handle. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether we will put in the Budget any sum of money to 
help face those responsibilities in billions, and what is going to happen to the employment of 
the employees of the BAI? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I have not got the hon. Leader of the Opposition’s question 

very well.   It’s the employees for BAI. 

Mr Bérenger: Yes. If the hon. Minister of Finance will allow me; he has guaranteed 
the employment of all the employees of the Bramer Bank.  What is the situation as far as the 
employees of BAI Insurance and related companies? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  gave the  figures just now in the reply;  I will give it once 
again.  For BAI, we have, therefore, 407 full-time employees and their employment is fully 
guaranteed.  There are also 895 insurance agents and sales persons.  We have also taken the 
responsibility  for  them  too,  which  amount,  therefore,  to  some  1,302  full-time  employees, 
part-time employees and also sales agents who are working on a commission basis. 

 

17 

As  for  the  policyholders,  I  have  just  said  that  there  are  135,283  recurring  premium 
insurance policyholders.  I would like to stress again that we are guaranteeing the insurance 
policies that are being paid regularly by insurance holders, not the holders.  Because some of 
the holders have invested also in the Ponzi Scheme, and we can’t guarantee security for that. 
Mr  Bérenger:  The  BAI  Group  had  been  looking  -  from  what  I  understand  -  for  a 
strategic  partner.    Can  I  know  whether  the  conservators  will  be  looking  eventually  for  a 
strategic partner for the BAI group? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: That’s a question I can’t reply now, because we had to move 
in fast during the weekend to safeguard the employment of BAI and Bramer.  Then, we had 
to safeguard also the deposits of depositors in Bramer Bank, and then we had to safeguard 
also  those  honest  insurance  policyholders  who  have  been  contributing  for  years  in  the 
scheme.  So, this was our priority.  I feel still very deeply that we had to avert a social crisis.   
I am not playing on words.  If we had not moved that fast, the country would have been in a 
deep social crisis today.   So, that was my priority during the weekend. 

Now, with regard to the question of what will happen as from now on, the Conservator 
- Pricewaterhouse -  will have to manage all those assets.  We all know that Apollo Hospital 
is  losing  money,  Iframac  is  losing  money,  Courts  is  losing  money.    It  is  quite  a  situation 
which will have to be managed, but not by us.  We, as Government, intervened to protect the 
savers, to protect the policyholders, to protect the workers, and we have done it. We have, in 
the course of this weekend, protected some 220,000 people. We did not want those people to 
be on the street today. So, they have been safeguarded. Now,  I think that Pricewaterhouse 
will  have  to  manage  hereon  the  situation.  It  has  got  its  own  facilities,  it  has  confirmed 
therefore quite a few things. Now, will Pricewaterhouse, Mr Bonieux and Mr Oosman decide 
on finding  a strategic partner, it will depend on  them.  I think that we have moved for the 
essential now and now I need to take some breath and relax because we have gone through 
the most difficult part of the crisis itself. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  do  you  have  many  more 

questions? 

Mr Bérenger: Can I have one? I understand that, although the BAI group was in such 
trouble  in  Mauritius,  they  have  managed  to  invest  in  Kenya  and  that  the  value  of  their 
investment, especially in Equity Bank and Housing Finance Corporation of Kenya, is to the 
value of some Rs6 billion. Has this been looked into, what is going to happen? Will that be 
available, here, in Mauritius to help in the local situation? 

18 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: In the night of Friday to Saturday last, in-between 1 a.m. to 
5  a.m.,  negotiations  went  through  and  something  incredible  happened,  Mr  Dawood  Rawat 
signed and sold the whole group for Rs1; he must know what he was doing.  But we have a 
document signed by him, whereby he was relinquishing all the rights of the whole group. I 
am speaking of some 500 companies! Ponzi Schemes are always very complex to explain.  
We are dealing now with subsidiaries companies, hidden companies, indirect companies and 
we  are  expecting  now  that  this  commitment  of  Mr  Rawat  will  materialise  in  a  formal 
document on which his lawyers are working, here, in Mauritius. So, my first reaction was one 
of pleasant surprise, but I also feel that if he moved that quickly to relinquish all his rights 
then it might be fishy also. 

Madam Speaker:  We  are  running out of time.  I will allow one question for hon. 
Shakeel Mohamed and then I will come back to the hon. Leader of the Opposition for his last 
question. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  has  been  talking 
about  scam  and  Ponzi  Scheme.  Does  he  have  any  report  from  any  institution  that  has 
enquired  into  all  the  aspects  of  this  case,  as  being  expatiated  upon  by  himself,  be  it  the 
Financial Intelligence Unit, the Bank of Mauritius, the Financial Services Commission, the 
Police or be it any institution or any private institution, that confirms what the hon. Minister 
is saying, Madam Speaker, that, indeed, there is a scam or indeed there is a Ponzi Scheme? 
Because we have heard outside independent lawyers, who have no interest of their own to 
protect, have come out very independently, have said there is no Ponzi Scheme, there is no 
scam! 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  you  made  your  point!    We  are  running  out  of 

time. 

Mr  Mohamed:  So,  on  what,  therefore,  does  the  hon.  Minister  base  himself  to  say 
that? If he bases himself on something substantial, can he now come up with it and deposit it 
on the Table of the Assembly? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I won’t be surprised that the hon. Member, himself, knows 

since quite a long time that BAI is a Ponzi Scheme! Therefore, let’s not play on words. 

The Leader of the Opposition knows very well, we have been working.  In fact, I 

(Interruptions) 

must confess … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

 

19 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, please allow the hon. Minister to reply! You have asked your question, you 
have made your point! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: No, I don’t want to hurt any feeling here. I can just tell you 
that we all know that this is a Ponzi Scheme, a scam that has been set up to steal poor people 
savings.  

(Interruptions) 

Let us not play on words! And if the Government had not moved fast this weekend, 
we  would  have  had  a  social  crisis  of  unlimited  dimension  in  this  country  and  the  House 
knows also.  You know why … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: …the Leader of the Opposition is adopting a very serious 
approach because we have been working on this file since 2010. We know each of us that the 
scam – this one - has been copied and pasted from Trinidad; that BAI Trinidad collasped in 
2009 and the then Prime Minister of Trinidad, Kamla Persad, went to Parliament and said and 
confessed that ‘BAI is a Ponzi Scheme’. The chance we had here is that Trinidad & Tobago, 
the Carribean islands, are still fighting even now to refund insurers policy of their money … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, you have made your point! No cross-talking! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  come  to  the  hon.  Member  in  one 

second … 

I wish to tell the hon. Member … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please don’t get excited! 

Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  have  a  last  question.  I  know  it  is  early,  but  has  the  Ministry  of 
Finance started looking at what impact this whole mess will have on GDP growth? I know it 
is not an easy question, but is the beginning of an answer available and, if not, will the hon. 

 

20 

Minister keep us informed as we go along, as the drama develops, what impact this whole 
mess will have on GDP growth? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Just as a matter which concerns the whole House, I need to 
say that predators, vultures don’t have religion, don’t have race, don’t have colour. They are 
there  to  steal  poor  people’s  money,  that’s  all.  Let  us  not  give  to  predators,  to  vultures  a 
community, a name or a religion because this is not true. I wanted to make this very clear 
because  I  don’t  want  anyone  in  this  country,  even  for  one  second,  to  doubt  that  we  are 
dealing  with  a  Ponzi  Scheme  of  incredible  proportion,  planned,  master  minded  to  steal 
people’s money.  But, there is nothing on this issue that can concern a religion, a community 
or a race, that is number one.  

The Leader of the Opposition has put the question. I can tell you that I will keep the 
nation  informed  and  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  the  media  also.  I  will  keep  you  all 
informed on a day to day basis of what we are doing to save the situation. What I can say is 
that we have come out of the most substantial part of the crisis and this is something which is 
great for the country, for the nation. So, the Government will certainly keep the public, the 
nation, the Opposition, the media fully informed about the evolution of the situation.  

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question Nos. B/254 and B/261 have been withdrawn. Parliamentary Question 
No. B/263 addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will now be replied by the hon. Minister 
of Agro Industry and Food Security! 

NDU - DISTRICT CONTRACTORS 

(No. B/252) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the National Development 
Unit,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  the  names  of  the  district 
contractors  region-wise  for works  carried out, over the past three  years, indicating in each 
case – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the  contract  value  thereof  and  the  variation  costs,  if  any,  indicating  the 
authorized limit thereof;  

if procurement procedures were complied with;  

if  works  were  delayed  and,  if  so,  if  new  performance  bonds  were  provided 
therefor and, if not, why not; 

 
(d) 

(e) 

21 

any sum of money still overdue thereto, and  

if  assessments  of  the  quality  of  the  works  and  procedures  observed  before 
disbursement of funds will be made. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform that the names of the Zonal 
Contractors  and  the  works  they  effected  for  the  National  Development  Unit  during  period 
2006-2014  were  provided  as  part  of  my  reply  to  PQ  No.  B/161.    The  description  of  the 
projects were also given. 

As regards the contract value of each project and the variation costs thereof, if any, 
same  are  being  compiled  and  will  be  tabled  at  the  earliest.    All  additional  information 
requested and pertaining to variations, delays, performance bonds and amount still overdue, 
will also be provided. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, will the hon. Prime Minister confirm to the House 
that  under  the  Emergency  Rehabilitation  Programme  an  amount  of  Rs1,000,376,000  were 
voted and, out of it, one contractor was awarded works amounting to almost Rs742.5 m. and 
out of these sums, an amount of Rs569.7 m. was awarded by direct procurement? Can the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister - I don’t know if he has the information - confirm these figures for the 
benefit of the House? 

The Prime Minister: I am not really sure about the figures, but the trend has been 

like that. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  When  we  look  at  the  figures,  Madam  Speaker,  we  also  note  that 
there has been in June 2013, an advice that the NDU took from the Attorney General’s Office 
where the Attorney General advised the NDU not to go through direct procurement for such 
huge sums of money.  Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm that the then Minister and the 
Ministry  went  against  the  advice  of  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  awarded  contracts 
worth more than Rs500 m. to one of the contractors through direct procurement? 

The  Prime  Minister:  That  is  confirmed,  Madam  Speaker.  There  was  ‘pourriture’ 

everywhere. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  I  just  wanted  to  have  confirmation  from  the  Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  as  to  whether  all  the  payments  that  are  still  due  under  these  direct 

 

22 

procurements, investigation will be carried out and that no payments will be effected unless it 
is  ensured  that  works  were  carried  out  as  per  scope  of  works,  and  that  all  the  procedures 
relating to the Public Procurement Act were followed. Will the hon. Prime Minister confirm 
that the payment will not be released unless the inquiry is completed? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, that will be so. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  We know that there is an inquiry 
going  on  on  the  NDU,  but  in  previous  PQs  and  in  my  last  intervention  at  Adjournment 
concerning Canal Anglais, the hon. Rt. Prime Minister stated that there are no funds at the 
NDU because of various reasons that he gave to the House. Therefore, there is a Budget that 
is going to be voted.  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister when will the NDU start working 
again and when funds will be made available, because with recent heavy rainfalls, there are 
so many works to be done, especially in the Capital? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will have to wait. I can’t answer this right now. The 
inquiry is on. We will have to see how much we are really indebted, how much we owe, how 
much we will have to pay from what we get from the Budget, what will be left, and how it is 
going to be distributed among all the different Constituencies. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the reply of the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister to hon. Rughoobur, will the hon. Rt. Prime Minister consider referring this case to 
the Police for inquiry? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, we are having an internal inquiry first and then, if need 

be, we will ask the Police to inquire. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA CENTRE - DRAINS - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/253) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the project for the construction of drains at 
the  Swami  Vivekananda  Center,  awarded  through  the  emergency  procurement  method,  he 

 

23 

will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Development Unit, information as 
to the - 

(a)  cost thereof; 

(b)   names of the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

contractors, and 

subcontractors thereof;  

(c)  date of award of contract, and 

(d)  contractual period thereof, indicating the expected completion and commissioning 

dates thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  construction  of  drains  at  the 
Swami Vivekananda Centre through emergency procurement, I am informed by the National 
Development Unit (NDU) that three Works Orders were issued to the Zonal Contractor for 
that  region,  namely  Safety  Construction  Co  Ltd  on  12  November  2013  and  an  additional 
Works Order on 31 December 2014.   

The details of Works Orders issued on 12 November 2013 are as follows - 

(i)  Cut-Off Drain at Swami Vivekananda International Conference Centre for an 
amount of Rs15,474,860 (Incl. of VAT). The Works apparently started on 13 
November  2013  and  were  scheduled  for  completion  on  31  December  2013.  
However,  they  were  completed  on  15 September  2014  only.  An  amount  of 
Rs425,000  (Incl.  of  VAT)  was  deducted  for  the  delayed  completion  of  the 
works.  The project is under maintenance until September 2015. 

(ii)  Culvert at entrance of Domaine Les Pailles for an amount of Rs11,177,338.75 
(Incl. of VAT). The Works started on 15 January 2014 and were scheduled for 
completion  on  14  July  2014.    However,  due  to  delay  caused  by  Mauritius 
Telecom to divert its services and by the CEB to relocate one electrical pole 
thereat, the completion date was revised to 09 October 2014.  The Works were 
however,  completed  on  12 December  2014  only.    An  amount  of  Rs325,000 
(Incl.  of  VAT)  was  deducted  for  the  delayed  completion  of  works.    The 
project is under maintenance until December 2015. 

24 

 
(iii)  Rehabilitation  Works  at  Dolce  Vita  Restaurant  premises  for  an  amount  of 
Rs3,317,681.00 (Incl. of VAT). The Works started on 13 November 2013 and 
it was scheduled for completion on 31 December 2013.  The completion date 
was, however, subsequently revised to 05 May 2014 by the Consultant, Mega 
Design  Ltd  due  to  the  change  in  the  structural  design.    The  Works  were 
completed on 30 July 2014 only.  An amount of Rs432,741.00 (Incl. of VAT) 
was deducted for the delayed completion of the works.  The project is under 
maintenance until 30 July 2015. 

The Works Order issued on 31 December 2014 comprises, inter alia, the construction 
of 1400 mm wide precast drain at the back of Swami Vivekananda International Conference 
Centre  to  replace  the  blocked  pipe  culvert  900  mm  diameter.    The  Works  started  on  12 
January  2015  and  was  completed  on  20  March  2015,  within  the  contractual  period.    The 
Works will be handed over to the Municipal Council of Port Louis shortly.  The project will 
be  under  maintenance  until  20  March  2016.    The  Works  Order  was  for  an  amount  of 
Rs8,556,177.10 (Incl. of VAT). 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  National  Development  Unit  that  the 

latter works only with zonal contractors and does not have dealing with sub-contractors. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  mentioned  that  no 
subcontractors are involved but, according to my information, the Safety contractor has been 
given so many works by the ex-Minister of the last Government that he could not comply 
with and has subcontracted it to an ex-Minister’s relative - Mr Bundhoo? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that may be so. We will have to inquire into it.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Prime Minister 
whether the bridge at the entrance of Swami Vivekananda Centre forms part of that contract 
and,  to  my  knowledge,  this  bridge  is  falling  down  already  before  completion  and  is  being 
‘colmater’, as we say in Creole? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: I won’t be surprised. 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

25 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - MR P. T. - ARREST 

(No.  B/254)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the arrest of Mr P. T. at the 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, in March 2015, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the reasons thereof and 
table a list of the belongings thereof that had been seized by the Police in the course thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

GAMBLING REGULATORY AUTHORITY – BOARD MEMBERS 

(No.  B/255)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Gambling Regulatory 
Authority, he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  composition  of  the  Board  thereof,  indicating  the  terms  and 
conditions of appointment of the Board members thereof, and  

if urgent consideration will be given for the purchase and installation 
of  a  central  server  to  better  control  betting  in  anticipation  of  the 
forthcoming horseracing season, and  

(b) 

if a new Gambling Regulatory Bill will be introduced in the Assembly and, if 
so, indicate when. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Board  members  of  the  Gambling 
Regulatory Authority have been appointed in accordance with Section (5) of the Gambling 
Regulatory Act 2007, as subsequently amended.  I am tabling the information as regards the 
composition of the Board together with the terms and conditions of appointment of the Board 
members.  

I  am advised that  all the Board members have  duly signed the  “Declaration Form” 
provided  under  Section  5(4)  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act  2007,  as 
subsequently amended, to the effect that they did not have any direct or indirect interest in 
any  activity,  regulated  by  the  said  Act,  in  the  previous  5  years  as  from  the  date  of  their 
appointment as Chairman or member of the Gambling Regulatory Board. 

26 

 
As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that, in the wake of the Budget 
Speech 2013 and further to the amendments brought to the Gambling Regulatory Authority 
Act, following the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2012, the Horse Racing Betting 
Control System, which was located at the seat of the Gambling Regulatory Authority, was 
transferred to the Mauritius Revenue Authority, in March 2013. 

Following  this  transfer,  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  has  effected  several 
improvements on the server hosting the Horse Racing Betting Control System namely, with 
respect to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

recording  horse  racing  betting  transactions  on  the  central  server,  on  a 
continuous on-line basis, by all on-course and off-course bookmakers; 

resolving the frequent electrical outage, abrupt shutdown of GRA server, data 
corruption  of  horse  racing  transactions  and  guarantee  continuous  online 
recording of betting transactions, and  
improving compliance of bookmakers with regard to taxes  through the use of 
Business Analytics Tools. 

The Mauritius Revenue Authority has also investigated the use of an electronic fiscal 
device, on a pilot basis, to record betting transactions of bookmakers in a more reliable and 
secured manner.  

The  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  has  further    informed  that  a  Request  for 
Information is under preparation with a view to  seeking consultancy services to conduct  a 
study  on  “monitoring  system  for  gaming  activities”  and  for  preparing  the  Request  for 
Proposal document for the setting up of Central Electronic Monitoring System. This exercise 
will  take  on  board  the  findings  and  recommendations  of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  on 
“Horse  Racing  in  Mauritius”  with  regard  to  betting  and  tax  collection.  The  decision  to 
purchase  and  install  a  new  central  server  will  be  taken  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  this 
exercise.  

In respect to part (b) of the question, the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in 
Mauritius  has  stated,  in  its  Report,  that  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act  2007 
provides  an  excellent  statutory  backing  for  the  Authority  to  discharge  its  duties  for  the 
regulation of gambling activities in Mauritius. 

However,  taking  into  consideration  the  recommendations  of  the  Commission  of 
Inquiry on Horse Racing and Government’s own assessment of the situation prevailing in the 

 

27 

gambling industry, I envisage to come forward with necessary amendments to the Gambling 
Regulatory Authority Act in order to leave no loophole for the gambling mafia to pursue their 
illegal activities. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan:  I have two supplementary questions, Madam Speaker.  The first one 
is:    can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  will  give  directives  to  the  Board 
members and the Chairperson of the GRA, the newly appointed ones, to declare their assets 
and  liabilities,  as  we  have  been  doing  ourselves,  despite  the  diverses  lacunes  dans  la  loi 
pending the coming into operation of a new Declaration of Assets of Act? 

The Prime Minister:  I don’t know whether there is legal obligation for that.  I leave 

it to the members. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan:  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the MRA will look 
actively  into  the  findings,  as  he  has  just  stated,  of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  on  “Horse 
Racing in Mauritius” concerning those operators; there is one, ‘SMS Pariaz’ which has been 
operating outside the purview of the law, without going to the central server for, at least, four, 
five or six years? 

The Prime Minister:  I said in my answer that we will be looking into all these. 
Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Teeluckdharry. 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING DEPARTMENT –  
ASSISTANT GOVERNMENT PRINTER - POST 

(No.  B/256)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  post  of  Assistant 
Government Printer at the Government Printing Department, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Printing Department, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

official and approved qualifications and experience required therefor; 

qualifications and experience required in the advertisement in relation to the 
recent  recruitment  of 
the  date  of 
advertisement, and  

incumbent 

the 

thereof, 

indicating 

(c) 

name and qualifications of the incumbent thereof. 

28 

 
The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  as  per  the  prescribed 
Scheme of Service for the post of Assistant Government Printer, the post is filled by selection 
from  among  officers  of  the  Government  Printing  Department  who  hold  appointment  in  a 
substantive capacity in the grade of Senior Graphic Artist or Printing Officer. 

Candidates for the post should possess - 

(i) 

a diploma in Printing Technology or Printing Administration or Management 
or Business Administration or in a related field from a recognized institution 
or an equivalent qualification acceptable to the Public Service Commission;  

(ii) 

interpersonal and communication skills, and  

(iii) 

leadership skills. 

The Scheme of Service also includes a “Note 1” which provides that, in the absence 
of  candidates  possessing  the  above  academic  qualifications,  selection  will  be  made  from 
amongst officers in the grade of Senior Graphic Artist and Printing Officer who - 

(i) 

reckon at least five  years’ service in a substantive capacity in the respective 
grade, and 

(ii) 

possess a certificate in Printing Technology. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  vacancy  for  the  post  of 
Assistant Government Printer was advertised on 27 August 2014. According to the Circular, 
the  post  was  to  be  filled  by  selection  from  among  officers  of  the  Government  Printing 
Department as per the prescribed Scheme of Service. 

However,  I  am  further  informed  that  the  “Note  1”  was  not  inserted  in  the 
advertisement  as  in  the  absence  of  qualified  candidate;  the  vacancy  would  have  been  re-
advertised with the qualifications as provided in “Note 1”. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed Ms Genevieve Taryn Knubley is 
the incumbent. She was a Senior Graphic Artist holding a Degree in Public Administration 
and Management and an MBA. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhuboo! Next question! 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO - UNITED NATIONS ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL - RULING 

(No. B/257) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 

 

29 

National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Chagos Archipelago, he will state if the 
Chagossian  community  will  be  fully  involved  in  the  way  forward,  following  the  recent 
Ruling of the United Nations Arbitral Tribunal. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  the  Chagos  Archipelago,  including  Diego 
Garcia, forms and has always formed an integral part of the territory of Mauritius.  In fact, all 
persons born in the Chagos Archipelago, whether before or after 1965, are regarded as being 
born in Mauritius and are Mauritian citizens.   

My Government is deeply sympathetic to the sufferings which Mauritian citizens of 
Chagossian  origin  have  endured  as  a  result  of  their  forcible  removal  from  the  Chagos 
Archipelago  by  the  United  Kingdom  which  illegally  excised  the  Archipelago  from  the 
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  reply  to  the  Private  Notice  Question  on  20  March  2015,  I  had 
informed the House that my Government would study carefully the award delivered by the 
Arbitral Tribunal in the case brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom in respect of 
the Chagos Archipelago. 

I had also indicated that in the coming period, we would define the steps that would 
now  need  to  be  taken  to  give  effect  to  the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the  Chagos 
Archipelago and to all our rights over the Archipelago, including those relating to fisheries, 
and  oil  and  minerals  which  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  unanimously  affirmed.    I  had  further 
informed the House of my proposal to chair a committee which would consider the best way 
forward. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  longstanding  struggle  of  Mauritius  to  effectively  exercise  its 
sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago and the right of Mauritian citizens, including those 
of Chagossian origin, to return to and resettle in the Chagos Archipelago are indissociable. 

In this regard, I would welcome any views or proposals which our fellow countrymen 
of Chagossian origin may have on the way forward with regard to the Chagos Archipelago 
issue.  Such views or proposals can be submitted in writing to my office, and I shall see to it 
that they are brought to the attention of the Committee which I shall be chairing.  The House 
may  wish  to  know  that  I  have  already  conveyed  this  message  to  Mr  Olivier  Bancoult, 
Chairman and leader of the Chagos Refugees Group, who wrote to me following the award 
delivered  in  the  case  brought  by  Mauritius  against  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  the 
Chagos Archipelago. 

 
I am pleased to inform the House that the Committee will meet for the first time next 

30 

week. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
his answer. Since the Mauritian legal team has made use of several documents provided by 
Mr Chance, the UK Legal Adviser of the Chagos Refugees Group of Mr Bancoult, we felt 
that  in  return  Government  should  keep  the Chagossian  community  fully  aware  of  the  way 
forward. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House which entity is responsible in the 
following-up of the claim of our legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago? Is it the Prime 
Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or both? 

The Prime Minister: I do not follow the question. 

Madam Speaker:  Can you repeat the question, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: I would like to know, Madam Speaker, which entity is responsible in the 
following-up of the claim of our legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago? Is it the Prime 
Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or both? 

The Prime Minister: It is the Government through the Prime Minister’s Office. 

POLICE FORCE – VACANCIES 

(No.  B/258)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police 
Officers from the grade of Police Sergeant to that of Assistant Commissioner of Police, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 
the number of vacancies that presently exists in each grade, indicating when – 

(a) 

(b) 

they will be filled, and 

the competitive examinations for the rank of Police Sergeant and Inspector of 
Police will be held. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  number  of  vacancies  which  presently  exist  in  each  grade  from  Police  Sergeant  to 
Assistant Commissioner of Police is as follows – 

Grade 

Number of Vacancies 

31 

 

Assistant Commissioner of Police 

Superintendent of Police 

Assistant Superintendent of Police 

Deputy Assistant Superintendent of Police  

Cadet Officer 

Chief Inspector of Police 

Inspector of Police 

Police Cadet Inspector 

Sub Inspector of Police 

Police Sergeant 

03 

27 

08 

16 

05 

11 

176 

11 

23 

278 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  further  informed  that  procedures  have 
already been initiated with respect to the promotion exercise to fill vacancies from the rank of 
Inspector of Police up to that of Assistant Commissioner of Police. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that once the Budget 2015-2016 is approved, the necessary procedures, including competitive 
examinations, will be initiated to fill in all the existing vacancies by the end of this year. 

POLICE FORCE – RECRUITS 

(No.  B/259)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Police Force, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police a list of the 
recruits, since the last semester 2014 to date. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that since July 2014 to 03 April 2015, 666 Trainee Police Constables have been enlisted in 
the Mauritius Police Force. 

I am tabling the list of the recruits. 

 

32 

PUBLIC SERVICE – RECRUITMENT PROCEDURES 

(No.  B/260)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the public service, he will 
state if consideration will be given for amendments to be brought to the existing legislation 
with a view to reinforcing chances of equal opportunities for all, regarding the – 

(a) 

(b) 

recruitment procedures, and 

provision of - 

(i) 

(ii) 

accrued  powers  to  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  and  to  the 
Equal Opportunities Tribunal respectively; 

increased facilities and avenues of redress to victims of discrimination 
or in relation to other complaints, and 

(c) 

tougher penalties for violations of the law. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Equal Opportunities Commission was set 
up to work towards the elimination of discrimination, the promotion of equal opportunities 
and the promotion of good relations between people of different status. Where complaints on 
these issues cannot be resolved through conciliation at the level of the Commission, these are 
referred to the Equal Opportunities Tribunal. 

Regarding  the  public  service,  appeals  concerning  recruitment  procedures  of  public 
officers,  including  all  matters  pertaining  to  discrimination  and  equal  opportunity  are  dealt 
with  by  the  Public  Bodies  Appeal  Tribunal.  This  Tribunal  has  the  power  to  hear  and 
determine any appeal made by any public officer against any decision of the Public Service 
Commission pertaining to an appointment exercise or to a disciplinary action taken against 
that officer. 

It is to be pointed out that since a decision of the Public Service Commission may 
only  be  reviewed  by  the  Supreme  Court  or  the  Public  Bodies  Appeal  Tribunal,  the  Equal 
Opportunities Commission cannot exercise any of its powers under the Equal Opportunities 
Act with respect to the Public Service Commission. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, section 27(3) (b) of the Equal 
Opportunities Act provides for the Commission to submit to the Attorney General proposals 
for amendment to the legislation if required. I am informed by the Attorney General’s Office 

 

33 

that in 2013 and 2014, the Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Commission had made 
proposals  to  the  Attorney  General  for  amendments  to  be  brought  to  the  legislation.  These 
include,  inter  alia,  the  amendment  to  be  made  to  the  Constitution  to  enable  the  Equal 
Opportunities  Tribunal  to  entertain  cases  involving  the  Public  Service  Commission.  The 
proposals  were  examined  at  the  level  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  and  it  was 
recommended at that time not to proceed with piecemeal amendments, but to adopt a holistic 
approach and examine the policy and legal implications thereof before taking a decision. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  clear  lines  of  demarcation  between  the  roles  and 
responsibilities of the three institutions and there may be a risk that any amendments to the 
Equal  Opportunities  Act  in  order  to  enable  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  to 
investigate  into  complaints  regarding  decisions  made  by  the  Public  Service  Commission 
would create an overlapping with the existing role of the Public Bodies Appeal Tribunal and 
this would not be in the public interest.   It is, therefore, not proposed to proceed with the 
amendments referred to in the question. 

FINANCIAL SCANDALS - MRS N. S. 

(No.  B/261)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  financial  scandals  in 
which Mrs N. S. is allegedly involved, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if measures have been taken to secure her return to 
assist  in  the  inquiries,  indicating  if  the  assistance  of  the  investigating  authorities/or  law 
enforcement agencies of European countries where she is suspected to be currently residing, 
under the Mutual Legal Assistance, has been sought and if our Embassies and Consuls have 
been requested to co-operate therewith. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  No.  B/265  has  been 

withdrawn. Time is over! 

With regard to questions addressed to hon. Ministers, the Table has been advised that 

Parliamentary Question Nos. B/281, B/282, B/283 and B/294 have been withdrawn. 

Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/284  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms will now be replied by the hon. Deputy 
Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications. 

34 

 
 Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/287  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment, 
Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management.  

Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/297  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social 
Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands.  

Hon.  Members,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  has  to  attend  an  official 
function and he has made a request for his questions to be called out of turn. I have acceded 
to his request. The same request has been made by the hon. Minister of Social Integration and 
Economic Empowerment and I have acceded to his request too. So, now I will call upon hon. 
Quirin for Parliamentary Question No. B/271! 

IOIG 2015 – ATHLETES - DOUBLE NATIONALITIES 

(No.  B/271)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the forthcoming Indian Ocean 
Islands Games 2015, he will –  

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the sports federations, information as 
to if athletes possessing double nationalities are being invited to form part of 
their  respective  selection  therefor  and,  if  so,  will  he  obtain  and  table  a  list 
thereof, indicating in each case, the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

other nationality held, and  

performance level thereof, and  

(b) 

state if his Ministry is agreeable thereto. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  sports  federations  that 
there  are  21  athletes  possessing  double  nationalities  who  have  been  preselected  for  the 
forthcoming Indian Ocean Islands Games 2015. 

I  am  tabling  a  list  of  these  athletes  giving  details  of  their  nationalities  and  their 

performance. 

As regards part (b) of the question, in the event any of these athletes are selected for 
the Indian Ocean Islands Games of 2015, my Ministry will ensure that they are the best in 

 

35 

their respective category and discipline and also that they do not contravene the provisions of 
the charter of the Games. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir même si ces athlètes qui je suppose 
ont réussi les minimas dans leurs pays respectifs, ne serait-il pas souhaitable qu’ils viennent 
aussi à Maurice participer à une épreuve de sélection avant les jeux des îles? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, those athletes are only pre-selected.  That does 
not mean that they will be selected for the Indian Ocean Islands Games.  All the selection will 
be based on performance. So, once they perform they will be selected.  

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  j’aimerais  que  le  ministre  nous  dise  s’il  est  au 
courant qu’il y a un boxeur nommé Samuel Kistohurry qui est actuellement en France et qui a 
fait une demande pour intégrer la sélection nationale de boxe en vue des jeux des îles. Peut-
on savoir si la fédération a répondu favorablement à cette demande ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I don’t have an answer to this question. I will 

look into the matter with the federation and will give an answer to the hon. Member.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  hon.  Minister  made  reference  to  the  forthcoming  Indian  Ocean 
Islands Games. Is he aware that there is already big trouble on the issue of Mayotte taking 
part as a department of France, which has been a problem in the past, but now Mayotte is 
legally a department of France and there is big trouble already brewing, is he aware of it and 
is Mauritius helping to find a way forward?  

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  the  president  of  the  Comité International Olympique 
who is part of the committee of the Indian Ocean Islands Games is looking into the matter 
very closely and we are monitoring. Definitely, if there is any help, we will help. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

NATIONAL SPORTS ACADEMY – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/272)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the project for the setting up of 
a National Sports Academy, he will state where matters stand. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  neither  this 
Government  nor  l’Alliance  Lepep  had  made  any  reference  to  the  setting  up  of  a  National 

 

36 

Sports Academy. However, one of the measures announced in the Government Programme 
2015-2019  is  the  setting  up  of  a  high-level  football  academy  in  the  context  of  the 
consolidation of the professionalisation of football in Mauritius. The project has already been 
enunciated in the electoral manifesto of l’Alliance Lepep. 

Madam Speaker, I presume that the hon. Member is referring to the project for the 
setting up of a National Sports Academy which was provided for in the political manifesto of 
the defunct Alliance Parti travailliste/MMM. 

However, if the hon. Member has in mind the setting up of a Football Academy,  I 

would refer him to the reply I made to my Parliamentary Question No. B/164. 

Mr Qurin: Madame la présidente, je dois rappeler au ministre que j’ai fait référence 
au National Institute of Sports qui, d’ailleurs, figure en bonne place dans le Sports Act. De ce 
fait, le ministre peut-il nous informer - vu que c’est un projet qui date de pas mal d’années, 
qui a régulièrement figuré dans les différents estimates et budgets qui ont été présentés, ici 
même,  à  l’Assemblée  nationale  -  s’il  y  a  eu  des  travaux  préliminaires  qui  ont  déjà  été 
effectués par rapport à ce projet et de bien vouloir nous les indiquer?  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I think no one is agreeable to the Sports Act and 
in my speech, last week, I did mention that we are reviewing the Sports Act and I invited the 
hon.  Member  to  give  any  suggestions.    I  am  not  going  to  reply  on  something  that  we  are 
going to amend.  The best is that after amending the Sports Act, we can see whether we are 
going ahead with the National Sports Academy as in the Sports Act. 

Mr Quirin: Donc, Madame la présidente, le ministre est en train de confirmer qu’il 
n’est pas d’accord avec la mise sur pied d’un National Institute of Sports? Est-ce que c’est ce 
qu’il veut dire? 

Madam Speaker: But he has already replied, hon. Quirin! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, cela figure dans le Sports Act. Comme il vient de 
préciser qu’il va amender la loi, cet institut figure dans le Sports Act. C’est pour cela que je 
fais référence à la réponse du ministre. 

Mr Sawmynaden: As I mentioned, Madam Speaker, we are going for the amendment 
of  the  Sports  Act  and  if  the  National  Sports  Academy  is  still  into  it,  definitely  we  will 
consider for the best interest of sports. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!  

37 

GROS CAILLOUX – HOUSING PROJECTS 

(No.  B/286)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
Gros  Cailloux,  in  Petite  Rivière,  he  will  state  when  were  the  housing  projects  thereat 
initiated, indicating the –  

(a) 

name of the consultant appointed therefor, giving details as to the – 

(i) procedures followed for the recruitment thereof, and 

(ii) quantum of fees paid out thereto, and  

(b) 

number of housing units built, indicating the – 

 (i) size, and  

(ii) cost thereof; 

(iii) number thereof delivered and occupied todate; 

(iv) expected date of delivery and of allocation of the unfinished ones; 

(v) criteria used for the allocation thereof, and  

(vi) if structural defects have been noted in relation thereto and, if so, indicate 

if remedial actions have been taken. 

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  for  having  called  this  Parliamentary 
Question out of turn. I am tabling part of my reply to the question as a long list of details has 
been  requested  for.  I  wish,  furthermore,  to  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  this  question  as  it 
provides me with an opportunity to underscore the travails this project has been subjected to. 

In December last, immediately after assuming duty, I effected an informal site visit 
accompanied by the Permanent Secretary of my Ministry to take stock de visu as to why these 
houses had not yet been allocated. 

It was noted that all on-site and off-site works were completed and the houses which 
appeared as being completed were lying idle. I immediately queried the NEF on this matter 
and was informed that the contractor had been requested to attend to a list of snags identified 
by the MHC and same were to be completed by the end of January 2015. 

38 

 
In view of the fact that the deadline of end of January was not met by the contractor, I 
convened  a  meeting  on  05  February  where  both  the  NEF  and  the  project  manager  were 
present and gave instruction to impress upon the contractor to expedite matters and complete 
all outstanding works by end of February. 

I was then informed by the MHC that upon completion of the outstanding works; the 
latter will have to submit a practical completion certificate before formal handing over of the 
site is effected. 

It  was  only  on  the  third  meeting  held  on  18  March  that  it  was  revealed  that  the 
contractor  has  still  not  completed  the  remedial  works  whereas  the  retention  money  has 
already been released by the NEF without prior approval of the MHC. 

To date, the contractor has still not effected any remedial works. This state of affairs 
is, to say the least, Madam Speaker, appalling and I have already instructed the Permanent 
Secretary to refer this matter to the ICAC and I am informed the latter is already in presence 
of a formal request made by my Ministry. 

On the other hand, my Ministry, in collaboration with the MHC, is exploring ways 

and means to have outstanding works completed by end of May. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister if he could give the name of the contractor 

and when he was allocated the contract? 

Mr  Roopun:  In  fact,  this  forms  part  of  the  written  reply.  The  works  have  been 
entrusted to T&T construction on 12 September 2011 and the construction period was to be 
10 months. 

Mr Bhagwan: Has the attention of the hon. Minister been drawn - I draw his attention 
this morning - that there are structural defects on all the roofs/slabs of the remaining houses 
which  have  not  yet  been  allocated?    And  even  those  which  have  been  allocated  to  flood 
victims of the flash floods in Port Louis. 

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  asked  MHC,  but  they  confirmed  that  there  are  no 

structural defects on the constructions. 

Mr Bhagwan: Will the hon. Minister agree to have a site visit with all the MPs of the 
constituency,  at  least,  to  see  de  visu  that  the  information  which  has  been  given  to  him  is 
wrong information? 

 

39 

Mr Roopun: If need be, we will arrange for a site visit. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  make  a  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  that,  pending  all  the 
procedures of allocation of houses which were meant for the poor people, at least, the NEF 
sees to it that there is some order there; that the region is clean, all the set-up infrastructure is 
being maintained, and even the children’s playground which has been left there for months 
without being used? 

Mr Roopun: It will be looked into, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

SIT - MANAGEMENT - INQUIRY 

(No. B/266) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Sugar 
Investment Trust, he will state if consideration will be given for an inquiry to be carried out 
on the overall management thereof during the tenure of office of Mr R. B. as acting Chief 
Executive Officer thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  Mr  R.  B.  joined  the  Sugar 
Investment Trust in October 2005 as Chief Operating Officer.  His contract of employment 
was renewed for a period of three years in 2010 when the appellation of the post was changed 
to Chief Executive Officer.  The contract was not renewed at its expiry in 2013, but Mr R. B. 
continued  to  stay  in  employment  at  the  Sugar  Investment  Trust  until  his  resignation  in 
February last. 

On 14 January 2015, the Board of the SIT decided to suspend Mr R. B. with immediate 
effect,  as  it  has  come  to  light  that  he  has  committed  a  number  of  irregularities  in  the 
performance  of  his  duties.    A  disciplinary  committee  was  accordingly  set  up  to  hear  his 
defence with regard to the following charges – 

(i) 

(ii) 

he  deliberately  bypassed  a  Board  decision  by  granting  salary  increases  in 
December 2014 ranging between 34% and 111% to a number of employees, that 
is, at rates higher than what was approved by the Board, which was 27%; 

in November 2013, he appointed an employee as team leader up to December 
2014 against payment of a monthly allowance of Rs32,500 without seeking the 
approval of the Board; 

 
(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

40 

he  has,  on  his  own,  and  without  seeking  approval  of  the  Board,  granted 
allowance  to  two  members  of  the  staff  for  the  period  November  2013  to 
December 2014 for a total amount of Rs660,000 without seeking the approval 
of the Board; 

on 15 December 2014, he willfully and criminally commit an act of forgery in a 
private writing, and 

in December 2014, he willfully and without authority made use of the premises 
of the SIT for the holding of political activities during the last general election.   

At the hearing of the disciplinary committee, on 18 February, Mr R. B. submitted his 
resignation and undertook not to enter any case against the SIT for payment of compensation, 
subject to the management of the SIT not taking any legal action against him.  His resignation 
has been accepted by the Board.  But at the Annual General Meeting of the SIT held on 12 
February  2015,  the  shareholders  present  strongly  requested  for  the  institution  of  a 
Commission of Inquiry on the Management of the Trust in particular with regard to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

the agricultural morcellement project at Ile d’Ambre; 

the Aurea residential morcellement project; 

the construction of the CORE building; 

the acquisition of the NG Tower at Ebene, and 

the recruitment of staff. 

An internal audit, with emphasis on these complaints, is being currently carried out at 
the SIT.  A decision will be taken in the light of the report as to whether an inquiry should be 
carried out into the management of Mr R. B. during his tenure of office at the SIT. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, after taking note of the answer of the Minister, I 

think the House will unanimous agree that this is simply unacceptable. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, what is your question? 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, can the Minister confirm whether there were a few 
abuses that were undertaken?  Because in 1994, the SIT had almost 7,000 arpents of land, 
and in 2015, as a date, the SIT holds less than 200 arpents. Can the Minister confirm this? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, it is indeed the case that, when the SIT was created, 

they had 7,000 arpents of land but, to date, they have only 2,479 acres left. 

 

41 

Mr Jhugroo: Would the hon. Minister refer this case to the Police for further inquiry, 

being given that we have heard several maldonnes? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I have just said in my reply that an internal inquiry is 
being undertaken.  So, further to that, we will see whether the matter will be referred to the 
Police. 

Mr  Gobin:  Will  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  that,  out  of  the  numerous  charges  that 
were laid against Mr R. B., one was clearly that of forgery?  What is the need of any further 
internal audit when the charges are already laid? At least, why not refer this particular charge 
to the Police right now, and then, eventually, if any other criminal matter comes up, refer the 
rest to the Police? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, as you probably know, the decision rests with the 
Board of the SIT.  But I will look into it myself, so that the suggestion made here will be 
taken into consideration. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one and half hours for lunch. 

At 1.04 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

RDA – DISTRICT CONTRACTORS 

(No. B/267) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Road 
Development Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, the names of 
the district contractors region-wise for works carried out over the past three year, indicating –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

 the estimated value of each contract and the actual value of works undertaken 
in the different districts;  

any approved variations in each contract awarded and the authorized limit as 
per the Public Procurement Act 2006, and  

the  region  where  the  highest  value  of  works  were  executed  and  the  reasons 
thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to PQ No. B/267, with your permission, I 
am tabling the required information in respect of parts (a) and (b) of the question.  As regards 

 

42 

part (c) of the question, the House would not be surprised that the highest value of contracts 
executed was in Zone 4 (Districts of Moka and Flacq). 

Madam Speaker, RDA is responsible for the construction and maintenance of main 
roads and  maintenance works are works which are carried out on also some existing roads. 
As  these  are  of  a  repetitive  nature,  they  have,  over  the  years,  been  executed  using  rates 
contracts.  For that purpose, the RDA divided the country into four Zones as follows - 

North (Districts of Pamplemousses and Riviere du Rempart); 
East (Districts of Moka and Flacq); 
Central (Plaine Wilhems, Black River and Port Louis); 
South (Grand Port and Savanne) 

District  Contractors  were  last  appointed  by  the  RDA  in  2012  under  a  Maintenance 

and Minor Works contract.  They were as follows - 

North   

East 

 

 

 

 

 

Central part of Mauritius  

South   

 

 

- 

- 

- 

- 

General Construction 

Colas 

Gamma Construction 

Transinvest 

The contracts became effective on 26 April 2012 and they  were to last 15 months.  
Given that there was no standard bidding documents, an exercise was carried out by the PPO, 
the CPB and the RDA to devise an appropriate document which was floated at the end of 
December 2013.   

The actual variations on the contracts are as follows - 

North:   

East:      

Central: 

South:   

  6.9% 

20.7% 

12.2% 

11.55% 

Then  there  was  a  Framework  Agreement  which  became  effective  on  31  July  2014.  The 
contractors who have signed the Framework Agreements are as follows - 

 

Zone North: 

Zone East: 

 

 

General Construction, Colas and Gamma Construction  

General Construction and Colas 

 
Zone Central:   

43 

Gamma and Transinvest  

Zone South: 

 

Gamma and Transinvest 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Again  with  RDA  as  well,  similar  to  NDU  the  hon.  Minister  will 
confirm  that  under  the  Emergency  Rehabilitation  Programme,  contracts  through  direct 
procurement were awarded worth Rs523 m..  But pire, in this case, will the hon. Minister 
confirm that there was no approval from the Ministry of Finance when  those works were 
executed? 

Mr Bodha: Well, I cannot confirm whether there was an approval from the Ministry 
of Finance, but I think and we know that, as regard to works done by the RDA and at the 
NDU, there is a backlog of more than Rs1 billion. Just to take an example, in the East where 
Colas was the constructing  company in the District of  Flacq, the sum was supposed to be 
between Rs100 m. to Rs350 m. and it ended up being Rs600 m.  

Mr  Rughoobur:  The  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  most  of  the  works  were 
carried out in the region of Moka and Flacq. Will the hon. Minister look into it that, from 
now on, there is a better distribution of the budget that is awarded to the RDA? And will the 
hon.  Minister  make  a  survey  in  the  northern  region  where  the  coastal  areas  have  a  high 
concentration of tourists, and also to look into the possibility of asphalting the roads - works 
that are executed normally by the RDA? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I can assure the hon. Member that there will be a fair 
distribution of the budget.  As regards coastal roads, I think he is right; I have seen it myself. 
I have received a number of complaints. In fact, I have requested the hon. Minister of Finance 
to give us a budget for the resurfacing of ‘Chemin 20-pied’ ,which is the by-pass in the North 
and is used by many road users, including those who are in the tourism industry. I have also 
received a number of complaints as regard to roads leading to the main hotels which are in a 
very bad state.  We will  do whatever we can because we have to see to it that we have the 
best road system to service  the tourism industry. 

IVTB–PHOENIX ROUNDABOUT – TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

 (No. B/268) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  IVTB–
Phoenix  roundabout,  he  will  state  the  permanent  remedial  measures  that  are  being 
contemplated,  if  any,  to  address  road  traffic  congestions  thereat  during  peak  hours  and  to 
allow fluid traffic to and from Petit Camp and from Valentina. 

 
Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  fully  aware  that  there  is  a  serious  and  acute 

44 

problem at the IVTB-Phoenix Roundabout, especially during peak hours. 

The  Pont  Fer  Roundabout  is  a  strategic  traffic  intersection  where  traffic  from  Port 
Louis via the M1, the Lower Plaine Wilhems, the Upper Plaine Wilhems, the West and the 
South  converge.  In  addition,  the  Dowlut  and  Jumbo  Roundabouts  represent  adjacent 
bottlenecks.  Hence, the severe traffic congestion during both peak and off-peak hours. 

As a temporary measure to mitigate the traffic congestion, the third lane from St Jean 
has been extended to bypass the Pont Fer Roundabout and its operation has been found to 
alleviate the problem significantly. However, this measure gave rise to strong protests from 
the inhabitants of Petit Camp and Valentina since it prevents, for road safety reasons, direct 
access to the motorway via the Pont Fer Roundabout.  Consequently, in order not to penalise 
the inhabitants, the bypass is opened and operated by Police during the  morning and peak 
hours only. 

Madam  Speaker,  taking  into  consideration  the  high  traffic  volume,  the  bottlenecks 
caused by the three roundabouts and the difficulty to access these regions, the construction of 
a complex interchange which will replace all three roundabouts, is the only feasible solution 
and is high on the priority list of the Government projects. 

Provision has been made in the Budget 2015-2016 for the funding of the preparation 
of  the  bidding  documents  in  respect  of  the  grade  separation  of  the  Pont  Fer,  Jumbo  and 
Phoenix Roundabouts which will also connect to the Terre Rouge-Verdun Road. 

The terms of reference for the consultancy services are being worked out by the RDA 
for the implementation of the project on a “Design and Build” basis.  The calendar is set for 
the project to start off at the beginning of the next financial year. 

The  fluidity  of  the  traffic  to  and  from  Petit  Camp  and  Valentina  will  be  addressed 
within  the  project.  Pending  its  implementation,  the  present  arrangements  to  alleviate  the 
traffic congestion will be maintained. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  just  said  that  to  alleviate  the 
problem we now  have Police Officers there, but when we were together in the Opposition, 
we  know  very  well  that  Rs55  m.  were  spent  just  for  that  additional  lane.  Can  the  hon. 
Minister consider that, instead of flyovers, to consider the new project now to have underpass 
under the roundabouts?  

45 

 
Mr Bodha: This is a question which requires engineering expertise. I will consider 
that, but what I can say is that a double level - they call it the spaghetti - flyover has already 
been designed. The budget is going to be Rs1.9 billion. The feasibility study is being done 
and this is what we have thought to connect the three roundabouts at two levels and connect 
also with the Terre Rouge-Verdun coming from the South. 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, hon. Minister, but all this ‘spaghetti junction’ we have it in 
England and it is unaesthetic. We have this region with very aesthetic views and with these 
flyovers,  I  am sure  you  will destroy  them.  But  with underpass, it might cost slightly  a bit 
more.  So, will the Minister consider  to go for underpass, which is a normal design? 

Mr Bodha: I will make this request. I can understand the holistic and aesthetic view 
of the area, but the problem is whether we can have tunnels at two levels, this has yet to be 
seen. But, I will definitely ask the experts to see some solutions in that direction. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  being  given  that  we  addressed  several  PQs  in  this 
august  Assembly  for  the  past  ten  years  to  alleviate  the  traffic  flow  at  the  roundabout  of 
Phoenix, so it is good news that it is starting very soon. So, can the hon. Minister give us a 
timeframe when this will start and when it will finish? 

Mr Bodha: The project is to be funded from Government funds and we believe that 
the works can start at the beginning of the next financial year. All the bidding documents, all 
the procedures would have been done by then. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

Mr  Gobin:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  give  fresh 
consideration  to  the  new  set  of  circumstances  which  have  emerged,  namely  after  having 
heard the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development this morning? I am saying 
this  in  the  context  that  in  the  vicinity  of  that  roundabout  is  a  building  called  Phoenix  Les 
Halles  which,  if  we  have  understood  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  will  change  hands,  the  ownership  thereof  will  change  hands  since  all  the 
shareholdings  have  been  transferred,  will  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  give  fresh 
consideration of the construction of… 

(Interruptions) 

That’s my question, whether a fresh consideration will be given to that. 

Madam Speaker: Allow the hon. Minister to reply. 

 

46 

Mr Bodha: We will consider the matter, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

MOTORWAYS – DECONGESTION – MASTER PLAN 

(No. B/269) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the motorways, 
he will state if Government proposes to come  up with a Master Plan for the decongestion 
thereof as soon as possible and, if so, indicate - 

(a) 

(b) 

when, and 

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  roundabouts  to  be  replaced  by  traffic 
lights and underpasses at some roundabouts, wherever appropriate, especially 
at the Place d’Armes. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the preparation of a Master Plan for 
the decongestion of motorways within the Terre Rouge-Curepipe corridor was initiated by the 
RDA since 2009. The endeavour culminated into a PPP project with the selection of PLAN 
Consortium as the Preferred Bidder and Group Five Strabag as a Reserved Bidder in 2012.  

However, the contract was not awarded since the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development  raised  concerns  on  the  financial  implications  in  view  of  the  prevailing 
economic environment and Government’s commitments and priorities. That was in 2012.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  light  of  several  decisions  taken  by  the  present  day 
Government  in  relation  to  the  shelving  of  the  Mauritius  Light  Rail  Transit  System,  a  new 
definition to the city of Port Louis, smart cities and techno poles, the Master Plan is being 
reviewed  by  the  Transaction  Adviser  upon  request  from  my  Ministry.  In  fact,  we  had  a 
meeting and we have changed the scope of works. The new Master Plan will be presented to 
Government in two weeks’ time, that is, at the end of the week.  

The new Master Plan will also address traffic issues in and around Port Louis and in 
relation to traffic congestion at Place d’Armes, budgetary provision has been made for the 
preparation of bidding documents for the construction of a new entrance into Port Louis via 
Decaen Street. Works are expected to start very soon after we have done the design and the 
bidding procedures.  

The  decision  to  replace  roundabouts  by  traffic  lights  and  underpasses  at  some 

roundabouts will also be addressed in the new Master Plan for road decongestion. 

 

47 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  mentioning  advisers.  Are 
they the SPP advisers who were in the last Government, and we have paid a lot of money to 
them and nothing has been executed so far?  Are we talking of the same transaction adviser? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, we are, but they have reached the end of their contract 
and, in fact, they came to present the final design according to the contract they had been 
given  with  the  selection  of  the  Preferred  Bidder  and  the  Reserved  Bidder.  What  we  have 
done, in fact, we have told them that we have changed the scope of works, we have reduced 
them and we are going to have a final presentation in April, and that would be the end of the 
contract. 

Dr. Sorefan: Will that cost the Government a bit of more money? 

Mr Bodha: No. In fact, they had come with a plan which covered the Dream Bridge, 
the Ring Road Lot II and Lot III. We have reduced the scope of works so that would be the 
final undertaking with the consultant. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  reconsider  about  the  Dream  Bridge 

between Quay D to Caudan? 

Mr Bodha: Well, in the new Master Plan, the Dream Bridge is out and the LRT is 
out. So, we are thinking of, in fact, doing the A1  M1, that is, the bridge over the Grand River 
North West to connect at Sorèze, improve the Ring Road Phase 1 which is being repaired, 
implement the tunnel and then, do the third leg which will be connecting the end of the tunnel 
to Mer Rouge with the development of the port.  We believe that with this circular design, we 
should  be  able  to  provide  for  the  traffic  entering  into  Port  Louis  with  this  new  access  at 
Decaen Street and then, going around Port Louis to the Ring Road. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Regarding Place d’Armes, will the hon. Minister consider here also the 

design of underpass so as not to jeopardise the scenery? 

Mr  Bodha:  We  have  thought  about  this  idea  of  having  an  underpass  at  Place 

d’Armes, but it is under water.  

(Interruptions) 

 

48 

Yes, because the only possibility is to do an underpass on piles. I think technologically this 
can be done, but it will cost us a lot of money. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

PUBLIC HOSPITALS - NEUROSURGERY 

(No. B/270) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to neurosurgery, he will state if 
same is performed in the public hospitals, and, if so, indicate - 

(a) 

(b) 

if it is performed by individual surgeon;  

the number thereof performed, since 2010 to date - 

(i) which have been unsuccessful and referred abroad, and  

(ii) in which the patient has suffered severe consequences like blindness and 
paralysis, amongst others. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  neurosurgery  or  neurological  surgery  is  a  medical 
speciality  concerned  with  the  precaution,  diagnosis,  treatment,  rehabilitation  of  disorders 
which  affect  any  portion  of  the  nervous  system,  including  the  brain,  the  spinal  cord,  the 
peripheral nerves and extra-cranial cerebrovascular system.  

I am informed that neurosurgery is performed in public hospitals mainly at Victoria 
and Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Hospitals. A few emergency cases are operated at 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Dr. Jeetoo Hospitals. 

With  regard  to  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  2,140 

neurosurgeries have been performed by five surgeons since 2010.  

It  is  a  common  practice  worldwide  that  only  one  Neurosurgeon  operates  on  his 
patient,  but  he  is  usually  assisted  by  an  RMO  (Registered  Medical  Officer)  from  the 
Department itself. 

With regard to part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that only one unsuccessful 
case  of  neurosurgery,  which  was  operated  at  SSRN  Hospital,  was  referred  to  VIMHANS, 
New Delhi in July 2013 following initial urgent surgery for decompression of the optic nerve 
at SSRN Hospital. 

With regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, I am further informed that the same patient 
as mentioned at part (b) (i) of the reply, Mr M. J., 35 years old, who was referred abroad for 

 

49 

pre-operative embolization and definitive treatment in the form of complete excision of the 
tumour, had lost vision in both eyes on his return, but there is no evidence of any paralysis. 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, hon. Minister. You are talking about only one neurosurgeon 
worldwide. This is not true. I come from England. It is a teamwork of neurosurgeons. Some 
neurosurgeons come here to gain experience. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  please  ask  your  question.  Don’t  make  a 

statement, please! 

Dr. Sorefan: I have to clarify a bit that in Mauritius, foreign doctors come and get 
experience on their own and there is one case that you have mentioned, he is blind, because 
he did basal cranial surgery. Will the hon. Minister come with a specific guideline that certain 
tumours  of  the  brain  should  be  taken  at  certain  level  by  neurosurgeons  and  the  rest  go 
abroad? Do not open here and send abroad, it’s too late and he just happens to be - I will say 
it in this House - my nephew. They did the wrong surgery with him; one surgeon going in the 
basal of the brain has caused havoc to that young man with two children. So, I don’t want that 
to happen to others. Please, come with a guideline! If they can’t do it, they must send him 
abroad, they must not poke their nose into it and cause havoc to that 100% human being! 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I have taken good note of what the hon. Member 
has said, but I am informed that in the case of any adverse emergency or incident happening 
to the neurosurgeon who is carrying out the operation, help is always available because there 
is always a team of neurosurgeons who are in the hospital premises all the time. That is my 
information, and help can be obtained from the other hospitals within a short time and during 
that  time  the  patient  remains  attended  by  the  anaesthetic  team  and  the  Registered  Medical 
Officer.  But in the case which has been mentioned, I must say, Madam Speaker, that this 
patient had complained of headache and left eye blindness and severe visual impairment of 
the right eye since the end of May 2013; that was pre-operation. But unfortunately something 
went wrong and he had to be sent overseas. I am sure that, in ideal circumstances, to the best, 
you have, at least, two neurosurgeons carrying out an operation of this nature because it is 
dealing with the brain or the spinal cord, it is very serious.   

Dr.  Sorefan:    Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  of  introducing  an  apparatus  that  is 
called  Gamma  Knife,  which  uses  gamma  rays  without  opening  the  skull,  a  non-invasive 
surgery?    It  costs  some  money;  you  enter  in  the  morning  and  you  leave  in  the  afternoon 

 

50 

without any  consequences and  you do not have to open the brain.  Will the hon. Minister 
consider of procuring one such apparatus? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I am sure that we can entertain that suggestion of the 
hon.  Member,  but  I  must  also  say  that,  in  the  hospital  services  today,  we  have  four 
neurosurgeons  who  are  Mauritians  and  one  is  from  overseas.    Most  of  them  have  either 
retired or on the point of retiring.  So, what I am doing?  In fact, that’s what I mentioned in 
my  intervention  on  the  Budget,  that  we  need  to  build  capacity  and  the  only  way  to  build 
capacity is to get the young ones to be trained in these specialised areas.  Unfortunately, the 
training for neurosurgery takes a long time.  Not many people are interested, but we will have 
to do it.  If we cannot get the Mauritians to do it, then we will have to import specialists from 
overseas.    I  am  also  concerned  that  many  operations  dealing  with  the  brain  surgery  and 
neurosurgery have to go overseas when we could have them operated in Mauritius if we had 
the expertise and we have to build the expertise. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Madam  Speaker,  after  listening  to  the  answer  of  the  hon.  Minister; 
would  he  consider  to  have  a  specialised  neurosurgery  unit  like  the  one  we  have  for  the 
cardiac patients at Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care? 

Mr Gayan:  Neurosurgery is already, Madam Speaker, considered a specialised care 
system.  We have a team at Pamplemousses and another team at Victoria and in emergency 
cases… 

(Interruptions) 

The problem is that if there is a serious road accident, let’s say, in the North, then everybody 
will be taken down to Victoria; it might take long.  So, I think that, because of the nature of 
those operations, it is best to decentralise in my opinion.   

FORM IV STUDENTS – DIGITAL TABLETS 

(No.  B/273)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the project for the allocation of digital tablets to the students 
of Form IV, she will state if all the students of Form IV have been allocated with a digital 
tablet, including those of the prevocational sector and, if not, indicate the reasons therefor. 

 
The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 

51 

Speaker, with your permission I am going to reply to this question.  

The Tablet PC project was implemented by the Ministry in 2013 following a measure 
announced in the Budget Speech 2013 to allocate Tablet PCs to all Form  IV students and 
educators of State and Private-aided Secondary schools, and also to Year 4 students of the 
pre-vocational schools.  

The process of the procurement of Tablet PCs for Form IV students and educators of 
the year 2013 started in July 2013, but due to lengthy tendering procedures, the award of the 
contract was made in December 2013 with delivery, commissioning and registration of the 
Tablet PCs taking place from January to June 2014.   

The  distribution  of  the  Tablet  PCs  to  students  could,  therefore,  be  effected  only  as 
from July 2014 and since, at that time, the Form IV students of 2013 had already moved to 
Form V, it was decided to distribute the tablets to the Form V students of 2014.   

The  students  of  the  pre-vocational  sector  who  were  in  Year  4  in  2013  were  not 
allocated the Tablet PCs given that, at the time of distribution, they had already left the pre-
vocational schools in October 2013.  As regards students who were in Year 4 in 2014, since 
at the time of the distribution in July 2014, they were nearing completion of their studies, no 
Tablet PC was distributed to them. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  2014  procurement  exercise  for  Tablet  PCs,  which  started  in 
September 2014, has not yet been completed due to two challenges received on the tender 
exercise upon notification of award to all bidders.  

Since my Ministry currently has a stock of 2,263 Tablet PCs, and so as not to penalise 
this year’s Year IV students of the pre-vocational schools, my Ministry will proceed with the 
distribution of these Tablets to the students during the second term of this year.  

As regards the distribution to Form V students and educators of 2015, that is, Form IV 
of 2014 and educators, same will be effected once the issue of challenge is sorted out and the 
contract is awarded.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

ROCHE BOIS - PIG BREEDING 

(No.  B/274)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to pig breeding in 

 

52 

the region of Cocotterie, in Roche Bois, he will state if the relocation thereof to St Martin is 
being contemplated and, if so, indicate when. 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I am informed that the site at St Martin is saturated 
and  the  existing  waste  disposal  system  does  not  allow  for  additional  breeders  to  be 
accommodated there.  

My Ministry is proposing to establish specific breeding zones across the island and 
once the land has been identified and all facilities set up, consideration will be given to the 
relocation of pig breeders operating outside St Martin and Bassin Requin.  

Mr Barbier:  Madam Speaker, this is not the first time I am raising this issue in this 
august Assembly and I was told some time back that once the site will be made available at St 
Martin,  these  breeders  will  move  there.    I  am  surprised  today  that  there  is  no  more  land 
available. So, may I ask the hon. Minister to give a top priority to this problem?  Today life is 
becoming very, very impossible in this area where the region is becoming more and more 
densely populated. May I ask the hon. Minister to give an urgency to this matter and to see to 
it that site be available for the transfer of pig breeding outside the residential zone? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  I  must  inform  the  House  that,  following  the 
outbreak of the disease of the African Swine Fever in the year 2007, those pig breeders who 
were in Roche Bois and in its vicinity were asked to be transferred to St. Martin.  There were 
77 pig breeders, and of those 77 pig breeders only 71 opted to move to St. Martin and 6 were 
not  keen  to  move  to  St.  Martin.    To  date,  only  26  have  moved  and  are  doing  breeding 
activities at St. Martin; the rest is still yet to be moved to St. Martin.  There is some resistance 
of some breeders to move to St. Martin.  But like I said, of the 77 initially, 71 agreed to move 
to St. Martin but they have not all moved over there yet.  With regard to the new breeders 
who have come after that outbreak of the African Swine Fever, those new breeders won’t be 
considered to be moved to St. Martin because that area is now already allocated to whoever 
was  interested  in  that  activity  during  the  time  that  we  set  up  that  region  for  pig  breeding 
purposes. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:   Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure the hon. Minister is well 
aware that this relocation process has long been in the cards and couldn’t be performed yet 
for several reasons.  Can I ask the hon. Minister if he could advise his officers to perform a 
new  survey  -  an  updated  one  -  on  the  number  of  pig  breeders  actually  in  the  Roche  Bois 

 

53 

region?  Many of them have stopped their activities, but those of them who are still there are 
reluctant to move outside this region. As you know, it is a densely residential area; therefore, 
can I ask the hon. Minister if he could look urgently into the matter? 

Mr Seeruttun:  I will look into it, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

FISHERS – PROFESSIONAL CARDS - ISSUE 

 (No.  B/275)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the fishers, he will – 

(a) 

(b) 

give a list thereof registered as such over the past five years for mainland 
Mauritius and Rodrigues respectively;  
state the number of applications for the issue of a professional fisher card 
received, since January 2015 to date, and  
state Government policy in relation to the issue of fisher professional cards. 

(c) 
Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am tabling a list of registered 

fishers year wise since 2011 for mainland Mauritius.  

I have been informed that with regard to registered fishers in Rodrigues, the list is still 

being compiled by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly and will be tabled in due course. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House 
that since January 2015 to date, 20 applications have been received in my Ministry for the 
issue of professional fisher cards. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, the policy of the previous Government since 
2010 had been not to issue any new fisher cards. However, I have reconsidered the issue and 
I have already set up a committee with the following objectives – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to assess whether each and every registered fisher is a bona fide fisher; 

to deregister mala fide fishers; 

to  monitor  closely  the  activities  of  each  applicant  for  a  fisher  card  over  the 
period of six months, and 

(iv) 

to consider any new applications to fisher card for only off lagoon fishing. 

54 

 
Mr  Barbier:  I  think  the  hon.  Minister  is  on  the  right  track,  he  is  doing  the  right 
things. May I know from these past five years whether there is a change in number, that is, 
the number of fishers we have five years back is not the same today? So, the hon. Minister 
just  tabled  the  list,  but  what  about  the  movement  from  year  to  year,  does  he  have  this 
information so that we may base on that to know how many new cards can be issued to those 
who are waiting for so long? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.    For  the  information  of  the  hon.  Member,  in 
2011, there were 2,214 fishers; in 2012: 2,160 fishers; in 2013: 2,136 fishers; in 2014: 2,082 
fishers and in 2015, as at now, it is 2,065. So, there is an outstanding demand for 148 fishers 
as  at  now  and  we  are  working  on  that  to  distribute  the  cards,  but  we  have  to  see  that  the 
fishers  make  their  applications,  they  have  certain  conditions  to  satisfy  before  they  are 
registered. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! Do you have any question on fishers? 

Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon Minister whether - he can consider for the fishermen 
of Constituency No. 12 -  since several years they are looking for fisher cards, to see to it if 
he can do something? 

Mr Koonjoo: Yes, Madam Speaker, that will be done on the same exercise. 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  replying  that  at  his  Ministry,  therefore,    the 
number of applicants for a new fisherman card is only 148. Therefore, can I ask him why is it 
that in case the fisherman card will be granted, it is only for offshore lagoon fishing? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  working  on  that,  because  people  who  go 
outside lagoon are despatched with special boats. Those who are fishing inside the lagoon can 
go with small boats and all other devices. So, we are looking into that. We will see to it that 
people  who  are  willing  to  go  off  lagoon  and  in  lagoon  are  both  supported  with  the  same 
facilities. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  to  consider  this  possibility  that 
when the cards will be distributed to the fishermen the Ministry considers also giving them 
the  possibility  of  fishing  inside  the  lagoon,  because  for  years  now  the  number  of  lagoon 
fishermen has been dwindling? 10 years ago, there used to be 4,000 fishermen and now we 
just heard that the figure has been reduced by about 50% and has come down to only 2,000. 
The Ministry has implemented a policy of replenishing the lagoons during the past 10 years, 

 

55 

therefore why not consider the possibility of allowing the fishermen to fish inside the lagoon 
when the new cards will be distributed to fishers? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  is  looking  into  all  these  factors  and  I 
want to give a new impulsive to the fishing sector. I have got it in mind, we are working upon 
that and in the future we want to make the fishing sector a very attractive sector where more 
jobs will be created. Not only that, we are also looking forward to put some restrictions on 
the issue of licences to foreign fishing vessels. We have got an area of more than 2.3 million 
kilometres  of  ocean,  in  our  ocean  we  have  plenty  of  fish  and  in  spite  of  that  Mauritius  is 
suffering from the consumption of fish. I want to make Mauritius a healthy country where 
people will have more fish to eat which is good for health. We are working upon that at my 
Ministry and definitely we will come forward with a serious plan after this Budget. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No! I think we should pass on to the next question. Hon. Barbier, 

next question! We have canvassed the issue! 

POINTE AUX SABLES – BUS TERMINAL – CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/276)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to Pointe-
aux-Sables,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  a  modern  bus  terminal  to  be 
constructed thereat for the benefit of the inhabitants thereat and of the users thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the construction of a bus 
terminal at Pointe-aux-Sables is included in the list of priority projects for my Ministry.  We 
are fully aware of the fact that the location of the existing bus stand in that region is a major 
source of hazard and inconvenience for the inhabitants. 

I am informed that the project plan for the construction of a bus terminal at Pointe aux 
Sables has already been prepared and land has also been identified, but it seems that we have 
some land swapping issues with the Ministry of Housing and Lands and I will look into the 
matter. 

Mr Barbier: May I ask the hon. Minister to give us a time frame now because this 

project is so long overdue? 

56 

 
Mr Bodha: The time frame will depend upon the availability of funds. First of all, we 
will have to finalise the project plan, address the issue of the swapping of land and then we 
will go to the Ministry of Finance. 

Mr  Armance:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  will  consider  enlarging  the 
main road to and from the new bus terminal, because the road is actually very narrow and we 
have noted that we have several accidents recently? 

Mr Bodha: I will look into the matter. 

POINTE-AUX-SABLES/PETITE RIVIERE – ROAD WIDENING 

(No. B/277)   Mr J. C.  Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW &  Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the road 
linking Pointe-aux-Sables to Petite Rivière, he will state if consideration will be given for the 
widening thereof to avert risks of accident. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the Pointe aux Sables road which is B31 extends from 
Albion Road at Petit Verger to the bus terminal at Pointe aux Sables which is about 2.6 kms 
long and its width ranges from only 4 metres at some places to about 5.5 metres.  It is very 
narrow by normal standards. 

The Road Development Authority has already worked out a preliminary design and 
the project will be included in the new master plan taking into account the upcoming projects 
like the smart city being proposed at Bambous and the Coromandel Bridge A1M1 which will 
attract traffic from the A3, that is, that road in the west whilst also taking into account the 
proposed development of a ferry service from Pointe aux Sables to Port Louis. 

Mr Barbier: May I draw the attention of the Minister that my question is about the 
road linking Petite Rivière to Pointe-aux-Sables, but may I ask, in the same trend, whether he 
would consider also the possibility of enlarging the coastal road of Pointe-aux-Sables from 
the bus terminal to  Grand River North West? 

Mr Bodha: I will look into the matter and I will ask the RDA, in fact, to see to it 
because we agree that it is too narrow in many areas so we will have to realign it and enlarge 
it.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 

 

57 

SAMOA - SIDS - THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE 

(No. B/278) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
whether,  following  the  Third  International  Conference  on  the  Small  Islands  Developing 
States, held in Apia, Samoa, from 01 to 04 September 2014, he will state if his Ministry has 
set up a standing committee to coordinate the implementation of the actions taken under the 
various  related  and  cross  cutting  themes  discussed  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  progress 
achieved and the outcome thereof. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, the Mauritius delegation at the Third International 
Conference  on  Small  Island  Developing  States  (SIDS)  was  led  by  the  then  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade  and  comprised  the  then 
Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development as well as other officials.  

Madam Speaker, the hon. Third Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, 
hon.  Mahomed  was  himself  a  member  of  the  delegation.  As  the  hon.  Member  should 
therefore  be  aware,  the  main  outcome  of  the  Third  International  Conference  on  the  Small 
Islands  Developing  States  was  the  adoption  of  an  Accelerated  Modalities  of  Action, 
otherwise known as the Samoa Pathway. This was endorsed on 14 November 2014, by the 
United Nations General Assembly.  

I am informed that on 19 September 2014, it was approved by Cabinet that the ad-hoc 
Core Group, set up prior to the Samoa Summit for coordination purposes, be converted into a 
Standing Committee in order to follow up on the implementation of the Samoa Pathway. 

I am also informed that under the previous Government, two meetings were held on 

13th and 21st October 2014, but that the committee then went on sleep mode.  

However, since the advent of the new Government in December 2014, four meetings 

have been held and, I understand that a fifth meeting will be convened this month. 

In this regard, Madam Speaker, let me highlight a number of implementing measures 

taken by and/or implemented under the stewardship of a standing committee to date.  

First  of  all,  a  training  programme  on  climate  finance  is  currently  being  held  for 
officers of relevant Ministries, the private sector and non-government organisations (NGOs). 
This programme was, in fact, inaugurated not later than yesterday itself and will last from 06 

 

58 

to  10  April  2015.  This  training  programme  is  in  line  with  paragraph  37  of  the  Samoa 
Pathway. 

There is also the 2050 Pathway Calculator which is designed to assist the country in 
proactive planning for our future energy efficiency strategy. This is in line with paragraph 49 
of the Samoa Pathway and was launched a few weeks ago. There is also work which is being 
pursued  as  regards  the  setting  up  of  a  climate  finance  skills  hub  which  is  in  line  with 
paragraph 44 (d) of the Samoa Pathway.  

The SIDS Dock Statute which is an institutional mechanism designed to facilitate the 
development of a sustainable energy economy with Small Islands Developing States is also 
currently being worked upon in line with paragraph 50 (c) of the Samoa Pathway. 

Work  is  also  being  done  as  regards  the  21st  conference  of  parties  of  the  United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change which is scheduled for December 2015. 
This is in line with paragraphs 31 to 46 of the Samoa Pathway. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  believe  what  the  hon.  Minister  referred  to  a 
sleeping mode was due to the general elections and then the change of Government. May I 
ask the hon. Minister the dates of the four meetings and if there is any time frame that has 
been set going forward? 

Mr Sinatambou: No, I must say that I am not referring to elections because elections 
were in December and the first two meetings were in October. It was indeed on sleep mode, 
but maybe it was the coze cozer period! As for the four meetings, Madam Speaker, they were 
held respectively on 05 January 2015, 19 January 2015, 22 January 2015 and 31 March 2015. 
These are the four meetings and the fifth meeting is scheduled some time in April. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition!  

Mr Bérenger: Being given that this Samoa meeting and the work that is being done, 
all this is part of a build-up towards the December Paris United Nations Conference which 
will be crucial and, a few days ago, a deadline was met for all countries to put in their offers, 
what they are going to do individually at the level of each country. There was a deadline. Can 
I know whether Mauritius has put in its commitments? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  With  all  due  respect,  let  me  allow  myself,  Madam  Speaker,  to 
however correct the hon. Leader of the Opposition. What is being done is not a build-up to 
COP21 of December 2015. No, Madam Speaker! All the work which is being done under the 

 

59 

Samoa  Pathway  is  about  the  three  international  conferences  on  Small  Islands  Developing 
States. The first one was in 1994 in Barbados. The second one was in 2004 in Mauritius and 
the  third  one  was  in Samoa  in  2014.  Therefore,  these  are  the  three  ten  yearly  conferences 
which are held for Small Islands Developing States and whatever build-up regarding COP21 
is  not  under  the  Samoa  Accelerated  Modalities  of  Action.    But,  if  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition would like to come up with a Parliamentary Question regarding COP21 which is 
about climate change, this is a matter for the Ministry of Environment and I would request 
him to come up with a substantive question as this deadline has nothing to do with the SIDS 
Accelerated Modalities of Action under Samoa.  

(Interruptions) 

I know a little bit more than you on this one! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mohamed, next question! 

DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/279) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the recommendations made by the consultants in 
2012 for the Development of an Inundation, Flooding and Landslide National Risk Profile, 
Maps, Strategy Framework and Action Plans for Disaster Risk Management for the Republic 
of Mauritius, he will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating 
the timeframe set therefor, if any. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, the consultants had submitted their final report in 2013 
with key recommendations. They had proposed that same be implemented within a timeframe 
of two planning cycles; the first planning cycle being from 2013 to 2018 and the second cycle 
from 2019 to 2025. 

Based on those recommendations, the following actions have been taken –  

(i) 

a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC) was 
set up in 2013 to serve as a national platform on Disaster Risk reduction. This 
Centre  is  also  responsible  for  coordinating  the  implementation  of  the 
recommendations in the report; 

(ii) 

regarding the need to reduce risk in areas prone to very high and high-risk and 
the  need  to  adopt  a  sound  development  strategy,  the  NDRRMC  had 

 

60 

consultations with stakeholders concerned, including the Ministry of Housing 
and Lands.  In the first instance, it was proposed to develop high resolution 
danger  zone  maps.  Further  consultations  will  be  held  on  this  matter.  In  the 
meantime, my Ministry is developing toolkits for the Local Authorities based 
on the vulnerability maps produced by the Consultants which will help Local 
Authorities in identifying risk areas to guide sound development; 

(iii)  

several  measures  are  being  taken  my  Ministry  to  preserve  our  natural 
environment,  including  Environment  Sensitive  Areas.    Moreover,  the  EPA 
will  be  amended  this  year  to  provide  for  the  better  management  of  our 
environment; 

(iv)   with a view to embrace a culture of risk, in September 2014 an international 
consultant was hired through the UNDP to prepare school safety plans and to 
ensure the integration of DRR in primary and secondary schools curriculum. 
The  report  of  this  study  has  been  referred  to  the  Ministry  of  Education  and 
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research for appropriate 
action; 

(v)   with  regard  to  emergency  response,  my  Ministry  is  at  present  finalising  the 
National  Disaster  Scheme  (NDS)  2015,  which  defines  the  roles  and 
responsibilities of all relevant stakeholders before, during and in the aftermath 
of specified disasters; 

(vi)  

the report also highlights the need for a consistent Spatial Data Infrastructure 
for  conducting  risk  assessment.    The  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  has 
initiated action for the development of a National Spatial Data Infrastructure 
with  the  assistance  of  the  Regional  Centre  for  Mapping  of  Resources  for 
Development (RCMRD) from Kenya; 

(vii)  

the NDRRMC has embarked on the implementation of a national Multi-hazard 
Early  Warning  and  Emergency  Alert  System.    This  system  will  allow  the 
sending  of  emergency  notifications,  messages  to  all  first  responders  and  the 
public about impending hazards; 

(viii)   as regards the recommendation for the setting up of an emergency fund and 
insurance  scheme,  the  NDRRMC  has  been  working  very  closely  with  the 
Indian  Ocean  Commission  under  the  ISLANDS  project  on  a  programme 

 

61 

‘Financial  protection  for  our  people  and  our  economy  against  natural  and 
climatic disasters’. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, can I know how long is your reply? 

Mr Dayal:  Only a couple of seconds. 

Madam  Speaker:  If  you  have  got  two  or  three  more  pages,  then  it  is  better  to 

circulate. 

Mr Dayal:  No, it is the last page, Madam Speaker. 

As  part  of  the  programme,  a  report  on  ‘Building  capacities  for  increased  public 
investment  in  integrated  climate  change  adaptation  and  disaster  risk  reduction’  has  been 
produced.  I wish to inform the House that my Ministry is organising a national workshop on 
13 April 2015 whereby this report will be presented. 

inform 

the  House 

that 

to 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish 

the 
recommendations  involves  billions  of  rupees  and  requires  participatory,  multi-agency  and 
multi-stakeholder engagement. A copy of the report has been circulated to all stakeholders 
concerned with the adoption of the ‘Sendai Framework for  Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
2030’ in March 2015, my Ministry will ensure that the recommendations of the consultants 
are implemented in line with the new Framework.  

implementation  of 

ECOLOGICAL AGRICULTURE ACTION PLAN 

(No. B/280) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
proposed  preparation  of  an  Ecological  Agriculture  Action  Plan,  in  line  with  Maurice  Ile 
Durable,  as  decided  by  Government  in  March  2013,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand, 
indicating  if  a  list  of  the  pesticides,  chemical  fertilizers,  fungicides,  insecticides  and 
herbicides  which  can  be  withdrawn  from  the  market,  either  immediately  or  in  a  phased 
manner,  is  available  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  actions,  if  any,  taken  or  that  will  be  taken  in 
relation thereto. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am informed that a High-Level Steering Committee 
was set up in August 2013 at the level of the Ministry to work out a list of pesticides which 
could  be  withdrawn  from  the  market,  either  immediately  or  in  a  phased  manner,  and  to 
prepare an Ecological Agriculture Action Plan for both Mauritius and Rodrigues.  A list of 20 
pesticides  was  consequently  identified  for  withdrawal  and  safer  pesticides/bio-pesticides 

 

62 

were  proposed  as  alternatives.    I  am  tabling  the  list  of  pesticides  which  have  been 
recommended for withdrawal. 

Upon  the  recommendation  of  the  High-Level  Steering  Committee,  the  Dangerous 
Chemicals  Control  Board,  which  operates  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality  of  Life,  decided  to  stop  issuing  permits  for  the  importation  of  three  pesticides  in 
January  2014  and  six  pesticides  in  January  2015.    These  pesticides  are  highlighted  in  the 
statement I am tabling. 

This new Government, Madam Speaker, is conscious of the abusive use of pesticides in 
agricultural production, and the problem will be tackled in a holistic way.  My Ministry will 
now  be  implementing  the  bio-farming/organic  farming  projects  where  the  use  of 
agrochemicals in agricultural production will be minimised. 

As  regards  the  withdrawal  of  additional  toxic  pesticides  from  the  market,  this  is 
currently being worked out by my Ministry, and the specific timeframe for the total ban of 
these products from the market will be established. 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that, in regard to the preparation of an Ecological 
Agriculture  Action  Plan  for  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues,  technical  assistance  from  FAO  has 
been solicited. 

Mr Mahomed: Would the hon. Minister clarify, for the benefit of the House, whether 
the list that he has just tabled will be active, meaning all these pesticides will be immediately 
banned in the country? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I have just mentioned that all those pesticides that are 
on that list have already been banned.   So, no import permit is granted for the importation of 
those pesticides. 

SIC – BUILDING - PURCHASE  

(No.  B/281)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
purchase by the State Insurance Company Ltd. of a building located in Ebene from Arushi 
Development  Co.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  company, 
information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

total purchase price thereof; 

total amount of money paid in relation thereto, and  

 
(c) 

date of delivery thereof. 

63 

(Withdrawn) 

CRIMINAL CASES - FOREIGN STATE - MUTUAL ASSISTANCE 

(No.  B/282)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked the  Attorney General whether, in regard to  criminal cases, he  will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain information as to the number of request made on behalf of the 
State  of  Mauritius  to  the  competent  authorities  of  a  foreign  State  for  mutual  assistance  in 
proceedings commenced in Mauritius in relation thereto, since 2003 to date on a yearly basis, 
indicating in each case, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

nature of the assistance sought and obtained, if any, and  

outcome thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MPCB LTD – BOARD - COMPOSITION 

(No.  B/283)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius  Post  and  Co-operative  Bank  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

composition of the Board thereof;  

names, qualifications and terms and conditions of appointment of the General 
Manager thereof, and 

(c) 

aggregate amount of non-performing loans thereof, since 2010 to date. 

(Withdrawn) 

AIRPORTS OF MAURITIUS LIMITED – RECRUITMENT & CONTRACT 

ALLOCATION - INQUIRY 

(No. B/284) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Airports  of  Mauritius  Limited,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  will 
consider initiating inquiries in respect of all the decisions taken by Mr S. P., former Chief 
Executive thereof, wherein the approval of the Board thereof were not sought, especially with 

 

64 

regard to recruitment and contract allocation and at the conclusion thereof, if so required, for 
the referral thereof to the Independent Commission against Corruption and to the Police. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am replying to PQ No. B/284.  The 
information  requested  by  the  hon.  Member  is  being  compiled  as  appropriate  and  will  be 
forwarded to the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
for any action deemed necessary. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

PARASTATAL BODIES & GOVERNMENT-OWNED COMPANIES – 

CHAIRPERSONS & BOARD MEMBERS 

(No.  B/285)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  parastatal  bodies,  Government-owned  companies  and  private 
companies wherein Government is a majority shareholder, he will state if Government has 
approved a new set of guidelines in relation to the Chairpersons and to the Board Members 
thereof  and,  if  so,  in  each  case,  give  details  thereof  regarding  the  payment  of  salaries, 
allowances and other fringe benefits attached thereto, including the enjoyment of office car 
facilities and of office space. 

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  P.  Jugnauth): 
Madam  Speaker,  following  Cabinet’s  approval,  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  issued  a  circular  letter  on  13  February  2015  to  all 
Ministries and Departments informing them of a clear line of demarcation between the roles 
of Chairpersons and Chief Executives Officers to be adopted in public sector organisations. 

As  regards  parastatal  bodies,  the  fees  payable  to  Chairpersons  and  members  of 

Statutory Boards and Committees fall under the purview of the Pay Research Bureau. 

Regarding  the  Government-owned  companies  and  those  not  governed  by  the  PRB, 
Government  has  approved  that  part-time  Chairpersons  and  other  members  of  Boards  be 
categorised in four groups and the monthly fees payable to them be revised as follows – 

•  Chairpersons, ranging from Rs30,000 to Rs70,000; 
•  Vice-Chairpersons, ranging from Rs20,000 to Rs45,000, and 
•  Board members ranging from Rs10,000 to Rs25,000. 

 

65 

Furthermore,  transport  facilities  will  be  provided  to  the  Chairperson  for  attending 

Board meetings as well as official functions. 

Concerning  office  space,  the  Chairperson  makes  use  of  the  Board  room  of  the 
organisation for meetings, but he is not provided with a permanent office in view of the part-
time nature of his office. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can we know from the hon. Minister whether he has a list of all the full-

time Chairmen? 

Mr Jugnauth:  I have a list of the institutions concerned that fall under the different 
categories, namely A, B, C and D.  But I am not aware of full-time Chairpersons.  I know the 
Chairpersons are part-time.  But I can provide, of course, a list of those Chairpersons. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

PLASTIC BAGS - BAN 

(No.  B/287)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the banning of plastic bags, as announced in the last Budget Speech, he will state – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

when same will be implemented; 
 the alternatives identified, if any, giving details thereof, and 
 the measures that will be taken to preserve the industries involved therein, 
indicating the expected number of job losses in relation thereto. 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Madam Speaker, the battle against the abusive use of plastic 
bags  is  a  long  standing  concern.    It  is  acknowledged  that  various  measures  have  been 
undertaken to reduce the use of plastic bags since 2002.  These measures include amongst 
others, promulgation of regulations, introduction of levy and awareness raising.  However, 
these measures to curtail excessive use of plastic bags have been largely unsuccessful. 

As you know, a zero plastic strategy was also advocated by the previous Government 
since  2011.    However,  the  absence  of  a  sustained  action  plan  to  implement  the  strategy, 
coupled  with  inadequate  monitoring  and  enforcement,  coordination  and  follow-up  of  the 
measures failed to achieve expected results. 

66 

 
Consequently, the use of plastic bags has continued to increase over the past decade, 
amounting  to  some  Rs300  m.  annually.    The  situation  has  been  worsened  after  the 
liberalisation of import of plastic bags in 2013.   

The decision to ban plastic bags, as announced in the recent Budget, is indeed a very 
bold measure, which will allow leapfrogging from the throw-away society to an ecologically 
responsible one.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House 

 
that, as announced, plastic bags will be banned as from 01 January 2016.  

 My Ministry is already working on the modalities and strategies, including awareness 
raising as well as promulgation of regulations for the ban of the local manufacture, import, 
trade and use of plastic bags under the Environment Protection Act. I would like to reassure 
the House that exceptions will be made for plastics used for packing purposes, in view of 
hygienic and sanitary reasons.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, current alternatives produced and sold on the 

 
market include, among others, – 

 Bags made of recycle cloth; 
 ‘Tente vacoas’; 

•  Jute bags; 
•  Cloth bags made of cotton, linen, polyester and jean; 
• 
• 
•  Raffia bags; recycled paper bags, and 
• 
We have seen from the experience of other countries and Rodrigues that the industry 
is  market-driven.    The  business  of  the  entrepreneurs  of  alternative  bags  has  expanded  in 
Rodrigues and so will be in Mauritius.  We are confident that the ingenuity of Mauritians and 
Rodriguans will forge lots of innovation in that sector. 

 Leather bags. 

 
Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  as  far  back  as  2009, 
Government  had  hired  the  services  of  a  Technical  Consultant  to  conduct  a  study  on  the 
reengineering of the plastic industry.   

The consultant conducted in-plant audits  for  each enterprise  and had made specific 
recommendations  mainly  in  terms  of  machinery  modification,  acquisition  of  additional 
accessories and purchase of new equipment for product diversification. The enterprises did 

 

67 

not  implement  the  measures  recommended  due  to  uncertainty  about  the  viability  of  the 
proposals made by the consultant. 

I am informed by the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection that 
 
there  are  presently  some  12  enterprises  producing  plastic  packaging  materials,  including 
plastic bags.  Most of the enterprises are SMEs, except for three. I understand that the number 
of jobs concerned is about 280.  The larger enterprises have adequate resources and know-
how to further diversify their products range.   

I am also informed that the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

 
is envisaging the following course of action – 

•  Assessment of the diversification potential of the enterprises by Industrial 

Engineers of the Ministry. 

•  Evaluation of the needs of the enterprises, and 
•  Assistance to the enterprises to address the needs through support institutions.  
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, according to the reply given by the hon. Minister, 
whereby part (c) of my question I stated that the number of job losses that would occur due to 
this  measure,  the  hon.  Minister  did  not  reply  about  any  number  or  any  sort  of  this.  Can  I 
inform the hon. Minister, according to information that has been published in the press, there 
are  actually  25  plastic  companies,  and  ten  companies  out  of  these  25  would  close  down 
because all their machines can produce only plastic bags, they can’t be reengineered as the 
hon.  Minister  just  stated.    And  all  these  ten  companies  are  SME’s,  they  have  taken  loans, 
overdraft and they employ so many employees. So, therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister - 
this is why this question was firstly addressed to the Finance Minister - what would be done 
to these specific companies, which only produce plastic bags and those SME’s that have so 
many employment at risk? 

Mr Dayal: Let me just clarify the points. Part (c) of the question I answered. I said, I 
understand that the number of jobs concerned is about 280. Let me add now that, yesterday 
itself, I received three manufacturers in my office and I wanted to get first-hand information 
concerning how they are going to adapt to what the Government is proposing. I can tell you 
that all of them said they are going to reengineer their processes, but that will take some time. 
Only in certain cases, they are going to have problems because they only deal with a certain 
type of plastic. So, therefore, the issue of reengineering is possible. 

68 

 
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that there will be exceptions and 
he gave a few examples. Can I know from the hon. Minister how widespread would be those 
exceptions  and  how  will  this  be  administered?  These  permits  -  I  suppose  -  which  are 
exceptions are going to be delivered by somebody.  How is this going to be administered? 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  said,  we  are  working  on  the  various  aspects 
governing this very important environmental issue and it is being done by our technicians.  
We are going to sensitise the whole nation how we are going about certain type of plastics, as 
I said - I have just quoted one - for hygienic reason, for health concerns. Therefore, we are 
going to communicate and inform the public how we are going about it in a timely manner. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister clarify whether the plastics used by households 

will  continue to be manufactured because these are used for dustbins? 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, we are going to announce how we are proceeding with 
what type of plastic and what we are doing.  This will be communicated in a timely manner, 
as I said, and we are working on it. 

Mr Ganoo: I wanted to ask the hon. Minister more or less the same question.  In the 
specific case of les grands sacs noirs that all households have in their kitchen and used by all 
housewives, will these be banned also? 

Mr Dayal: All these issues will be taken on board. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, we are not contesting the fact that plastic bags do 
a  lot  of  damage  to  the  environment,  this  is  not  the  point.  My  point  is,  some  of  those 
companies  will  close  down.  The  hon.  Minister  said  he  met  some  of  these  plastic  bag  
companies, but not all of them.  I can table a press cutting from ‘Le Defi Quotidien’, where 
already a company, Meeshy Plastic Bag Company Ltd. said -  

«  Il ne sait plus quoi faire. Affirmant qu’il a contracté des dettes pour financer son 
entreprise, il confie que cette fabrique est le gagne-pain de sa famille ». 

Therefore, if the hon. Minister cannot answer on this issue, maybe I may come back 
with another substantive question to the hon. Minister of Finance who can reply. Secondly, 
Madam Speaker, paradoxically the tax on paper bag actually is 30% .  If we want people to 
use paper bag, we should reduce this amount of tax so that it can be accessible at a good price 
for all people to use it. 

69 

 
Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  the  issue  of  manufacturers  is  concerned,  my 
office is open to everyone. I received the three persons because they asked for an interview 
on  that  specific  issue.  So,  therefore,  the  hon.  Member  can  ask  that  person  to  come  to  my 
office and we will meet with our technicians and discuss about these issues. We are here to 
help,  but  then,  it  has  to  be  within  the  framework  of  Government  policy.  The  policy  is  of 
national  interest  and  on  environmental  interest.  Concerning  the  tax  on  paper,  I  would 
communicate that to my colleague the Minister of Finance and he will see what can be done. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  In  order  to  sensitise  the  population,  will  the  hon.  Minister  and  the 
Ministry consider also investing in the manufacture of cloth bag, and then distribute to school 
children and other poor families as a first step? 

Mr  Dayal:  Thank  you  very  much,  hon.  Member.  I  would  like  to  say  that  we  are 
already sponsoring the manufacturer of cloth bag through our community-related projects and 
one of them is in Quatre Soeurs where they have produced already thousands of those bags, 
we are distributing free of charge because it is funded by an international concern. So, these 
issues are there. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the plastic bags used 

by retail pharmacies to put sugar coated tablets will be banned? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, did you declare your interest? 

Mr Dayal: Can I have the question again, please? 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Minister confirm whether the plastic bags used in retail 

pharmacies to put sugar-coated tablets, which may be damaged, will be banned? 

Mr Dayal: This is something that I will take on board. It’s a very valid suggestion. 

We will take it on board, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

NICE COMMITTEE – CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/288)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

 

70 

appointment  of  Mr  V.  M.  as  Chairperson  of  the  National  Institute  for  the  Cooperative 
Enterprise  Committee,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Committee, 
information as to his - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

qualifications;  

address, and  

terms and conditions of appointment. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, Mr Vishal Mauracheea was appointed Chairperson of 

the National Institute of Cooperative Entrepreneurship (NICE) on 13 February 2015.  

With regard to part (a) of the question concerning his qualifications, I am informed 
that he has a Cambridge School Certificate and has also followed a ‘Practical Spreadsheet 
Processing’  examination  conducted  by  the  Pitman  Examinations  Institute.  He  has  wide 
experience in business activities.  

As regards part (b) of the question, his address is Royal Road, Montagne Blanche. 

As for part (c) of the question, regarding the terms and conditions of his appointment 
as  the  Chairperson  of  the  National  Institute  of  Cooperative  Entrepreneurship,  this  is 
determined  by  section  114  of  the  Cooperatives  Act  2005  (as  amended).  It  is  stipulated  at 
section 114, subsections (2) and (3) that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

The Chairperson shall hold office for a period of two (2) years and he shall be 
eligible for re-appointment, and 

The  Chairperson  shall  be  paid  such  fees  or  allowances  as  the  Minister  may 
determine.  

Consequently, I am informed that he is paid an all-inclusive allowance of Rs12,350 
per  month.  Moreover,  he  has  no  office  at  the  National  Institute  of  Cooperative 
Entrepreneurship. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  The  population  and  the  country  will  be  pleased  to  know  that  this 
gentleman is actually on bail for possession of stolen property, Cause No. 547/14 and other 
cases.  He was convicted for assault on 01 October 2014, convicted for insult on 22 October 
2010, and other cases also. I will be tabling it later. 

(Interruptions) 

 

71 

Mr Bholah: I don’t have any such information at hand, but I will look forward and 

inform the House accordingly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I enlighten the hon. Minister more.  He has been caught again in 
another  case  these  days  and  the  hon.  Minister  may  inquire.  I  will  give  the  hon.  Minister 
several information. OB No.1688/2010, Cause No. 1142/12.  Secondly, OB 536/07, Cause 
No.  6164/09;  Cause  No.  1408/012,  allowing  licence  premises  to  remain  open  during 
prohibited hours. There are several other cases. Can the hon. Minister, at least, inform the 
House whether he has asked for a certificat de moralité before appointing such persons? And 
this  is  the  example  which  he,  as  a  Minister  of  Government,  has  recommended  to 
Government. 

Mr  Bholah:  I  have  no  such  information  at  hand,  but,  again,  I  will  look  for  the 

information and inform the House. 

Mr Bhagwan: Will the hon. Minister, at least, inform the House and give information 
to the hon. Prime Minister that this person will be sacked immediately, because these are true 
information? 

Mr Bholah: If this is the case, yes, it will be so. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

BELLE MARE - FRENCH TOURISTS - DEATH 

(No.  B/289)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  death  of  two  French  tourists  at  sea  in  the  region  of  Belle 
Mare, he will state - 

(a) 

(b) 

the outcome of the inquiry, if any, carried out thereinto by his Ministry and the 
actions taken in relation thereto, if any, and 

if his Ministry proposes to introduce new policies in relation to the nautical 
sports activities within our lagoons. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, 
I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that a Police inquiry is being carried out and is 
still ongoing.  

 

72 

However,  pending  the  completion  of  the  Police inquiry,  the  following  actions  have 

been taken by my Ministry and the Tourism Authority - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the licence of the skipper involved in the accident has been suspended and the 
pleasure craft has been impounded at Belle Mare National Coast Guard post;  

A snorkelling zone has been demarcated by marker buoys at Trou Corn, where 
snorkelling which was temporarily prohibited has resumed, and 

procedures have been initiated for the demarcation of speed limit zones in the 
lagoon of Belle Mare, which are expected to be completed by next week. In 
the meantime, towing and water ski activities have been prohibited thereat.  

In addition, a flying squad has been set up by the National Coast Guard to carry out 

regular inspections and continuous monitoring, including surprise checks. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, the following new policies have 

been introduced to reinforce safety and security of sea users - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

suspension of skipper’s licence for an approved period upon establishment of 
a minimum of 3 contraventions within a period of 12 consecutive months; 

suspension of pleasure craft licence for an approved period upon establishment 
of a minimum of 3 contraventions within a period of 12 consecutive months, 
and 

obligation  on  owners  of  commercial  pleasure  crafts  to  ensure  that  their 
skippers  attend  every  two  years  refresher  courses  dispensed  by  the  Tourism 
Authority to keep them abreast of new safety standards and norms.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to reassure the House that there 
will be no compromise on the issue of safety and security. In fact, it would be pertinent for 
me to highlight some of the measures which were introduced as far back as 2005 to step up 
safety and security at sea and which are still being pursued.  These include, inter alia - 

(i) 

a  new  legal  framework  for  the  Tourism  Authority  through  the  Tourism 
Authority Act in 2006 complemented by policies, regulations and guidelines 
for the conduct of nautical activities in a safe and orderly manner;  

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

73 

a  comprehensive  programme  for  the  zoning  of  lagoon  to  demarcate 
snorkelling  zones,  speed  limit  zones,  ski  lanes,  swimming  zones,  mooring 
zones and installation of navigational aids and passes; 

setting-up of a Competency Test Panel to assess the competency of skippers; 

printing of Creole edition of the Code de la mer; 

survey  of  pleasure  crafts  to  assess  their  seaworthiness  before  delivery  of 
licence; 

(vi) 

pleasure crafts operating outside lagoons to be equipped with 2 engines, and  

(vii) 

setting-up of a Monitoring and Compliance Unit at the Tourism Authority.  

Safety and security is a topmost priority of my Ministry. An Action Plan to reinforce 
safety and security at sea has been elaborated for implementation and an amount of Rs13 m. 
has been earmarked in the budget of my Ministry.  

But,  as  always,  Madam  Speaker,  enforcement  remains  a  major  issue.  Since  taking 

office, I have had regular meetings with the Coast Guard in this respect.  

Also, the Tourism Authority will build up its enforcement capability as a matter of 

urgency. 

Mr Ramano: Est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre si des actions ont été prises contre 
l’hôtel  en  question  pour  opération  sans  permis,  notamment  en  ce  qui  concerne  la  plongée 
sous-marine? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, there are two things: one is the hotel 
and the other one is the boathouse. In fact, the boathouse also did not have a licence and it did 
not have a licence because it had no security boat.  

Now, it has a security boat and a licence has been delivered, but we are waiting for the 
whole inquiry to finish before taking any further action. But we have not taken any action 
against the boathouse itself. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: With regard to the insurance cover for the skippers or for passengers of 
the pleasure craft, can the hon. Minister indicate to the House if the law makes it imperative 
for the owner of the pleasure craft or the skipper to take any insurance cover to protect the 
passengers? 

 

74 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am sure that the requirements cover 
the existence of an insurance policy by all concerned, but I will check what the situation is. I 
am quite sure that it is the case. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  very  sad  occasions  like  that,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister  whether  the  Ministry  -  the  hotel  probably  does  its  part,  but  the  Ministry  and  the 
Tourism  Authority  whether  we  do  something  special,  we  do  something  human  in  the 
direction of the relatives, the family of those tourists that come here to spend good time and 
meet with death? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  This  was  a  very,  very  tragic 
incident, in fact, where the parents died and their daughter stayed in Mauritius. We visited the 
girl obviously and we provided all the assistance necessary for relatives to come to pick up 
the girl and return back to France. 

Mr Ganoo: It would seem that on the day of that fatal accident, the weather was not 
very  good.  Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister indicate the House  whether new policies 
should be taken on days of bad weather to ensure that pleasure crafts owners and skippers 
should  be  warned  or  should  be  sensitised  about  the  weather  conditions  and  should  be 
discouraged from taking tourists or other local passengers outside the lagoon. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Member is confusing 
between  this  accident  and  the  one  at  Flat  Island.    This  particular  accident  was  inside  the 
lagoon and I have not been told that the weather was particularly bad at that time. We have 
taken  additional  measures  concerning  out  of  lagoon  excursions  involving  commercial 
pleasure crafts. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ramano! 

PAVILLON - RECEPTION HALL - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/290)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the construction of the new 
reception hall at Pavillon, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal 
Council of Quatre Bornes, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

contract value thereof;  

names of the bidders thereof;  

 
(c) 

(d) 

75 

provisions,  if  any,  made  in  regard  to  pollution  hazards  to  the  surroundings 
thereof, and  

nature of the complaints received from the inhabitants thereof, if any, and if 
so, indicate the actions taken in relation thereto. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker,  with regard to parts (a) and  (b) of the question,  I am 

informed by the Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes that –  

• 

the contract value for the extension and sound proofing of the Pavillon Reception 
Hall is Rs5,417,615.50, inclusive of VAT and contingencies, and 

•  only one offer was received from Messrs New Horizon Builders Ltd, following a 

procurement exercise conducted by the Council. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I am informed that the new concrete building is 
being  constructed  with  sound  proofing  measures.  These  specifications  include  that  all  the 
openings  be  doubly  gazed,  air  conditioners  be  installed  and  air  curtains  be  fixed  at  exit 
location.  The  reconstruction  is  being  done  in  order  to  address  the  noise  emanating  from 
activities held at the Hall which was due to the fact that the roof of the building was made up 
of iron sheets. 

As far as part (d) of the question is concerned, I am informed that the inhabitants of 

the region have complained that –  

• 
• 

• 

they were not aware of the project;  
they are concerned with the green space which is already very scarce in the 
town, and 
if there was any tender process. 

I am further informed that the following actions have been taken by the Council to 

address these complaints – 

•  a  notification  plate  with  all  relevant  information  on  the  project,  the 

contractor’s name and the implementing agency has been placed on the site; 

•  a  meeting  was  held  on  01  April  2015  in  the  office  of  the  Mayor  with 
representatives  of  the  Regroupement  Citoyen  de  Quatre  Bornes  whereat  all 
details were made available to them, and 

•  as regards the green space, the turfing and the shrubs will be reinstated after 

completion the project. 

 

 

76 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS – NON-TEACHING STAFF - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/291) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recruitment  of  the  non-teaching  staff  of  the  primary 
schools, she will state the tests, if any, the prospective recruits are made to undergo before 
they are assessed to be fit and proper persons to work in an environment involving children. 

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker, I am informed that the non-teaching staff posted to the primary schools comprise the 
following grades: 

(i) 

(ii) 

Assistant  School  Superintendent  and  School  Clerks  recruited  by  the  Public 
Service Commission, and  

Head/Senior  School  Caretaker,  School  Caretaker  and  General  Worker 
recruited  by  the  Ministry  under  delegated  powers  from  the  Public  Service 
Commission. 

Appointment  to  the  above  grades  are  made  either  by  selection  from  serving 
employees/officers of the Ministry/Civil Service or by selection from outside candidates or 
by promotion depending on the qualification requirements of the post.  All candidates joining 
the  Civil  Service  for  the  first  time,  prior  to  their  appointment  on  the  permanent  and 
pensionable establishment or confirmation in their post, are required to  undergo a medical 
examination carried out by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life as soon as convenient 
after  their  assumption  of  duty  in  order  to  assess  whether  they  are  medically  and 
constitutionally  fit  for  employment  in  the  Civil  Service.    If  found  medically  unfit,  their 
appointment  is  terminated  immediately  as  stipulated  in  the  offer  of  appointment  made  to 
them when joining the service on probation or in a temporary capacity or on a casual basis.    

Prior to joining the Ministry, police clearance is sought as well in respect of outside 

candidates to check whether there is any adverse report or police case against them.  

It  is  also  to  be  pointed  out  that  School  Caretakers  recruited,  following  a  selection 
exercise from among officers in service, are offered appointment in a temporary capacity in 
the first instance, and they are required to undergo a fresh medical examination carried out by 

 

77 

the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to certify whether they are fit to work in schools. 
In case they are found medically unfit, the appointment is terminated and they are reverted to 
their previous substantive post. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Can I ask the hon. Minister - of course he is not the substantive 
Minister - whether that medical test includes psychological test especially when we know that 
these people are going to work with young children, young girls and boys? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Well, Madam Speaker, I don’t think I am in a position to confirm 

whether it includes a psychological test.  Probably I will have look into that. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rutnah! 

STATE SECONDARY SCHOOLS – SUPPLY TEACHERS – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/292)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the supply teachers in the State Secondary Schools, she will 
state the number thereof employed over the past two years, indicating – 

(a) 

on average the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

shortest, and  

longest engagement contract allocated thereto, and  

(b) 

if  her  Ministry  will  consider  adopting  and  implementing  the  policy  of 
recruiting the supply teachers on the permanent establishment. 

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  Supply  Teachers  are  enlisted  in  respect  of  State  Secondary 
Schools for both mainstream and pre-vocational stream in order to palliate the shortage of 
staff and to replace Educators proceeding on sick/maternity/vacation leave and leave without 
pay.   

For the past two years, the number of Supply Teachers enlisted for mainstream and 

the pre-vocational stream are as follows: 

Mainstream 

Pre-Vocational stream 

Year 2013 :  332 (short and long periods 

31 (long periods) 

 

78 

Year 2014 :  397 (short and long periods) 

31 (long periods) 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that, generally - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  shortest  period  of  enlistment  of  Supply  Teachers  is  19  days  to  replace 
Educators who have proceeded on vacation leave, and  

the longest period is one full academic year, that is, as from the resumption of 
studies in January up to the end of the third term, normally in the first week of 
November. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the enlistment of Supply Teachers is made every 
year  under  delegated  powers  from  the  Public  Service  Commission  on  the  terms  and 
conditions  specified  by  the  Commission.  In  the  offer  of  appointment  made  to  the  Supply 
Teachers, it is clearly stated that their enlistment would be on a purely temporary basis as and 
when required.  

It is also specified that in the offer of appointment that the enlistment will not give 
them  any  claim  for  permanent  appointment  as  Educator  and  may  be  terminated  without 
notice  or  compensation  in  lieu  of  notice  in  the  event  of  incompetence,  misconduct  or 
insubordination or in case their services are no longer required.   

Should they wish to be considered for appointment to the grade of Educator, they will 
have  to  submit  their  application  anew  as  and  when  the  post  is  advertised  by  the  Public 
Service Commission. Hence, it is not  envisaged to implement a policy  for employment of 
supply teachers on a permanent basis inasmuch as there already exists a mode of recruitment 
for Educators on a permanent basis.   

However,  it  is  also  to  be  pointed  out  that,  with  the  approval  of  the  Public  Service 
Commission, around 125 Supply Teachers were enlisted in the years 2004/2005 for the pre-
vocational stream.  Their enlistment was on a month to month basis as and when required.  
As at date, 30 supply teachers prevocational are still in employment.  They are enlisted at the 
start of the academic year in January and their enlistment is terminated at the end of the third 
term in October/November and they are re-employed at the beginning of the following year 
on  the  same  terms  and  conditions.    Given  that  the  30  supply  teachers  are  serving  since 
2004/2005,  the  approval  of  Cabinet  was  obtained  in  May  2014  to  absorb  them  on  the 
establishment of the Ministry.   

79 

 
In this respect, the scheme of service is actually being amended to take on board the 
Supply Teachers in conformity with the Cabinet decision. It is expected that their situation 
will be regularised shortly as a special case. 

Mr  Rutnah:  That  is  the  answer  that  the  hon.  Minister  gave  in  relation  to  making 
some of the teachers permanent once the Cabinet will meet. Is the hon. Minister aware that 
for the last 10 years, there is a shortage of teachers in, at least, three State Secondary Schools 
in  my  constituency,  for  example,  at  the  Piton  State  Secondary  School,  at  Mapou  State 
Secondary  School  and  at  Ramsoondar  Prayag  State  Secondary  School  and  in  the  last  10 
years, only supply teachers have been teaching on and off? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, if this is the case, then probably I will have to ask 
the officers of the Ministry to look into it and see what are the measures they intend to take to 
correct that situation. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question, hon. Rutnah! 

BOI, SIC & STATUTORY BODIES – STATE LAW OFFICERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/293)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Board of 
Investment, the State Insurance Company Ltd. and the other statutory bodies falling under the 
aegis of his Ministry, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from each of them the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

names of the State Law Officers whose services are presently retained thereat, 
indicating in each case, 

the date of appointment thereof, and 

remuneration drawn. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to parts (a), (b) and (c) of the 
question,  I am tabling the information requested in relation to State Law Officers who are 
called upon to provide their services by Statutory Bodies and Government-owned companies 
falling under the aegis of my Ministry. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

STATE-OWNED SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE – FEES 

(No.  B/294)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  State-owned  sports 

 

80 

infrastructure and facilities, he will state if the Mauritius Sports Council had consulted his 
Ministry before increasing the fees payable by the general public to have access thereto and, 
if so, indicate the stand of his Ministry in relation thereto, especially in the light of the policy 
of his Ministry to encourage the practice of sports by the mass. 

(Withdrawn) 

MAURITIUS PORTS AUTHORITY – SCAVENGING & CLEANING SERVICES – 

CONTRACT 

(No.  B/295)  Mr  A.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the Mauritius Ports Authority, he will, for the benefit 
of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom  and  table  a  list  of  the  contractors  who  have  been  awarded 
contracts for scavenging and cleaning services thereat, as regards the ships and ports area, 
since 2005 to 2015, indicating in each case, the amount of money paid thereto. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am tabling, as requested by the hon. 
Member, the information regarding scavenging and cleaning services contracts awarded by 
the Mauritius Ports Authority for the period 2005 to 2015. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Armance! 

POINTE-AUX-SABLES - AREA HEALTH CENTRE 

(No. B/296) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the existing area health centre 
in the region of Pointe-aux-Sables, he will state if he has been informed of the derelict state 
thereof and that it is too small to accommodate the number of patients attending thereto on a 
daily basis and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

(b) 

if urgent remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto, and 

where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed  construction  of  a  new  mediclinic 
thereat, indicating the time frame set for the implementation thereof, if any. 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, the Pointe-aux-Sables Community Health Centre is a 
single storey building of 45 metre square located on a plot of State land of 46.8 metre square.  
This Community Health Centre has been operational since more than 25 years. I am informed 
that the building does not suffer any structural distress and as such can be considered safe.  

 
The  average  yearly  attendance  for  the  last  three  years  at  Pointe-aux-Sables 

81 

Community Health Centre is 8,643 patients and the average daily attendance is 43 patients. 

In view of the space constraints thereat, in 2010 and 2011, my Ministry decided to 
carry out an extension project which did not materialise as no responsive bids were received 
on  four  occasions  to  temporarily  house  the  Committee  Health  Centre  in  a  rented  building 
pending completion of the extension project. 

In  October  2013,  the  inhabitants  of  Pointe-aux-Sables  made  a  request  for  the 
construction of a new Community Health Centre in order to provide more facilities for the 
patients and the staff.  

On 03 April 2014, the Ministry of Housing and Lands was requested for the vesting of 
a  plot  of  land  of  580  metre  square,  situated  behind  the  Community  Health  Centre,  in  my 
Ministry for an extension project. They informed the Ministry that the land was vested in the 
Ministry  of  Local  Government  for  use  by  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis  for  the 
construction of a sports complex. 

On  09  May  2014,  my  Ministry  requested  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  to 
consider releasing the said plot of land for vesting in my Ministry for the extension of the 
Pointe-aux-Sables Community Health Centre.  

The Ministry of Housing and Lands has informed that the said portion of State land 
has been retrieved from the Ministry of Local Government and vested in my Ministry on 02 
April 2015 for the extension of the Pointe-aux-Sables Community Health Centre. 

Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that there was some leakage after 
heavy rainfalls, and waterproofing as well as painting works have already been carried out. 
Now that additional land has been vested in my Ministry, the Community Health Centre will 
be extended to accommodate the following facilities – 

(i) 

(ii) 

a record room; 

one pharmacy store; 

(iii) 

one family planning/antenatal care clinic; 

(iv) 

one mess room; 

(v) 

additional toilets for both patients and staff; 

(vi) 

extension of the pharmacy, and 

 
(vii) 

a waiting area. 

82 

As regards part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, there is no project at present for 

the construction of a mediclinic at Pointe-aux-Sables. 

Mr Armance: May I ask the hon. Minister if he will intend to provide dental services 

at the new health centre? 

Mr  Gayan:    On  the  list  that  I  have  just  mentioned,  dental  services  do  not  appear, 

Madam Speaker, but it can always be considered. 

Mr Barbier:  Is the hon. Minister aware that in the recent past the NDU circulated a 
list  of  projects  for  Constituency  No.  1  and  amongst  the  extension  of  the  health  centre  at 
Pointe-aux-Sables with a proviso of Rs18 m. for the project?  

Mr Gayan: Well, I listened to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister early this morning on the 
NDU. It would appear that there does not seem to be much scope for that, but at the level of 
the Ministry, steps are being taken to revamp this particular project. 

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST - SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS 

(No. B/297) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
numerous  applications  and  demands  for  social  housing  units  in  the  Constituency  No.  1, 
Grand River North West and Port Louis West, he will state – 

(a) 

the number of social housing units constructed, since 2005 to date, indicating 
the expected date of delivery thereof; 

(b) 

the names of the beneficiaries of the social housing units  

(i) 

(ii) 

constructed at Sugar Planter, and 

under construction at La Pointe, and 

(c) 

if  any  project  for  the  construction  of  new  social  housing  units  in  the  said 
constituency is in the pipeline. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this Parliamentary Question. 

83 

 
With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the NHDC Ltd. that during 
the 9-year period running from 2005 to date, 235 housing units have been constructed and 
delivered in Constituency No. 1 as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

198 housing units constructed at Pointe-aux-Sables in February 2006, and 

37 housing units at La Tour Koenig in December 2011. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)  (i)  of  the  question  which  refers  to  the 
beneficiaries of housing units constructed at Sugar Planter, I wish to inform the House that 
there is no project implemented by the NHDC Ltd. there. 

Regarding parts (b) (ii) and (c) of the question which refers to the housing project at 
La Pointe, I am informed that some 24 housing units are being constructed by the NHDC Ltd. 
The project is expected to be completed in July 2015. The allocation of these housing units 
will be made once the project will be completed. 

Mr  Barbier:  Maybe  hon.  Armance  is  referring  to  those  housing  units  already 
completed now at Sugar Planter which, I suppose, is under the aegis of the Ministry of Social 
Integration and Economic Empowerment. Is the hon. Minister aware of that project and will 
he inform the House as to who are going to be the beneficiaries of all these housing units? 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for his question. Concerning 
the  NEF  project,  I  am  not  in  a  position to  answer  because  I  have  no  information  as  such. 
Surely, I am going to liaise with the hon. Minister concerned and communicate same to him. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Minister, with regard to the construction at La 
Pointe,  when  will  the  inhabitants  be  made  aware  that  these  houses  are  available  for 
occupation so that they can apply and by what means will this be done? 

Mr Soodhun: 24 housing units are being constructed. Madam Speaker, I am coming 
with a new plan. Really, we have a big problem concerning the registration and now I am 
going to work in close collaboration with the Prime Minister’ Office, that is, NDU and the 
CAB  office  where  people  can  go  and  apply  for  a  housing  unit,  for  land,  roof  slabs  or 
materials. In this case, they have to go to the NHDC of Rose Hill. 

They are informed. 

(Interruptions) 

84 

 
Mr Barbier: Regarding the housing units at Pointe-aux-Sables, may I know from the 
hon. Minister whether they are for the classe moyenne or low-cost housing units because we 
don’t have any precise information on the types of housing units being constructed there? 

Mr  Soodhun:  As  it  is  considered  like  boîte  allumettes,  they  are  still  like  boîte 

allumettes.   

(Interruptions) 

We are going to change because still the same types of houses are being constructed. 

BOI – COMPOSITION & INVESTMENTS 

(No. B/298) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Board of 
Investment, he will, for  the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, for the period 2009 to 
date, information as to the –  

(a) 

(b) 

composition thereof; 

remuneration paid  and fringe benefits to which  the Chairperson thereof  was 
entitled, and  

(c) 

number of trade/other missions conducted by the Board, indicating the – 

 (i) outcome thereof, and/or  

(ii) total amount of investments attracted to Mauritius. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 

tabling the information requested.  

Regarding part (b) of the question, I am informed that the previous Chairman of the 
Board of Investment did not take any fees and was not paid any fringe benefits. However, the 
costs  of  promotion  missions  in  which  he  participated  were  incurred  by  the  Board  of 
Investment. 

The current Chairman draws an all-inclusive monthly fee of Rs70,000 and is not paid 

any fringe benefits. 

As far as part (c) of the question is concerned, I am further informed that from 2009 to 
date,  the  Board  of  Investment  has  undertaken  60  investment  promotion  missions.  These 

 

85 

include State Visits with a business component, Minister-led investment promotion missions, 
as well as BOI-led ones.  

I  am informed that as  a direct outcome of the  missions conducted by the Board of 
Investment  from  2009  to  2014,  there  have  been  82  projects  with  a  total  project  value  of 
Rs43.5 billion, of which Rs23.6 billion of FDI and that some 9,700 jobs have been created. 

Furthermore, the BOI-led export of services promotional initiatives have contributed 
in  increasing  the  number  of  foreign  students,  the  number  of  global  business  companies  as 
well as the number of foreign patients following medical treatment in Mauritius. 

Mr Sesungkur: Given that BOI is an important arm of the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development, and that the Government is targeting a lot of FDI, is the Minister 
satisfied with the current structure and the team that he has within the BOI to deliver in the 
forthcoming days and months? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The structure of the organisation is being reviewed to make 
it  more  compatible  with  our  own  vision.  So,  this  is  being  carried  out  presently.  On  the 
question  of  team,  we  are  presently  understaffed  and  following  the  results  of  the 
reorganisation, we will take the measures. But, still, we have advertised recently some five or 
six jobs at management  level and we have received more than 600 applications which are 
being processed. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has just informed us that the former chairperson was 
not taking any salary. But, will the Minister be surprised to learn - and he can enquire - that 
that person was giving contracts to his close relatives! Even his son! Can I make a request to 
the  Minister  to  go  and  check  whether  photographs  were  taken  by  the  son  of  the  previous 
chairperson and paid out of public funds for the annual report of the Board of Investment? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, we have so much information on the former chairman! 
For the moment, what the hon. Member said on the question of whether he was involved in 
the allocation of contract for the identity card which, I remind the House, was to cost Rs400 
m. and finally cost Government Rs1.5 billion. So, the question is whether I should investigate 
into the matter, yes, we will.  

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over,  hon.  Bhagwan!  The  Chair  has  been  informed  that 

Parliamentary Question Nos. B/301 and B/302 have been withdrawn!  

 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - PARACETAMOL 

86 

INTRAVENOUS INFUSION - COUNTERFEIT MEDICINES 

(No. B/301) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether he will state if a stock of 70,000 
units of paracetamol intravenous infusion, 10mg/ml x 50ml, and 90,000 units of paracetamol 
intravenous  infusion,  10mg/ml  x  100ml,  of  counterfeit  medicines  were  delivered  to  his 
Ministry on 27 March 2014 and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

name of the supplier thereof; 

cost incurred in relation thereto, and  

actions, if any, taken in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

AIR MAURITIUS LIMITED – AIRPLANES & PILOTS  

(No. B/302) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Limited, he will state the number of –  

(a) 

airplanes it has, and  

(b)  Mauritian  national  pilots  and  foreign  national  pilots  employed  thereat, 

indicating – 

(i)  

(ii)  

in each case, the terms and conditions of employment thereof, and 

during the last recruitment exercise, the number of Mauritian national 
pilots and foreign national pilots recruited. 

(Withdrawn) 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

(4.20 p.m.)  

87 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

              DENGUE FEVER – PREVENTION & CONTROL 

The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 
wish  to  make  a  statement  on  the  dengue  fever.  Madam  Speaker,  a  first  case  of  locally 
transmitted dengue fever was detected on 30 March 2015. The patient was admitted at Dr. A. 
G.  Jeetoo  Hospital  and  kept  under  mosquito  net  to  prevent  any  disease  propagation.  All 
necessary public health measures in terms of fogging and larviciding were carried out to the 
vicinity  of  the  residence  of  the  case  detected.  Furthermore,  I  immediately  initiated  the 
implementation  of  the  operation  of  plan  for  prevention  and  control  of  dengue  fever  in 
Mauritius. 

On 31 March 2015 another case of locally transmitted dengue fever was reported. On 
01 April 2015 there were eight cases which have been reported. Surveillance was increased, 
but other cases were reported as follows –  

On 2 April - 2; 

On 3 April – 3; 

On 4 April – 3; 

On 5 April – 1; 

On 6 April – 2; bringing the cumulative number of cases to 21.  

The  Health  Surveillance  Officers  carried  out  fogging  and  larviciding.  Mosquito 
repellent  creams  have  been  distributed  to  more  than  2,000  households  in  Port  Louis. 
Communiqués have been issued and there has been a distribution of pamphlets to sensitize 
members of the public on preventive measures. 

Programmes  on  radio  and  TV  are  being  broadcast.  The  public  is  being  advised  to 
eliminate  all  mosquito  breeding  places  and  accumulation  of  water  in  the  yards  and  on 
rooftops and to trim overgrowing bushes and shrubs.  

An inter-sectorial meeting was held on 02 April 2015 and I held a press conference on 
the  same  day  to  make  an  appeal  to  all  stakeholders,  including  the  private  doctors,  to 
collaborate to curb the spread of dengue fever. Emphasis has been laid on the urgent need for 
a cleaning campaign to be carried out in the region affected and eventually, across Mauritius. 

88 

 
Three  patients  affected  by  dengue  fever  have  recovered  and  they  have  been 
discharged. The surveillance and vigilance programme against the spread of dengue fever is 
being intensified. 

Following the detection of the locally transmitted case of dengue fever, the response 
was immediate and health sanitary and health surveillance personnel have been on the alert. 
The  Communicable  Disease  Control  Unit  has  promptly  initiated  implementation  of  the 
operation of plan for the prevention and control of dengue fever in Mauritius. All this has 
contributed to prevent the spread of dengue fever in the country. 

Thank you. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Local Government (Amendment) Bill (No. V of 

2015) was read the first time. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 4.24 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.00 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Second Reading of the Appropriation 

(2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 
Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, this is my  turn now to address  you on the  Budget that  was presented to this 

 

89 

House, which was entitled ‘Mauritius at the Crossroad.’  And, indeed, we are today in the 
history  of  not  only  politics,  but  history  of  economic  and  history  of  our  society  at  a  real 
crossroad.  And  if  we  are  not  going  to  be  cautious  in  formulating  and  implementing  our 
economic policies, especially contemporary economic policies, then the crossroad where we 
are at, we are going to take the wrong turn. 

But what this Budget has brought about is an introduction to a new way of economics 
and a new way of dealing with the real issues that today affect our country, in terms of its 
development and in terms of where our society is. 

Since this Government has come to power, people are happy. When the Budget was 
presented, people all over Mauritius expressed their happiness.  It reminded me of Thomas 
Hardy’s  ‘Far  from  the  Madding  Crowd’,  in  which  he  said:  ‘Happiness  is  an  occasional 
episode in the general drama of pain.’  There were lots of pains and sufferings going on in 
this country because we were governed by a regime that was so corrupt, so much of illicit 
matters were going on, so much of immorality that people were living in pain, and there came 
happiness when we took power.  And there came happiness when the Budget was presented. 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  were  a  number  of  great  moments  when  the  Finance 
Minister was making his Budget Speech, and I will come to those great moments later on.  
But the greater moment  in the Budget Speech was when the Finance Minister, in his very 
introduction, spoke about the principle of sharing. The principle of sharing meaning that both 
the private sector and the public sector have to work together to move towards what we call 
progress; economic progress, social progress, and progress in all spheres of activities of our 
daily life. 

The  second  greater  moment  was  when  the  Finance  Minister  announced  that  6  m³  of 
water will be free to every citizen or every household of this country. And the third greater 
moment of the Budget Speech was when the Finance Minister announced that this is a No-
Tax  Budget.    The  greatest  moment  of  the  Budget  Speech  was  when  the  Finance  Minister 
dedicated that Budget to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

All these great moments did not just come as if from the air, it came through lots of 
focus, of hard work, of thinking, because at the crossroad where we are, we have to put the 
economic priorities of this country in the right direction and in the right track. It is, indeed, a 
Performance-Based Budget so that clear objectives are set.  

Secondly, so that there will be adherence to the principle of accountability. Thirdly, so 
that we will experience, what is called, improved performance and, fourthly, that in economic 
terms  we  have  what  we  call  a  wider  margin  of  appreciation  of  economic  activities  in  our 

 

90 

country  so  that  everything  is  done  in  such  a  scientific  way  that  our  country  as  a  whole 
progress. This is what the Budget is all about, bringing progress to our country, our nation 
and our people. 

I will now be dealing with a greater moment of the Budget. I was glad to hear that for 
the first time, with partnership, as between the Government and the private sector there will 
be the creation of 13 Mega projects - Smart Cities. In my Constituency, in Roches Noires, 
there will be one of these kinds of cities. There will be also the Phase 2 of Azuri. When I 
went  to  my  Constituency,  where  I  was  electioneering  together  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and the hon. Minister of Finance, we noticed quite a large 
number of people who are living in poverty or even below poverty line.  This development in 
my  Constituency,  insofar  as  the  Mega  city  project  is  concerned  and  the  Phase  2  of  Azuri, 
will, indeed, give an impetus, an encouragement to our youth to obtain employment.  

This Budget reflects what it is all about, about creation of wealth and distribution of 
wealth. Creation of wealth - it reminds me of Adam Smith, one of the greatest economists, 
who is also known as the father of modern economics.  

He  described  the  creation  and  distribution  of  wealth  in  his  seminal  work,  which  is 
called the Wealth of a Nation, and he said, ‘Wealth is not only material, it is also mental, it is 
also physical’.  Because to create wealth, we have to have the right approach to apply our 
mind, we have to have the requisite labour force and the requisite capital to invest in order to 
bring about the creation of wealth, which, in turn, will be distributed in such a way that it is 
equitable and fair. And against this background, the hon. Minister of Finance announced the 
creation of SMEs bank in order to bring about a new generation of business, a new generation 
of  businessmen  who  would  obtain  advances,  loans  from  a  bank  without  even  putting  or 
providing for a lien on their property. Then, what are they going to do with it? They are going 
to actually create employment and opportunities. There is also the Port Louis Harbour which 
is going to be transformed in a regional hub. What is going to be this regional hub? It is going 
to place Mauritius at the centre of trade and at the centre of international commerce.  

Mauritius, during the colonial era was, indeed, a regional hub for trade because all the 
vessels  that  were  travelling  to  the  Indian  Ocean,  going  to  India  or  elsewhere  were  using 
Mauritius as a port of transit and a port of trade. Mauritius is coming back in modern day a 
centre for trade by the creation of the hub.  

The Budget also deals with education at all levels, not only University but the creation 
of a Polytechnic in order to educate middle management; to render our economy efficient, 
education in ICT at Montagne Blanche, the project of the hotel industry school and the MITD 

 

91 

programme where people will be trained to become plumbers, electricians -  Les Chambres 
de  Métiers  where  those  who  have  a  skill  can  be  trained  properly  and  given  a  Carte  de 
Compétence.  

There is also provision for law and order where this Government will provide Rs7.9 
billion to the Police Force - and to do what? We know how poor, below-average some of our 
high-ranking  Police  Officers  were,  and  still  are.  We  also  know  that  the majority  of  Police 
Officers  in  this  country  work  very  hard  and  in  very  difficult  condition.  Everybody  in  the 
House was present when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister answered my question last week, that, in 
Mauritius, in the year 2010 up to now, there was a Police post that was housed in a derelict 
building. It is not only in Rose Hill, it is not only in Beau Bassin, it is in a quite large number 
of  areas  in  our  country  where  Police  Officers  work  in  derelict  buildings  and  in  poor 
condition. These are the kind of things that this Government is now addressing; provision is 
also  made  for  the  creation  of  a  Police  Complaints  Commission.  A  Police  Complaints 
Commission not like the one we have known before.  At least now there will be a former 
Supreme Court Judge who will be chairing that Commission to ensure that there is going to 
be never a second  Iqbal Toofany in this country, to ensure that there is  never  going to be 
another Ramlogun in this country, to ensure that there is never going to be a Legends 2 Lux 
Hotel, a Legends 2 case in this country. It is important that the Police get all the facilities in 
terms of tools so that they can work and deliver and not to think that they are a Police Force 
but the Police should be rendering a service. It should be a service and this is what comes 
about when we read the Budget Speech that has been presented in this Assembly.  

How can I not speak about the Judiciary? The Judiciary is going to get Rs600 m., an 
unprecedented sum of money in order to go and innovate our Judiciary. Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, me being in the legal profession, I know quite a lot about the Judiciary in this country. 
But I am not going to say anything here, otherwise people are going to say that I speak under 
the cover of immunity, but I have said quite a lot about the Judiciary, about the Police outside 
the House and I will always say it with candour and without any hesitation.  

What do we need in our Judiciary?  There is a lot of injustice that goes on because 
there  are  no  proper  record  keeping  and  I  anticipate  this  Rs600  m.  will  be  used  to  provide 
technologies from the lowest Court of this country to the highest Court of this country so that 
every  proceedings  could  be  video  recorded  and  every  proceeding  be  properly  recorded  by 
way of digital recording.  And I hope that there will be change in law, in particular, section 
74  of  the  District  and  Intermediate  Courts  (Criminal Jurisdiction)  Act so  as  to  amend  that 
piece of legislation to make it mandatory for all Courts to have digital recording system in 

 

92 

every single Court of this country so that there is no ongoing injustice that goes on in our 
Courts on a regular basis. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is also provision for small sugarcane planters.  In my 
Constituency, we are  a  community of small sugarcane planters who produces less than 60 
tonnes of sugar and I was glad when it was said that despite the decreasing price of sugarcane 
that there will be compensation in the region of Rs3,400 to sugarcane planters who are small 
in size.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is a number of measures that have been announced in 
the Budget which have been acknowledged as good by the whole nation, especially by the 
workers of this country. However, there are a few people, only a handful, who say that this is 
a ‘l’occasion ratée, ene budget décousu’. This is a statement made by the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, of a Budget which has been acclaimed by more than 80% of our country; similar 
remark from hon. Shakeel Mohamed on the very day of the Budget. But those who walk fast, 
they don’t carry out any assessment or any exercise like any right-thinking member of the 
society does on the street. 

(Interruptions) 

And I find it extraordinary that there have been such comments by those who sit on 

the other side of the House.   

How can I not talk about the BAI and the Bramer Bank saga?  And this is very well 
planned when now I think about it what Dr. Sithanen as Finance Minister did in this House 
when he imposed tax on savings.  That time no one in this House would have realised that 
when he was imposing tax on savings, in other words, when he was imposing it to discourage 
people from saving money in the bank, he was, on the other hand, encouraging people to take 
endowment policy at BAI and all this saga was well planned and now we know it.  

Today, if our Minister of Finance and if our Prime Minister would not have worked 
hand  in  hand  last  week,  this  country  today  would  have  been  on  the  brink  of  economic 
collapse like when the Barings Bank collapsed. We are in a similar situation of the Barings 
Bank. The Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister took control of the situation and last 
time when I addressed this House, I said this was Act 1 Scene 1, but today it is Act 1 Scene 2. 
Act 1 Scene 2, doubtful it stood as two spent swimmers that do cling together and choke their 
art; like two soldiers, they saved this country from economic collapse.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  BAI  saga  is  not  about  a  particular  community.  It  is 
wrong, it is not responsible, it is intellectually dishonest to go around and try to invoke that 

 

93 

this is about a particular community or it is about, if I can say it candidly, Muslim bashing. 
No! This cannot be right!  

If we would have been complacent against all prone to corruption; against all those 
who have stolen in this country like current allegations being faced by the ex-Prime Minister 
of this country, Navinchandra Ramgoolam. There is enquiry on Nandanee Soornack.  There 
is  enquiry  on  Mr  Bheenick.  There  is  enquiry  going  on  and  more  enquiries  will  come  up: 
Betamax, etc.  This is not called hindu bashing.  There is no hindu bashing or muslim bashing 
or community bashing.  Read the papers!  Perhaps the hon. Member can extend the courtesy 
of listening rather than making comments when I am on my feet. 

I am not pointing at him! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

We are a Government that is governing with a degree of responsibility that reflects 
the promise that we have made to the people of this country during the elections.  All the 
thieves will be chased and smoked out of their holes whether they are living in a hole in Italy 
or in any other country.  They will be brought here to face the full machinery of justice. In all, 
this was indeed a Ponzi scheme that BAI was operating.  If Charles Ponzi of Boston, who 
created the Ponzi scheme in 1919, is still alive, you can go and ask him whether the BAI is a 
Ponzi scheme or not and he will say: “Yes, it is my baby”.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on the Budget Speech, there is quite a lot to say. Indeed, I am 

now getting ready to speak but I see… 

…the Chief Whip who is sending me a signal.   

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

He is looking at his watch and saying time is up.  But let me assure the nation today that this 
Government is going to leave no stone unturned to create the right economic condition for 
growth at the rate of 5.7% which we have promised - an economic development for the future 
of our country, of our nation, of our people and of our children.  

On this note, I thank you very much, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(5.28 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis 
East):  M.  le  président,  la  préparation  d’un  budget  au-delà  des  chiffres  et  de  la  technicité 
requière tout un effort artistique. Ce budget n’est pas une exception. Il est d’un optimisme 

 

94 

insolent.  Les  phraséologies  et  les  mots  ont  été  cliniquement  choisis  pour  éviter  toute 
référence  à  la  dure  réalité  quotidienne  que  nous  constatons  sur  le  terrain.  L’approche  tout 
comme l’emballage laisse à désirer. Si c’est pour doper le moral,  c’est tant mieux mais si 
c’est pour endormir l’opinion, c’est raté. D’ores et déjà et dans les mois à venir, la population 
comprendra la supercherie et gare au retour de la manivelle. 

M. le président, un budget est une occasion pour fixer un nouveau cap. L’honorable 
ministre des finances pouvait donner l’élan nécessaire pour relancer l’économie mauricienne 
mais il a raté l’occasion. Tout le monde est sorti de l’exercice du 23  mars avec une drôle 
impression, celle d’avoir raté quelque chose. 

M.  le  président,  il  est  vrai  qu’on  n’attend  plus  rien  du  budget;  celui  de  2015-2016 
intervient  dans  un  contexte  économique  incertain  et  tourmenté.  Ce  budget  est  tout  sauf 
rassurant pour l’avenir. Qu’y a-t-il à l’horizon? Pas grand-chose qui embrigade la nation. Un 
budget est surtout une occasion pour insuffler un nouveau dynamisme à l’économie. 

Si l’idée était de séduire, de créer l’optimisme et de booster le moral des gens, après 
plus  de  100  jours  que  ce  gouvernement  est  en  place,  les  gens  attendent  toujours  une 
amélioration de leurs conditions de vie. Tel n’est pas le cas. L’enthousiasme et l’espoir créés 
après des élections se sont estompés. 

Si nous partons du principe qu’un budget c’est une présentation chiffrée et non pas une 
ébauche des dépenses et des revenus de l’État sur une période donnée, nous pourrons dire que 
ce budget, tel qu’il est présenté, n’a rien d’un budget. Il est manifestement incomplet. Car 
nous  ne  savons  pas  comment  ce  gouvernement  compte  s’y  prendre  pour  trouver  autant 
d’argent pour réaliser tous ces projets sans recourir à des taxes de façon déguisée. 

En répétant que c’est un ‘no tax budget’ on veut faire croire qu’il n’y aura pas de taxes. 
Or, un pays ne peut rouler sans la taxe. On aurait dû dire ‘invisible tax budget’. Cela aurait 
été  plus  honnête.    Le  gouvernement,  pour  motiver  la  croissance  de  nos  exportations 
traditionnelles sur le moyen et long terme n’a  trouvé d’autres moyens  que de dévaluer la 
roupie  vis-à-vis  des  principales  devises  notamment  le  dollar  qui  s’est  dévalué  de  façon 
systématique et continuelle, depuis l’installation du nouveau gouvernement, de 20 %. Cela a 
augmenté  les  revenus  du  gouvernement  par  le  truchement  de  la  TVA  et  des  taxes 
d’exportation  qui  se  basent  sur  une  roupie  faible.  C’est  une  supercherie  et  c’est  une  taxe 
invisible juste pour pouvoir dire un ‘no tax budget’. Nous payons cette taxe invisible et nous 
le finançons déjà à travers une réduction du pouvoir d’achat. Les compagnies opérant dans le 
manufacturier sont actuellement asphyxiées par la hausse dans le coût de production suite à 
l’importation des matières premières à des prix élevés. 

 

95 

En  ce  mois  d’avril  une  série  de  produits  importés  en  dollars  sont  majorés  et  cette 
augmentation salariale de six cents roupies va être dérisoire vis-à-vis de la hausse du prix. 
C’est un coup dur pour les consommateurs. C’est un coup dur à Lepep et au niveau de leur 
porte-monnaie. 

A  peine  les  100  premiers  jours  terminés,  le  feel  good  factor  dans  la  population 
commence à se dissoudre par la façon de faire de ce gouvernement. La population commence 
à se rendre compte qu’elle s’est fait embobinée.  Pour cela, laissez-moi parler sur la pauvreté 
et sur le Plan Marshall, dont mention est faite dans le budget.  Le Plan Marshall contre la 
pauvreté  est  la  mesure  budgétaire  qui  a  provoqué  une  onde  de  choc  au  sein  de  la  classe 
politique.  Son  premier  volet  consiste  à  développer  le  concept  de  parrainage  par  le  secteur 
privé  -  concept  permettant  aux  institutions  de  contribuer  au  programme  sociétal  des 
entreprises, connu comme la corporate social responsibility - pour prendre sous leurs ailes 
ces poches de pauvreté. 

D’après l’honorable ministre des Finances, ils sont 5,478 ménages qui vivent dans 38 
endroits considérés comme des poches de pauvreté, alors que nous savons que c’est beaucoup 
plus, deux fois, trois fois ou quatre fois plus que cela! C’est le secteur privé qui aura pour 
mission de sortir ces personnes de la pauvreté absolue ! 

Le ministre des Finances a expliqué que le deuxième volet du Plan Marshall est de 
revoir  la  structure  du  programme  sociétal  des  entreprises  afin  de  le  rendre  plus  efficace ! 
Ainsi le gouvernement a décidé, pour le rendre plus efficace selon les mots du ministre des 
Finances, d’enlever les lignes directrices, c’est-à-dire les guidelines réagissant le CSR ! M. le 
président,  en  enlevant  les  guidelines,  ce  sera  la  pagaille  totale.  Et  pour  le  ministre  des 
Finances  c’est  une  approche  innovante  dans  le  combat  contre  la  pauvreté.  Au  fait,  M.  le 
président, le gouvernement est en train de se dédouaner dans le combat contre la pauvreté ! 

C’est,  en  fin  de  compte,  un  prolongement  du  discours-programme,  pour  épater  la 
galerie, pour faire perdurer l’euphorie, pour bercer les gens dans des rêves chimiques. C’est 
une opération de mystification et un tour de passe-passe digne d’un magicien de haut calibre. 
Mais  les  gens  ne  vont  pas  tarder  à  s’interroger  et  à  découvrir  la  supercherie.  Ils  se  diront 
qu’ils se sont fait mener ‘en croisière’. Il y a des zones d’ombre à éclaircir au plus vite pour 
qu’il y ait cette dynamique d’adhésion de la population aux efforts nationaux pour une vraie 
relance économique digne de ce nom, comme nous le souhaitons tous en tant que patriotes. 

96 

 
Que  l’île  Maurice  devienne  un  vaste  chantier  de  construction,  c’est  tout  à  fait 
possible.  Comment  cela  va  changer  la  vie  des  mauriciens,  il  faudra  faire  une  étude 
approfondie  pour  ne  pas  constater  plus  tard  qu’on  a  été  ‘off  target’  avec  le  gros  de  la 
population  se  sentant  nullement  concerné  et  que  le  développement  n’a  pas  répondu  aux 
attentes. 

Faire, toutefois, de l’ile Maurice une nation d’entrepreneurs, cela fait sourciller. Après 
une  tournée  auprès  des  jeunes  chômeurs  gradués  ou  pas,  en  quête  d’un  emploi, 
l’enthousiasme  n’y  est  pas.  Ils  sont  très  sceptiques,  ne  sachant  pas  comment  lancer  une 
entreprise. Ils ne comprennent pas trop comment d’une petite île avec un marché restreint, ils 
pourront faire une percée. Déjà, ils constatent une saturation dans le secteur de l’artisanat. On 
ne  fait  pas  d’un  jeune  qui  a  passé  le  plus  clair  de  son  temps  à  l’école  et  qui  a  nourri  des 
grandes ambitions, se convertir à un entrepreneur du jour au lendemain ; le chômage restera 
un problème épineux dans les années à venir, malheureusement. 

Le sort des jeunes doit nous interpeller tous, car ils représentent la vraie richesse de ce 
pays à l’état brut. A leur intention, tout un programme doit être soigneusement élaboré, axé 
sur  quatre  aspects  fondamentaux :  une  éducation  de  pointe  par  rapport  aux  exigences  du 
marché  du  travail,  un  programme  de  loisir  et  de  distraction  sain  à  leur  portée,  de  réelles 
perspectives d’emploi et une protection efficace contre la toxicomanie et le HIV-SIDA. 

M. le président, laissez-moi venir sur un dossier qui me tient à cœur, parce que cela 
affecte toute l’île Maurice, mais surtout ma circonscription, notamment Plaine Verte et Roche 
Bois. C’est le dossier de la drogue où aucune mention n’a été faite  dans ce présent budget. 
M. le président, il n’y a rien de sérieux dans le budget pour donner un nouveau souffle au 
combat contre la drogue. La toxicomanie persiste et, là-dessus, je le dis – que la drogue c’est 
un  fléau  qui  doit  être  placé  au-dessus  de  la  politique  partisane.  Nos  travailleurs  sociaux 
engagés semblent prêcher dans le désert. Pire que l’indifférence, il y a de la complaisance. Le 
mouvement anti-drogue mène une croisade, et ne bénéficie d’aucun soutien digne de ce nom 
de l’Etat. Nous croyions que le gouvernement allait se ressaisir et tenterait de reprendre du 
poil de la bête avec de nouveaux textes de lois très musclés pour casser les reins des magnats 
de la drogue. Mais silence radio, là-dessus, M. le président ! 

Au  lieu  d’utiliser  la  MBC/TV  à  des  fins  de  propagande,  on  aurait  dû  la  mettre  au 
service de ceux qui militent, au péril de leur vie, contre tous ces fléaux qui gangrènent notre 
société, tels que la drogue et le SIDA. En effet, dans le budget, rien n’a été prévu contre ce 

 

97 

phénomène et on ne peut éternellement se fier à la bonne volonté des travailleurs sociaux. Il 
faut  professionnaliser  ce  secteur  avec  des  moyens  musclés.  Des  écoles  spécialisées  pour 
permettre  aux  enfants  affligés  par  ce  même  problème  de  se  rattraper  et  l’encadrement 
financier  et  psychologique  à  ces  familles  pour  lutter  contre  le  stigma  afin  d’intégrer  le 
‘mainstream’ de la société. D’ailleurs, l’institution d’une commission d’enquête sur la drogue 
se fait toujours attendre. 

Maintenant, M. le président, laissez-moi parler sur l’administration locale. Pas mal de 
gens  se  demandent  si  l’honorable  Dr.  Husnoo  est  toujours  le  ministre  des  Administrations 
locales. Il s’est muré dans un silence de cathédrale sur les amendements qui seront apportés 
au Local Government Act en prévision des prochaines élections municipales. Il a été devancé 
par l’honorable ministre Gayan qui a animé une conférence de presse, suite à une réunion du 
comité exécutif du Mouvement Libérateur comme quoi les députés ne pourront être candidats 
aux prochaines élections et que les élections municipales se tiendront probablement en juin ! 
Comme quoi se la coule douce pour le ministre de tutelle et encore le Deputy Prime Minister, 
l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, lui aussi, a commenté, parce qu’il préside cette réunion, les 
amendements  qui  seront  faits  par  rapport  à  l’administration  locale.  Je  ne  crois  pas  que 
l’honorable Dr. Husnoo est très occupé. D’abord, c’est un comité ministériel qui a eu la tâche 
de proposer les amendements. Ensuite, l’honorable Dr. Husnoo est à la tête du ministère le 
plus – je ne dis pas cela méchamment – squelettique de ce gouvernement. Son ministère a été 
amputé de la Beach Authority et du Solid Waste Management. Il n’est responsable que des 
collectivités  locales  et  des  services  de  pompes  à  incendie.  C’est  malheureux  pour  les 
mandants de la circonscription No. 3 ! 

Sans l’ombre d’un doute qu’il dispose suffisamment, voire abondamment de temps 
pour se concentrer sur le problème des marchands ambulants. Là aussi, c’est le silence radio. 
Quoi qu’il soit prévenu que l’oisiveté n’est non seulement la mère de tous les vices mais c’est 

aussi une bombe à retardement. Le plus longtemps qu’il dort sur le dossier des marchands 

ambulants, le problème ne fera que s’empirer. Les marchands ambulants sont dans 

l’expectative et ils ont de quoi de se faire des soucis. Et là, M. le président, en lisant le 
discours de l’honorable Dr. Husnoo, il fait mention dans son discours que le problème de 
marchands ambulants est un problème humain et qu’on doit prendre en compte les shop 

owners, les market traders et les hawkers, et que deux places ont été identifiées à la gare du 
nord.  Il y a seulement la gare du nord dans son discours. Mais cela a été fait depuis belle 
lurette, depuis plus d’une année ces deux sites ont été identifiés. Il y a quatre mois que ce 

 

98 

gouvernement est en place, la majorité du travail a été fait par la municipalité de Port Louis. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: Pas un survey, deux, trois surveys, il y a tout ce qui a été fait. Il 
faut  seulement  reloger  ces  marchands  ambulants !  Il  a  besoin  d’une  année  pour  ça !  C’est 
vraiment  incroyable !  Et  il  dit  qu’il  travaille  avec  le  ministre  de  Public  Infrastructure  and 
work will start very soon. Donc, on attend toujours le relogement des marchands ambulants. 

Et je peux vous dire que… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  …  le  problème  des  marchands  ambulants  demeure  entier,  M.  le 
président. Ces marchands ambulants craignent que le gouvernement Lepep ne tienne pas ses 
promesses de trouver une solution durable à leurs problèmes en déclenchant l’opération de 
les  chasser  des  trottoirs.  En  parlant  de  la  chasse  aux  indésirables,  comment  peut-on  faire 
l’impasse sur les protégés de ce gouvernement? Il ne faut pas aller trop loin.  Ici même, dans 
l’hémicycle, le premier Serjeant-At-Arms, choisi par ce gouvernement Lepep n’a pas tardé à 
décevoir tout le monde en assistant à un anniversaire d’un trafiquant de drogue présumé et de 
sa fiancée! Avant cela, on a eu l’occasion, à travers un parliamentary question de l’honorable 
Bhagwan de savoir qui a été nommé par le ministre des Coopératives.  Un habitual criminal 
(HC) qui a été condamné et inculpé, vient d’être nommé par ce nouveau gouvernement! 

En parlant toujours des nominés politiques, comment oublier la protégée du ministre 
Anil Gayan? Pour la défendre, il est allé aussi loin que de brandir l’arme du communalisme 
contre le député, l’honorable Shakeel Mohamed! Let me quote what Minister Gayan said in 
his speech in this august Assembly, M. le president. I quote –  

“It must be mentioned that it is the first time in the history of independent 
Mauritius that a non-Hindu is sitting as a Leader of the Labour Party in this 
House!” 

On croyait que ce type de discours était réservé à des organisations sectaires et d’un 
autre  temps!  On  croyait  entendre  M.  Dulthumun!  C’est  une  attitude  infecte,  ignoble, 
rétrograde,  honteuse  et  écœurante  et  ce  n’est  pas  digne  d’un  ministre  de  la  République  en 
2015! Le Premier ministre aurait dû le révoquer sur un tel commentaire communal. Mais la 
plus choquante, M. le président… 

 

99 

(Interruptions) 

M.  le  président,  c’est  la  déclaration  du  Vice-Premier  ministre,  l’honorable  Ivan 
Collendavelloo.  Qu’est-ce  qu’il  dit ?  « Je  suis  solidaire  d’Anil  Gayan. »  Et  il  cite :  « Je 
comprends le sentiment de blessure qu’il exprime - Anil Gayan - au Parlement. »  Ena là! Il 
comprend  le  sentiment  de  blessure  et  le  discours  communal  que  le  ministre  a  fait !  Et 
l’appellation de ces mêmes gens est quoi ? C’est le Mouvement Libérateur, M. le président ! 

 (Interruptions) 

Quand  même !  C’est  ça  le  changement ?  Laissez-moi  venir  par  rapport  aux 
promesses  électorales  et  je  ne  peux  m’empêcher  de  citer  le  discours  de  l’honorable 
Hurreeram. Let me quote –  

  

 “L’Alliance Lepep had made electoral promises during the campaign which the other 
side  of  the  House  said  could  not  be  achieved.  We  have  kept  our  word  and  within 
hundred days those promises were fulfilled.” 

Je conseillerai bien à l’honorable Hurreeram d’aller relire le manifeste électoral de l’Alliance 
Lepep !  

(Interruptions) 

S’il l’a lu ! Moi j’ai pris la peine de le lire. Qu’est-ce qu’on voit dedans? On dit : « les 12 
priorités des trois premiers mois au gouvernement… » 

(Interruptions) 

« Les 12 priorités des trois premiers mois au gouvernement ! »  

Qu’est-ce qui est dit dedans ?  
 

« Introduire un salaire minimum pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle. » 

 

 «… offrir les chances égales… » 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

« ...  offrir  les  chances  égales  à  tous  et  amendement  à  la  loi  pour  assurer  la 
transparence et la méritocratie dans les recrutements effectués par la PSC, la LGSC et 
la DFSC. » 

Je  vais  revenir  là-dessus,  M.  le  président.  On  parle  de  méritocratie  et  de 
transparence!  Dans  ce  manifeste  électoral  -  je  vais  retourner  comme  j’ai  dit  là-dessus  - 
pourtant  le  leader  du  Mouvement  Libérateur,  le  Vice-premier  ministre,  l’honorable  Ivan 
Collendavelloo n’est pas passé par quatre chemins  jeudi soir, ici même, dans cette auguste 
Assemblée  pour  dire  que  ce  sont  des  gens  compétents  mais  proches  de  ‘nous’,  ‘nous 

 

100 

dimounes’,  qui  vont  être  nommés  à  la  CWA,  au  CEB  et  à  la  Wastewater  Management 
Authority ! 

(Interruptions) 

Le ministre des Finances avait annoncé avec tambours et trompettes que les postes importants 
dans les corps paraétatiques seront remplis par appels de candidatures, or il est le premier à 
faire le contraire en nommant le controversable  Rajah Pillay au Casino! 

Revenons aux promesses électorales, le titre est « 12 priorités des trois premiers mois 

au gouvernement » et je continue – 

« Le ID Card… » 

(Interruptions) 

Le commencement est d’introduire un salaire minimal. Le deuxième est d’offrir des 
chances égales. Et là je viens aux  ID cards. Lors des divers meetings dans leur programme 
les dirigeants de l’Alliance Lepep avaient promis de détruire la banque des données où sont 
stockées les empreintes digitales recueillies après l’utilisation de la nouvelle carte d’identité 
nationale.  C’était  la  priorité!  C’était  la  promesse  électorale  et  mention  est  faite  des  trois 
premiers mois du gouvernement mais rien n’a été fait, M. le président! 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, silence! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: Et je continue sur les promesses – 
 « Offrir un service Wi-Fi gratuit dans tous les endroits stratégiques et assurer une 
connexion Internet rapide à travers l’île. »  

« Institution d’une commission d’enquête sur la drogue afin de finir avec la mafia. » 

On attend toujours!  
 
On attend toujours!  
« Combattre la fraude et la corruption, la Declaration of Assets Act sera amendée pour 
 
inclure les propriétés acquises sous les prête-noms et la publication de toutes les informations 
dans la gazette du gouvernement ». 
 On attend toujours!  
 
policiers à se syndiquer. »  
On attend toujours!  
 

« Redonner  à  l’ICAC  et  la  police  une  indépendance  opérationnelle  et  autoriser  les 

« Introduire la télévision privée pour élargir l’espace démocratique. »  

 

101 

On attend toujours !  
« Réorganiser 
 
radiotélévision publique. » 

la  MBC  pour  qu’elle  puisse  fonctionner  comme  une  vraie 

 On attend toujours! 

M. le président, voilà peut-être… 

… peut-être l’honorable Hurreeram… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo!  
Mr Ameer Meea: … a eu la mémoire rafraîchie mais des 12 mesures annoncées, une 
seule a été faite! Une seule sur 12 mesures, les promesses électorales qui ont été faîtes par 
l’Alliance Lepep. 

(Interruptions) 

M. le président, maintenant laissez-moi dire quelques mots par rapport à Agalega qui 
se trouve dans ma circonscription qui est la circonscription No. 3. A travers la Private Notice 
Question  du  leader  de  l’Opposition  on  a  pu  constater  que  le  ministre  ne  connaît  rien  par 
rapport à Agalega. Il n’a pas pu répondre aux questions malgré la Private Notice Question du 
leader de l’Opposition par rapport à la sécurité de l’île, l’installation des radars,  à quand est-
ce  que  les  développements  vont  commencer.    Il  n’a  pu  donner  aucune  date,  aucune 
information par rapport à Agalega. D’après mes informations - parce que j’ai communiqué 
avec des gens qui sont là-bas - le ministre n’a pas encore pris contact avec les gens qui se 
trouvent à Agalega. L’île est très petite, et il y a peu de gens qui habitent à Agalega. Donc, on 
attend toujours que le gouvernement bouge dans la bonne direction par rapport à Agalega.  

Autre mesure qui a été débattue dans cette Chambre est l’importation du bétail. On 
sait que l’ancien gouvernement avait lancé des tenders pour le transport et l’importation du 
bétail  mais  on  a  su,  à  travers  le  ministre  Gungah,  que  ce  n’était  pas  viable  pour  la  STC 
d’importer le bétail et il a balancé cela sur son collègue, mon bon ami, l’honorable ministre 
Seeruttun;  ce  n’est  pas  viable  pour  la  STC  mais  ça  va  être  viable  pour  la  Mauritius  Meat 
Authority  d’importer  le  bétail.  C’est  ce  qu’il  a  dit  au  Parlement.  Donc,  je  vous  donne  le 
bénéfice du doute. On attend, parce que je sais que l’honorable Soodhun aussi s’en est mêlé. 
Il a fait des déclarations à la presse par rapport à ça. On attend toujours, et on y reviendra plus 
tard. 

 

102 

M.  le  président,  dans  l’affaire  BAI,  en  voulant  soi-disant  mettre  de  l’ordre,  le 
gouvernement n’a fait que créer de nouveaux désordres. D’abord, on a l’impression que le 
Premier ministre et son ministre des Finances se sont substitués aux institutions. C’est clair et 
net de l’ingérence dans les institutions. 

Pire, pour justifier cette ingérence, le Premier ministre et quelques-uns des ses ministres 
ont accusé la BAI de pratiquer le Ponzi Scheme. Et là, je vais revenir sur la déclaration faite 
par rapport au Ponzi Scheme.  Le Premier ministre avait dit que – 

« Sa zaffaire BAI là li un Ponzi de R 25 milliards. C’est un projet prémédité 
pour  arnaquer  des  personnes.  Trois-quarts  sa  l’argent  là  ine  fini  alle  à 
l’étranger. » 

J’aurais  aimé  intervenir  ce  matin  sur  la  PNQ,  mais  je  n’ai  pas  pu.  Mais,  j’aurais 
aimé  quand  même  que  le  ministre  des  Finances,  dans  son  summing-up  sur  le  discours  du 
budget  -  puisque  le  Premier  ministre  a  annoncé  que  trois-quarts  de  la  somme  ont  été 
transférés à l’étranger - nous dise où cette somme a atterri et comment on va faire pour la 
récupérer, puisque le ministre détient des informations par rapport à ça. 

Et voilà que la majorité des professionnels du secteur financier et des avocats d’affaires 
ont  prouvé  le  contraire  dans  les  médias.  L’économiste  Chandan  Jankee,  un  proche  de 
l’Alliance Lepep, était hier à la radio dans le Grand Journal.  Il a tenté d’expliquer que c’était 
du Ponzi Scheme. Mais il a fini par accepter - aujourd’hui même on a entendu ça à la radio - 
que  ce  n’est  pas  un  Ponzi  Scheme.  Même  le  conservateur,  M.  André  Bonieux  -  un 
professionnel - a déclaré qu’on ne peut pas utiliser à ce stade le terme Ponzi. Cela a été dit par 
l’administrateur. 

Actuellement, avec tout ce qui se passe dans le secteur bancaire et des assurances, où 
des  centaines  de  milliers  de  braves  gens  ont  placé  leur  argent,  il  faut  craindre  un 
refroidissement d’ardeur de la population à s’aventurer dans le monde de la finance. 

Il faut venir avec des mesures concrètes au plus vite pour rassurer tous ces gens. Sinon, 
leur crainte pourrait devenir contagieuse et se répandre dans la société, créant une psychose 
générale, ce qui serait très mauvaise pour la relance de l’économie. 

Peut-on être si naïf pour croire que les investissements étrangers vont se bousculer à 
notre  porte,  et  les  valises  pleines  de  capitaux,  pour  se  disputer  les  secteurs  où  ils  vont 
investir? Déjà, nous avons une image à refaire, tout un climat de confiance à établir. Pour 
qu’on nous prenne au sérieux, il faut envoyer des signaux forts, et surtout nommer des gens 
hautement crédibles dans des secteurs vitaux de l’économie. 

 

103 

Pour  terminer,  M.  le  président,  je  souhaiterais  voir  une  île  Maurice  émergente, 
prospère,  juste  et  généreuse ;  une  nation  unifiée,  avec  chaque  individu  jouissant  de  droits 
égaux. Souhaitons à notre auguste Assemblée moins d’agressivité verbale et de démagogie 
inutile de la part du ministre Gayan, et des attaques viles et personnelles … 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 
Mr Ameer Meea: ... et davantage de débats d’idées, et surtout moins de commentaires 

communaux. 

M. le président, je vais conclure en citant le Leader de l’Opposition, et dire: ‘Arrette 

badiner mam, arrette bluffer mam!’ 

Merci. 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Boissezon! 

(5.59 p.m.) 

Mr E. Boissezon (Third Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): M. le président, je 
vous remercie de me permettre de participer aux débats sur le budget présenté par le ministre 
des Finances. 

Avant,  avec  votre  permission,  je  voudrais  exprimer  mon  soutien  aux  clients  et  les 
employés de la BAI et de la Bramer qui ont été affectés moralement par l’un des plus grands 
scandales  financiers  qu’a  connu  le  pays.  Je  remercie  et  félicite  le  gouvernement  qui  a  été 
prompt à sécuriser les emplois et les épargnes de la population. 

M. le président, d’habitude je suis calme, tolérant, j’accepte les bonnes réparties qui 
existent  entre  l’Opposition  et  le  gouvernement,  et  j’ai  tendance  à  bien  souvent  mettre 
beaucoup d’eau dans mon verre. 

Aujourd’hui, pendant les débats du discours, j’ai senti un consensus entre l’opposition 
et le gouvernement ; qu’il fallait faire un effort pour travailler. J’avais cru que l’opposition 
avait compris le premier message de Sir Anerood Jugnauth le soir de notre victoire quand il 
avait dit: ‘nu ena un grand defi où tous dimounes bizin travay ensemble’. 

Même si je n’acceptais pas certains points dans les discours des précédents orateurs de 
l’opposition,  j’ai  senti  ce  besoin  de  travailler  ensemble.  Et,  aujourd’hui,  je  suis  déçu. 
Complètement déçu par l’attitude du précédent orateur. Peut-être qu’il n’a pas compris. Moi 
je mets ça sur l’incompréhension. Lui-même a si bien résumé son discours en venant parler 
d’agressivité, de démagogie, d’attaques viles et de personnalisation. 

 (Interruptions) 

 
The hon. Member can do what he wants, but he said that!  Those words are from 

104 

him! 

C’est faire insulte à la population que de venir dire que la présentation du budget par le 
ministre des Finances a essayé d’endormir la population. Parler d’un budget de supercherie ! 
Venir dire qu’il n’attend plus rien de ce budget, M. le président, alors qu’aujourd’hui tout le 
monde parle de 15% de dévaluation de la roupie envers le dollar… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed !  Hon.  Members,  please,  no  cross-talking!  I 

would ask hon. Mohamed not to interrupt.  Hon. Member, please continue! 

Mr Boissezon: Merci, M. le président. Vous voulez des preuves ! Venir parler d’une 
dévaluation de la roupie envers le dollar de 20%, alors que vous savez sciemment  que ce 
n’est que 15% ! Vous savez vous-même que la dévaluation envers le dollar est un peu ‘pile je 
gagne, face tu perds’. Parce que comment expliquez-vous, qu’aujourd’hui, le secteur agricole 
et le tourisme bénéficient de cette dévaluation ? Pensez à combien d’employés aujourd’hui 
qui se réjouissent de cette situation ! Venir parler de mystification ! Peut-être les résultats des 
élections  ont  été  la  preuve  d’une  démystification.  Vous  parlez  d’entrepreneurs  sceptiques. 
Tout  à  l’heure  je  viendrai  vous  dire  que  vous  avez  mal  fait  -  you  have  not  done  your 
homework - et que vous n’êtes venu ici que pour faire du mal. 

Vous avez essayé de parler du local government alors que nous avons des amendements 
au projet de loi. M. le président, l’honorable membre aurait pu attendre les débats qui vont 
venir  demain  ou  après-demain  pour  parler  des  amendements  au  Local  Government  Act. 
Maintenant quand vous parlez de ce Local Government Act, oubliez-vous que le Leader de 
l’Opposition,  lui-même,  n’est  pas  satisfait  de  la  loi  que  nous  avons  aujourd’hui  et  tout  le 
temps il parle de back to memory lane quand il parle du budget présenté par le gouvernement 
MSM/MMM.  

(Interruptions) 

Vous avez causé ! Maintenant quel est votre problème avec le Mouvement Libérateur ? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissezon, please address the Chair! 
Mr  Boissezon:  Quel  est  le  problème  de  l’honorable  membre  avec  le  Mouvement 
Libérateur ?  Est-ce  cette  vérité  que  nous  avons  montré  pendant  la  dernière  campagne 
électorale qui fait mal ? Aujourd’hui, venir profiter d’un débat de budget pour venir régler 
son compte avec l’honorable Ivan Collendavelloo alors qu’il n’est pas là, c’est de la lâcheté ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: M. le président, on a point of order. The hon. Member is imputing 

motive, il a dit ‘c’est de la lâcheté’. So, he should withdraw his words. 

 

105 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Boissezon: I withdraw! Mais s’il a eu à venir encore …. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please allow the hon. Member to continue! 
Mr  Boissezon:  M.  le  président,  venir  parler  de  la  politique  de  recrutement  de  ce 
gouvernement, peut-être que l’honorable membre ne sait pas que les membres des Corporate 
Bodies ne sont pas régis par la PSC, la Local Government Service Commission et la DFSC.  
Apprenez Monsieur ! Si vous voulez être dans le gouvernement, il vous faut apprendre… 

Mr Deputy Speaker : Hon. Boissézon, please address the Chair! 
Mr Boissezon: M. le président, j’ai comme l’impression que  l’honorable membre a 
encore  la  nostalgie  de  la  MBC  qu’il  voulait  faire  devenir  une  BBC  mauricienne.  M.  le 
président, je ne prendrai pas encore le temps de la Chambre mais je terminerai pour dire une 
fois pour toutes,  laissez l’honorable Gayan tranquille. Le choix de la personne choisie est 
une personne qualifiée. Elle a été recrutée de par ses compétences. Vous personnalisez des 
attaques  viles  et  personnalisées.    Cessez  avec  cela!  Soyez  sérieux,  honorable  membre ! 
D’autant  plus  que  je  penses  que  vous  faites  sciemment  des  erreurs  pour  embêter  la  salle. 
Vous parler de liste de 38 … 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissézon, please! Once more you have to address the 

Chair and no one else! 

Mr  Boissézon:  M.  le  président,  l’honorable  membre  tout  comme  un  membre  de 
L’opposition  précédemment,  ils  savent,  et  on  leur  a  dit  que  dans  cette  liste  de  poches  de 
pauvreté - il y a un mot, « indicative list » ça veut dire à titre indicatif, ça ne veut pas dire 38 
poches.  Il  y  a  plus  de  200  poches  de  pauvreté,  mais  nous  nous  retrouvons  avec  une  liste 
indicative, c’est-à-dire vous pouvez choisir dedans.  

(Interruptions) 

M.  le  président,  l’honorable  Benydin  a  qualifié  ce  budget  de  smart  budget,  je  lui 
emboiterai  le  pas  en  faisant  un  acronyme  du  mot  pour  dire  –  ‘s’  pour  simple,  ‘m’  pour 
magistrale, magnifique, ‘a’ pour audacieux et ambitieux, ‘r’ pour réalisable et ‘t’ pour tentant. 
M. le président, nous avons eu droit à un budget simple et facile à comprendre et c’est 
pourquoi  que  tout  un  chacun,  dans  tous  les  quartiers,  ils  ont  accepté  ce  budget  et  l’ont 
plébiscité. Peut-être que l’honorable membre qui m’a précédé n’a pas compris. C’est un acte 
de foi.  Le ministre va dans le sens que pour créer les emplois il faut des investissements. 
Pour investir il faut de l’argent, pour avoir de l’argent, faisons appel au secteur privé  - pas 

 

106 

Rawat - et  aux mauriciens, serrons-nous les coudes. Je vais répéter une phrase du Premier 
ministre –  

‘Nou ena enn grand defi, tou dimoune bizin travay ensam’. 
Ici-même, dans cet auguste Assemblée, le premier intervenant, l’honorable Uteem n’a 

pu s’empêcher de dire, et je cite –  

«I  am  not  saying  that  it  is  a  bad  Budget,  there  are  many  good  measures,  popular 

measures… ».  

Oui,  ce  budget  a  le  mérite  d’être  un  brillant  exercice  économique,  montrant 
l’éminence  de  ce  gouvernement  à  maîtriser  les  tenants  et  aboutissants  d’une  bonne 
gouvernance  économique,  d’une  bonne  connaissance  des  besoins  et  aspirations,  craintes  et 
soucis des mauriciens. 

Ce  budget  a  le  mérite  de  remplir  les  aspirations  des  mauriciens,  tout  en  prenant 
compte de l’environnement économique du moment et du besoin de partage entre tous les 
stakeholders. Je cite, M. le président, Monsieur Azad Jeetun, économiste réputé – 

“This  is  thus  some  sharing  already  which  account  for  the  general  acclaim  of  the 
budget.  The  rich,  the  poor,  businessmen,  planters,  taxpayers,  professional,  the 
unemployed, consumers, the youth, SME s, all can say that they have not been let out. 
They are part of the budget, they have got a share of the cake, and the budget does not 
deviate from the top priority  which remains investment, growth and unemployment 
and delves at length on all these issues”.  

Contrairement aux commentaires de l’Opposition qui parle de mirage ou de supercherie, ce 
budget vient à un moment où Maurice est à la croisée de sa destinée. Contexte économique 
difficile,  inflation  et  contrainte  par  la  baisse  du  prix  du  pétrole,  la  déflation  pointe ;  le 
chômage  est  une  réalité.  Comment  résoudre  le  problème  du  chômage  quand  nous  savons 
qu’au cours de ces trois dernières années il y avait plus de 2,500 pertes d’emplois ? Comment 
réduire la dette publique décriée pas tous, alors que le gouvernement précédent n’a rien fait 
pour ramener le déficit budgétaire à 50 % du PIB ? Comment investir pour créer des emplois, 
comment  investir  pour  avoir  un  meilleur  taux  de  croissance  quand  nous  savons 
qu’aujourd’hui  il  y  a  eu  une  perte  de  plus  de  3,500  emplois  dans  l’industrie  de  la 
construction ? 

Le  gouvernement  a  choisi  de  faire  du  PME  la  colonne  vertébrale  de  l’économie. 
Tenant en ligne de compte que, dans le passé, plusieurs tentatives de développer ce secteur de 
l’économie n’ont pas eu les effets escomptés, cette démarche révèle plus de l’audace que de 

 

107 

l’ambition.  Plus  de  5,000  compagnies  ont  mis  la  clé  sous  le  paillasson  au  cours  des  10 
dernières années, mais le moment est propice.  

Dans le monde du travail l’attitude a changé, les employés de la génération X, suivant 
les pas des baby boomers entraient dans une entreprise en empruntant la première marche de 
l’échelle d’une grande carrière. 

Aujourd’hui, s’il est plus difficile de trouver un emploi pour la vie, les jeunes ont plus 
d’opportunités  de  travailler  à  la  maison,  échanger  plusieurs  carrières  ou  devenir  self-
employed. 

Une étude effectuée en Angleterre qui reflète la tendance universelle révèle les points 

suivants - 

•  69% des personnes âgées entre 16 et 30 ans ont déjà changé d’emploi depuis qu’ils 

ont quitté le cycle scolaire ; 

•  45% pensent changer de carrière ; 
•  41% pensent qu’ils pourront être sans emploi à un moment donné, et 
•  plus de 33% rêvent de créer leur propre entreprise. 

La génération Y n’est-elle pas qualifiée de la génération des start-ups? Mais, M. le 
président, même si un sur trois pense avoir sa propre organisation, beaucoup ne franchissent 
pas le cap en raison des points suivants - 

•  ne pas avoir suffisamment de financement ; 
•  de la conjoncture économique ; 
• 
•  de ne pas avoir la bonne idée, et 
•  un manque de support. 

la peur d’échouer ; 

À Maurice nous devons créer une culture d’entreprise. Nous ne cesserons pas de dire 
que notre système d’éducation doit être revu et on ne peut pas le refaire dans 100 jours. Ce 
budget vient répondre aux questions des jeunes et vient leur dire: « N’ayez pas peur d’avoir 
peur. » Pour le financement, la banque est là parce qu’il y aura une banque spécialement pour 
les PME. 

Mais,  pour  aider  le  support  que  les  jeunes  ont  besoin,  nous  devons  avoir  un 
regroupement  de  penseurs,  capables  de  développer  des  entreprises  qui  permettraient  aux 
jeunes d’avoir des entreprises off-the-shelf.  

 

108 

La SMEDA tant décriée par tous les partis à Maurice, devra revoir son opération. Elle 
devra  travailler  conjointement  avec  les  divers  ministères,  le  secteur  privé,  le  Board  of 
Investment, Enterprise Mauritius et Air Mauritius pour informer les entrepreneurs des niches 
possibles. Car, savez-vous à Maurice, les entrepreneurs ont peur de perdre de l’argent. Aussi 
dès qu’une entreprise, dès qu’il y a une niche, tout le monde plonge dans cette niche. Tout le 
monde  est  marchand  de  kebab,  tout  le  monde  est  marchand  d’achard,  tout  le  monde  est 
marchand de X, Y, Z et dès qu’il y a trop de concurrents, le secteur n’est plus rentable et c’est 
la faillite assurée.  

M. le président, j’ai beaucoup de points, mais vous savez, nous avons quelqu’un ici 
qui a la guillotine, aussi je concentrerais un autre jour pour parler du développement que nous 
pouvons faire avec les petites et moyennes entreprises. J’ai dit que c’est un programme, un 
budget  réalisable,  un  vaste  chantier  de  développement  et  je  pense  que  nous  pouvons 
vraiment, avec les actions prises, comme nous le faisons, nous allons vers une victoire pour le 
pays Maurice. 

Pour terminer, je dirais – 
« Maurice, fais-nous à nouveau rêver,  
   Redevient le pays où tout est possible,  
   Montre que les mauriciennes et mauriciens ont l’audace d’espérer. » 
Merci, M. le président.  
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Callichurn! 

(6.20 p.m.) 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me, at the very outset, join my other colleagues to 
congratulate the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, for coming up with such a 
Budget  that  will  remain  a  major  landmark  as  he  has  been  able  to  reconcile  the  economic 
imperatives to our social objectives through a gamut of bold measures.  

Indeed,  this  much  awaited  first  Budget  of  this  Government  has  been  positively 
acclaimed and welcomed not only by the private sector and business community, but also by 
the Trade Unions and social workers and, most importantly, by the population in general. 

The  nation,  as  a  whole,  is  convinced  that  the  path  that  has  been  traced  out  by  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, under the able leadership of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, the Prime Minister, for sustainable development. 

 

109 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government assumed duty less than four months and has 
already taken firm and bold decisions by breaking the unfair rules of the previous regime. We 
have all heard comments from the Opposition inside and outside the House. 

One cannot be more ‘royaliste que le roi’. Indeed, how can one criticise this Budget, 
when the majority of the Trade Unions, workers, representatives of  Forces Vives and NGOs, 
have  acclaimed  most  of  the  measures  proposed  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. Indeed, this is a budget which is fair and responsible, and perfectly addresses 
the expectations of the population, the workers as well as the business community. The focus 
is on investment, employment creation, sharing of the national wealth in a fair manner and on 
addressing the problem of poverty. It is a budget that further strengthens our Welfare State by 
providing  adequate  funds  and  proposing  innovative  and  pragmatic  measures  to  such 
important and vital sectors as education, health, social security and housing, which remain the 
backbone of our social fabric. 

Clearly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Opposition has no arguments, no proposals and 
no credibility at all. I think that the only place where the comments, opinions and statements 
of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and hon. Members of the Opposition are accepted is at 
the Assemblée des délégués of the MMM. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
rightly indicated in this Budget that we are “At the Crossroad”. We are, indeed, at crossroads. 
We need a new vision, a new direction in the way things are done in this country. 

My colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has rightly 

stated in his Budget Speech, I quote - 

“It  will  not  be  enough  to  plan  for  the  creation  of  greater  wealth.  We  also 
need to be concerned with better sharing and that we should put the principle 
of sharing at the very heart of our policies.” 

This statement, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, indeed perfectly translates the vision of this 
Government  as  underlined  in  its  Government  Programme.  This  Budget  has  come  up  with 
concrete and bold measures in order to realise the aspirations of our people and to improve 
the  quality  of  life  of  each  and  every  Mauritian  citizen.  As  a  caring  Government,  we  have 
come up with a Budget that lays the foundation for a better Mauritius for our children. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the majority of Mauritians still bear the nostalgia of the 80’s 
when, thanks to the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth and hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, the 
Government  managed  to  achieve  full  employment  and  thus  achieved  the  first  economic 
miracle. With these two stalwarts back in business, there is no reason why we cannot achieve 

 

110 

the  second  economic  miracle.  All  the  ingredients  are  there  for  us  to  realise  the  second 
economic miracle. All the ingredients are there for us to realise the second economic miracle. 
It is time to take hard decisions and we are prepared, as a responsible Government, to take the 
appropriate  decisions  to ensure  a  better  life  to  the  present  generation  as  well  as  the  future 
generation. The people of Mauritius voted for a change in December last and have given us a 
clear mandate to set up a new economic order to end all economical disorders and mess left 
by the former Government. We won the election with a comfortable majority but that does 
not mean we should sit back. We vowed to bring a change for the people and no change can 
come  without  courageous  and  innovative  measures  which  aim  at  bringing  back  economic 
prosperity.  We  have  decided  not  to  opt  for  economic  survival  in  this  competitive  global 
economy but we want creation of wealth and fair sharing of such wealth among our people. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Leader of the Opposition has qualified the Budget of 
the hon. Minister of Finance as a ‘show de Lutchmeenaraidoo’.  His attacks were against my 
colleague, the hon. Minister Finance, who, let me remind this House, had been his economic 
spokesman  for  many  years,  his  favourite  shadow  Cabinet  Finance  Minister  for  nearly  a 
decade.  The  only  difference  was  that  our  colleague  refused  to  embark  on  a  Labour 
Party/MMM  coalition.  That  is  the  main  reason  for  the  attacks  against  the  hon.  Minister 
Finance. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister Finance took several courageous decisions 
against gambling and the use of plastic bags. He decided to go forward against a tax budget. 
Benjamin Franklin said that two things that are certain in life were taxes and death. Our hon. 
Minister of Finance is ready to go with a no tax budget. Very few Ministers of Finance in the 
world are able to play with such an economical move.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we also all know that unemployment is related to poverty. The 
Anti-Poverty  Marshall  Plan,  which  is  a  major  innovative  approach,  aims  at  addressing  the 
acute  problem  of  poverty  which  is  linked  to  various  social  issues.  The  new  concept  of 
‘parrainage’ and new formula for CSR will help to tackle these problems at community level 
in  a  well-structured  manner.  The  private  sector  has  a  responsibility  towards  eradicating 
poverty  in  our  country.  Fighting  poverty  is  also  the  responsibility  of  the  Government.  We 
have just changed some rules aimed at eradicating poverty.  

One  cannot  expect  an  improvement  in  law  and  order  with  so  much  poverty  in  some 
areas  in  our  paradise  island.  Some  Members  of  the  former  Government  are  accusing  this 
Government of privatiser la pauvreté. They have forgotten how huge amounts of taxpayers’ 

 

111 

money were given to close friends of the former Prime Minister through the scheme called 
the Stimulus Package. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, all the criticisms of the Opposition heard so far in this House 
are unjustified. Same applies for the issue of new smart cities where the Opposition claims 
that the Government is being pro-private sector.  

With the creation of smart cities in rural and urban areas, our island will be transformed 
into a chantier de construction where thousands of job opportunities will be unlocked for the 
unemployed while a boost will be given to the construction sector. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in addition, the commitment taken by the Government for the 
SME  sector  to  become  the  backbone  of  our  economy,  and  in  that  context  the  panoply  of 
measures and facilities announced, especially regarding the one-stop shop to be put up by my 
colleague, the hon. Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives,  clearly demonstrate 
the political will of this Government to build a nation of entrepreneurs.  As rightly pointed 
out by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, business should not be as 
usual, it is time to change the way things have been done so far and adopt a new mind-set in 
the  face  of  the  challenges  ahead.  We  need  to  inculcate  in  our  youth  the  entrepreneurship 
culture.  It  is  our  responsibility,  as  a  farsighted  Government,  to  provide  them  with  the 
necessary tools and guidance for them to be successful in their endeavours. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  transformation  of  Port  Louis  Harbour  into  a  modern 
regional  hub  will  undoubtedly  create  immense  opportunities  for  our  SMEs  and  again, 
thousands of new jobs for the labour force. In fact, the making of Port Louis Harbour into a 
hub for bunkering, seafood, transhipment, cruise and petroleum is a laudable initiative. 

I  equally  welcome  the  initiative  regarding  the  strengthening  of  regional  cooperation, 
namely the opening of Africa where we can explore job opportunities for our professionals, 
as many regions in Africa are facing a shortage of doctors, teachers, and accountants amongst 
others. In this context, we will have consultations with various countries for the placement of 
our jobseekers abroad through signing of bilateral agreements. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  highlighted  in  the  Budget  Speech,  we  currently  have  an 
education and training system that is not capable of producing skills at the pace and quantum 
that the economy requires. Recent employment surveys have revealed that 54% of enterprises 
across all sectors in Mauritius could not recruit the right number of candidates with required 
skills,  appropriate  experience  and  proper  attitude.  The  situation  is  more  prominent  in  the 
manufacturing sector where there is a substantial demand for plant and machinery workers, 
and in emerging sectors such as ICT and financial services. 

 

112 

It is imperative that our education and training systems adapt to the realities and the 
requirements  of  the  employment  market.    The  socio  economic  growth  of  our  country 
increasingly demands on people who have the right skills and knowledge to join the services 
and the knowledge economy. 

I  am,  indeed,  grateful  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  who  has  added  training  to  the 
portfolio  of  my  Ministry  as  education,  training  and  employment  are  interrelated.  Without 
training, it is difficult to ensure the employability of jobseekers. 

My  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  has  rightly 
pointed out that we must have an education and training system which caters for the need of 
the  new  economy.  I  welcome  the  provision  whereby  3,000  gradués  chômeurs  will  follow 
tailor-made  crash  courses  for  which  Government  will  meet  the  costs  up  to  Rs80,000  per 
student.  I  am  confident  that  the  population  will  appreciate  the  Government’s  efforts  to 
address the problem of unemployment, especially among the youth. I reiterate that support 
services are essential to jobseekers to assist them in finding jobs.  

Accurate  information  on  labour  market,  different  training  schemes,  job  requirements 
and other counselling activities should be available at a one-stop shop. We will soon set up 
the  National  Employment  Agency  which  will  find  suitable  job  placements  for  the 
unemployed.  This  agency  will  be  a  modern,  client-oriented  institution;  it  will  be  equipped 
with necessary resources to unlock job opportunities. 

An integrated career counselling system will be set up to provide information to people 
about the current and future labour market to enable them to make career decisions over the 
life spans. 

Moreover, with a view to curbing the problem of unemployment, my Ministry  will 
enhance  the  employability  of  young  jobseekers  and  fresh  graduates  through  the  Youth 
Employment  Programme.  The  Back  to  Work  Programme,  targeting  specifically  women 
above 30  years and Dual Training Programme for our diploma and degree holders will be 
launched soon by my Ministry. 

To address the skills mismatch problem, my Ministry would collaborate closely with 
institutions  such  as  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Training  and  Development,  the  Human 
Resource  Development  Council  and  other  specialised  training  institutions  on  this  issue. 
Training  will  be  given  utmost  priority  for  our  local  workforce  to  update  the  skills  and 
knowledge  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  employment  market.  This  will  also  reduce  our 
dependency on foreign labour. 

113 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the same vein, the MITD is being called upon to make 
necessary provision for training required for the construction sector. I would like to point out 
here  that  there  is  a  great  demand  abroad  for  skills  such  as  masons,  carpenters,  welders, 
plumbers  and  electricians.  The  trained  Mauritians  in  these  occupations  will  secure  jobs  in 
local companies as well as abroad through labour migration programmes.  

I  also  welcome  the  setting  up  of  the  Chambre  des  Métiers  which  will  give  due 
recognition to our tradesmen who have acquired experience and skills in trades but do not 
have  formal  certificates.  After  necessary  testing  by  the  Chambre  des  Métiers  a  “Carte  de 
compétences”  will  be  delivered  to  them,  thus  facilitating  their  integration  in  the  world  of 
work. 

I also wish to mention that under the bilateral agreement signed between France and 
Mauritius, my Ministry will benefit from the technical and financial assistance to reengineer 
the present Employment Information Centres based on the concept of “Pôle Emploi” which 
is  in  line  with  the  Government  Programme  for  the  setting  up  of  a  modern  National 
Employment Agency. 

Contrary to what is being said by the other side of the House, the hon. Minister of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  foreseen  through  his  Budget  the  creation  of 
thousands of jobs in the public and private sector in short and  medium-terms. It is expected 
that thousands of jobs will be created through the 13 megaprojects, in the Regional Hub at 
Port Louis Harbour, and in the private sector through “parrainage” of pockets of poverty; 
qualified personnel in the ICT sector, doctors, paramedical staff, additional police officers, 
forensic, accountants, analysts and computer and mobile phone experts; and additional Court 
personnel will also be recruited, amongst others. 

There is, no doubt, that cruising has become a major part of the tourism industry, with 
over  20  million  passengers  carried  worldwide  in  2014.  This  figure  is  expected  to  increase 
significantly in the years to come as a result of the growing interest of the people around the 
world to travel on board of cruise ships. Moreover, jobs pertaining to cruise ship are also well 
remunerated. I am informed that a significant number of vacancies exist in occupations like 
cooks, stewards, waiters, housekeeping staff, security officers, massage and beauty therapists, 
hairdressers, nail technicians, fitness instructors, amongst others. 

I  will  soon  be  coming  forward  with  a  scheme  for  this  sector  in  view  of  job 
opportunities  to  be  tapped  at  various  levels  as  mentioned.  The  investment  in  Port  Louis 

 

114 

harbour,  as  announced,  will  open  the  ways  for  prestigious  cruise  ships  to  stop  over  in 
Mauritius. Not only this will facilitate employment of our local people, but the tourists sector 
will also be given a boost with tourists stopping by. 

Allow me, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to move to the Labour and Industrial Relations 
issues.  I  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, who has acceded to my request to increase the number of Labour 
Inspectors with a view to enabling the officers to meet fully the objectives of that Division. 

With the increased number of staff, I am proposing to review the inspection system 
through the setting up of a Special Squad to carry out inspections to ensure strict compliance 
with legislation and better protect workers’ rights. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  are  also  reviewing  our  labour  legislation  which 
essentially aims at encouraging the development of an industrial and working environment 
that will be mutually beneficial to workers and employers. 

This  Government  firmly  believes  that  any  amendment  brought  to  the  Employment 
Relations Act and the Employment Rights Act are fully in line with its vision to provide a 
legal framework whereby the workers’ rights, interests and welfare are fully safeguarded. In 
this context, I am pleased to inform the House that I have already started consultations with 
other stakeholders. 

In  the  same  breath,  other  Industrial  Relations  Institutions,  such  as  the  National 
Remuneration Board and the Commission for Conciliation and Mediation will be revisited 
and reinforced, if the need arises. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my Ministry has reviewed the National Occupational Safety 

and Health Policy so as to address the emerging challenges in the place of work. 

It  also  proposed  to  review  the  Registration  of  Associations  Act  with  a  view  to 
improving the legal framework for the registration of associations and trade unions and the 
legal requirements for internal governance, in according with the best international regulatory 
practices. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  task  of  this  Government  is  extremely  tough,  but  not 
impossible.  The  challenge  is  not  only  to  ensure  proper  implementation  of  the  various 
measures proposed in this Budget, but we also have the delicate task to put some order in 
many of our parastatals and State enterprises where le gaspillage was the order of the day. 

 

115 

We have to put them back on rail so that they can effectively contribute to the development 
of the country. 

This  Government  has  unveiled  its  first  Budget  in  line  with  its  electoral  promises 
which set out a vision to enhance prosperity and to establish a foundation for greater equity 
and social justice. The measures outlined in the Budget are designed to stimulate economic 
growth and employment in all sectors, particularly in the SME sector. It has also unleashed 
opportunities  for  all  stakeholders  with  a  strong  focus  on  immediate  growth  driven  by  the 
rapidly implementable megaprojects, without forgetting the social imperatives. 

Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have all the reasons to believe that ultimately we 

would be able to achieve the Second Economic Miracle. 

I thank you all for your attention. 

(6.43 p.m.) 

Mr  P.  Armance  (First  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, let me take the opportunity of this speech to congratulate my colleague, the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, for the Budget he presented to this House 
in March 2015. 

The crossroad, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, where Mauritius was standing at a very low 
growth and a very high unemployment rate, where social justice was only an illusion and the 
truth about the economy of Mauritius was only the hidden agenda of the former Government. 
Maybe, I should say there was no agenda at all. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  stood  as  candidate  in  Constituency  No.  1,  Grand  River 
North  West  and  Port  Louis  West.  I  have  been  elected  there  to  serve  the  people. 
Unfortunately,  this  constituency  has  been  neglected  for  many  years.  I  cannot  continue  my 
speech  without  mentioning  that  the  MMM  was  ruling  at  large  in  this  constituency  at 
Parliament as well as Municipal level. “Dépôt fixe” that was the consideration of the MMM 
until  the  result  was  proclaimed  on  11  December  where  dépôt  fixe  fine  cassé.  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, we strongly believe that soon we will clean up the municipalities with all the 
carapates as well.  

M.  le  président,  les  mesures  annoncées  dans  ce  budget  ne  peuvent  que  réjouir  la 
population que l’Alliance Lepep œuvre pour le bien-être de tous les habitants. Les mesures 
annoncées viendront assouplir la misère et la souffrance que subissent les mandants depuis 

 

116 

tant  d’années.  Je  vais  maintenant  commenter  sur  certains  points  de  ce  budget  qui  touche 
directement à ma circonscription. 

13 mégaprojets ! Pas un, pas deux, pas trois mais 13 mégaprojets, M. le président! 
Des milliers d’emplois vont être créés et cela va redynamiser le secteur de la construction, ce 
secteur, M. le président, qui a subi une baisse considérable depuis 2011. Nombreux sont les 
habitants de ma circonscription qui sont maçons, aide maçons, contracteurs ou qui travaillent 
directement  avec  des  compagnies  de  construction.  Je  ne  peux  que  me  réjouir  devant  ce 
prochain  vaste  chantier  de  développement.  Je  remercie  le  ministre  des  Finances  et  du 
Développement économique.  

Our SMEs in the constituency, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, have been left by themselves 
for so many years. With the ambition to empower more citizens to become entrepreneurs and 
the goodwill of the Government to create a nation d’entrepreneurs, I must say we have now 
taken the right path at this crossroad to move into a better, safer and greener Mauritius. 

M.  le  président,  je  suis  aussi  très  satisfait  de  la  décision  de  ce  gouvernement  de 
promouvoir la production d’énergie verte pour une île Maurice durable dans le vrai sens du 
terme. De plus, je convie les sincères remerciements des mandants au Vice-premier ministre 
et ministre des Utilités publiques pour l’abandon du projet CT Power qui était une épée de 
Damoclès sur notre tête. 

Several regions in our constituency do not have a proper waste water system. In the 
Budget, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development mentioned that Rs3 billion will 
be  invested  by  June  2018  on  this  matter.  We  trust  that  due  consideration  will  be  given  in 
regions like Pailles and Pointe-aux- Sables to provide a better, proper sewerage system to the 
inhabitants.  

Autre  mesure,  M.  le  président,  qui  réjouit  les  habitants  de  ma  circonscription  est 
l’accès  à  l’eau  potable.  En  projetant  de  remplacer  les  tuyaux  défectueux,  le  gouvernement 
donne un signal fort que les attentes du peuple pour pouvoir avoir de l’eau potable ne sont 
plus des rêves mais des rêves qui deviendront réalité très prochainement. L’eau c’est la vie ! 
Je remercie le ministre des Finances et du Développement économique pour ce beau geste de 
comprendre  la  souffrance  du  peuple  et  mettre  les  moyens  nécessaires  pour  remédier  à  la 
situation. 

Le rapport de la Commission Justice et Paix publié par le Diocèse de Port Louis, paru 
en  novembre  2014,  est  un  document  qui  vient  confirmer  qu’il  y  a  une  augmentation  des 
pauvres et de l’inégalité à l’île Maurice. Ce rapport démontre que les pauvres sont devenus 
pauvres année après année. Il faut reconnaître que ce n’est pas possible à une famille touchant 

 

117 

R 6,200 par mois de se nourrir, de s’acquitter des loyers, des factures d’électricité, d’eau et 
d’autres dépenses nécessaires. Le Household Budget Survey de 2012 estime que le seuil de 
pauvreté pour une famille de quatre personnes est de R 13,330 par mois. La famille moyenne 
dépense environ R 6,540 en mois pour se nourrir. 

M.  le  président,  pour  aider  à  combattre  la  pauvreté,  le  ministre  des  Finances  et  de 
Développement  économique  a  proposé  à  la  Chambre  le  concept  du  parrainage  du  Plan 
Marshall contre la pauvreté. Ce même concept sera un atout majeur à court et à long terme 
pour  pouvoir  améliorer  les  conditions  de  vie  tout  en  combattant  le  fléau  qui  touche  notre 
société. L’élimination du guideline permettra aux NGOs de bénéficier d’aide du CSR pour 
pouvoir continuer leur travail sur le terrain et, en même temps, aider à combattre la pauvreté. 
À Pointe-aux-Sables, à la Tour Koenig, Pailles,  Grande Rivière, Richelieu, Plaine  Lauzun, 
Cité  Vallijee,  il  y  a  des  centaines  de  compagnies  qui  sont  établies.  Je  fais  un  appel  à  ces 
compagnies contribuant au CSR de contribuer au développement de la localité. Soixante pour 
cent des cas reportés au Citizens Advice Bureau de Pointe-aux-Sables et Résidence Vallijee 
concernent  les  demandes  de  logements  sociaux.  Nombreux  sont  les  attentes  des  mandants 
pour  pouvoir  avoir  un  logement  décent  pour  abriter  leur  famille.  Ces  pères  et  mères  de 
familles  se  battent  depuis  des  années  pour  bénéficier  des  logements  sociaux  mis  à  la 
disposition par le gouvernement. 

On note dans le budget que la superficie des maisons sera augmentée de 39 m² à 50 
m²,  ce  qui  va  offrir  un  espace  plus  convivial  aux  bénéficiaires.  Je  demanderai  au  ministre 
concerné  de  bien  vouloir  prendre  en  considération  l’attente  des  habitants  de  ma 
circonscription  lorsque  les  1,000  maisons  seront  construites  ainsi  que  les  700  autres 
logements sociaux sous la NEF. Je remercie le Vice-premier ministre, l’honorable Soodhun 
pour la garantie qu’il a donnée à la Chambre que certaines de ces maisons seront construites 
dans  ma  circonscription  et  je  reste  convaincu  de  la  transparence  de  son  ministère  à  la 
distribution des maisons par ordre de priorité et de méritocratie. 

M. le président, en voyant la situation aggravante de la montée des jeux du hasard, 
j’accueille favorablement les mesures prises pour promouvoir la nation entrepreneurs au lieu 
de continuer avec la nation zougadère.  Ceci dit, M. le président, je me réjouis de ne plus voir 
les gens gratter les cartes dans l’espoir de devenir millionnaire. Je me réjouis de constater que 
le  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement  économique  a  pris  le  devant  pour 
responsabiliser la nation vis-à-vis de l’entreprenariat au lieu de vivre dans l’illusion. 

Dans  la  même  foulée,  la  réduction  des  intérêts  sur  les  crédits  viendra  assouplir  les 
forts taux d’intérêt que subissent ces achats et, en même temps, améliorer le pouvoir d’achat 

 

118 

parmi  les  habitants.  Ceci  viendra  réduire  considérablement  les  dettes  domestiques  de 
nombreuses  familles.  Je  suis  d’avis  que  ces  mesures  vont  protéger  les  droits  des 
consommateurs  et  que  l’Ombudsperson  on  Financial  Institutions  sera  un  chien  de  garde 
contre les abus des frais bancaires pratiqués par certaines banques commerciales. 

M.  le  président,  une  attention  spéciale  est  donnée  aux  femmes  et  aux  enfants  en 
détresse dans ce budget. Le recrutement du personnel à la CDU vient renforcer l’effectif des 
gens  en  place  et  va  rassurer  la  population  que  la  CDU  sera  plus  efficiente  pour  traiter  les 
nombreux cas des enfants dans le besoin. 

Pour conclure, je souhaiterais dédier ce budget au peuple mauricien. C’est un budget 
de relance,  un budget qui va assouplir la misère et la souffrance du peuple. Je remercie le 
vice-Premier  ministre,  le  Deputy  Prime  Minister  et  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  pour  leur 
volonté à bâtir une île Maurice meilleure. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  say  it  loud,  I  love  my  country,  I  love  Mauritius.  I 
strongly  believe  in  the  performance  of  the  Government  and  I  am  proud  to  be  part  of  the 
architects who will rebrand our country leading to a second miracle économique.  Thank you, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
 (6.52 p.m.) 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): 
Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Although I know that it is customary for the next orator 
to comment on the speech of hon. Armance, I pray your indulgence and that of the House that 
I may do that later. 

I first have a few points to clarify on a statement that the hon. Hurreeram made on my 
person during his speech on the Appropriation Bill. We now know how sharp and accurate 
his intervention, his observations can be. Hon. Ameer Meea mentioned elaborately on that 
earlier. According to hon. Hurreeram, I have returned a zéro bilan at the Head of Maurice Ile 
Durable.  

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, I must beg to differ for it is an undeniable fact that it is under 
the MID initiative that we are today producing electricity from the sun, wind and waste on a 
commercial basis in this country. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please continue! 
Mr Mahomed: And that there are many more to come from the many contracts that 
we  have  already  signed,  about  70  MW  worth  of  them  by  the  previous  Government  in  the 

 

119 

wake of the MID project. For this Government, MID may be officially dead and buried, but 
these projects have some of its children who are alive and kicking.  

The Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, in his earlier speech has listed some of 
the  benefits  that  we  are  currently  reaping  from  MID.  Indeed,  I  was  pleased  to  hear  the 
following from him, and I quote –  

“It  is  the  addition  of  the  little  by  little  that  makes  us  become  energy 

sufficient.” 

Is this a zéro bilan? Without wishing to resurrect the past, I feel bound to add, to correct the 
record that it is in line with our efforts on MID, as hon.  Minister Dayal stated so proudly in 
this august Assembly, that some 59,000 families benefitted a solar water heater from the MID 
Fund and that besides the environmental and social benefits, there are economic savings as 
well, Rs54 m. per  year.  The Scheme has  a simple payback period of 2.7  years. 2.7  years! 
Now, where else could you find that kind of return? So, let us not throw the baby of MID 
with  the  bathwater  of  the  old  regime.  The  outcome  of  MID  remains  a  valuable  gift  to  the 
nation and I am pleased to see that the new Government is reaping some of the rewards of 
this long-term investment in the interest of the people of this country. We have just heard 
today the contribution of MID to the agricultural sector and that at the Samoa Conference.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in 2011, we expanded our vision of what could be taken on 
board  on  the  flagship  of  MID.    We  moved  beyond  a  focus  on  energy  and  embraced  the 
broader social remit of the 5Es: Energy, Environment, Employment, Education and Equity. 

Hon. Dayal rightly said it. Without equity, sustainable development is a vain word.  
By equity, we mean a fair distribution of the benefits and of the costs.  In socialist terms, that 
has been succinctly put as ‘to each according to his needs from each according to his means’. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I add that these benefits of our studies and wide-ranging 
consultations  in  the  pursuit  of  sustainable  development  remain  on  offer,  carefully  gift 
wrapped with the technical support and backing of the UNDP and the Agence française de 
développement in the form of a Policy Strategy and  Action Plan.  May I add that, by October 
2014 - just before I stepped out to become candidate in this election - nearly two-thirds of the 
action proposed was already being implemented, with some having already been completed. 

Now, this is truly no zero bilan! 
For the  record and,  with  your permission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I would like to 
table both the Maurice Ile Durable Policy Strategy and  Action Plan and the MID Progress 
Report as at October 2014 - which I would like now to table - which I hope will enable the 
new Government, fully committed to sustainable development as a core policy, to get off to a 

 

120 

flying start in the further elaboration of the Budget process, the allocation of funds and in the 
engagement of the private sector in these ventures for the benefit of the people. 

This  is  not  pie  in  the  sky.    For  those  who  wish  to  follow  up  these  ideas  -  and  I 
commend  hon.  Hurreeram  to  do  so  -  they  will  find  that  the  European  Union  has  already 
planned the disbursement of Euros 3 million (meaning Rs120 m.) under the Global Climate 
Change Alliance for the implementation of the MID Action Plan. Additionally, the European 
Union  was  insisting  on  inserting  an  MID  Policy  Indicator  for  the  disbursement  of  a  fixed 
tranche of Euros 15 million (approximately Rs600 m.) given that the EU considers that the 
MID Policy and Action Plan is an important reform which is stated not only locally, but in 
international fora.   Indeed, at the  UN SIDS Conference in Samoa in  2014 where the MID 
Commission hosted the Mauritius pavilion, the only non-commercial pavilion besides that of 
Samoa, Achim Steiner, the Executive Director of United Nations Environment Programmme 
(UNEP), who inaugurated the pavilion stated the following, and I quote - 

“Mauritius  has  become  a  model  for  sustainable  development  with  its  Maurice  Ile 
Durable Programme”. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I now pass on to some other issues raised in the Budget 

and in the current debate. 

First, Land Management.  It has been announced that the Morcellement Act will be 

amended to expedite the processing of morcellement permits. 

Yet, according to the Environment Statistics of 2011, the built-up area combined with 
infrastructure already stood at some 27% of the total land area of this country in 2005.  By 
world standards, this figure is very high.  In some European countries, for example, the built-
up area is limited to 15%.  The official statistics of 2005 means that  this  figure of urban 
blight is now much higher given the number of morcellements, IRS, RES, housing and road 
infrastructure developments that have occurred in the last ten years. 

What is Government’s long-term strategy for building?  Do they intend us to end up 
like Malta, with concrete from shore to shore?  What is our target?  What is best suited to a 
small island State, where most people live happily with their families in villages surrounded 
by open fields?  What do we need to conserve to continually attract tourism and to become 
self-sufficient on food?  These issues need to be more carefully examined.  The true value of 
land is not what we sell it for housing, but the provision of essential environmental services 
that it offers.  The real value of the remaining unbuilt land is in clean air, in its function for 
the provision of ground water, in its habitat for pollinators for growing fruits and vegetables 
and in its use for leisure, sports and the pleasure of silence and solitude. 

121 

 
The  fundamental  truth  is  that  the  sustainable  future  of  Mauritius  depends  on 
conserving  its  limited  land  stock  for  food  security,  energy,  climate  change  mitigation  for 
water provision, be it green space, for precipitation or from ground water sources. 50% of the 
water we consume comes from underground water sources, and excessive development will 
pollute the quality of water available to the people now, our children and our grandchildren. 
This is a serious issue buried in the Budget. 

Do  we  really  need  more  morcellements?    If  you  look  at  those  we  have,  there  is  a 
surplus.  Moreover, many of the lots on them have been left undeveloped for years or have 
been built on and left vacant as mere repositories of value, yet at the same time undermining 
the quality of our environment and vital ecosystems.  Our children are leaning about this at 
school in environmental studies.  May I suggest, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that we start to mug 
up  on  it  too.    This  delinquent  urban  sprawl  is  visible  all  over  the  island.    The  abandoned 
building  plots  and  the  tatty  unoccupied  houses  is  not  merely  an  eyesore,  but  a  source  of 
nuisance as well and also a key of the gap in our vision for a sustainable future. So are we 
going to encourage building more morcellements for speculation purposes? 

Instead of going for more morcellements, we should make a fresh assessment of our 
real needs for land use and put it in the equation of the ecological value of land.  If we are 
still  convinced  there  is  a  demand  for  such  homes,  first  we  should  have  fiscal  measures  to 
create disincentives to worthless unoccupied buildings, and then where there is a real need for 
living space, construct vertically inland and only below the tree line on the coast. 

I will now touch on water.  I am wondering whether the provision of 6 m3 free to all 
households, although on the face of it seems attractive, is really in the interests of conserving 
water in a land of water scarcity. 

In my case, this will amount to a savings of Rs48 a month.  When something is given 
free, people tend to use it irresponsibly.  I am just fearful people will start using water as if 
there is no tomorrow - there could be other ways of doing it - at a time when consumption is 
already on the rising. 

Last week, California Governor Jerry Brown ordered officials there to impose state-
wide mandatory water restrictions for the first time in their history, as surveyors found the 
lowest snow level in the Sierra Nevada.  Now, Mauritius does not possess these reserves of 
water in snow-capped mountains.  Every year, when it does not rain, we are in big trouble! 

Are we investing massively in more reservoirs for people to waste water? Catchment 
areas  are  being  reduced  with  each  passing  day  in  this  country,  with  the  creation  of  more 

 

122 

underused morcellements and now the 7,000 acres adversely allocated for the so-called smart 
cities. This will affect rainfall pattern and our groundwater quality. 

And  smart  cities  –  any  cities,  any  urban  expansion  means  more  roads,  more  cars, 
more dissection of the essential ecology, more pollution of the air and the land. The lack of a 
strategy for land management as a backdrop to the Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is a real 
sustainability issue, especially now that the Light Rail Transit project has been shelved. 

An hon. Member earlier stated in this House, and I quote – 
“Notre planète est en détresse”.  
 
He is not wrong. Bit by bit action being taken in this Budget adds up to more stress on 
our  environment  and  that  it  is  without  considering  the  real  inescapable  future  impact  of 
climate change, which is really upon us now. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this country needs not just a land strategy but also a water 
strategy which is based on economical use and conservation.  A case in point is that of free 
agricultural water. None or very few estates and planters have adopted wide scale drip water 
feeding,  which  has  high  merits  on  water  economy,  simply  because  they  do  not  have  any 
compelling  reasons  to  do  so.  Much  of  the  water  gushing  out  of  those  overhead  irrigation 
systems is wasted through evaporation.   

Industry and agriculture use 70% of our scarce water. Now, let us examine the policy 

of concealed subsidies and the impact these have on wasteful use.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I now turn to the part of the Budget that deals with energy.  
We  have  industrial  and  manufacturing  sectors  where  there  is  very  little  incentive  to 
encourage resource efficiency, be it on water or even energy. These are really low-hanging 
fruits to improve competitiveness in enterprises. 

We find in the Budget no measures at all to convert our grid, and to quote the hon. 
Minister  of  Energy,  which  is  a  “dumb”  grid  into  a  smart  one  to  accommodate  the  huge 
proposed entry of renewable energy in there. In his reply to my additional question on the 
PNQ on Electricity of last week, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 
Utilities has stated that,  the Government hopes  all these smart  cities will be self-sufficient 
insofar as energy is concerned.  

A  smart  grid  is  a  sine  qua  non  requirement  for  that  to  become  a  reality  given  the 
intermittent nature of renewable energy. And what about extending that from the smart cities 
to smart villages so the bulk of ordinary households have a chance to be in on the savings as 
well?  

123 

 
Now  about  ethanol  which  is  part  of  the  energy  chapter,  it  was  mentioned  in  the 
Presidential Address but does not appear in the Budget. I look forward to a policy statement 
on that one.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  his  speech  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Energy and Public Utilities mentioned that coal can be of zero emission. I just don’t believe 
that,  but  I,  for  one,  would  be  more  worried  about  the  coal  ash  disposal.  This  is  a  real 
sustainability issue which will contaminate our land and, hence, affect the quality of the food 
we grow and our groundwater supply. Business as usual is not an option here. 

Insofar as social housing is concerned, there are some good measures there. However, 
I am informed that tenders were launched prior to the general elections for the construction of 
some 550 housing units at Chebel, Quatre Cocos, Camp Ithier, Sebastopol, Beau Bois and 
also some 142 service plots as well. These are mainly being built on land that the previous 
Government had negotiated with the sugar industry. I hope the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister 
of Housing and Lands will clarify whether the announced 1,000 units for 2015 will be over 
and above those launched by the previous Government.  

As regards plastic bags, I think this is a bold initiative which needs to be commended. 
The only challenge we were facing in the past, was how to allow households to do away with 
their  home  waste  in  properly  closed  bags,  disposed  in  the  bins  that  have  been  distributed. 
Plastic bags are one element here and a more crucial one is the separation of waste. Let us 
hope that the bag ban is the first step in a new era of strategic waste management and not a 
half-baked gesture.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  my  experience  of  the  evidence  based  for  sustainable 
development, I welcome many of the elements in the Budget that touch on this. But I also 
remain hopeful that the Government might begin to fashion a real strategy which joins up the 
dots. They could do worse than starting with the MID Policy Strategy and Action Plan which 
I have just tabled.   

I thank you for your attention.   

(7.11 p.m.)  

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 
The  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer  Islands  (Mr  P.  Koonjoo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  start  with,  like  most  of  the 
Members, if not all the Members on this side of the House have done, by congratulating the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and his technical and consultative team 
for the innovative ideas and effort put in towards the achievement of this exceptional working 

 

124 

document. I would also like to highlight that the inspiration and motivation of our Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister has contributed significantly in putting the pieces together and to produce the 
vision  and  major  strategies  contained  therein  and  reflecting  naturally  the  manifesto  of 
L’alliance Lepep.  

There is a unanimous feel good factor within the population outside that the Budget 
has touched immediate and short-term needs of one and all. Madam Speaker, the document 
contains  serious  commitments  covering  relevant  aspects  of  the  legislative  framework  that 
need action and regulations, such as combating crime, drug abuse, domestic violence, gaming 
syndrome, wage policy,  tax administration, finance, and incentives  and interest relief.  It is 
with a great sense of satisfaction that the population is welcoming the strategies for ensuring 
transparency,  accountability and  good  governance. There is no doubt that, these measures, 
together  with  the  support  of  the  forthcoming  Civil  Service  College,  will  improve  the 
performance output in the public sector and parastatal bodies. It is hoped that coordinating 
agencies of the private sector will also take appropriate steps to satisfy the aspirations of its 
workforce,  improve  efficiency  and  overall  companies  output  through  better  transparency, 
productivity and good governance, and I have no doubt about this.  

Madam Speaker, indeed, Mauritius is at a crossroad and faces challenges on various 
fronts.  On  the  domestic  front,  since  2005,  the  growth  rate  has  been  below  past  trends, 
averaging 3.0 per cent per annum, with an unemployment rate of 7.8 per cent. In 2014, the 
current account deficit and the trade deficit have been as high as 10.3 per cent of GDP and 
19.9 per cent of GDP respectively.  

The  previous  Government  has  been  inactive  while  facing  the  erosion  of  our  trade 
preferences and stalling global economy. Our vulnerability is being intensified as the drivers 
influencing economic activity are changing. This is the first reason.  

Secondly,  we  have  to  grapple  with,  among  others,  geographical  remoteness  from 
established markets, small domestic market, effects of climate change and food and energy 
insecurity.  

And  thirdly,  a  crucial  requirement  is  filling  the  inadequacy  in  highly  skilled 
technicians and professionals, to help drive emerging economic sectors such as ICT, ocean 
economy,  biotechnology,  manufacturing  electronics,  robotics,  nanotechnology  and  the 
shipping and sea transport industry. It is in this context that this Budget has been designed.  
On the economic front, we can note that emergence of new growth poles, such as – 

• 

the creation of 13 megaprojects; 

 

125 

•  consolidation  of  SMEs  strategies  for  making  “Ile  Maurice,  une  Nation 
d’Entrepreneurs”, through the creation of SME Bank, and the setting-up of a 
comprehensive one-stop shop; 
reform to the ICT sector and development of biotechnology parks; 

• 
•  development of the Port Louis Harbour into a regional hub, and 
•  development of the ocean economy. 

Madam Speaker, permit me now to highlight on the policies and operational activities 

of my Ministry.  

The Mauritian economy, including that of Rodrigues, depends heavily not only on the 
inland resources and lagoons, but also on the ocean. The ocean supplies thousands of jobs, as 
well as support related industries that contribute to the national Gross Domestic Product. As a 
new economic pillar, the current Government is laying much emphasis on the ocean economy 
as an important sector to sustain economic diversification, job creation, wealth generation and 
benefit - naturally everybody, especially all income groups. Indeed the creation of a Ministry 
dedicated  to  the  ocean  economy  is  instrumental  in  addressing  the  challenges  concerning 
fisheries, aquaculture, land-based oceanic industry, non-living marine resources and shipping 
development.  

setting-up of the appropriate regulatory framework for the ocean economy; 

The thrust of our strategic direction depends on the following, namely - 
(i) 
(ii)  promotion of marine research, innovation and sustainable ocean development; 
(iii)  promotion of innovative SMEs in the sector; 
(iv)  addressing the skills gap in the sector; 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  promotion of the ocean sector as a linchpin for our vision of high income level 

introducing appropriate incentive schemes; 
improving our ocean health index; 

country, and last but not least, 

(viii) inclusiveness and international cooperation. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry proposes to embark on the ocean economy in a planned 
and  systematic  manner.  You  would  agree  with  me  that  no  serious  and  responsible 
Government can contemplate developing the ocean economy without a Strategic Plan.  

In this connection, Government has signed an MoU with the Republic of India during 
the official visit of His Excellency, Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of 

 

126 

India  to  Mauritius  in  March  to  promote  cooperation  in  the  development  of  the  ocean 
economy during the period 2015-2019.  

Furthermore,  my  Ministry  is  seeking  technical  assistance  from  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat  for  consultancy  services  for  the  elaboration  of  a  National  Ocean  Economy 
Strategic  Plan  as  well  as  the  setting-up  of  a  National  Ocean  Economy  Council,  National 
Ocean  Authority  and  enactment  of  an  Ocean  Economy  Act  to  give  legal  force  to  our 
initiatives.  

Madam  Speaker,  before  embarking  on  the  strategic  fit  of  this  crucial  sector,  it  is 
important to note that the fishermen community is facing several constraints and challenges.  
My Ministry is according high priority to the sustainable development of the artisanal 
fisheries  subsector,  because  of  its  crucial  role  in  providing  employment  opportunities  and 
protein diet to some 4,000 householders in the marginal coastal region.  

It  is  being  planned  to  increase  the  supply  of  fish  products  through  commercial 
aquaculture.  In  the  short-term,  my  Ministry  is  aiming  to  create  opportunities  in  the 
development of fish farms in our lagoons and inland.  

Fisheries and related activities contribute approximately to 1.6 per cent of GDP, with 
a workforce that nears 13,000. Total export for fish and fish products which accounted for 
22.0 per cent of the national export in 2014 was estimated at Rs13.9 billion, which emanated 
mainly from the processing of imported fish.  Total imports of fish and fish products (mainly 
frozen and canned) amounted to Rs10.3 billion, thus resulting in a positive trade balance of 
some Rs3.6 billion for 2013.  

Madam  Speaker,  despite  some  progress  made  in  the  fisheries  sector,  much  still 
remains to be done. My Ministry proposes to make the fisheries sector, principally industrial 
fishing sector, a major subsector of the economic development in the near future.  

In this connection, a new Fisheries and Maritime Resources Bill will be introduced to 
ensure refined policies and best management practices. And, the first one of this is, naturally, 
aquaculture. Aquaculture is the fastest growing food production sector in the world, growing 
at an annual rate of 8.0-10.0 per cent. It is internationally acknowledged that the increased 
supply of fish products to meet demand will be sourced through aquaculture. 

In this context, potential cage culture sites are being identified along the coasts, which 
would be leased to small scale entrepreneurs and fishermen cooperatives. Mechanisms will 
be sought to embark them on cage aquaculture jointly with the private sector. My Ministry 
would  closely  monitor  these  activities,  and  within  the  financial  year  2015-2016,  ten  cage 

 

127 

culture  platforms,  free  of  charge, will be  allocated  to  the  fishermen  community.  Rs8  m. 
would be injected into the project, and some 200 direct additional jobs would be created. 

There  is  a  need  to  protect  consumers,  and  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  industry. 
Without  consumer  confidence  on  the  safety  of  fish  as  food,  the  demand  can  shrink,  thus 
causing  damage  to  the  industry.  Food  safety  and  quality  assurance  are,  therefore,  key 
elements  for  access  to  the  international  market.  With  a  view  of  ensuring  food  safety,  a 
National Aquatic Animal Health Strategy would be elaborated by the Competent Authority-
Seafood. 

Training in fish handling, preservation and marketing for quality and safety of seafood, 

in line with international norms, will be provided to fishers and fish processors. 

To accompany fishermen communities to engage in fish cage farming, comprehensive 
technical support will be provided through training in cage culture techniques.  Fingerlings 
will be provided free of cost in the initial phase. To support the development of aquaculture 
and enhance infrastructure, modern jetties and slipways will be constructed at fish landing 
stations. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry, through research and development, will redynamize the 
aquaculture  industry.  Research  will  be  carried  out  to  improve  the  growth,  productivity, 
competitiveness  and  environmental  sustainability  of  aquaculture, 
including  offshore 
aquaculture. Such research would also spearhead the development of sea ranching for culture 
of octopus, sea-cucumbers, prawns, oysters, seaweeds, pearl and crab farming. 

Furthermore,  my  Ministry  would  restock  the  lagoon  areas  with  some  two  million 
fingerlings of siganus which we call normally cordonnier and gueule pavé for the benefit of 
the artisanal fishermen, as well as for stock enhancement of the lagoon ecosystem.  Protection 
of the coral reef, and coral reef farming are not being neglected, as it serves as living and 
feeding habitat for lagoon fish. 

So  far  as  the  offshore  fisheries  are  concerned,  my  Ministry  will  impart  specialised 
training to fishermen, including those using fish aggregating devices, to enable them to fish 
further  offshore,  using  long  lines,  and  target  species  other  than  tuna  fish.  Fishermen, 
following this training, would be provided with a stipend of Rs300 per day. 

The training will also include placement of FADs. The fishermen community will be 

provided with FAD’s for placement themselves, and this will be monitored by my Ministry. 

My  Ministry  would  ensure  that  twenty-eight  FADs  are  active  and  operational 
throughout the year, through regular maintenance and replacement of lost FADs. Rs3 m. are 
earmarked for the procurement of FAD’s. 

128 

 
Since  fishermen  will  be  required  to  travel  further  offshore  and  stay  longer  at  sea, 
safety equipment like hand-flares, radar reflectors, life jackets, life rafts, first aid box and fire 
extinguishers, and  also fluorescent tarpaulins to  improve security  and safety  at sea will be 
provided free of cost.  A sum of Rs1.5 m. has been earmarked under the Budget from January 
to June 2015, and Rs2.5 m. in 2015-2016. 

Moreover, to enable fishermen to operate in the off-lagoon areas - I hope the Member 
of  the  Opposition,  hon.  Barbier,  who  asked  me  is  there  -  a  50%  grant  on  the  purchase  of 
“canottes” up to an amount of Rs200,000 per “canotte” would be allocated. A sum of Rs5 m. 
would be allocated for a total of 25 “canottes”  to start with. 

Training will also be provided to skippers, for fishing boats of less than 24 m. in length, 
with a view to addressing the shortage of skippers for the maintaining of these boats. A first 
batch of twenty fishers would be enrolled in the skippers’ course starting very soon.  

My Ministry is very sensitive to the outcry of fishermen regarding damage and loss of 
gears  due  to  weather  vagaries  which  cost  a  fortune  for  the  vulnerable  groups.  We  would 
arrange to relieve them through the provision of wires, free of cost, to construct basket traps 
for their daily subsistence. 

 A  budgetary  provision  of Rs2  m.  has  been  made  for  the  procurement  of  wires  for 
outward distribution to fishers, for the construction of basket-traps; as loss of the latter have 
been reported to Fisheries during bad weather days.  

Turning to sea food industry now, Madam Speaker, the present national fish production 

of 15,000 tonnes is expected to increase by twenty-five per cent by the end of 2016.  

At present, the EU is the main export market for fish and fish products for Mauritius. 
Promoting aquaculture production and meeting the requirements of international markets for 
aquaculture  products,  would  therefore  spearhead  diversification  in  the  fisheries  sector,  and 
help an increase in growth. 

In the quest to prospect other markets for our fishers, bilateral/multilateral cooperation 
to  accede  to  new  markets  and  expand  trade  opportunities  for  fish  processing  and  export 
would be prospected. Japanese, Chinese and Russian markets are now within the reach of our 
seafood operators.  Export of canned tuna to New Caledonia is being explored. 

We would also be carrying out studies with the help of overseas assistance to examine 
how  we  can  attract  international  fishing  companies  to  land  their  catch  for  processing  and 
transhipment  from  Port  Louis;  and  equally  promote  development  of  new  fish  processing 
factories. In the medium-term, a second fishing port can be probably accommodated within 
the proposed port expansion plan which the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has mentioned. 

129 

 
This can be supported by the fact that development of the port area from Grand River 
North West to Baie du Tombeau would be the much needed catalyst to spearhead innovation 
and  valorisation,  and  also  harbinger  micro  enterprises  which  will  be  the  key  elements  of 
competitiveness in the fishing industry. SMEs  would gravitate  around the development, to 
ensure a better adequacy between fish supply and the real need of the fish market. 

Currently,  fish  transhipped  in  Mauritius  Port  has  reached  65,000  tonnes.  The 
anticipated expansion of the Port Area will, no doubt, double transhipment within the next 
five years, as well as justify for a second fishing port, and new shipyard facilities for ship 
repair, maintenance and refurbishment. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  make  fisheries  a  model  of  sustainability,  and  enable 
effective integration at the international, regional and national level. We will thus focus on 
SADC,  COMESA,  EU,  US,  Asian  and  Middle  East  markets.  In  this  endeavour,  bilateral 
cooperation will also be pursued with Brazil, Gabon, Comoros, Kenya, Madagascar, Mayotte, 
Mozambique, Seychelles, and Tanzania. 

Mauritius relies heavily, Madam Speaker, on the sea transportation for its import of 
goods.  It  also  provides  intermediate  service  in  the  production  process  of  the  industrial, 
agricultural  and  manufacturing  sectors.  High  maritime  connectivity  has  proved  to  be 
important  for  our  global  competitiveness.  As  liberalisation  continues  to  reduce  artificial 
barriers, the effective rate of protection provided by transport costs is now higher than the one 
provided by tariffs. Today, high maritime connectivity has enabled the ailing sugar sector to 
move to higher value added activities such as refinery. Taking cognizance of the importance 
of logistics in economic development, it should be noted that the development of industrial 
fisheries in the ocean economic context would be largely influenced by the competitiveness 
of port logistics. 

Port  Louis  has  become  an  important  transhipment  hub  after  Durban,  and  has 
improved  maritime  connectivity,  enabling  us  to  compete  for  markets.  However,  we  must 
always be on our lookout, as hub ports are at the mercy of the ocean carriers they serve. This 
business  segment  is  facing  competitive  pressure  from  regional  ports,  as  regional  capacity 
might be ahead of demand, following major expansion strategies undertaken in recent years. 
This situation could intensify our transhipment volatility and thus impact negatively on our 
maritime connectivity. 

130 

 
Over and above policies and challenges facing the sector regarding the volatility of 
transhipment  activities,  my  Ministry  would  promote  Mauritius  as  a  decoupling  location  to 
integrate the global supply chain system and attract global shippers to reduce our reliance on 
footloose shipping lines. 

Despite our effort, Madam Speaker, to improve our trade logistics, in particular our 
maritime connectivity, it is still being felt that much remains to be done. The World Bank has 
emphasised in its report of 2014, that in this respect, Mauritius is currently lagging behind 
middle income countries, due to lack of appropriate infrastructure and competence in modern 
logistics.  Consequently,  our  logistics  performance  index  has  been  downgraded  from  72th 
position in 2012 to 115th position in 2014. 

In  view  of  international  trade  becoming  transport  intensive  and  time  sensitive,  the 
importance of good logistics performance for economic growth, diversification and poverty 
reduction is now firmly established in an increasingly liberalised world. 

Madam  Speaker,  shipping  development  is  high  on  the  Government’s  agenda,  as  it 

helps to create jobs and also save jobs in a globally competitive market. 

I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  development  of  our  shipping  sector  can  create 
thousands  of  jobs  for  our  unemployed  youth,  provided  there  is  a  vertical  integration, 
supported by training and skills development. We have lessons to learn from countries such 
as Singapore, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Philippines, China and India. In 
the  immediate,  we  are  reviewing  the  performance  of  the  Shipping  Division,  the  Mauritius 
Maritime  Training  Academy  and  the  Mauritius  Shipping  Corporation.  Subsequently,  we 
would  have  to  make  course  corrections  in  their  budgetary  allocation  and  in  line  with  the 
Ministry’s strategic plan. 

Madam Speaker, another import sector is about the registry of ships. An example is 
the  case  of  the  Ship  Registry  which  has  been  much  neglected  over  the  past  years.  It  is  a 
mainstay of the shipping hub. My Ministry will spare no effort in developing this subsector as 
an important segment of the Ocean Economy. 

The  vision  of  my  Ministry  regarding  the  Shipping  Sector  is  to  attract  high  quality 
ships that would boost ancillary services, such as maritime financing, banking and insurance. 
It will also be an important source of employment opportunities to Mauritian seafarers. 

131 

 
In  this  connection,  my  Ministry  will  enhance  the  visibility  of  the  Mauritius  Ship 
Registry as a reliable and reputable flag on the international arena, with a view to attracting 
more ships to register under our flag. 

Madam  Speaker,  another  example  is  the  case  of  maritime  training.    Most  of  our 

seamen are aged above fifty. There has been no succession planning in this discipline. 

The Mauritius Maritime Training Academy, which functions under the aegis of my 
Ministry, is presently elaborating a comprehensive Training Strategy to enable greater access 
to employment by our youth in the Shipping Sector, including the cruise industry. 

In this connection, our objective is to capture a bigger chunk of this market to provide 
new job opportunities for the young generation. For this purpose, my Ministry is planning, 
through the Mauritius Maritime Training Academy, to increase the number of seafarers to be 
trained by fivefold, during the period 2016. We thus hope to train a total of 2,000 seafarers. 
To achieve this target, my Ministry will provide the required human resources, logistics and 
equipment. On completion of the training, successful candidates will have the opportunity to 
secure  employment  on  board  cruise  or  passenger  vessels  as  the  certificates  issued  by 
Mauritius,  enjoy  worldwide  recognition.  It  is  worth  noting  that  Mauritius  is  on  the 
International Maritime Organisation White List. 

Since  the  opportunities  for  employment  on  board  cruise  vessels  are  increasing,  my 
Ministry will also consider authorising private sector or private service providers to deliver 
training on basic safety, in line with IMO convention and requirements. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  order  to  sensitize the  young   to  get  interested  in maritime 
jobs, my Ministry proposes to organise an Open Day. This action will also indirectly address 
the problem of ageing seafaring elite in Mauritius. 

 My Ministry will also address the severe shortage of technical and professional staff 
and Pilots. Contacts have been established with the Faculty of Ocean studies at the University 
of Mauritius for joint action in this regard. 

 Madam Speaker, I have observed with much concern that there is a lack of qualified 
personnel in the fishing industry to serve on fishing vessels of 24 metres long and beyond. In 
this  connection,  my  Ministry  proposes  to  come  up  with  a  new  training  programme. It  is 
proposed to conduct four classes in parallel, both in the navigation and engineering fields at 
the MMTA; the objective of which is to train a maximum of 200 persons per year. 

132 

 
 Let  me  turn  now  towards  the  Mauritius  Shipping  Corporation  Ltd.  I  seize  this 
opportunity,  Madam,  to  thank  my  colleague  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development to put at the disposal of the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd. fund for the 
chartering of M/V Anna for a period of six months.  The hon. Minister  has also agreed to 
finance the purchase of a new cargo-cum-passenger vessel to service Rodrigues and the Outer 
Islands as well as countries of the Indian Ocean region. 

 Following consultations, I recently had with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I am taking 

the following actions regarding the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd.-  

(i)  I  will  ask  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional  Reforms  to  carry  out  a  forensic  and  financial  audit  of  all 
transactions done by the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd. during the past 
ten years, including the sale of M/V Mauritius Pride,  all dry docking costs as 
well as the inception of Betamax project. It is good to note, Madam Speaker, 
that the egg of Betamax was laid there in the Mauritius Shipping Corporation 
Ltd; 
 a  profound  restructuring  of  the  MSCL  (financial,  operational  and  Human 
Resource)  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Chairman  who  was  the 
Turnaround  Project  Leader  at  Rogers  Group  and  has  successfully  re-
engineered Rogers Shipping & Logistics as well as several major companies 
operating in the port and shipping sector of Mauritius, and 
following the return from dry docking of M/V Trochetia, Mauritius Shipping 
Corporation Ltd. to implement a strategic action plan to make optimal use of 
both vessels at its disposal so as to considerably  improve its services in the 
region,  and  also  generate  additional  revenue 
it  financially 
independent. 

to  make 

(ii) 

(iii) 

 Now, I will turn towards Agalega. Madam Speaker, it is comforting to note that the 
Government in its Programme 2015-2019, inter alia, stated that it will equip Agalega with 
appropriate  amenities,  including  an  airstrip  and  a  new  jetty  to  improve  accessibility  and 
connectivity. It is also good to note that Rs750 m. provided as a financial grant by the Indian 
Government will be devoted for the construction of a new airstrip, new jetty facilities and 
other infrastructural development in Agalega. It is good to note also that it is the first time in 
the history of Agalega that such a huge amount of money is being involved in infrastructural 
development and this amount is being invested in two main activities which would enable 
Agalega to effectively take off in its socio-economic development. 

133 

 
Regarding  port  development,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  only  infrastructure 
available is a jetty of 60 metres, which is more than 30 years old!  I am speaking of Agalega 
again, Madam. Vessels anchor at approximately 400 m. from the shore and all goods as well 
as passengers disembark in the high sea into barges up to the jetty.  This has been a very risky 
on-going activity. In this connection, Government proposes to construct a T-shape jetty, 150 
m. long to accommodate the vessel at berth. 
       As far as the airstrip is concerned, provision has been made for a resurfacing to allow an 
ATR72 plane to land.  At present, due to its very poor condition, there is no regular flight to 
Agalega.  Flights are effected only for medical evacuation.  The scope of work would, inter 
alia, consist of - 

  1. grading and re-profilng of the existing runway by 1,300 m x 30 m; 
  2. construction of two aircraft parking stands; 
  3. provision of a Navaid; 
  4. facilities for night flight as well; 
5. provision  of  electrical  power  sources  (primary  and  secondary)  to  include  solar 
power facilities; 
 6.  provision of aviation fuel storage facilities; 
 7. provision of airport rescue and fire fighting station and associated facilities; 
 8. provision also of a terminal building, and last, but not least, 
 9.  provision of a control tower including communications equipment. 
  
It is also relevant to note that the provision of Rs3.0 m. has been earmarked in the 
current Budget for the setting up of a Cold Room on North Island.  This will enable better 
supply of foodstuff and safe storage between two voyages. Government also commits itself to 
improving internet connectivity with Agalega. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  come  to  emerging  economic  sub-sectors.  Emerging 
sectors such as deep water applications, marine biotechnology, ocean technology, including 
desalinization and marine renewable energy are areas that will also be focussed upon. In this 
context of energy  security, my Ministry is looking  forward to  further diversify our energy 
mix. Ocean waves, tidal and non-tidal ocean flows, collectively known as Ocean Renewable 
Energy,  are  attracting  increasing  interest  worldwide  as  a  potentially  viable  source  of 
renewable energy. Recent research suggests that wave energy alone can theoretically cover 
three-quarters of the total energy consumption of the European Union by 2030. Under such 

 

134 

scenario, we can envisage to rely less on fossil fuel, as marine renewable energy can amply 
contribute to our energy security and help in exceeding the planned target of 35 per cent of 
our electricity production from renewable resources in the long-term. Preliminary research on 
offshore  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues  has  demonstrated encouraging  results.  My  Ministry 
together with the relevant stakeholders would follow up this development. 

Last, but not the least, Madam Speaker. 
Mauritius Oceangraphy Institute 
For hon. Members of this House who are new,  I  would like to inform them that the 
main  aim  of  the  Institute  is  to  advise  Government  on  the  formulation  of  policies  and 
programmes in respect of oceanography and related matters; and secondly, to dessiminate the 
results  of  the  research  and  importance  of  oceanography  in  the  conservation,  management, 
utilisation and development of marine and coastal ecosystem.   I remember, last time in the 
House, I said that this was already found by our Rt. hon. Prime Minister long a time back in 
the 1980s.   

The newly consituted Board will be reviewing the current activities of the Institute and 
bring reform to adapt to the research and development needs of an ocean economy, including 
shipping development and seafood industry, ocean technology and marine resources. 

I would also like to inform the House that the construction of MOI building in Albion is 
on-going.  The budget earmarked for the construction may exceed the budgeted estimates of 
Rs142 m. by Rs20 m.  Due to absence of planning, the anticipated launching is expected to 
take place in July 2017.   Capital estimates covering period July 2015 to  July 2017 have been 
earmarked  for  infrastructure  such  as  laboratory,  physical  facilities,  laboratory  equipment, 
furniture,  sea  water  pumping,  fit-out,  covered  parking,  CWA  and  CEB  underground 
installation. 

However, my Ministry will endeavour to achieve the completion of the building and all 
infrastructures by the end of 2016.  All steps will be taken for the timely installation of all 
laboratory equipment, amenities and services. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget 2015-2016 will go down in history as one of the social 
and economic reconstruction after a decade of fraud, corruption and mismanagement.  As the 
saying goes ‘jackpot for some selected few, la misère noire for many.’  We are confident, 
Madam Speaker, because we have got the conviction, we have got the vision, and we have 
got  the  desire  to  fulfill  our  promises  to  this  lepep  admirable.    I  thank  them,  the  lepep 
admirable,  for  reversing  the  situation  and  voting  our  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  as  the  next 
future Prime Minister. 

 

135 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one hour for dinner. 
At 7.59 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 9.18 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  and  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 
Speaker, as I did not intervene during the debate on the Presidential Address, may I seize this 
opportunity  to  congratulate  you  for  your  election  as  Speaker  of  this  august  Assembly.  In 
doing so, in giving  you this opportunity of chairing this august Assembly the Government 
‘L’alliance Lepep’ makes you the first woman of this Mauritian Republic to occupy such an 
important position in our democracy and it is a positive signal to the country and to the whole 
world. I hope and I wish that all Members of this Assembly give you all the support and the 
due respect you deserve as the first lady Speaker of the Republic of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker,  I will seize this opportunity also to congratulate all newly elected 

Members of this National Assembly. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  personally  have  no  big  quarrel  with  this  budget  de  L’Alliance 
Lepep, but I would like to express some inquiétude and I will expect some clarification also. 
First of all, let me reply to my friend, hon. Armance, who  in his speech  talked about the last 
10 years, the recent past when the Constituency No. 1 have elected Members from the MMM 
party, which, I would say, unfortunately, I was one of the Members of the MMM. During the 
past 10 years we were not in power and the hon. Member knows well who were in power for 
the past 10 years.  

May I just remind, en passant, the hon. Member that from 2000 to 2005 the MMM 
and the MSM alliance made so many projects in Constituency No. 1. Just to remind the hon. 
Member a few of them : Ecole de pêche à Pointe-aux-Sables, terrain de football à La Tour 
Koenig,  la  foire  de  Pointe-aux-Sables    -  où  le  membre  y  va  souvent.    Il  y  a  aussi  la  Cité 
Firinga, La Tourelle Housing Estate, Le Coquillage Housing Estate, le terrain de football de 
la  Tour  Koenig,  Le  Centre  Polyvalent  Emmanuel  Anquetil  à  la  Tour  Koenig,  le  Richelieu 
Women Centre, le Richelieu parcours de santé, le basketball pitch toujours de Richelieu, le 
Centre  Polyvalent  à  Pailles,  la  construction  de  la  Cité  Flamboyant  pour  remplacer  les 
longères qu’il y avait à l’époque, the football ground at Camp Chapelon, sewage project in 
Richelieu, Cassis, Borstal, just to name a few realisation of the MMM/MSM alliance from 
2000 to 2005. Je voulais quand même amener certaines précisions for the sake of the record. 
Madam Speaker, as I have just said, I don’t have a big quarrel with this Budget but I 
think some clarification is needed on the part of my good friend, the hon. Minister of Finance 

 

136 

and  Economic  Development,  who,  unfortunately,  is  not  in  the  House  today.    The  hon. 
Minister of Finance, at page 2 of the Budget Speech, gives us a very important figure on our 
trade  deficit  and  the  current  account  deficit  which  are  Rs76.8  billion  and  Rs39.6  billion 
respectively. It represents 19.9% and 10.3% of our GDP.  

Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  une  situation  extrêmement  inquiétante.  Comment  et 
pourquoi  sommes-nous  arrivés  à  cette  situation  économique  que  je  dirais  dangereuse ?  On 
peut engager un très long débat rien que sur cette question, mais le plus important c’est de se 
demander  comment renverser cette situation, sans compter que les dettes publiques frôlent 
actuellement la limite autorisée pour qu’on puisse rester économiquement fiable.  

Madame la présidente, quoique c’est un budget politiquement correcte, qui donne de 
l’espoir, qui rassure, qui créé le good feeling factor, - tant attendu - je dirai que c’est très bien. 
C’est très important comme signal lors d’une présentation du budget parce que, quand même 
il faut gagner d’abord ce combat au niveau psychologique. C’est très important. Mais dans les 
faits, du point de vue technico financière, je reste sur mes gardes. Le ministre ne nous dit pas 
concrètement  comment  adresser  ce lourd  trade  deficit,  current  account  deficit  ou  même  le 
déficit  de  la  dette  publique.  Il  nous  faut  chercher  les  réponses,  Madame  la  présidente,  à 
travers les différentes propositions budgétaires qui ne nous donnent pas de réponses à court 
terme. Est-ce que cela veut dire que le ministre vise dans le long terme ou même dans le très 
long terme ? Le ministre lui-même se dit optimisme, mais il est lui-même inquiet quand il 
prévoit une situation économique mondiale non favorable.   

Permettez-moi de citer, avec votre permission, ce que dit le ministre à la page 3 au 

paragraphe 13 de son discours du budget, je cite –  

« However, there are risks and uncertainties at the global level.  Deflation is looming. 
Growth is fading.   The  outlook for the  global economy is  rather  grim.   Any major 
black  swan  event  can  and  will  play  havoc  in  the  world  economy,  and  affect  us 
negatively”. 

Ce sont les mots mêmes de l’honorable ministre des Finances et du Développement 
économique  quand  il  parle  de  la  situation  économique  au  niveau  mondial.  Madame  la 
présidente,  ce  paragraphe  exprime  le  fond  même  de  la  pensée  du  ministre  par  rapport  au 
challenge qui nous attend au niveau de l’économie mondiale. 

Madame la présidente, ce paragraphe en dit beaucoup de la préoccupation actuelle de 
notre ministre des Finances et du Développement économique. Avant de fixer ses objectifs 
pour ce budget, le ministre lui-même se pose plusieurs questions aux pages 4 et 5 du Budget 
Speech, et je suis d’accord avec le ministre quand il dit qu’on est à la croisée des chemins. 

 

137 

J’aimerais ajouter encore quelques questions à notre réflexion sur ce budget pour, je dirais, 
élargir le débat par rapport aux problèmes économiques réels qui se posent actuellement au 
niveau régional et international. Ce sont des questions sérieuses, mais j’aimerais aussi poser 
d’autres questions, par exemple - 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Jusqu’où  allons-nous  laisser  le  dumping  des  produits  venant  de  l’Asie,  en 
particulier de la Chine, sur le marché mauricien ? 
Sommes-nous  obligés  de  pratiquer  ou  d’implémenter  une  politique  de  non-
imposition de tarifs douaniers dans le long terme quoi que c’est une des raisons de 
notre trade deficit ? N’y a-t-il pas là un élément, un fait qui pourrait être revu au 
niveau de l’organisation mondiale du commerce ? 
N’est-il pas le moment d’essayer de contrôler l’importation ou du moins de freiner 
la consommation des produits importés ? 
Comment augmenter substantiellement l’exportation des produits locaux à court et 
à moyen terme ? 
Le  gouvernement ne devrait-il pas subventionner et assister ceux qui se lancent 
dans le secteur manufacturier à des fins d’exportation ? 
Est-ce que nous ne manquons pas d’agressivité et de constance dans notre quête 
d’exploiter d’autres marchés des économies émergentes ? 
Ou même, je me permets de dire, qu’avons-nous profité jusqu’à maintenant du 
point  de  vue  économique  de  notre  appartenance  à  la  SADC  et  d’autres  zones 
économiques régionales ? 

Bien sûr, on peut y aller comme ça, il y en a beaucoup d’autres questions mais il nous 
faut quand même pouvoir aussi penser sur l’exploitation optimale de notre zone économique 
exclusive qui, d’après moi, est un de nos plus grands atouts vers lequel on doit se tourner 
impérativement : la mer, l’économie bleue, ocean economy  qui, jusqu’ici, n’est qu’un rêve 
ou même par rapport au port de Mahebourg dont j’ai toujours entendu l’écho des différents 
discours mais il nous faut prendre au sérieux cette possibilité d’exploiter économiquement à 
fond notre économie bleue.  Le ministre de la pêche en  a touché  rapidement sur ce propos 
mais je pense que ça dépasse largement le ministère de la pêche.  Il faudrait que ce soit un 
projet  beaucoup  plus  vaste,  beaucoup  plus  large  et  que  le  gouvernement  doit  donner 
beaucoup  plus  d’attention  à  cette  possibilité  d’exploitation  qui  pourrait  éventuellement 
apporter  beaucoup  plus  dans  l’économie  mauricienne  et  combler  ce  lourd  déficit  de  notre 
balance commerciale. 

 

138 

Je  pense  qu’il  nous  faut  évidemment  exploiter  toutes  ces  nouvelles  possibilités 
économiques  durables.  Nous  devons  accélérer  nos  efforts  par  rapport  aux  recherches  des 
possibilités de nos ressources marines. Encourager la production des produits de qualité, c’est 
très important pour pouvoir insérer le marché international.  Pour pouvoir y accéder, il nous 
faut quand même rehausser le niveau de nos produits surtout dans le secteur manufacturier. 
C’est très important. L’île Maurice ne peut pas rivaliser avec les produits de bas de gamme. 
Donc,  c’est  impossible  parce  que  nous  avons  quand  même  un  coût  de  production  qui  est 
nettement supérieur aux pays asiatiques tels que la Chine, Malaisie, l’Indonésie, l’Inde, entre 
autres. Mais nous pouvons quand même former, encadrer, faire la promotion et acquérir de 
nouveaux marchés, subventionner nos PME dans un premier temps et gagner des dividendes 
nationaux  dans  le  long  terme.  Il  nous  faut  freiner  ou  arrêter  la  conversion  de  nos  terres 
arables  et  encourager  d’autres  types  de  plantations  susceptibles  d’être  exportées  pour  un 
apport supplémentaire en devises étrangères.  

La sécurité alimentaire mondiale est une préoccupation dans le moyen et long terme. 
Donc, ne perdons pas de temps et ne perdons pas aussi des terres qui sont sous culture à des 
fins pour être transformées ou converties en des terres commerciales. Cela nous rapportera 
des bénéfices à court terme mais dans le long terme j’en doute, Madame la présidente. 

 Madam Speaker, the project of smart cities will generate growth in the economy for 
sure, but it will stimulate the economy only in the short-term. We need to have a vision for 
the economy to be sustainable in the long-term.  We can have a look, Madam Speaker, at the 
shopping malls which are flourishing here and there in the country. It is encouraging us to 
become  more  and  more  une  société  de  consommateurs  and  what  is  worst  is  that  foreign 
products are preferred, exposed and promoted more than local products. We should not be 
surprised that this new phenomena is contributing a lot to our trade deficit.  

Just  imagine  what  will  happen  with  these  smart  cities  if  we  go  ahead  in  the  same 
direction  with  the  same  type  of  products,  same  société  de  consommateurs?  Its  setting  will 
improve  our  GDP  in  the  short-term,  but  once  completed  with  the  development  or  even 
promote the occidental culture of living, I doubt, for the long-term.  We may have a more 
difficult  economic  situation,  especially  on  our  balance  of  trade,  as  I  just  mentioned. 
Developing  our  economy  is  one  thing  but  developing  a  sustainable  economy  is  something 
else. I am most in favour of the development of the technopoles. I am fully for this type of 
development  which,  according  to  me,  will  bring  more  wealth  to  the  country  and  will  give 
employment  to  our  fellow  countrymen,  and  will  have  a  long-term  and  sustainable  income 
through the technopoles. So, I have a preference for the technopoles which, according to me, 

 

139 

by definition, will bring more wealth and employment also to one and all. So, it is a win-win 
situation for the Government and the population. 

Madam Speaker, concerning the SME Bank, let me tell the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development  that  it  is  not the  institution  which  matters  but  the  delivery  of 
service.  What’s in a name?  What is most important is the seriousness of the service with a 
professional  approach.  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  myself  witnessed  how  in  the  past  some 
entrepreneurs  were  creating  des  entreprises  fictives,  rien  que  pour  avoir  des  loans,  gather 
quotations  here  and  there,  and  then  go  to  the  DBM  with  recommendation  of  a  particular 
Minister - I won’t name. 

(Interruptions) 

Ex-Minister,  yes,  you  are  right,  thank  you.  With  the  recommendation  of  a  particular  ex-
Minister and they get the total sum of the loan at one go.  They never reimburse these loans 
because  ‘misié  la  ine  dire  pa  gagne  tracas,  nou  pou  write-off  après  ça’.  This  is  what 
happened in the recent past when the last Government was in power, Madam Speaker.  

I am much worried about giving loans without guarantee.  Yes, it is a good decision 
because  for  some  entrepreneurs  who  don’t  have  access  to  financing  facilities,  maybe  it  is 
good for them to start something sustainable for the long-term, but believe me, we have to be 
very cautious. Don’t forget about the millions of wastage in the Stimulus Package which the 
Government gave without any collateral.  I am not sure that we have been able to have this 
money back and it is public money. This was a wastage of public fund, believe me. Public 
money  is  our  money.  I  am  for  giving  facilities,  but  I  think  it  should  be  by  phase  and  the 
enterprise should report progress before any further disbursement is given. The Government 
needs to have a very close monitoring on that issue, Madam Speaker.  

Madame la présidente, sur une question de principe, je ne suis pas d’accord que la 
SMEDA joue un rôle de collectionneurs de trade fees pour les  collectivités locales. C’est 
encore une fois dépouiller davantage les collectivités locales de leur rôle dans la vie de tous 
les jours. Depuis sa création à ce jour, Madame la présidente, les différents gouvernements 
qui  ont  subséquemment  occupé  le  pouvoir  ont  porté  atteinte  aux  collectivités  locales,  à  la 
démocratie régionale. Dans le passé,  il y a eu la CWA et le CEB  qui étaient sous la tutelle  
des administrations régionales. Je comprends que pour ces institutions il fallait quand même 
mettre en place ce qu’on a mis en place, donc c’est bon pour le pays. Qu’en est-il maintenant 
de la Tourism Authority, de la MRA entre autres qui, en ce moment, collectionnent tout ce qui 
était dû aux autorités locales il n’y a pas longtemps de cela.  Donc, ce qui fait quand même 
des  revenus  d’un  manquement  considérable  aux  autorités  locales  du  pays.  À  la  moindre 

 

140 

décision  qui  porte  atteinte  à  cette  démocratie  régionale,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  crie  au 
loup.    Je  dirai  au  gouvernement  de  faire  bien  attention.  Donc,  comme  j’ai  dit,  il  y  a  eu 
certaines décisions dans le passé qui étaient quand même rationnelles, mais aller encore plus 
loin maintenant dans ce que nous sommes en train de faire, je pense que c’est un crime. Il 
faut faire attention. Je note quand même que, par rapport aux autres décisions concernant la 
SME,  à  part  cette  décision  de  se  transformer  en  collectionneur  de  trade  fees,  beaucoup 
d’autres décisions sont très encourageantes. Par rapport au financement, il faut quand même 
un suivi très ingénieux parce qu’il y en a - comme je vous ai dit, concernant les loans - qui se 
frottent les mains déjà. Ils pensent pouvoir abuser de la générosité du gouvernement. 

For  those  SMEs  who  will  obtain  an  operating  space  on  the  SMEs  park,  I  will  ask 
Government  to  make  it  a  cut  clear  criteria  for  eligibility  to  obtain  same,  because  for  the 
already delivered ones at La Tour Koenig and Roche Bois there is a complete dark.  Il y le 
flou total.  Il n’y a pas eu de transparence.  On ne sait même pas comment le gouvernement a 
procédé pour donner aux SMEs ces différents bâtiments dans ces complexes-là. 

Madame la présidente, par rapport au développement portuaire je n’ai pas de doute que 
c’est vital et très important pour atteindre nos objectifs économiques. Mais je suis très triste 
qu’à chaque fois qu’il y a des développements dans la région portuaire, les pêcheurs en font 
les frais et aucun gouvernement ne pense à priori à prendre en considération ces hommes et 
femmes  pêcheurs  qui  se  battent  pour  leur  survie.    Est-il  trop  de  demander  qu’ils  soient 
contactés, qu’ils soient informés, qu’ils soient dédommagés pour les conséquences négatives 
de  ces  développements  sur  l’exercice  de  leur  métier ?  Je  fais  un  pressant  appel  au 
gouvernement.  Je  l’ai  déjà  fait  à  travers  une  question  parlementaire  que  j’ai  récemment 
adressée au Premier ministre adjoint, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval.   Je vais faire le même 
appel ce soir.  Donc, je me permets, encore une fois, de réitérer cet appel au gouvernement en 
faveur des pécheurs de Pointe-aux-Sables, Grande Rivière, Sable Noire, Les Salines, Roche 
Bois et Baie du Tombeau.  Tous ces gens-là sont concernés par tout ce qui est développement 
dans la région du port. Donc, je pense que les gens should be at the centre of development car 
des développements sont faits et à côté il y a des gens qui souffrent. Ils ne sont pas intégrés 
dans les projets de développement qu’on dit modernes pour l’avenir économique du pays.  

Madame la présidente, je salue la décision du gouvernement en faveur du recyclage de 
trois milles gradués chômeurs pour qu’ils puissent être éligibles à trouver du travail et aussi je 
salue les facilités qui accompagnent. J’ai tout mon temps.  Mais, par rapport à la Chambre 
des  métiers,  je  suis  sceptique  en  ce  qu’il  s’agit  de  la  livraison  des  Cartes  de  compétences 
parce que nous avons déjà, Madame la présidente, au niveau de MITD et d’autres institutions, 

 

141 

le MQA qui reconnaît certains certificats pour la compétence des métiers. Je pense que c’est 
dangereux d’avoir une autre institution qui va donner des certificats ou des compétences par 
rapport au métier car il y aura des conflits d’intérêts. Je pense que c’est très important que le 
gouvernement uniformise tout ce qui se rapporte aux métiers. 

Madame Speaker, concerning the omnibus permits to tourism operators, I will ask the 
hon. Minister to give some clear information about which operators he is talking about, as 
there are many different types of operators in the tourism industry.   

Madam Speaker, concerning waiving of interests on loans up to Rs100,000 to planters, 
fishermen  and  breeders,  I  think  the  ceiling  of  Rs100,000  is  very,  very  low.    This  is  not 
enough.  So, may I ask the hon. Minister to raise the ceiling up to, at least, Rs400,000 and 
extend the same facilities which the hon. Minister is  giving to the planters, fishermen and 
breeders to other SMEs and traders such as manufacturers and small commercial businesses?  
The  hon.  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,    Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer Islands just mentioned aquaculture, but I am not sure that this project of aquaculture is 
benefitting  our  country  because  the  pilot  project  which  we  have  at  Pointe-aux-Feuilles, 
Mahebourg is not giving any positive results. I think Government needs to study this pilot 
experimental project very seriously. Before going ahead with any further project, we need to 
know what has happened and is happening to the project at Pointe-aux-Feuilles, Mahebourg. 
This type of project needs to be assessed - the environmental impact and the quality of the 
fish on the farm. The quality of these fish should be compared with those who are living in 
their natural ecosystem. 

Madam Speaker, concerning the vegetables wholesale markets, I welcome the project. 
This is a long overdue project.  I will be glad if the hon. Minister can tell us where it is going 
to be situated and what is the time frame for its implementation.  

Madam Speaker, concerning the Rs442 m. to be provided to the Ministry of Industry, 
Commerce and Consumer Protection to support the manufacturing industry - paragraph 81, 
page 15 - I think the hon. Minister should give us some more details on how he proposes to 
use this fund, though I welcome this funding which is very important for our manufacturing 
industry.  

 Madam Speaker, with regard to the increase in free wifi hotspot from 15 to 350, the 
hon. Minister did not give us any information in his Appendix to the Budget on the location 
of  these  new  wifi  hotspot.  May  I  suggest  that  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  the  list  to  hon. 
Members of the National Assembly and state the approximate implementation date and the 
location of the wifi hotspot. 

142 

 
Madam Speaker, I welcome again Government’s decision to do away with asbestos 
contents  in  public  buuidlings.  May  I  seize  this  opportunity  to  make  a  request  to  the  hon 
Minister  to  include  also  the  old  EDC  housing  units  across  the  country  which  also  contain 
asbestos and which is a threat to the people living there. 

Madam Speaker, concerning housing, I welcome all the Government’s suggestions in 
that  Budget.  But  let  me  make  a  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  review  and  update  the 
conditions for eligibility to obtain a housing unit within the NHDC.  Very often,  people are 
refused  a  housing  unit  because  the  family  income  is  too  low.  Let’s  say  if  a  family  has  a 
monthly revenue of Rs7,000 or Rs8,000, they are not eligible because their salaries are too 
low and the repayment represents more than one third of their salaries. Obviously, they won’t 
be able to cope  with their minimum cost of living and pay their housing loan at the same 
time. So, they are denied the allocation of NHDC housing lots. Now, those families, with an 
income which is around Rs15,000 or more, are not eligible because their income is too high. I 
think everyone in this House is aware of the situation and all these are obsolete and need a 
review  and  updating.  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment  to  state  clearly  who  are  those  eligible  for  CIS  and  CIS  Cum  housing  types 
with blocks or wood and ironsheets. All these are not clear and I would like the hon. Minister 
concerned to give us a clear tableau of the eligibility criteria for obtaining all the facilities 
which Government is giving, but, unfortuantely, which is not well-known to the population at 
large and even to hon. Members of this House. I think detailed information should be made 
available to the public, NGOs and parliamentarians. 

Madame la présidente, je salue la decision du gouvernement de mettre  en place un 
task force pour se pencher sur le sort de la culture à Maurice. Comme le gouvernement nous 
propose d’amender le Local Government Act pour plus de démocratie, je fais une requête au 
ministre des Arts et de la Culture pour que la loi soit amendée, pour que les artistes puissent 
avoir une représentation équitable au sein de la  Mauritius Rights Society telle qu’elle  était 
avant à la MASA. Une injustice a été faite aux artistes à travers cette loi qui est passée l’année 
dernière  au  Parlement  par  l’ancien  régime,  et  sous  ce  nouveau  gouvernement  c’est  une 
occasion  pour  qu’il  puisse  corriger  cette  injustice  envers  les  artistes.  Je  fais  un  appel  au 
ministre pour qu’il se penche sur la question. 

Je  félicite  le  gouvernement  pour  son  projet  de  mettre  en  place  un  stade  musical. 
Bravo ! Mais, je demanderais au ministère concerné de mettre un comité pour commencer à 

 

143 

travailler au plus vite possible sur ce projet. Les artistes mauriciens, je crois, sont les seuls 
dans ce monde à ne pas y avoir une telle infrastructure culturelle. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister is giving a lot of incentives to those Mauritians 
who have chosen to stay abroad after their study and work there. I am told by those who have 
chosen  to  stay  here  and  work  for  their  country,  as  a  patriot,  that  they  feel  as  if  this  is  a 
discrimination  envers  ceux  qui  sont  restés  malgré  les  conditions  parfois  très  difficiles  et 
malgré les avantages qu’ils auraient pu avoir ailleurs. Je vous dis cela, Madame la présidente, 
parce  qu’on  m’a  dit,  dans  ma  circonscription,  qu’il  faut  absolument  attirer  l’attention  du 
gouvernement,  qu’il  ne  faut  pas,  en  encourageant  la  diaspora  mauricienne  de  revenir,  en 
même temps décourager ceux qui sont là, qui restent et qui travaillent pour le pays. 

Madam Speaker, I will conclude by drawing the attention of Government on a few 

problems of my constitutuency, very rapidly, as my good friend, hon. Armance did earlier - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 
(vii) 

(viii) 

the water problem in Pailles and Pointe-aux-Sables; 
the sewerage problem in Pailles and Pointe-aux-Sables; 
the road congestion problem at Pointe-aux-Sables, Canal Dayot, Cité Vallijee; 
frequent flooding at Cité Vallijee, Cité Richelieu, Grande Rivière, Sable-Noir 
and Canal Dayot; 
enlargement of road at Pointe-aux-Sables, – the issue was raised this morning 
– coastal road linking Pointe-aux-Sables, Petite Rivière; 
housing; 
the ZEP school - I willl not elaborate on this, I will come with Parliamentary 
Questions, and  
fisheries. 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  nearly  finished.  Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  end  by  adding  a  few  things.  Madam 
Speaker, this is my fifth consecutive mandate in this House. 

… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, as you know, I have always been a faithful and loyal serviteur to the 
 
MMM  and  my  constituents.  Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  following  false  information 

 

144 

given to the hon. Leader of the MMM by an hon. Member in this House, and supported by an 
ex-collistière… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Barbier:…who was an hon. member of this august Assembly… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Barbier:  …  I  was  suspended  from  the  MMM  on  18  February,  le  jour  où  j’ai 
commencé mon carème chrétien. I was accused of having organised a meeting at my place or 
elsewhere, which meeting was never organised or planned. Later on, as you know, Madam 
Speaker,  you  received  a  letter  from  hon.  Bhagwan  informing  you  that  I  am  no  more  a 
Member of the MMM. 

Madame  la  Présidente,  le  grand  défenseur  de  la  démocratie  qui  se  prétend  être 
l’honorable Paul Bérenger, m’a suspendu à la fin des travaux du bureau politique, alors que 
dans la constitution du MMM, il n’y a que le comité central qui puisse prendre des actions 
disciplinaires. Et il l’a fait publiquement dans une conférence de presse que j’ai assistée le 
même jour à la MBC. C’est incroyable !  Ce grand défenseur de la démocratie qui ne m’a 
même pas donné la chance de venir m’expliquer devant le comité central et le comité central 
n’a même pas eu le temps de prendre de décision… 

Madam Speaker: Order ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Barbier:…et  moi  j’ai  été  suspendu.  Pire !  Pire  maintenant,  Madame  la 

présidente ! La lettre que vous avez reçue, qui m’expulse du MMM, cette lettre là… 

Madam Speaker: Please, do not bring me in the debate. 

Mr Barbier: Yes.  I  would like to do otherwise, but it is a fact that it was Madam 
Speaker who announced me that she received a letter that  I am no more a Member of the 
MMM. and when I asked for some clarification… 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Member, I just informed you that I had received a letter 

and that your seat had to be changed. 

145 

 
Mr Barbier:  Hon. Bhagwan informed me: “Ou conné mo pas capave écrire sa sans 
mo gagne instruction”.  Faire sa sans mo gagne instruction! So, the instruction as we know, 
comes from the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Bérenger. This is again… 

(Interruptions) 

This is again a vice de procédure du grand démocrate qui n’a même pas consulté son bureau 
politique, ni même le comité central. Je pense que c’est la honte du siècle! 

(Interruptions) 

La honte du siècle pour un leader qui a toujours prôné la démocratie ! Madame la présidente, 
je  vous  dis  que,  moi,  Jean-Claude  Barbier,  pour  mon  cinquième  mandat  je  servirai  mes 
mandants avec le même zèle, avec la même détermination et le même principe. La différence, 
aujourd’hui, Madame la présidente, c’est que maintenant je suis libre. 

J’ai la liberté d’expression… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

J’ai la liberté d’expression, la liberté d’opinion et la liberté d’action. Vive la République de 
l’île Maurice ! 

 Madame la présidente, je dis merci. 

(9.56 p.m.) 

Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière): Madame la 
présidente,  avant  toute  chose,  je  souhaiterai  féliciter  le  ministre  des  Finances,  l’honorable 
Lutchmeenaraidoo,  pour  ce  formidable  budget  qui  est  en  faveur  des  plus  démunis  et  ainsi 
réduire l’écart entre les riches et les pauvres. Pour ne pas être répétitif, je ne ferai pas d’éloge 
des bienfaits des différents points du budget car cela a été très bien fait par mes collègues et 
je partage leurs opinions.  

Madame  la  présidente,  pour  moi,  c’est  un  très  bon  budget  malgré  le  fait  que 
l’Opposition partage un avis contraire et trouve que d’autres mesures auraient été mieux à la 
place. Ce qui est plutôt normal comme opinion afin de mériter le titre de l’Opposition. Mais 
cela n’est pas grave car 83 pour cent de la population est favorable à ce budget, l’Opposition 
fait donc partie des 17 pour cent de ceux qui ne sont pas favorables. Madame la présidente, la 
suite de mon discours sera axée sur l’utilisation de ce budget au profit de ma circonscription. 
La première mesure qui me tient à cœur est l’ouverture de la banque des PME. Les 
facilités qui seront offertes aux petits entrepreneurs permettront à ces personnes compétentes 
et talentueuses de monter un dossier convenable afin de bénéficier des avantages. Pour cela, 

 

146 

je pense qu’il faut donc guider ces entrepreneurs dans leurs projets et gestion d’un cashflow 
afin de les aider à la bonne gestion de leurs petites entreprises. 

Au niveau de la circonscription No. 20, des mesures sont déjà prises afin de les guider 
dans  la  mise  en  place  de  leurs  dossiers  pour  une  demande  d’emprunt.  Au  sein  de  cette 
circonscription  nous  avons  beaucoup  de  plombiers,  électriciens,  maçons  opératifs  qui  ne 
savent  pas  comment  faire  pour  monter  leurs  propres  entreprises.  Je  dis  bien,  maçons 
opératifs, pour que certains ne pensent pas que ce sont des francs-maçons! 

(Interruptions) 

Une fois leurs entreprises mises en place, en tant que gouvernement, nous devons 
leur donner la chance de participer aux appels d’offres sur les maisons de 50 m² qui seront 
construites.  De  cette  manière,  les  coûts  seront  réduits  et  par  la  même  occasion  ces 
entrepreneurs pourront prendre goût au monde du business. J’ai personnellement été témoin, 
à plusieurs reprises, des situations où les grandes firmes soustraient leurs contrats aux petits 
entrepreneurs avec un écart de prix conséquent entre le contracteur et le détenteur du contrat. 
Cela démontre que le coût peut être réduit si on s’adresse directement à ces entrepreneurs. 

Madame la présidente, dans ma circonscription il y a une centaine de maisons qui sont 
en projet et je souhaiterais que les petits entrepreneurs de cette circonscription aient la chance 
de proposer une cotation si leurs dossiers sont convaincants en ayant un suivi de l’ingénieur 
du  ministère  avant  chaque  déboursement.  Cette  mesure  permettra  de  créer  l’emploi,  par 
exemple, sur 100 maisons un partage peut être fait entre 10 petits entrepreneurs compétents. 
De  mon  côté,  je  suis  en  train  de  guider  ces  personnes  afin  qu’elles  puissent  avoir  leurs 
propres entreprises mais aussi être formées dans la gestion de celles-ci pour être profitable. 

J’ai actuellement ouvert un bureau  à la rue Dr.  Reid où je reçois  régulièrement les 
personnes de ma circonscription en faisant de mon maximum afin de les aider dans différents 
secteurs.  À  ce  jour,  j’ai  fait  embaucher  une  cinquantaine  de  personnes  dans  le  privé.  Ce 
budget vient conforter les ambitions à aider ces personnes qui ont la capacité de monter leurs 
propres  entreprises.  Le  bureau  est  ouvert  de  lundi  à  samedi,  une  secrétaire  est  présente  à 
temps plein pour prendre des doléances ou prendre des rendez-vous. Je souhaiterai avoir le 
soutien des ministres concernés et de les solliciter afin d’aider ces personnes à réussir dans le 
lancement de leurs entreprises. 

Lors de mon dernier discours, j’avais fait part de ma volonté à combattre la pauvreté 
dans la circonscription No. 20. Le nouveau système du CSR me permettra plus facilement de 
solliciter le soutien de toutes les firmes qui opèrent dans ma circonscription pour mener un 

 

147 

combat  contre  la  pauvreté  et  aider  les  sportifs  à  mieux  s’épanouir.  Ainsi,  cela  me  donne 
l’occasion d’atteindre mes objectifs prioritaires lors de mon mandat. 

Madame la présidente, je souhaiterai exprimer mon opinion sur les nominations qui 
font  un  peu  la  une  en  ce  moment.  J’ai  constaté  que  suite  à  certaines  nominations, 
l’Opposition  fait  un  brouhaha.  En  ce  qui  me  concerne,  du  moment  que  les  nominations 
suivent toutes les procédures et les qualifications et compétences sont respectées, il n’y aurait 
pas  dû  avoir  de  problème.  En  tant  que  député  gouvernemental,  je  ne  pense  pas  que  mes 
proches ou encore mes enfants forment désormais partie de la catégorie B. Si demain un de 
mes enfants ou un proche fait acte de candidature à un poste au gouvernement, il doit avoir le 
même traitement s’il a les qualités et qualifications requises.  

Je  vais  citer  l’exemple  d’un  proche  qui  avait  obtenu  une  bourse  d’études  pour 
poursuivre  ses  études.  Cette  bourse  permettait  à  cette  personne  de  travailler  pour  le 
gouvernement  après  ses  études.  Aujourd’hui  ayant  un  Masters  II,  cette  personne  travaille 
dans le privé et, donc est-ce qu’elle ne peut pas être considérée pour un poste vacant dans le 
secteur  gouvernemental étant  proche  de  moi  car  je  fais  partie  du  gouvernement?  Je  pense 
qu’il  faut  que  l’Opposition  arrête  de  polémiquer  sur  ces  soi-disant  problèmes  et  de  se 
concentrer à contribuer à faire avancer le pays. Car il ne faut pas oublier que nous sommes 
payés  par  les  contribuables  pour  apporter  notre  contribution  à  faire  avancer  notre  pays.  Et 
alors, un peu plus de respect à la Présidente et au Président de la Chambre ! 

Madam  Speaker,  as  a  Member  who  just  joined  this  House  after  the  last  general 
elections, I was looking forward to participating in the most important forum of the country 
in the spirit of a mutual respect between the Opposition and the Government. I must confess, 
Madam  Speaker,  that  I  have  been  let  down  by  what  I  have  seen  and  heard  from  the 
Opposition. Their hostility is an indicative of the fact that they have not reconciled to their 
crushing defeat on 10 December 2014. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, avant de terminer, je souhaiterais faire quelques commentaires 
sur  le  leader  de  l’Opposition  concernant  le  budget  exposé  par  l’honorable  ministre  des 
Finances et du Développement économique. Madame la présidente, après que le ministre ait 
présenté son budget, j’ai écouté les commentaires de l’honorable leader de l’Opposition à la 
télévision.  Commentaires  très  déplacés  de  sa  part  alors  que  tout  récemment  l’honorable 
Lutchmeenaraidoo était le conseiller financier du MMM. Je cite ces remarques – 

« Enn budget kot narien na pas bon et lor la bann la pé tap la table alor ki 
zott pas finn comprend narien. » 

 

148 

(Interruptions) 

Avec  ces  remarques  cela  sous-entend  que  nous  sommes  des  imbéciles.  D’ailleurs 
comme il a toujours fait en supposant que nous sommes des imbéciles, il sous-entend, encore 
une  fois  que  la  population  de  l’île  Maurice  est  imbécile  ayant  voté  pour  nous.  Je  suis 
conscient  que  je  suis  nouveau  dans  le  Parlement  mais  je  peux  quand  même  constater  la 
jalousie de ces membres de l’Opposition… 

(Interruptions) 

…  qui  s’attaquent  souvent  au  PMSD,  le  parti  auquel  j’appartiens.  Je  fais  quand 
même remarquer, Madame la présidente, que le PMSD et le MMM ont un point en commun. 
Ces deux parties ont fait trois à la suite mais, la seule différence c’est que le PMSD a fait un 
trois à la suite dans le gouvernement et le MMM… 

… a fait… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Et  le  MMM  a  fait  un  trois  à  la  suite  dans  l’opposition !  Sur  les  circonstances 
actuelles au sein du MMM, dans les cinq ans à venir, un quatre à la suite, avec quatre députés 
dans l’Opposition, comprenne qui pourra! 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, je vais m’arrêter là parce qu’il est déjà tard. Je vous remercie. 

Mr Jahangeer: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

(Interruptions) 

 Mr Gobin rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

(Interruptions) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  &  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn to Wednesday 08 April 
2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Gayan rose and seconded. 

 
Question put and agreed to. 

149 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 10.06 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 08 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m.                                      

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

SYRIA – MAURITIAN CITIZEN  

(No. B/262) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent case whereby a 
Mauritian citizen was found dead and buried in Syria, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain information as to if – 

(a) 

(b) 

other such cases and/or of Mauritian citizens suspected to be involved in holy 
war in Syria has been detected, and 
the  anti-terrorist  cell  is  actively  monitoring  the  situation  both  inland  and 
outside our territory to detect terrorist practices and/or attacks. 

Reply: I am informed that there is no official record of any Mauritian citizen who has 

either been found dead and buried in Syria or has been involved in holy war in Syria. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  assure  the  House  that  the  Counter 
Terrorism Unit of my office is closely monitoring the situation both inland and outside our 
territory to detect any terrorist activities. 

BELLE MARE LEISURE WATER PARK –  

COMMISSION OF INQUIRY - FEES 

(No. B/263) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime &Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit    whether,  in  regard  to  the  Commission  of 
Inquiry set up by Government in relation to the Belle Mare Leisure Water Park, he will –  

(a)  state  who  recommended  the  payment  of  fees  to  the  Chairperson,  assessors  and 

supporting staff thereof, and  

(b) give a list of those who have been paid their respective fees, indicating - 

 

(i) in each case, the quantum thereof, and  

 
(ii) when the supporting staff thereof will be paid their respective fees. 

150 

 

Reply  (Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security):    I  am  informed  that  a 
Committee  of  Enquiry  was  set  up  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  of  the  death  of  two 
children at Le Water Park Leisure Village.  Payment of fees to the Committee members was 
not determined prior or following the setting up of the Committee of Enquiry.  
 
After  the  submission  of  the  report  to  my  Ministry,  a  claim  was  forwarded  on  14 
February 2014 for the payment of fees to the Chairperson and members of the Commission 
as well as the supporting staff. 
As the fees claimed were not in line with the approved rates of fees usually payable 
 
to Chairperson and members of Committees of Enquiry, on 19 February 2014, the advice of 
the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms was sought. 
 
On  03  July  2014,  the  Standing  Committee  on  Fees  and  Allowances  approved  the 
payment of fees to the Chairperson and members of Committee of Enquiry in line with the 
existing guidelines approved by Government on fees payable to Commissions of Enquiry, 
Adhoc Committees and Technical Committees. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that in August 2014, the Sugar 

Investment Trust has effected payment of the following fees – 

- 
- 
- 

Rs 46,500. 
Rs 23,250. 
Rs 13,950. 

 
The Chairperson 
Members (50%) 
Secretary (30%) 
 
With regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that on 10 September 2014, the 
Chairperson  of  the  Committee  has  also  made  a  request  for  the  payment  of  fees  to  the 
supporting staff comprising an Assistant Secretary and Transcriber, a Police Officer and an 
Attendant.  Advice on the quantum of allowance to be paid was accordingly sought from the 
Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms. 
 
has advised that my Ministry should stand guided by the provisions of the PRB Report. 
 
However, as no such provisions exist in the PRB Report, my Ministry has requested 
the Sugar Investment Trust to effect payment to members of the supporting staff at rates to 
be determined by its Board. 

On 09 September 2014, the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

 

 

151 

ROCHE BOIS – POLICE QUARTERS  

(No.  B/264)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police 
quarters located at the Abattoir Road, in Roche Bois, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
proposed pulling down thereof, indicating the projects earmarked for implementation on the 
site thereof and if procedures have been initiated therefor. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that it is not envisaged to pull 
down the Police Quarters at Abattoir Road, Roche Bois.  In fact, the quarters comprise three 
blocks, one of which has been allocated to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life since 
2011 and is being used as a Methadone Drop-in-Centre. 

One of the two unoccupied blocks was previously earmarked to be pulled down, as it 
stands on the track identified for the Port Louis Ring Road Project.  The Commissioner of 
Police has requested the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, to carry out a 
survey  to  assess  the  state  of  these  two  quarters  to  determine  whether  it  would  be  cost 
effective  to  renovate  them  in  the  meantime.    In  the  affirmative,  the  two  blocks  may 
eventually  be  converted  into  warehouses  for  the  storage  of  serviceable  and  unserviceable 
items. 

Furthermore, the compound where the quarters are located will be rehabilitated as it is 

subject to water accumulation and flooding during heavy rainfall. 

 

GOVERNMENT CAR POOL – BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/265) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  persons  who  have  been 
allocated  with  an  official  car  from  the  Government  car  pool  and  who  have  been  provided 
with  the  services  of  the  Very  Important  Person  Security  Unit  drivers  over  the  period  July 
2005  to  11  December  2014,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, a list thereof, indicating the – 

(a) 

capacity in which they have been granted same; 

152 

 
(b)  make and model of the car put at the disposal thereof; 
(c) 
(d) 

duration thereof, and 
reasons therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

COMMERCIAL BANKS – PENALTY INTERESTS 

(No. B/299) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE)  
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the alleged 
abuse of imposition of penalty interests on arrears by some banking and financial institutions, 
he will state if he will consider –  

(a) introducing legislation for the elimination thereof, and  
(b) requesting the issue of clear guidelines, by the –  

(i) Bank of Mauritius regarding the recognition of interests income, especially 

regarding non-performing credits, and  

(ii) banks, asking that a moratorium on capital and interests payment be granted 
to the customers undergoing hardships and come up with a stimulus package 
for borrowers who are encountering difficulties in repaying their debts. 

Reply: We are fully aware of the issue being raised by the hon.  Member and we are 

working on it.  

In  fact,  as  announced  in  the  2015  Budget  Speech,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  be 
implementing  the  recommendations  in  the  report  on  abuses  of  commercial  banks  released 
recently.  Furthermore,  we  are  also  setting  up  an  Office  of  Ombudsperson  on  Financial 
Institutions  which  will  deal  with  complaints  received  and  recommend  appropriate  remedial 
action.  
 

BANKS - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY SYSTEMS 

 (No. B/300) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the recent 
leakage  and  publication  of  sensitive  information  pertaining  to  the  banking  transactions  of 
some corporate bodies and individuals, he will state if he will consider requesting the Bank of 
Mauritius  to  ensure  that  banking  systems  are  safe  in  general  and  that  the  Information 
Technology security systems of banks are strengthened to avoid reputational damage to the 
country. 

153 

 
Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  that  in  line  with  provisions  of  the 
Banking  Act,  the  Information  Technology  security  systems  of  banks  are  continually 
reviewed,  strengthened,  tested  and  upgraded  so  as  to  avoid,  inter  alia,  any  reputational 
damage to the country.  

Furthermore, the Bank of Mauritius has also issued a guideline on “Maintenance of 
Accounting and other Records and Internal Control Systems” to ensure that adequate internal 
control measures are maintained by banks in respect of their information systems. 

As such, the Banking Act provides appropriate legal safeguards for the maintenance 

of confidentiality of information and also the sanctity of the information system. 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

