 

 

1 

 

 

 

No. 28 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 01 SEPTEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

OBITUARY 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Family Welfare 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of  Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

 

4 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

            Hansard Editor 

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 28 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 01 September 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(The Deputy Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 
                                                                         PAPERS LAID 
 

The Prime Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A. 

 

 

B. 
 

 
C. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office of the President 
(a) 

(b) 

The Representation of the People (Variation of Dates) Order, 2015 
(Government Notice No. 105 of 2015).  
The Municipal City Council and Municipal Town Council Elections 
(Polling  Stations)  Order,  2015.  (Government  Notice  No.  108  of 
2015).  

 
Office of the Speaker 
Declaration of Interest by the Honourable Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles 
and  Souillac  (Mr.  Jahangeer)  in  regard  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/393.  (In 
Original). 

Prime Minister’s Office – 
(a) 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills. (In Original) – 
(i)  The Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency Bill (No. XI of 2015); 
(ii)  The Roads (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2015); and 
(iii)  The Pharmacy Council Bill (No. XIII of 2015). 
The  National  Awards  (Amendment)  Regulations  (Government  Notice  No. 
107 of 2015).  
The  Civil  Aviation  (Sir  Gaëtan  Duval  Airport  Fees)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 125 of 2015).  
The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the Prime 
Minister’s Cyclone Relief Fund for the year ended 31 December 2014. (In 
Original). 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

D. 
 

Ministry of Tourism and External Communications  – 
(a) 

The Annual Report and the Audited Financial Statements of the Mauritius 
Tourism Promotion Authority (MTPA) for the year ending 2013. 

 

 

8 

 

(b) 
 

(Hotel  Classification)  Regulations  2015 

The  Tourism  Authority 
(Government Notice No. 162 of 2015). 
 
 
 

E.  Ministry of  Energy and Public Utilities – 
 

The Annual Report 2013 of the Central Water Authority 

(a) 

 

F.  
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

The Annual Report 2012 of the Central Electricity Board.  

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 
(a) 
 

The Digest of Productivity and Competitiveness Statistic 2014 Vol. 18.  

 (b) The Annual Report and Audited Accounts of the Lottery Committee for 
the year ended 31 December 2014. (In Original). 

(c)  Mauritius in Figures 2014.  
(d)  The Annual Report 2014 of Procurement Policy Office. (In Original).   
(e)  The Annual Report 2014 of Central Procurement Board.  
(f)  The  Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreement  (Republic  of  South  Africa) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 113 of 2015).  

(g)  The  Customs  Tariff  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015. 

(Government Notice No. 124 of 2015).  

(h)  The  Investment  Promotion  (Smart  City  Scheme)  Regulations  2015 

(Government Notice No. 128 of 2015).  

(i)  The  Investment  Promotion  (Property  Development  Scheme)  Regulations 

2015 (Government Notice No. 129 of 2015). 

(j)  The Companies (Fees payable to Registrar) (Amendment) Regulations 2015. 

(Government Notice No. 139 of 2015).  

(k)  The  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  (Prescribed  Area  and  Prescribed  Percentage  of 
Total  Insurable  Sugar)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice  No.  143  of 
2015).  

(l)  The Land (Duties and Taxes) (Amendment of Schedule) (No. 2) Regulations 

2015. (Government Notice No. 149 of 2015). 

(m)  The Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (Republic of Zambia) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 150 of 2015). 

9 

(n)  The  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  (Amendment  of  Schedules)  Regulations  2015. 

(Government Notice No. 157 of 2015). 

(o)  The Analytical Report - Household Budget Survey 2012.  
(p)  The  Methodological  Report  -  Household  Budget  Survey  2012  and  the 

updated Consumer Price Index.  

(q)  Convention de Crédit en date du 25 juin 2015 entre L’Agence Française de 

Développement et La République de Maurice. (In Original)  

(r)  The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Accounts  of  the  Republic  of 

Mauritius for the Financial Year 2014. (In Original). 

(s)  The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Accounts  of  the  Rodrigues 

Regional Assembly for the Financial Year 2014 (In Original). 

(t)  The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 

Republic of Mauritius for the year 2014. (In Original). 

(u)  The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 

Rodrigues Regional Assembly for the year 2014. (In Original). 

(v)  Performance Audit Reports (In Original) on the: 

(i) 

Ministry of Housing and Lands – Acquisition and Use of Lands 
for Government Projects.  

(ii)  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  –  Lease 

and Use of Government Office Accommodation;  

(iii)  Ministry of Youth and Sports –Use and Maintenance of Sports 

Facilities;  

(iv)  Ministry  of  Education,  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education 
and Scientific Research – Maintenance of Government Primary 
and Secondary School Buildings.  

(w)  Activity  and  Performance  Report  of  the  National  Audit  Office  for  the 

Financial Year 2014. (In Original). 

(x)  Virement  (Contingencies)  Warrant  Nos.  1  to  3,  and  5  to  13  of  2015.  (In 

Original). 

(y)  Retrospective  Virement  (Contingencies)  Warrant  Nos.  14  and  15  of  2015. 

(In Original).  

(z)  Virement  Warrant  Nos.  1  to  27,  29  and  30,  32,  34  to  38  of  2015.  (In 

Original).       

(aa)  The  Freeport  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.  2)  Regulations  2015 

Government Notice No. 159 of 2015). 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

G. 

Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

H. 

 

 

 

I. 

 

J. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

The  Road  Traffic  (Crop  Season  2015)  Regulations  2015.  (Government 
Notice No. 109 of 2015).  
The  Public  Transport  (Buses)  Workers  Remuneration  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 127 of 2015).  
The  Road  Traffic  (Rehabilitation  Course  Fee  2015)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government  Notice  No.  109  of  2015).  (Government  Notice  No.  151  of 
2015). 

Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific 
Research – 
(a)    The  Annual  Report  and  Audited  Financial  Statements  of  the  Mauritius 

Qualifications Authority for the year 2012. 
The  Annual  Report  2011  of  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Training  and 
Development (MITD).  
The  Annual  Report  2012-2013  and  the  Audited  Financial  Statements  for 
December 2012 of the University of Mauritius.  

(b) 

(c) 

Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the  Morris 
Legacy Fund for the year ended 31 December 2014. 

Ministry of  Local Government  – 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

The Roche Bois Market/Fair (Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government 
Notice No. 110 of 2015).  
The  District  Council  of  Savanne  (Naming  of  Roads)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 111 of 2015).  
The  District  Council  of  Rivière  du  Rempart  (Traffic  Centre)  Regulations 
2015. (Government Notice No. 118 of 2015). 
The  Municipal  Council  of  Vacoas-Phoenix  (Street  naming)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 123 of 2015).  
The  District  Council  of  Moka  (Fees,  Dues  &  other Charges  for  Classified 
Trades) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 134     
of 2015).  
The  District  Council  of  Moka  (Fees,  Dues  &  other Charges  for  Classified 
Trades) (Amendment No. 3) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 135     
of 2015). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

K. 
 
 

 

 

L. 
 

 

 
 

 

 

11 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(l) 

The  District  Council  of  Moka  (Fees,  Dues  &  other  Charges  for  Classified 
Trades) (Amendment No. 4) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 136     
of 2015). 
The District Council of Flacq (Fees, Dues and other Charges for Classified 
Trades)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice  No.  140  of 
2015). 
The District Council of Flacq (Traffic Centre Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 141 of 2015). 
The  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  (Fees  for  Classified  Trade) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 145 of 2015).  
The  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  (Naming  of  Public  places) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 155 of 2015). 
The  District  Council  of  Savanne  (Traffic  Centre)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 156 of 2015). 

(m)  The District Council of Grand Port (Fees for Classified Trade) (Amendment 

No. 2) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 163 of 2015).  

Attorney-General’s Office – 
 
(a) 

The Revision of Laws (Revised Laws of Mauritius) Supplement – Issue 6) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 133 of 2015).  
The  Accounts  and  the  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial 
Statements of the Curator of Vacant Estates on the Curatelle Fund for the 
year ended 31 December 2014. (In Original)  
The  Curatelle  (Prescribed  Amount)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015. 
Government Notice No. 142 of 2015). 

(b) 

(c) 

Ministry of  Agro–Industry and Food Security – 
(a)   The  Wildlife  (Temporary  Prohibition  of  Hunting)  Regulations  2015. 

(Government Notice No. 114 of 2015).  

(b)   The Wildlife (Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 115 

of 2015).  

(c)   The Annual Report 2011 of Rose Belle Sugar Estate Board. 
(d)   The  Annual  Report  2012  of  the  Vallée  D’Osterlog  Endemic  Garden 

Foundation.  
(e)   The  Sugar 

Investment  Trust 

and 
Representatives) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 Government Notice 
160 of 2015. 

(Election  of  Directors 

(f)    The Annual Report 2011 of the Small Farmers Welfare Fund. 

 

 

 

12 

 

(g)   The Cane (Specification of Varieties (Amendment) Regulations 2015. 

(Government Notice No. 165 of 2015).  

M.  Ministry of Arts and Culture – 
 

(a) 

The Annual Report 2011 of the Mauritius Marathi Cultural Centre Trust. 

 

 

N. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

Rules  of  Election  2015  of  the  Rights  Management  Society.  Rules  2015 
(Government Notice No. 121 of 2015). 

(c)   The Annual Report and Financial Statements of the English-Speaking Union 

for the year ending 31 December 2014. 

Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 
(a) 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  9)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 103 of 2015). 
The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 10) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 104 of 2015). 
The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 11) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 112 of 2015). 

(b) 

(c) 

(d)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 12) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 116 of 2015). 

(e)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 13) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 117 of 2015). 

(f)  The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Imports)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2015. (Government Notice No. 122 of 2015). 

(g)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 14) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 130 of 2015). 

(h)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 15) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 131 of 2015). 

(i)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 16) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 137 of 2015). 

13 

(j)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 17) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 138 of 2015). 

(k)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 18) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 144 of 2015). 

(l)  The  Consumer  Protection  (National  Price  Consultative  Council)  Regulations 

2015). Government Notice No. 148 of 2015). 

(m)  The Annual Report 2012 of the State Trading Corporation. 
(n)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 19) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 154 of 2015). 

(o)  The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Sale  of  Imported  Live  Animals  for 
Home  Slaughter)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice  
No. 158 of 2015). 

(p)  The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 20) Regulations 2015 (Government 
Notice No. 161 of 2015). 

(q)  The Annual Report 2013 of the Fashion and Design Institute. 

Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development  and Family Welfare – 
The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National  Women  Entrepreneur  Council  and 
the  National  Women 
Entrepreneur Council Achievements for the year ended 31 December 2012. 

Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reform, 
Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation– 
(a)   The  National  Identity  Card  (Extension  of  Validity  Period)  (Amendment    

No. 2) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 132 of 2015).  

(b)   The  Financial  Services  (Consolidated  Licensing  and  Fees)  (Amendment) 

Rules 2015. (Government Notice No. 146 of 2015). 

(c)   The  Private  Pension  Schemes  (Auditor  and  Actuary)  Rules  2015. 

(Government Notice No. 147 of 2015). 

Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives – 
The Co-operative Law Advisory Committee Regulations 2015. (Government Notice 
No. 152 of 2015).   

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

O. 
 

P. 

 

 

 

Q. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

14 

R. 
 

Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions – 
(a) 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board (TEDPB) for the year 
ended 31 December 2012. 
The National Pensions (Non-citizens and Absent Persons) Regulations 2015. 
(Government Notice No. 126 of 2015).  

 

(b) 

S. 

 

 

T. 

 

 

U. 
 

 

V. 
 

 

Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 
Islands – 
(a) 

The  Annual  Report  of  the  Seafarers  Welfare  Fund  for  the  years  ended  
31 December 2012 and 2013.  
The Fisheries and Marine Resources (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 
2015. (Government Notice No. 106 of 2015). 

(b) 

Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management 
(a) 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National  Environment  Fund  for  the  year  ended  31  December  2013.  (In 
Original). 
The  Environment  Protection  (Banning  of  Plastic  Bags)  Regulations  2015.  
(Government Notice No. 153 of 2015). 

(b) 

Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms – 
(a) 

The Civil Establishment Order 2015. (Government Notice No. 119 of 2015).  

(b) 

The  Civil  Establishment  (Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly)  Order  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 120 of 2015).  

Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training – 
(a) 

The Annual Report of the Export Processing Zone Labour Welfare Fund for 
the period January 2013 to February 2014.  
The Occupational Safety and Health (Employees’ Lodging Accommodation) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 164 of 2015).  

(b) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

OBITUARY 

 DR. A. P. J. ABDUL KALAM - FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF 

INDIA 

The Prime Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is with a heavy heart and a deep 
sense of loss that I rise to pay tribute to the memory of one of the most illustrious sons of 
India and an eminent scientist who devoted his entire life to the service of his motherland and 
touched the world in his own unique way.  I am of course referring to late Dr. A. P. J. Abdul 
Kalam, former President of the Republic of India who passed away on 27 July 2015 at the 
age of 83. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Dr. Abdul Kalam was a man of exceptional qualities who 
rose  from  humble  beginnings  to  become  one  of  India’s  most  accomplished  and  acclaimed 
leaders. His life journey is a perfect illustration of the triumph of perseverance, courage and 
determination and is a source of great inspiration to millions of people in India and around 
the world, specially the youth.  In him, we see a remarkable genius who earned his rightful 
place in history through struggle and faith.  He was a great visionary, driven by grand and 
noble ideals and a deep faith in the universality of man, which made of him a beacon of peace 
and harmony. He indeed personified the wisdom of India. Throughout his life, he remained 
connected with the masses, so much so, that he became known as the People’s President and 
will remain so for a long time to come.  The scope of his accomplishments and the admiration 
that  he  so  rightly  earned  made  of  him  a  living  legend.    A  man  of  boundless  energy,  he 
showed us the power of action.  Even when out of office, he retained his intellectual aura and 
remained an inspiring personality to an entire generation.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as a scientist, a literary and a visionary, Dr. Abdul Kalam 
was an embodiment of pure intellect. But it was his stint as President of the Republic of India 
that endeared him to his fellow countrymen.  He was the man who redefined the role of the 
Indian  politician  by  earning  the  title  of  “the  People’s  President”  during  his  tenure  of  the 
highest  office  of  his  country.  He  professed  and  practised  a  patriotism  that  transcended 
religion  and  politics.  For  him,  religion,  caste,  language  and  other  criteria  that  divide  India 
were simply unacceptable. 

 

16 

Dr. Abdul Kalam was born on 15 October 1931 in a modest family in Rameswaram, 
Tamil Nadu. He attended the Schwartz Matriculation School in Ramanathapuram, graduated 
in  physics  from  Saint  Joseph  College,  Tiruchirappalli  in  1954,  after  which  he  joined  the 
Madras  Institute  of  Technology  to  study  aerospace  engineering  in  1955.    His  professional 
career  was  quite  exceptional,  spanning  some  forty  years  and  serving  his  country  at  the 
Defence  Research  and  Development  Organisation  and 
the  Indian  Space  Research 
Organisation. 

Dr.  Abdul  Kalam  was  instrumental  in  many  major  projects,  especially  in  India’s 
civilian space programme.  He also served as Chief Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister 
from 1992 to 1999. 

In  2002,  Dr.  Abdul  Kalam  was  unanimously  elected  as  the  11th  President  of  the 
Republic of India. He greatly enhanced the prestige and the stature of the office by serving 
with  his  usual  distinction,  selfless  devotion  and  his  utmost  commitment  to  constitutional 
values and norms. 

Dr. Abdul Kalam’s achievements and contribution were recognised both in India and 
abroad. He was in fact the recipient of several prestigious national and international awards, 
including the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest honour. He was also an accomplished writer and 
penned many articles and books including India 2020, Wings of Fire and Ignited Minds. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Dr.  Abdul  Kalam  was  a  friend  of  Mauritius.  His  death, 
therefore,  is  a  great  loss  for  Mauritius.    We  still  remember  and  cherish  the  memories  of 
President Abdul Kalam’s official visit to our country in March 2006, as the Chief Guest for 
our National Day Celebrations. He won the heart of all Mauritians by his simplicity, warmth 
and disarming friendliness. 

In  a  very  insightful  and  elevating  address  to  Ministers,  MPs  and  members  of  the 
scientific  community  of  Mauritius,  Dr.  Kalam  spoke  on  the  “Evolution  of  Enlightened 
Societies” and the need to bequeath our youth a peaceful, happy, prosperous and safe nation. 
To achieve this, he prescribed a three dimensional doctrine with three components – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

Education with a value system;  
Religion transforming into spirituality, and  
Economic  development  for  societal  transformation.  He  shared  with  us  the 
following philosophical lesson from the Bhagavat Gita, I quote - 

 

17 

 “See the flower, how generously it distributes perfume and honey. It gives to 
all, gives freely of its love. When its work is done, it falls away quietly. Try to 
be like the flower, unassuming despite all its qualities”.  

Dr. Kalam said that this was a beautiful message for all generations on the integration 
of minds and the universal mind. The message was that “the best component of religion can 
be  transformed  into  a  spiritual  force  that  will  shape  society”.  He  concluded  his  speech  by 
sharing this beautiful thought propounded by Saint Panjali in the Yoga Sutra in 500 BC, I 
quote – 

“When you are inspired by some great purpose, some extraordinary project, all your 
thoughts  break  their  bounds.  Your  mind  transcends  limitations,  your  consciousness 
expands in every direction, and you find yourself in new, great and wonderful world. 
Dormant forces, faculties and talents come alive, and you discover yourself to be a 
greater person by far than you ever dreamt yourself to be.”  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, during his memorable visit to Mauritius, Dr. Kalam not only 
addressed and interacted with the intelligentsia but made it a point to meet the local fishing 
community. He was one of those profound geniuses who could walk with kings yet keep the 
common touch of simplicity and humility. Besides, this is what earned him a golden opinion 
from one and all and enabled him to ignite the minds of the young Indians and unleash the 
energy within the whole nation. 

After leaving office in 2007, Dr. Abdul Kalam returned to civilian life, to his passion, 
that is, teaching and educating and interacting with students and the youth in whom he had 
placed an unbounded faith for the future of  India. Thus he became  a Visiting Professor at 
Indian  Institute  of  Management  (IIM)  Shillong,  IIM  Ahmedabad  and  IIM  Indore  and 
coincidentally, he passed away after suffering a massive cardiac arrest during a lecture at the 
IIM Shillong. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Dr.  Kalam  was  no  ordinary  mortal,  but  a  gift  of  God  to 
humanity.  The  demise  of  such  an  iconic  leader  is  a  loss  not  only  to  India,  but  also  to  the 
world community.  He has left a rich legacy not only to the people of India, but to the whole 
world.    His  love  and  breadth  of  vision  for  his  motherland  and  peaceful  co-existence  of 
multiple faiths are an enduring lesson of patriotism and tolerance. His exceptional intellectual 

 

18 

qualities, his noble high-mindedness, his abiding concern for the well-being of his people will 
continue to inspire and live in the hearts of his countrymen for generations to come. 

For us in Mauritius, the enlightened vision that Dr. Abdul Kalam had of the world 
coupled with his beautiful personality, his sincerity, wisdom and the uniqueness of his human 
touch will continue to be a source of inspiration for many years to come. We will miss him 
deeply. May God bless his soul! 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  may  I  request  you  to  be  kind  enough  to  convey  to  the 
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the deep condolences of this Assembly at the loss of such a noble 
and magnificent soul. 

Thank you. 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with the 
unexpected demise of Dr. Abdul Kalam, we all lost a wonderful human being, the people’s 
President, an eminent scientist, a great leader, but also, a very special friend of Mauritius. As 
soon as I learnt of Dr. Abdul Kalam’s demise, I respectfully requested the President of the 
Republic of India to convey to his family and friends the expression of my genuine sorrow. I, 
therefore, join with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in requesting you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
to convey to the Lok Sabha, but also to the Republic of India, the Government, the people of 
India,  the  family  and  friends  of  late  Dr.  Abdul  Kalam,  the  sincere  expression  of  our 
condolences. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, I associate myself with the tribute paid by the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  to  late  Dr.  Abdul  Kalam, 
former President of the Republic of India and undertake to convey to the Speaker of the Lok 
Sabha the deep condolences of the House. 

 

(1) MR JEAN SYLVIO L’HOMME 
(2) SIR LOUIS MARCEL PIERRE SIMONET 
(3) MR LOUIS RIVALTZ QUENETTE 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is with deep sadness and sorrow that 
   
we learned the demise recently of three of our distinguished former colleagues who had also 
devoted their life and career to the service of the nation. I am referring to Mr Jean Sylvio 

 

19 

L’Homme  and  Sir  Louis  Marcel  Pierre  Simonet,  both  former  MPs,  and  Mr  Louis  Rivaltz 
Quenette, former Clerk of the then Legislative Assembly. 

Mr Jean Sylvio L’Homme passed away on 18 May 2015 at the age of 92.   

Mr L’Homme was born on 07 April 1923 at Port Louis. Hon. Members will recall that 
Mr  L’Homme  was  among  the  freedom  fighters  who  actively  campaigned  for  the 
independence of our country under the banner of the Labour Party. 

He stood as candidate of the Independence Party at the 1967 General Election in the 

Constituency of Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière, but was not returned.  

However,  Mr  L’Homme  became  a  Member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  under  the 
Best  Loser  System  in  1968  when  he  was  called  to  replace  hon.  Guy  Forget  who  was 
appointed as our Ambassador to Paris. 

Mr L’Homme also participated in the 1976 General Election in the same Constituency 

as a Labour Party candidate, but was not returned. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Mr  L’Homme  was  a  man  of  conviction  and  served  his 
constituents  as  well  as  the  country  with  devotion  and  distinction.    Mr  L’Homme  is  also 
remembered as a savvy businessman and a stylish and always elegant gentleman. 

Mr L’Homme leaves a bereaved family among whom his daughter, Mrs Marie France 

Roussety who is a former Member of Parliament, Minister and Ambassador of Mauritius. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Sir  Louis  Marcel  Pierre  Simonet  passed  away  on  15  July 

2015 at the age of 81.  

Sir Pierre was born on 06 March in 1934 at Curepipe.  After his secondary education 
at St. Esprit College, he succeeded his father Marcel as Director of the Pharmacie Simonet at 
Curepipe Road where his sense of service to the community and his generosity for the poor 
people was very much appreciated. 

Sir  Pierre  started  his  political  career  alongside  late  Sir  Gaëtan  Duval.  He  became 
Municipal Councillor for the town of Curepipe in 1960. He was elected Vice-President of the 
Council  in  1962  and  President  in  1964.  Sir  Pierre  also  served  as  Mayor  of  the  town  of 
Curepipe in 1980. 

 

20 

In  1976,  he  stood  as  candidate  for  the  general  election  in  Constituency  No.  17  – 
Curepipe and Midlands – under the banner of the PMSD and was elected First Member of the 
said  constituency.  He  served  the  Legislative  Assembly  until  1982.    He  participated  in  the 
1982 General Election in the same constituency, but was not returned.  

During  his  lifetime,  Sir  Pierre  was  very  active  in  socio-cultural,  religious  and 
philanthropic  activities.  He  was  a  founding  member  of  the  Lions  Club  of  Curepipe  and 
presided over the Centre Culturel d’Expression Française from 1983 to 1996. 

After his retirement from active politics, Sir Pierre continued to serve his country as 
Board member of several institutions such as the Central Housing Authority, the Probation 
Hostel  Committee,  the  Business  Parks  of  Mauritius  and  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service 
Commission. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in recognition of the outstanding service to the community 
and to his country, Sir Pierre was awarded the honours of Knighthood of the United Kingdom 
and the Chevalier de l’Ordre National du Mérite français. 

Finally, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like now to pay tribute to Mr Louis Rivaltz 
Quenette, former Clerk of the then Legislative Assembly who passed away on 11 July 2015 
at the age of 86. 

Mr Quenette was born on 17 September 1928 at Port Louis. He received his primary 
education  at  the  Immaculée  Conception  and  Champ  de  Lort  School  and  his  secondary 
education at the Bhujoharry College. 

Mr  Quenette  took  up  employment  in  the  public  service  in  1949.  He  joined  the 
Legislative Assembly as Senior Executive Officer in 1960. He continued his service in the 
legislature and successively occupied the posts of Office Superintendent, Clerk Assistant and 
Deputy Clerk.  He was appointed as Clerk of the Legislative Assembly in 1986 and served 
the Assembly in that capacity till 1991. After his retirement, given his extensive knowledge 
in  parliamentary  practice  and  procedures,  Mr  Quenette  remained  in  the  service  of  the 
Assembly as Adviser from 1991 to 1996. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Mr Quenette nurtured a strong passion for reading. He also 
took to writing and became a prolific writer, authoring a series of works, mainly about the 
history of Mauritius, famous political figures and his native town of Port Louis. 

 

21 

He obtained le Prix Jean Lebrun in 1965. He was conferred the honours of Officer of 
the British Empire in 1980. In 2013, he was elevated to the rank of Grand Officer of the Star 
and Key of the Indian Ocean for long and distinguished service in the public service and for 
his contribution in the fields of history and literature. Mr Quenette is remembered not only as 
a grand commis de l’État, but also as a man of high intellect and wisdom. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I request you to be kind enough to direct the Clerk of 
the  National  Assembly  to  convey  to  the  grieved  families  the  deep  condolences  of  this 
Assembly.  

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir. 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with the 
departure of Mr Jean Sylvio L’Homme, the Labour Party has lost un vrai travailliste and I, 
therefore,  convey,  specially  to  his  daughter,  who  is  here  with  us  on  this  occasion,  the 
expression of my sincere sadness.  

With the departure of Sir Louis Marcel Pierre Simonet, c’est une des figures les plus 

connues de Curepipe qui nous quitte.  

And  I  have  known  Mr  Louis  Rivaltz  Quenette  well.  He  has  been  not  only  a  great 
Clerk of our Assembly, but a powerful historian. I, therefore, join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
to  request  you  to  convey  to  the  family  and  friends  of  the  deceased  the  expression  of  our 
condolences. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, I associate myself to the tribute paid by the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition to late Mr Jean Sylvio L’Homme, 
Sir  Louis  Marcel  Pierre  Simonet,  former  hon.  Members  and  Mr  Louis  Rivaltz  Quenette, 
former Clerk of the then Legislative Assembly and direct the Clerk of the National Assembly 
to convey to the bereaved families the deep condolences of the House. 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

(1)    COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION    (AFRICA 

REGION) 

(i)  MADAM SPEAKER – PRESIDENT – ELECTION 
(ii)  HON. V. BALOOMOODY – EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE - 

MAURITIUS BRANCH REPRESENTATIVE  

 

22 

(iii)  HON. MRS D. BOYGAH – MEMBER – COMMONWEALTH 

WOMEN PARLIAMENTARIANS 
 

(2)   ICAC PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE - HON. D. SESUNGKUR - 

RESIGNATION 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, I have two announcements to make. I have to 
inform  the  House  that  Madam  Speaker  led  a  delegation  to  Nairobi,  Kenya  from  08  to  15 
August  2015  to  attend  the  46th  Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Association    (CPA)  (Africa 
Region)  Conference.  On  14  August  2015,  Madam  Speaker  was  unanimously  elected 
President of the CPA (Africa Region) at the Annual General Assembly.  

At the same Conference, hon. Vedasingam V. Baloomoody, MP, Chairperson of the 
Public  Accounts  Committee,  was  nominated  representative  of  the  Mauritius  Branch  of  the 
CPA (Africa Region) on the Executive Committee thereof and hon. Mrs Deveena Boygah, 
MP,  Parliamentary  Private  Secretary,  was  nominated  Member  of  Commonwealth  Women 
Parliamentarians of the CPA (Africa Region).  

Hon.  Members,  I  also  have  to  inform  the  House  that  on  17  June  2015,  hon.  D. 
Sesungkur, MP, submitted his resignation to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as Member serving 
on  the  Parliamentary  Committee  set  up  to  monitor  the  functioning  of  the  Independent 
Commission  Against  Corruption  and  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  accepted  his 
resignation thereafter.  

On 22 June 2015, pursuant to section 59 (2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister designated hon. Rajcoomar Rampertab, MP, Parliamentary Private 
Secretary to serve on the Parliamentary Committee in replacement thereof. 

I thank you. 

 

23 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

EX-BRITISH AMERICAN INVESTMENT CO. (MTIUS) LTD. - ASSETS & 

LIABILITIES  

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  ex-British  American 
Investment Co. (Mtius) Ltd., he will state - 

(a)  the  estimated  value  of  the  assets  and  liabilities  thereof,  as  reported  by  the 

conservators/administrators appointed therefor;  

(b) the guarantees given to date to the - 

(i) 139,000 pension policyholders and 15,000 single premium policyholders of the 

ex-British American Insurance Co. Ltd., and  

(ii) investors of the ex-Bramer Assets Management;  

(c) the number of job losses at the companies of the ex-British American Investment 
Co. (Mtius) Ltd., and at other companies which transacted business therewith, as 
at to date;  

(d) if the small suppliers of Courts Ltd. have been paid Rs44 m., and  

(e)  where  matters  stand  regarding  the  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital,  Iframac  Ltd.  and 

Courts Ltd. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  understand  that  the  question  of  the  hon. 
Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  in  relation  to  British  American  Investment  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd, 
which is the holding company of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd, the insurance company. In fact, the 
confusion  in  the  names  is  indicative  of  the  modus  operandi  of  the  Directors  of  the  BAI 
Group. I shall therefore answer in relation to BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd, the insurance company. 
Also, it is apposite to note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that reference to ex-BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd 
as stated in the question is not accurate as I am informed by the FSC that the licence of this 
company has not been suspended or revoked. 

 

24 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  the  House  is  aware,  we  have  been  dealing  with  an 
unprecedented  crisis  which  could  have  seriously  jeopardised  the  financial  soundness  and 
social stability of our beloved country. This goes well beyond party politics.  

I fully concur with the statement made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition to this 

august Assembly on 28 April 2015, and I quote - 

“(…) I believe it is vital to go back to square one and to remind ourselves why we 
have come to where we are, an awful mess, a national catastrophe (….) why we have 
come  to  where  we  are,  is  because  as  from  2005,  the  then  Prime  Minister  and 
Government  did  not  allow  either  the  FSC  or  Bank  of  Mauritius,  or  even  more,  to 
function as independent regulators.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the fraudulent malpractices and the mechanisms of the Ponzi 
scheme are now well established. In fact, as far back as 29 March 2011, the auditors, KPMG, 
had  already  disclosed  the  fraud  and  the  resulting  losses  of  the  insurance  company  and  its 
related  subsidiaries  to  the  audit  committee  and  directors  of  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.  The 
insurance company, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, had already collapsed as far back as 2009. I am 
now tabling a copy of the presentation delivered on 29 March 2011 by the Auditors on the 
Results  of  Audit  for  the  financial  year  ending  31  December  2010,  which  unequivocally 
highlights the following - 

(i)  At page 6, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for the financial years 2004 to 2010, the Insurance 
Business consistently recorded Operating Losses. Only for the year ending December 
2010, the Insurance business reported an operating loss of Rs1,760,830,000. 

(ii)  At page 10, with regard to Single Insurance Premiums, the famous Super Cash Back 
Gold (SCBG), Net Deficits were recorded for years 2008 to 2010 with a shortfall of 
Rs704,302,000  for  the  year  ending  31  December  2010.  KPMG  disclosed  that  the 
losses  would  amount  to  Rs6,071,398,000  for  the  financial  year  ending  December 
2013, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

(iii) The  actuarial  report,  which  is  contained  in  the  presentation,  concluded  that,  and  I 

quote - 

“Policyholders’  funds  being  invested  in  assets  in  related  entities  where  minimal 
return obtained and recoverability low.”  

This, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, proves the Ponzi scheme; 

 

25 

(iv) At page 11, the heading ‘Single Premiums Expected Return’ - KPMG stated that net 
deposits  should  bring  returns  of  10.5%  to  enable  the  company  to  pay  guaranteed 
returns. KPMG questioned, and I quote - 

“Is the company yielding such returns on its investments?”  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, they were promising people in the towns and villages returns 
of up to 10%, 12%, 14% within Super Cash Back Gold (SCBG) and their investment 
products when they could not even generate more than 1 to 2% and had to use funds 
from new investors to repay the old investors. This again proves the Ponzi scheme. 

(v)  At  page  13  –  KPMG  reported  that  by  December  2013,  cash  deficit  -  and  we  are 
talking in cash terms - would amount to Rs13,600,000,000. That was already stated to 
all the Directors of the BAI Group and to the full audit committee of the BAI Group 
as  far  back  as  29  March  2011  that  by  December  2013  the  cash  deficit  would  be 
Rs13,600,000,000.  They  all  knew,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  In  actual  fact,  the 
consolidated  accounts  of  the  holding  company  based  in  the  Bahamas,  Klad 
Investments Ltd confirmed that as at December 2012… 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain, please, can you answer the question?  
Mr Bhadain: I am coming to that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I have to set the scene to 
explain the specific answers. I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition is also interested in 
finding out what exactly happened before I give specific answers to his questions. 

Well, if I may be allowed to continue, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

So,  Klad  Investments  Ltd.,  the  holding  company  of  the  group  confirmed  that  as  at 
December  2012,  the  excess  liabilities  of  the  group  over  its  assets  amounted  to 
USD302,000,000 which is above Rs10,000,000,000. This is in actual fact when KPMG had 
already stated that it would be Rs13,600,000,000. 

(vi) More  importantly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  at  page  15,  it  is  disclosed  that  the 

company had been involved in, and I quote – 
“Round-tripping of transactions in 2009.” 

The diagram shows how the company engineered a loan of Rs3,600,000,000 by the 
transfer of funds… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain, please, answer parts (a), (b), (c), (d) 

and (e) of the question. Thank you. 

 

26 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. But, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it needs to be explained. The context 

has to be put into. 

But anyway I will come to the specific answers. 

(Interruptions) 

So,  with  regard  to  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  then 
Conservators  submitted  an  interim  report  on  17  April  2015  to  the  Financial  Services 
Commission (FSC) and subsequently, a final report on 02 July 2015 on the estimated value of 
assets and liabilities of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd and its related entities based on their actuarial 
and professional valuations.  

In their  final report, the Conservators reported that, in terms of assets, the reported 
values as at 30 April 2015 were Rs13.1 billion and the insurance liabilities were Rs25 billion. 
Now, that again confirms the Ponzi which had already been detected as far back as 2009, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

With regard to part (b) (i), I am informed that BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd had a portfolio of 
135,283 recurring premium policies - and I must highlight to the attention of the hon. Leader 
of Opposition that they are not pension policies as mentioned in the question, but recurring 
insurance premium policies - and 24,690 single endowment policies, which is, of course, the 
Super Cash Back Gold. In respect of the recurring premium policies, Government has given 
its commitment to safeguard the interest of those who have contributed to these policies. That 
was  done  within  24  hours  of  the  scandal  breaking  up,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  This  has 
necessitated the carving out of Rs6.5 billion worth of assets by the Special Administrators 
from BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd to the newly created National Insurance Co. Ltd. Since 07 August 
2015,  the  National  Insurance  Co.  Ltd,  which  deals  with  both  life  insurance  and  general 
insurance, has been in operation and the 135,283 policies are well safeguarded and are being 
serviced.    In  fact,  the  insurance  company,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  now  growing 
significantly in value and new policyholders are subscribing to new policies. 

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, regarding the 24,690 single endowment policies, Super Cash 
Back Gold, which was held by 14,570 policyholders who have contributed a total of Rs19.2 
billion  in  capital,  Government  took  the  bold  step  and  decided  to  repay  12,001  policies 
representing a capital amount of less than Rs500,000. 11,436 policies for a total amount of 
Rs2,374,622,099 have already been repaid since 15 May 2015. 

 

27 

With  regard  to  policyholders  having  invested  Rs500,000  or  more,  Rs3,484,000,000 

have already been repaid to 6,968 policyholders on 30 June 2015.  

The  remaining  amount  of  Rs12.8  billion  payable  to  the  second  batch  of  the  Super 
Cash  Back  Gold  policyholders  would  be  converted  into  debentures,  to  be  issued  by  the 
National Property Fund Limited (NPFL) annually in 5 equal tranches of Rs2.6 billion. These 
debentures would carry zero coupon rate, with redemption dates of 30 June 2016; 30 June 
2017; 30 June 2018; 30 June 2019 and 30 June 2020. 

With regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, I am informed by 
the  FSC  that,  with  regard  to  the  investors  of  Bramer  Asset  Management  Ltd,  there  were 
different funds under management and this is another way where they have decided to go in 
the towns and villages and loot the people of this country.  

I wish to inform the House that - 
(a)  With  regard  to  A.L.E.E.F  Ltd,  sufficient  assets  were  available  to  cover  for 
liabilities  amounting  to  Rs58  m.  I  am  also  informed  by  the  FSC  that  the 
existing  CIS  Manager  has  been  replaced  by  a  new  one  and  the  fund  is 
operating normally; 

(b)  With  regard  to  Emerging  Africa  Bond  Fund  (EABF),  sufficient  assets  were 
available  to  cover  the  liabilities  of  the  Fund  amounting  to  Rs150  m.  I  am 
informed  that  one  CIS  Manager  has  already  expressed  interest  to  take  over 
management of the Fund, which will continue to operate normally also; 

(c)  With regard to Bramer Property Fund Limited (BPF), Discretionary Portfolio 
Management  Fund  (DPM),  Hennessy  Investment  Trust  (HIT),  Hennessy 
Capital  Limited  (HCL),  and  Bramser  Services  Bond  (BSB)  because  the 
hospitals  were  also  issuing  bonds,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  6,362  investors, 
including  individuals  and  charitable  organisations  have  invested  a  total 
amount of Rs4.3 billion. 

So, with regard to BPF, DPM, HIT, HCL and BSB, Government again took a bold 
step, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and agreed to repay 85% of the capital of those having invested 
less than Rs500,000 and 80% for those having invested Rs500,000 or more.  With regard to 
3,498  investors  who  had  invested  less  than  Rs500,000,  the  total  repayment  would  have 
amounted to Rs430 m. 2,294 persons registered their claims with NPFL, out of which 1,444 
were repaid on 31 July 2015 for a total amount of Rs240,495,294, the remaining applications 
are still being processed as their documentations were incomplete and they will be paid in 
due course when a proper documentation is submitted. 

 

28 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the remaining amount of Rs3 billion payable in respect of 
2,864 investors would be converted into debentures and issued by the National Property Fund 
Limited (NPFL) annually in 5 equal tranches of Rs600 m. in a similar manner to Super Cash 
Back Gold. These debentures would carry zero coupon rate, with redemption dates of 30 June 
2016; 30 June 2017; 30 June 2018; 30 June 2019, and 30 June 2020. I am informed by the 
NPFL that the needful is being done for the issue of the first tranche of the 30 June 2016 
debenture. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, regarding job losses, I am pleased to inform 
the House that contrary to many press reports which stated that there are a number of jobs 
which are being lost on a weekly basis, I must say, at Apollo Hospital, no job has been lost 
except for certain members of top management who have been asked to go. With regard to 
Iframac, no job has been lost to date and the process regarding  Iframac is ongoing.  With 
regard to Courts which employed over 900 persons, the new company which has taken over 
Courts has maintained 80% of the jobs within Courts. With regard to the Insurance Company 
BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd,  the  company  is  operating  normally  now  as  National  Insurance 
Company  Limited  and,  again,  except  for  a  few  jobs  at  senior  management  level,  all  the 
employees  are  working.  So,  there  have  not  been  any  major  job  losses  in  any  of  those 
companies.  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please, continue! 
Mr Bhadain:  Yes.  As I stated, in Courts 80% of the jobs are being maintained. 20%, 
probably the new company will deal with that, and they will operate on a last in, first out 
basis. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 
Training that with regard to GRNW Boatyard, Publico Ltd, Yukondale and Voyageur Travel 
Tour which are all the companies which are operating within the group, 101 persons, who 
were working in those companies, had their employment terminated and they have all been 
dealt  with  according  to  law.  The  former  employees  are  being  compensated  under  the 
Employment Rights Act and will benefit from the Workfare Programme. As far as the other 
companies which transacted business with the BAI Group, I am informed that no job losses 
have been reported as at date. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, concerning payment of Rs44 m. to the small 
suppliers  of  Courts  Ltd,  my  colleagues,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development and the hon. Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives have met the 

 

29 

representatives of Barclays, State Bank of Mauritius, Banque des Mascareignes along with 
the Special Administrators on this issue. I am pleased to announce, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
that the banks, in a spirit of solidarity, understanding the social issues involved, have agreed 
to earmark Rs44 m. from the total amount of Rs390 m. which is owed to them, for payment 
to  those  small  suppliers  of  Courts.  Subsequently,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development and the hon. Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives met the SME 
suppliers to explain the modus operandi for effecting payment to them. 

I am informed that payment to the SME suppliers would be effected as soon as the 

procedures for the sale of Courts (Mtius) Ltd are completed. 

With regard to part (e) of the question, in respect of Apollo Bramwell Hospital, the 
then Special Administrators have invited bids. However, the bids received were not reflective 
of  the  real  value  of  the  hospital  and  its  operations  as  compared  to  the  market  value  as 
determined by the Conservators themselves on 17 April 2015. I am informed by the FSC that 
the hospital operations and assets have been transferred to the National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
and  NIC  Healthcare  Limited  on  25  August  2015  by  the  Special  Administrators.  The 
operations  of  the  hospital  are  now  under  the  purview  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development  and the employees will be transferred to NIC Healthcare  Limited. 
This will bring finality and certainty to the concerns of some 800 employees of the hospital. 

With regard to Iframac Limited (Transport Division), I am informed by the FSC that 
two interested parties, namely GBH and Fleet Africa, who had expressed interest to make a 
bid to take over  Iframac as  a  going  concern, were not  entertained by the previous Special 
Administrators  while  on  the  other  hand,  companies  which  were  not  part  of  this  bidding 
process in the likes of CFAO represented by IMC, Axess and Leal, were granted confidential 
information on employees, payroll, terms of service, salaries and also invoicing. 

I am further informed by the FSC, and I quote – 

“The Special Administrators never informed the Board that the franchise agreement 
of  Mercedes,  Peugeot  and  Mitsubishi  included  a  clause  whereby  the  brand  would 
contractually be lost as a result of the appointment of an Administrator by the then 
Board of Directors of Iframac Ltd.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I also wish to inform the House that with regard to Iframac, a 
meeting  has  been  held  yesterday  with  the  representatives  of  Fleet  Africa,  the  trade  union 
representatives of Iframac Limited and the employees, and also E.A.L. Man Hin & Sons Ltd 

 

30 

who have expressed their interest to join in a consortium so that the Honda brand can now be 
used by New Iframac Motors for the sale of cars. Today, we are in the process of discussing 
and  finalising  the  agreement  between  the  New  Iframac  Motors  Ltd.,  Fleet  Africa  and  also 
E.A.L. Man Hin & Sons Ltd and there are various options which are on the table and we will 
be enlightened by this afternoon. 

With regard to Courts, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, again, there has been quite a lot of 
erroneous  reports  which  have  been  made  in  the  Press  regarding  Courts  Asia  Hillbrow  and 
also Mammoth represented by Mr David Isaacs. The situation is very clear. The FSC decided 
to  instruct  the  Special  Administrators  that  no  exclusivity  should  be  given  to  any  bidders. 
According to their process, the Special Administrators decided that they were going to have a 
preferred bidder, but that was in accordance with their procedures that they have established 
themselves.  The  reason  why  the  FSC  did  not  want  to  give  any  exclusivity  is  because 
transparency  would  be  lost  and  it  would  not  be  in  line  with  all  good  practices  of  good 
governance, because if you give exclusivity to only one person, then you will not have the 
benefit of both bids. Now, when both bids were considered - because Special Administrators 
have  already  engaged  with  both  companies  -  they  submitted  a  report  on  16  July  2015, 
showing  both  bids.  They  were  told  to  continue  the  negotiations  with  both  bidders  and,  at 
some time, they decided to disengage with Mammoth represented by Mr David Isaacs and to 
continue negotiations only with Courts Asia represented by the company Hillbrow so much 
so that Mammoth decided to write directly to the FSC and say: ‘What do we do because they 
are  not  talking  to  us  anymore?’  And  the  FSC  said:  ‘You  send  your  final  bid  to  the 
Administrators and you copy it to the Board of the FSC’, which was done. And on the basis 
of both bids which were received, the FSC made an informed decision, mainly based on the 
social  aspects  because,  as  I  have  explained  before,  with  regard  to  the  financial  aspect  of 
Courts, Rs44 m. is going to the Small and Medium Enterprises and Rs390 m. is owed to the 
banks based on fixed charges which are there on the properties. So, in financial terms, the 
Special  Administrators  would  not  have  been  able  to  bring  one  rupee  which  was  going  to 
repay insurance policyholders. Therefore, the social aspect was more important in terms of 
preserving the jobs of the employees, in terms of preserving the salaries and the conditions of 
service of the employees and, thirdly, in terms of maintaining the years of service of those 
employees as well. Now, both on the social side and the financial side, the FSC was happy to 
go ahead with the… 

 

31 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please! Excuse me for interrupting. Will your 

answer be much longer? 

Mr Bhadain: No. I am just finishing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. 

Mr  Bhadain:  So,  the  FSC  was  very  happy  with  the  bid,  informed  the  Minister 
accordingly,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Insurance  (Amendment)  Act  and,  of 
course, I went to Cabinet to seek Cabinet’s approval which was obtained. Sorry, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir!  

Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I want you to give us some extra time after 
what has happened. If I can start on the first part of my question; at first, the ex-conservators 
estimated that there would be a surplus of Rs6 billion comparing assets and liabilities. And 
then, as the hon. Minister told us, when an Interim Progress Report was submitted to the FSC 
on 07 April 2015, that Rs6 billion surplus turned into a Rs12 m. deficit, d’un trou, donc, de R 
12 milliards. And now, we are told that a final report was submitted on 02 July and I did not 
catch all the figures. Am I right from the figures quoted to say that this deficit, le trou¸ has 
now grown up to Rs19 billion and can I ask the hon. Minister whether this final report like 
the Interim Report which was made public, will be made public and circulated? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Well,  firstly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  not  aware  that  the 
Conservators ever reported any surplus. I thought it was always a deficit which was reported. 
Now, the figures I have quoted are the figures which have been provided to me by the FSC 
based on the final report submitted by the Conservators. So, these figures are, according to 
the FSC, the accurate ones, which I believe they are.  

With regard to the deficits which the hon. Leader of the Opposition is referring to, the 
situation  is  very  simple,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  and  we  have  always  operated  in  all 
transparency.  There  is  Rs19  billion  which  had  to  be  repaid  to  the  Super  Cash  Back  Gold 
insurance policyholders.  

Mr Bérenger: My question is: what is the deficit as per the final report whereas in the 

interim report it was officially put at Rs12 billion? 

Mr Bhadain: The final figure is what it is. It is in the final report as I have quoted 
before. That is the end of the matter as far as I am concerned based on what the FSC has 

 

32 

submitted to me, but I am also explaining what the real situation is. I am sure the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition will be interested to know. 

Mr Bérenger: Can we know whether he will make that final report public, circulate it 

and whether the deficit has grown to Rs19 billion? 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding the final report of the Conservators, 
I have no problem whatsoever to make it public, but this is the report of the Conservators at 
the  time  when  Conservators  were  in  operation.  Since  then,  we  moved  on  with  Special 
Administrators being appointed and the hon. Leader of the Opposition himself is aware that 
the law was voted here to appoint the Special Administrators. I am now giving the accurate 
situation, unless the hon. Leader of the Opposition is not willing to hear that. 

Mr Bérenger: Answer questions … 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister Bhadain, please sit down! 

Mr Bhadain: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: The Minister has answered the question. Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Yes. Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir, we will study the liabilities when the 
final report is made public and see what is the deficit in the final report, whether it is Rs19 
billion or not. Do the liabilities referred to by the hon. Minister include money lent by the 
Bank of Mauritius and by other banks, if not, can we have details? 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that is exactly why I was giving an accurate 

state of affairs… 

And now I am being asked about it! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

33 

Let me explain to the House what the situation is for the benefit of the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition and for the benefit of all the hon. Members! 

Mr Bérenger: On a point of order… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, please! Please, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: If he cannot give the figures, say so!  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain, the question was about the deficit and 

whether the Bank of Mauritius had lent money. Please answer the question! 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, of course, the Bank of Mauritius has lent money. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Can we have the figure? 

Mr  Bhadain:  To  explain  the  figures,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  must  be  able  to 

explain… 

Let me explain! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

This is the first time that I see that an Opposition is not willing to hear answers! The situation 
is as follows, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I will answer that as well if I may start where I 
should. 

The Deputy Speaker: Will it be a long answer? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Well, it was a very… 

(Interruptions) 

It was a very long and complex Board, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I will try to be quick. 

 

34 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  please  sit  down!  Time  is  running  out.  The 

question was about the figure. Can you give the figure? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, the figure was Rs3.5 billion as far as I remember, but I have to 

explain what the situation is. There are 19… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition or 
any other hon. Member might ask a question about explanation. The question was about the 
figure. 

Mr Bhadain: I don’t want to mislead them. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  will  also  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  figures  for  money 
spent by this whole BAI affair out of Government funds, apart from the Rs200 m. that were 
disbursed to get a new bank going, what other service has been spent by Government? 

Mr Bhadain: Again, I will have to go back and explain where we are! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! Silence!  Order, please, sit down! 

Hon. Minister, a question was put to you! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  No,  there  are  no  public  funds  which  have  been  taken  from  the 

Consolidated Fund at this moment in time. However, the Bank of Mauritius… 

(Interruptions) 
The Deputy Speaker: No time wasting, please! 

Mr  Bhadain:  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  granted  a  loan  for  the  repayment  of  the 
Super Cash Back Gold Premium policyholders on 30 June 2015 at a rate of, I believe, 3.6 
percent  interest  so  that  these  people  could  be  repaid  because  these  people  were  suffering, 
because  these  people  are  people  who  have  put  money  from  their  VRS,  lump  sums  and 
everything they have worked for all their life and which had been brutally taken away from 
them. As a caring, responsible Government, we decided that these people had to be repaid… 

(Interruptions) 

 

35 

This Government has been elected by the people, for the people, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have been given information concerning 
guarantees given, especially to the hundred and so people who contributed for a later pension. 
Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  has  been  done  in  writing,  whether  these 
people  have  been  provided  with  letters  confirming  that  they  will  benefit  from  the  same 
conditions of pension that they were to benefit from under the BAI scheme? Not just that, has 
it been done in writing? 

Mr Bhadain: There is no reason to do anything in writing, I mean, if we understand 
correctly what is being done and for that we need time. What is happening is that the NIC has 
taken  over  the  135,283  policies  which  were  being  operated  before  as  regular  premium 
switching  in  pensions.  These  are  being  operated  normally  and,  at  their  maturity  date, 
everybody is going to be repaid. The NIC has been duly licensed by the FSC, the assets and 
liabilities match in their balance sheet, unlike what Mr Rawat was doing. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, the question is very clear, it is about whether it 

was given in writing or not! 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I said no. It was not given in writing because there was no need 

for that. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you! 

Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if I can move on rapidly, regarding the sum of 
Rs44 m. to be paid to the petits fournisseurs.  Being given that there is a line of credit from 
the Bank of Mauritius - I understand that there are other lines of credit and so on - now these 
people  are  told  to  wait  until  the  Courts  issue  is  settled,  then,  they  will  be  paid.  Can’t 
Government use the line of credit from the Bank of Mauritius or any other source to pay them 
their due and then it will be recouped when the whole Courts saga is over and… 

(Interruptions) 

Rs44 m.! Can that Rs44 m. be paid out of the line of credit or otherwise? 

Mr Bhadain: Actually, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have done far better than that! 
What we have done is that we have got the banks to agree that they are going to pay the Rs44 
m. themselves out of their own generosity because they do understand the social crisis and 

 

36 

what has gone on in this country! This money is going to be repaid in the couple of weeks to 
come  because  the  agreement  has  already  been  signed  between  Courts  and  the  Special 
Administrators and the completion date is next week.  

Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can we know as 
far  as  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  is  concerned  whether  there  is  a  policy  decision  from  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  or  what  have  you  as  to  what  is  going  to 
happen to Apollo Bramwell Hospital? Is it going to be un hôpital universitaire or is it going 
to be run on another basis? Have there been discussions with Apollo India for them to take 
over? What is the situation as at now? 

Mr Bhadain: Firstly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it will not be run with fraud money 
anymore! Secondly, in terms of what will happen to the hospital going forward, it will be 
managed by professional people; there are people from India, the Apollo Group in India, who 
have signified their interest of managing the hospital. They have sent a proposal and this is 
being looked at by my colleague, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Time is over!  

(Interruptions) 

 Mr Bérenger: If you want to change the rules of the game, until now… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  we  have  allowed  five 
additional  minutes  to  the  question.  I  will  allow  you  a  last  question,  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: My last question, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is that the hon. Minister has 
been reported on 26 August on the occasion of the opening ceremony of the organisation of 
Eastern and Southern Africa Insurers of having said the following –  

(i) 

(ii) 

l'Insurance  Act  vont à 

 Les amendements  apportés  à 
démocratie, and 
Le texte de loi – the amendments  to the Insurance Act – ce texte de loi sera 
abrogé dès que les problèmes liés à la BAI seront réglés.  

l'encontre de  la 

 

37 

Can he confirm that? And can I ask him what does he mean when he says that the amendment 
we brought goes against democracy? Secondly, is the whole amendment going to be repealed 
or part thereof, and if it is part thereof, which part thereof? 

 Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, these are not the correct words which I had 
said on that occasion. What I had meant was, because of a situation where an Administrator 
had been appointed by the Board and he was operating under the Insolvency Act, we had to 
go ahead and change the Insurance Act so that we could appoint a Special Administrator to 
go  and  repay  all  the  insurance  policyholders  who  had  been  affected  by  this  huge  Ponzi 
scheme. I stated that in a democratic State, we would wish that we did not have to do that, but 
because we had to go and repay all these people, we had to go ahead and do it. This was what 
I explained at the conference. 

The Deputy Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that 
Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/365  addressed  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been 
withdrawn. Hon. Ameer Meea! 

PORT LOUIS – CCTV STREET SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM - SURVEY 

(No. B/358) Mr  A. Ameer  Meea  (Second Member for  Port Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Closed  Circuit 
Television Street Surveillance System installed in Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the 
House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  if  a  survey  has  been 
carried out to assess the efficiency of the recordings thereof and, if so, indicate –  

(a) when was it carried out, and  

(b) the actions taken in relation to the –  

(i)  

shortcomings thereof, if any; 

(ii)  

quality of the images at night;  

(iii) 
(iv) 

replacement of some of the cameras by PTZ cameras, and  
installation  of  additional  cameras  at  places  which  are  presently  not 
covered. 

 

38 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the Commissioner 
of  Police  that  the  project  of  installation  of  CCTV  surveillance  cameras  in  Port  Louis  was 
implemented in October 2011. The project, which was financed through a line of credit from 
the  Government  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  comprised  272  cameras  installed  in 
different  regions  of  Port  Louis,  of  which  221  fixed  cameras,  and  51  PTZ  cameras,  i.e., 
cameras with movement options and known as “Pan Tilt Zoom” cameras. 

 
In regard to parts (a) and (b) (i), (ii) and (iii) of the question, I am informed by the 
Commissioner of Police that in June 2013, a general survey of the CCTV surveillance system 
was carried out with a view to assessing the quality of the images captured by the cameras 
and proposing measures to enhance the quality  of the images, especially  those captured  at 
night time.  Whilst this assessment exercise was underway, the video management software 
of the system crashed and live images could no longer be viewed from the CCTV Control 
Room.  

In order to remedy this problem, Police temporarily installed a trial software on 14 
 
July 2013 and images were captured anew. In the meantime, a tender exercise was launched 
on 27 August 2013 for the acquisition of a new and more sophisticated software, and spare 
parts for the new system.  The contract for the supply of software was awarded to the firm 
ZTE (Mauritius) on 23 October 2013 for the sum of Rs4,747,726.42 and the contract for the 
supply of spare parts was awarded to the firm Enterprise Data Services on the same date for 
the sum of Rs736,736.  However, on 14 April 2014, the contract of ZTE (Mauritius) Ltd. was 
terminated as the company failed to fulfill the conditions of the contract. 

Police also encountered problems with the firm Enterprise Data Services as the latter 
failed  to  deliver  spare  parts  in  accordance  with  the  specifications  laid  down  in  the  tender 
document, and this matter is still subject of contention between the Police Department and 
the company. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am further informed that on 23 June 2014, a new tender 
exercise was launched.  Subsequently, on 28 August 2014, a contract was awarded to the firm 
Secupro Ltd. for the supply of spare parts for the sum of Rs1,017,620.05 and on 29 August 
2014,  another  one  was  awarded  to  Brinks  (Mauritius)  Ltd.  for  a  new  video  management 
software  for  the  sum  of  Rs22,301,735.18.  The  new  system  was  commissioned  on  15 
December 2014 and is composed of - 

 

39 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

an integrated system software;  
new cameras in replacement of faulty ones; 
a new recording system; 
the implementation of site storage, and 
 the  installation  of  Infrared  illuminators  at  strategic  locations  where     
poor images were reported at night. 

In addition, with a view to further upgrading the system in the region of SSR Street, a 

 
fixed camera was replaced by a PTZ one on 06 July 2015. 

 
In  regard  to  part  (b)  (iv)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Police that all cameras installed in Port Louis are currently functioning properly. Insofar as 
places not covered by the system are concerned, Police ensure regular foot and mobile patrols 
in these regions and according to the Commissioner of Police, the installation of additional 
cameras is not envisaged for the time being. 

DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – DEATH & ARREST 

(No.  B/359)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the new types of synthetic 
drugs on the market, including Wazabi, Black Mamba, C’est pas bien, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of – 

(a) arrest effected in connection therewith in Port Louis and in the vicinity thereof, if 

any, since January 2015 to date, and  

(b) death reported in connection therewith, since January 2014 to date, indicating the 
additional  measures,  if  any,  that  will  be  taken  to  curb  the  number  of  death 
occurring through drug overdose. 

The Prime Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I shall reply to 

PQ B/359 and PQ B/372 together, as they relate to the same subject matter. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to reassure the House that my Government is doing its 
utmost to combat this new phenomenon.   In that context, the Commissioner of Police, the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the NATReSA, the Forensic Science Laboratory and 
the Mauritius Revenue Authority are collaborating to combat the drug scourge. 

 

40 

Some of the measures already taken include the enhanced control at the Port and the 
Airport  through  the  reinforcement  of  personnel  and  the  use  of  scanners  as  well  as  other 
technological tools.   

Furthermore,  the  Police  Force  as  well  as  other  segments  of  the  population,  in 
particular, the youth, are being sensitised on the new psychoactive drugs and their negative 
effects on human beings. The ADSU and the Mauritius Revenue Authority have also set up 
their own networks for the gathering and sharing of intelligence with a view to combating 
drug trafficking. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, through the above measures, the Mauritius Police Force and 

the other relevant institutions are expecting to - 

(a) achieve optimal success in drug-related operations in terms of arrest and seizure; 
(b) ensure that places where drugs are seized remain drug free, and 
(c) ascertain that young persons sensitised do not get involved in drug offences. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that the issue of synthetic drugs 
also falls under the term of reference of the Commission of Enquiry on drugs which I have 
set up. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir, with due respect to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, the question mentioned the number of arrests effected in connection with synthetic 
drugs. I have not heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give any information in relation to this. 

The Prime Minister:  I  am sorry,  I think  I missed it.  I am further informed by the 
Commissioner of Police that, since October 2013 to 27 August 2015, 79 persons have been 
arrested by ADSU in cases involving synthetic drugs, including 21 from the region of Port 
Louis, from January to 27 August 2015.   

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  the  question  of  drugs, 
there has been the setting up of the Commission of Enquiry as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
just stated. May I know whether the Commission has already started its work? 

The Prime Minister: Well, not yet. Unfortunately, the Chairperson was away and he 
has only come back recently. Now, he is doing the needful and very soon, I have been told, 
they will start the work. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Sewocksingh! 

 

41 

Mrs Sewocksingh: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I would like to thank the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  for  answering  the  question.  May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister if these kinds of drugs, like the synthetic ones, fall under the Dangerous Drugs Act? 
The Prime Minister: Well, we are going to amend the law. We are looking into it 
and  we  will  try  to  incorporate  all  sorts  of  synthetic  drugs  that  are  being  imported  in  this 
country as illegal drugs. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 
Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  There  is  a  recent  decision  or 
proposition  for  ADSU  to  disclose  the  source  of  all  its  informers  with  regard  to  drug 
trafficking.  Will  that  not  impact  on  the  figures  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  just 
quoted, meaning bringing it down? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware of this. I will look into it. 

Mr Bérenger: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he said two things. One, that 
the Commission of Enquiry will also look into this whole issue of synthetic drugs and at the 
end of his answer, a few minutes ago, he said that ‘we will be amending the Dangerous Drugs 
Act.’ Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that there is urgency and that to amend 
the Dangerous Drugs Act and have a debate here, we should not wait for the Commission of 
Enquiry to complete its work; this will take quite some time and that therefore the need to 
amend the Dangerous Drugs Act should be dealt with urgently?  

The Prime Minister: Yes, I agree with that; we are looking into it. I don’t think we 

will wait for the result of the Commission of Enquiry. 

Mr Ganoo: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed the House that there are about 
79  suspects  who  have  been  arrested  in  connection  with  the  use  or  possession  of  synthetic 
drugs. Can I ask him whether he is aware if any of these suspects has given to the ADSU 
Officers,  to  the  Police,  the  origin  of  these  drugs?  Are  these  drugs  being  brought  into 
Mauritius or are they fabricated in Mauritius because we have information that there are even 
laboratories operating in our country itself, fabricating these drugs which are, as we know, 
cheaper and this is also another trouble? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Member, can you come with a substantive question? 

Mr Jhugroo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, would the hon. Prime Minister agree with me 
that  the  former  Prime  Minister  had  no  real  intention  to  tackle  the  problem  of  drugs  in 

 

42 

Mauritius  like  you  are  doing  by  the  institution  of  a  Commission  of  Enquiry  since  he  had 
d’autres chats à fouetter? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t pass judgment on the former Prime Minister, it is 

for the people to judge because he says ‘mo encore bien fort’. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the second part of my question states that 

– 

‘(b) death reported in connection with synthetic drugs’. 

This also, I think, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has omitted to give the answer. 

The Prime Minister: Yes, it could be because I think I missed one page.   

As  regards  the  number  of  death,  statistics  submitted  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality of  Life show that, from January 2014 to June 2015, 21 persons have died of drug 
overdose including synthetic drugs.  The average age of death being 41 years. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  mentioned  that 
strict control was carried out at the level of the Port and the airport. Can we know from the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister if some of these synthetic drugs are produced locally in clandestine 
laboratories? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the Police  is  doing  its  best  to  have  strict control.    We 
know that synthetic drugs are circulating.  Whether they are being fabricated here or abroad, 
but from information that I have, they are being even used in colleges by young students and 
all that. I think the situation is very serious and we have to look into it and do our best to have 
a strict control of that. 

PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE - ADVISERS/PRESS ATTACHÉS - 

APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/360) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Advisers/Press Attachés appointed on a 

 

43 

contract  basis  in  his  Ministry,  since  July  2005  to  10  December  2014,  he  will  give  a  list 
thereof, indicating in each case the - 

(a) qualifications held;  

(b) areas of responsibility thereof;  

(c) salaries and any other allowances drawn thereby;  

(d) terms and conditions of appointment thereof, and  

(e) make and model of Government car put at the disposal thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the information requested by the hon. 

Member is being tabled. 

I wish nevertheless to point out that as at 09 December 2014, there were 21 Advisers 
employed at the Prime Minister’s Office compared to only two who are now in employment. 

GOVERNMENT CAR & VIPSU DRIVERS – BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/361) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  persons  who  had  been  allocated  a 
Government car and who have been provided with the services of Very Important Persons 
Security Unit (VIPSU) drivers over the period July 2005 to 11 December 2014, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, a list thereof, indicating in 
each case, the – 

(a) capacity of the person who had been allocated such a car and provided with the 

services of VIPSU drivers;  

(b) make and model of the car put at the disposal thereof;  

(c) duration thereof, and  

(d) reasons therefor. 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to the list of persons who 
had been allocated vehicles from the Police Car Pool together with the services of VIPSU 
drivers over the period July 2005 to 11 December 2014, I am informed by the Commissioner 

 

44 

of  Police  that  in  April  2015,  there  were  indications  that  the  relevant  information  were  not 
fully available and there was suspicion that it might have been done intentionally.  

The Commissioner of Police then gave instructions for a full search for the missing 
information.  Concurrently, the Central Criminal Investigation Division was also instructed to 
carry  out  an  in-depth  investigation  with  a  view  to  establishing  responsibilities  and  taking 
appropriate action against those concerned.   

In the course of the enquiry, 20 persons have been interviewed and their statements 

 
recorded.  The enquiry is still in progress.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that the following officials are 

eligible for cars from the Police Car Pool and services of VIPSU drivers - 

The President; 
The Vice-President; 
Ex-President; 
Ex Vice-President; 
Prime Minister; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Ministers; 
(vii) 
Speaker; 
(viii)  Chief Whip, and 
(ix) 
Moreover,  cars  from  the  Police  Car  Pool  and  services  of  VIPSU  drivers  have  also 
been allocated to other persons during the period July 2005 to 11 December 2014 as directed 
by the Prime Minister's Office.  I am tabling the list of those beneficiaries. 

Leader of Opposition. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Prime Minister inform the House how many official cars 

were put at the disposal of the former Prime Minister? 

The Prime Minister: I have been given to understand that there were six cars at his 

disposal. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  to  the  House  out  of  these  six 

official cars whether one was put at the disposal of Mrs Nandanee Soornack, with VIPSUs?  

The Prime Minister: Well, I understand that this is so. 

 

45 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Will  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  asking  the  Commissioner  of 
Police to open an enquiry and see who decided to post CID Officers and VIPSU Officers on a 
daily basis to watch the shops of Mrs Nandanee Soornack at Jumbo, Phoenix? 

The Prime Minister: That I don’t know whether it is a fact, but if it is a fact, well I 

will ask the Commissioner of Police to have an enquiry. 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Prime Minister confirm whether the in-laws of the former 

Prime Minister were eligible for a Government car with VIPSU drivers? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know. We will try to get the information. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware as to whether the sister and the 
brother-in-law  of  the  former  Prime  Minister  were  allocated  one  official  car  plus  VIPSU 
driver plus a 24-hour residential security? 

The Prime Minister: Well, about the car, yes, that is correct. There was a car at their 

disposal. The other part, I cannot answer. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  we  know  on  what  ground  Mr  Laurent  Obadia  was  allocated  an 

official car with VIPSU driver on every trip to Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I know there was an official car with VIPSU driver put at 

his disposal every time he was here, but on what ground, I can’t say. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/366 and PQ No. 

B/370 have been withdrawn. Hon. Uteem! 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - MR P. T. - ARREST 

(No.  B/362)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the arrest of Mr P. T. at the 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, in March 2015, he will, for the benefit of 
the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  reasons  for  the 

 

46 

arrest and table a list of the belongings of Mr P. T. which had been seized by the Police in the 
course thereof.  

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police  that  on  Saturday  14 March  2015  at  12.15  hours,  Central  Criminal  Investigation 
Department  (CCID)  personnel  proceeded  to  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International 
Airport,  following  information  that  Mr  P.  T.  was  entering  Mauritius  with  a  huge  sum  of 
unlawfully obtained foreign currency in connection with a case of alleged money laundering 
which is currently under investigation. 

 At 16.40 hours, Mr P. T. arrived from Dubai and after Customs formalities, the CCID 
Officers  apprised  him  of  the  information  held  by  them  and  that  they  would  search  his 
luggage, to which he agreed.   

 At  no  point  in  time,  Mr  P.  T.  was  under  arrest.  He  voluntarily  accompanied  the 

officers to the CCID Office and voluntarily produced the following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

2 mobile phones and 2 SIM cards; 

one laptop and its charger, and 

a  number  of  documents  comprising  81  pages  in  all  regarding  the  case  of 
Airway Coffee Ltd. v/s AML and ATOL. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Mr  P.  T.  also  gave  a  statement  to  the  Police  testifying  that 

everything was done with his consent and of his own free will. 

Thereafter,  as  he  was  feeling  tired,  Mr  P.  T.  expressed  his  wish  to  proceed  to  his 
residence and to call back at the CCID Office on Monday 16 March 2015 for the examination 
of the documents, mobile phones and laptop with a view to proving that he had no connection 
with  the  case  of  alleged  money  laundering.    Given  that  he  was  not  under  arrest,  he  was 
allowed to go by the Officers. 

On Monday 16 March 2015, at 15.45 hours, Mr P. T. called at the CCID Office in 
company of his Counsels and requested the Officers not to proceed with the examination of 
his belongings. At 16.00 hours, he was informed through his Counsels that Police would not 
proceed  with  the  examination  and  that  he  could  collect  his  belongings.    He,  however, 
declined by stating that he would lodge an affidavit in the Supreme Court and left thereafter. 

 

47 

On 17 March 2015, an Interim Order in the form of an injunction was served on the 
Commissioner of Police restraining and prohibiting the Police from inspecting and searching 
Mr P. T.’s belongings. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  on  20  March  2015,  Mr  P.  T.  moved  to  withdraw  his 
application  before  the  Supreme  Court,  whereby  the  Interim  Order  was  discharged  and  the 
application was set aside. On the same day, the belongings of Mr P. T. were returned to him 
at the CCID Office.  He made no further complaint. 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. On 17 March 2015, the Attorney in 
question swore an affidavit where he makes very serious allegations against the Police about 
unlawful  arrest  at  the  airport,  unlawful  detention  until  9.30  p.m.  So,  in  the  light  of  this 
affidavit, may I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to consider requesting the Commissioner 
of Police to start an enquiry to see whether, in fact, there is either a case of swearing of false 
affidavit or there is a prima facie case of illegal arrest and detention? 

The Prime Minister: I don’t see any need for any further enquiry in this case. He 
withdrew his case which was before the Supreme Court and that speaks a lot in favour of the 
version of the Police. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Prime Minister may be aware that the case that was withdrawn 
was about documents that had been seized and these were remitted back to him, and that is 
why he had to withdraw his case. But my question is about the illegal arrest and detention 
which has nothing to do with the civil case where he asked that his documents be returned. 

The Prime Minister: There was no illegal arrest. There has never been any document 

seized. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  that,  as  at  to  date,                   

Mr P. T. has or has not made any complaint, firstly, to any Police Station as to whether there 
were any force that was exerted upon him by the Police; secondly, that he has not also made 
any complaint to the Human Rights Commission that any coercion was made upon him and 
that in line with all the procedures that exist, up until a complaint is not made, the Police 
Commissioner cannot initiate any enquiry? 

 

48 

The Prime Minister: No complaint whatsoever of any sort has been made by Mr P.T.  

I pity him! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

  Mr Baloomoody:  The hon. Prime Minister said that the Police had information that 
he  was  carrying  large  sums  of  money.  But  this  could  have  been  easily  verified  at  the 
Plaisance Airport itself by search, by the scanning of his luggage.  Why was he arrested and 
brought to the Central CID in Port Louis? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  Who said he was arrested! 

It’s rubbish! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order! Hon. Uteem, last question! 

Mr Uteem:  The hon. Prime Minister is insisting that there was no arrest.  But may I 
refer the hon. Prime Minister to a statement that was made by the representative of the DPP’s 
Office on the date where the case was withdrawn and she said in no uncertain terms that ex-
facie  the  affidavit,  the  arrest  was  anti-constitutional,  the  seizure  of  all  the  documents  was 
anti-constitutional  and  it  was  in  breach  of  section  300  of  the  Criminal  Code  relating  to 
privileged information between client and Attorney.  

The Prime Minister:  If that was his opinion, he could have taken certain actions.  

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  Nos.  B/367  and  B/368 

have been withdrawn. Time is over! I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours.  

At 1.13 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.44 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

 

49 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that Parliamentary 
Question  Nos.  B/386,  B/387  and  B/388  have  been  withdrawn.  I  also  have  to  inform  the 
House that the hon. Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac, hon. B. Jahangeer 
has declared his interest in regard to Parliamentary Question B/393.  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

MINISTRIES & GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS - PREMISES – RENT 
(No. B/373) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in 
regard to the buildings and premises rented by each Ministry and Government Department, 
he will give a list thereof, indicating in each case the - 

(a) location thereof; 
(b) name of the owners thereof;  
(c) extent thereof; 
(d) monthly rental thereof, and  
(e) duration thereof. 

Mr  Bodha:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  advised  that  my  Ministry  is  one  of  the 
various Government Ministries and Departments which need to give clearances for rental of 
buildings and premises by all Ministries and Departments. 

In  fact,  my  Ministry  gives  the  final  clearance  after  ascertaining  that  the  building  is 

structurally safe and sound and fit for renting. 

As my Ministry does not have the information requested for and it is not available, all 

Ministries and Departments have been requested to submit same.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your  permission,  I  will  table  the  information  in  due 

course.   

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Récemment, dans ‘L’Express’ 
du 13 avril de cette année-ci, il y a eu un article par rapport à la dotation budgétaire des 
loyers payés par le gouvernement.  Donc, pour l’année financière 2015 et 2016 à l’effet que 
les  loyers  vont  augmenter  de  27%,  passer  de  R  785  millions  à  R  1  milliard  pour  l’année 
prochaine, can I ask the hon. Minister why there is such an increase in the amount of rent? 

Mr  Bodha:    Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  is  supposed  to  give  the 
clearances  as  regards  the  renting.  I  think  it  is  the  Valuation  Office  which  has  to  do  the 
exercise and I think I can also say that the rent is also decided as per tenders.   

 

 

50 

PORT LOUIS - HAWKERS - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/374)  Mr  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
relocation of the hawkers operating in Port Louis, he will state where matters stand. 

Dr. Husnoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as the House is aware, it has been announced in 
the Budget Speech 2015-2016 that the construction of a Hawkers’ Centre at the Northern Bus 
Terminal in Port Louis has been approved. 

This project is, however, linked with the Port Louis Road Decongestion Project which 

is being piloted by the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  is 
currently  working  on  the  redevelopment  of  the  Victoria  and  Immigration  Square  Bus 
Stations, with a view to converting these two sites into modern bus stations with provisions of 
commercial/office block and parking. Both complexes, at Victoria and Immigration Square, 
will provide space for the hawkers. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  that,  concurrently  with  the  work  already 
initiated by the Ministry of Public  Infrastructure and  Land Transport, that Ministry is  also 
appointing  a  Consultant  on  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  to  study  and  recommend 
proposals to increase the vehicular fluidity in these areas. 

I  understand  that  the  plans  will  be  finalised  on  receipt  of  the  Consultant’s 

recommendations. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I would like to reassure the hon. Member that we are fully 
conscious  of  the  problem  of  hawkers  in  the  city  and  that,  in  addition  to  the  long  term 
solutions  which  the  Government,  through  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport and my Ministry, is contemplating to address the problem, I am working in close 
collaboration  with  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis  to  identify  temporary  measures 
regarding the hawking activities in the city, especially in view of the forthcoming end of the 
year festivities. As a matter of fact, on Thursday, 27 August 2015, I had a meeting with the 
Lord Mayor, as well as the Mayors of other towns, to brainstorm on measures that could be 
taken in December. The City Council of Port Louis is currently working, in consultation with 
the Police and other stakeholders, on the measures for the city of Port Louis for the month of 
December and I am expecting a report from the City Council by mid-September 2015. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in a past PQ this year, in February 2015, 
the  hon.  Minister  stated  that  this  is  one  of  his  priorities  as  he  assumed  office  and  he  also 

 

51 

stated to the House that the construction of malls for the relocation of marchands ambulants 
and the whole project will be implemented - according to his words - in about a year.  So, 
therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister where matters stand in relation to the construction of 
these buildings because six months has already elapsed and still we have not heard anything 
about it? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member is right, I did say so, but, 
at that time, I was planning to address the issue on my own, that is, the Local Government. 
Now, with the Road Development Programme, we are getting together with the Ministry of 
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. We are trying to see how we can modernise the bus 
stations at Immigration Square and Victoria Square. We will work together on an integrated 
project to provide better facilities and, as I mentioned, hawkers would be integrated.  I agree 
the plan has changed, but we are trying to do a much better job, that’s why it is taking a bit 
more time.  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    So,  clearly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  one  year,  this  problem 
won’t be solved and we don’t have a clear plan in which direction we are going.  But, in the 
meanwhile,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  he  is  doing  for  the  problem  of  marchands 
ambulants surtout que la fin d’année approche rapidement? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, it is not just that we do not have a clear plan. I have explained the 
plan. We are working on the plan. We have a plan and it is going to be better than what it was 
before. Yes, I mean it. As for the end of the year, I had meetings with the Municipality of 
Port Louis, with the Police and other stakeholders. We are going to see how we can control 
the situation. It should not be like what it was last year. It is not going to be like that. This 
time, we are going to have places where the hawkers would not be allowed and we are going 
to have better policing to control the situation this year. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  been  informed  by  some  of  the 
hawkers,  with  what  is  going  on  with  the  problem  of  hawkers  around  the  island,  there  is 
migration of hawkers, some from other regions coming to Port Louis and maybe vice versa. 
Is there such a problem and what is being done to address it? 

Dr. Husnoo: Definitely. As you know, this problem has been like that for years. From 
Port Louis, they had been going to different places. From one district to other districts; it has 
been like that for so many years. So, I am not going to change that. I cannot change that now. 
But when we are going to develop such place for hawkers, of course, we are going to give 
priorities for people who stay in the vicinity. 

 

52 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister has not given us any time frame as to when he is going 
to implement what he has in mind. May I ask him, in the meantime, is there going to be a 
survey about the existing hawkers that we have? Is there going to be a special badge given to 
them to identify them and distinguish them from other migrating hawkers? Does he propose 
to do anything pending the construction of these new places that he mentioned? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Yes,  the  hon.  Member  is  right.  Firstly,  we  are  not  going  to  do  any 
survey. The problem with survey is that when you do a survey this time, you are going to 
have x number, when you do it after a few months, it is going to double. That’s one problem 
with surveys which we have noticed, all the surveys that have been done by the municipality 
of  Port  Louis.  But  we  know  those  people  who  are  working.  Now,  I  have  discussed  -  as  I 
mentioned in my reply just now - with the Lord Mayor of the Municipality of Port Louis if 
we can issue them a badge so that we can differentiate who are the people who are, if we can 
say, genuine hawkers, or those who are just coming here for Christmas and New Year. You 
know what I mean? So, we are working on this as well and we have discussed it as well. 

Mr Mahomed: From what I know, the number of hawkers in Port Louis is about a 
thousand,  plus  or  minus.  Would  it  be  a  good  idea  to  put  all  these  hawkers  in  only  one 
building? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  No.  Firstly,  the  figure  from  the  Municipality  of  Port  Louis  is  about 
1,200. That’s one. I have mentioned, it is not going to be in one place. We are working in two 
places: Immigration Square and Victoria Square. 

TRIOLET – STATE SECONDARY SCHOOL - COMPULSORY ACQUISITION  

(No. B/375) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
compulsory acquisition of land for the extension of the State Secondary School in Triolet, he 
will, in respect of each portion of land, state the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

name/s of the former owner/s thereof; 
extent thereof, and 
amount of money paid thereto following the decision of the Board of 
Assessment in relation thereto. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government compulsorily acquired in terms of a Notice under section 8 
of the Land Acquisition Act duly registered and transcribed on 23 September 2002 in Volume 

 

53 

T.V. 5011 No. 73, four plots of land situated at Triolet for the public purpose of constructing 
a State Secondary School. Details of these are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Plot No. 1 of an extent of 1A 51p from Ww Mrs Dhunraz Ram;  

Plot No. 2 of an extent of 1A 53p from Ww Mrs Jasso Tulsi; 

Plot No. 3 of an extent of 0A 84p from Ww Mrs Talayboodeen Noormamode 
in usufruct and Mr Saleem Noormamode in bare ownership, and 

(iv) 

 Plot No. 4 of an extent of 0A 84p from Mr Cadamhossen Jaoffar. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, offers were made to the owners for the four 

plots as per assessment of the Valuation Department as follows - 

Portion No. 

Name of Former Owners 

 

 

1 

2 

3 

 

4 

Mrs Ww Dhunraz Ram 

Mrs Jasso Tulsi 

Mrs  Ww  Talayboodeen  Noormamode  in 
usufruct  and  Mr  Saleem  Noormamode  in 
bare ownership 

Offer made 

Rs680,923/- 

Rs691,964/- 

Rs378,645/- 

Mr Cadamhossen Jaoffar 

Rs3,033,033/-                

However, only the former owner of Plot No. 4 agreed to the offer made to him and 
payment of the relevant compensation was made in June 2003. As for the other three owners, 
they  each  submitted  counter  claims  which  were  referred  to  the  Valuation  Department  in 
September  2002.  Following  assessment  of  the  counter  claims,  the  Valuation  Department 
advised that the cases be referred to the Board of Assessment. 

On 06 February 2007, the Board of Assessment made its award as follows – 

(a) 
(b) 

Rs7,575,810 to Ww Mrs Dhunraz Ram for Plot No. 1; 
Rs7,698,486 to Ww Mrs Jasso Tulsi for Plot No. 2, and  

 

54 

(c) 

Rs4,217,166  to  Ww  Mrs  Talayboodeen  Noormamode  in  usufruct  and  Mr 
Saleem Noormamode in bare ownership for Plot No.3. 

The Solicitor General and the Chief Government Valuer were informed of the three 
awards on 27 February 2007. The three awards were subsequently deposited at the office of 
the Chief Finance Officer of the Supreme Court on 02 and 11 July 2007 for payment.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister confirm whether the plot of land is 

found in an irrigation zone whereby no conversion is permitted? 

Mr  Soodhun:  I  wish  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  House  that  no  information  is 

available in my Ministry regarding the irrigation zone. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House when this case had 
been referred to the Board of Assessment?  Did the Board abide by section 18 subsection (4) 
and subsection (5)? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have stated earlier in my reply to the main 
question that the case of plot Nos. 1, 2 and 3 were referred to the Board of Assessment as no 
arrangement was reached on the amount of compensation payable. Well, at least, I have to go 
to the Library of the Supreme Court to see the sections concerned. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question, please! 

Mr Jhugroo: I have got supplementary questions regarding a pertinent issue. Did the 
Solicitor General, while advising payment of compensation at the rate of Rs5 m. per arpent, 
abide by sections 18 and 19 of the Land Acquisition Act? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister did not have the 

answer for the first two questions. Please, let us not waste the time of the House! 

Mr Soodhun: No, in fact, there is a maldonne. We have to agree that there has been a 

maldonne in this case. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, definitely. I can understand the Chief Whip. As I stated earlier, the Board… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please! According to the Standing 
Orders, you may not reflect on a legal opinion or comment on the decision of the Court of 
Law. 

 

55 

Mr Soodhun: No, I am just giving the facts, where the difference… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  It  is  not  up  to  the  Vice-Prime  Minister  to  express  a  legal 

opinion! 

Mr Soodhun: With your permission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  In my opinion, I am 
going through the file and I am just giving those details to enlighten the House.  It is very 
important to enlighten the House. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Given the huge public interest in the question raised by hon. Jhugroo, is 

the hon. Vice-Prime Minister prepared to provide answers in writing to this question? 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I thought that you had 
already ruled. The second issue is that the Standing Orders are very clear.  One, we cannot 
ask, as it was couched in the sections of the law - the legal opinion of the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister cannot be sought for. There is another important issue as well and I thought that you 
had already ruled. 

The Deputy Speaker: Indeed, I did say that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister may not 

reflect on a legal opinion. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Soodhun:  It  is  not  my  opinion.  I  maintain,  it  is  not  my  opinion.  I  am  going 

through the file that exists and to enlighten the hon. Member, for the sake of the country…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, are you taking a point of order? 

Mr Mohamed: Yes, it is a point of order. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I have already taken your point of order. Please, sit down! Let 

us move on to the next question, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  one  last question.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-

Prime Minister whether … 

 

56 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, we have spent eight minutes on this question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Yes, but it is a question of national interest! One last question, please? 
Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether this case has been referred to ICAC and, if 
so, when, and what is the outcome thereof? 

 Mr Soodhun: The case was referred to ICAC in 2008. However, my Ministry has 

not been informed of an outcome so far. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

FLORÉAL – MRS N. S. – HOUSE PURCHASE 

(No. B/376)  Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the land and 
house located in Floréal purchased by Mrs N. S. from Mr D. M., he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Valuation Office, information as to –  

(a) the name of the Government Valuer who had assessed the value of the property, 

indicating the – 

(i) date of the assessment thereof, and  

(ii) region assigned by the Valuation Office to the said Government Valuer for 

the carrying out of assessments at the material time, and  

(b) if instructions emanating from the Prime Minister’s Office were received at the 

Valuation Office in relation thereto and, if so, indicate – 

(i) by whom, and  

(ii) to whom. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding part (a) of the question, I 
am informed by the Valuation Department that in relation to the land and house located in 
Floréal purchased by Mrs N. S. from Mr D. M., bearing Transcription Volume No. 8026/24, 
the value of the property was assessed by Mr K. Jugun, Ag. Deputy Director, Valuation and 
Real Estate Consultancy Services.  

 

57 

The date of the assessment was 07 March 2011, that is, the date on which the deed 

was registered. 

I am further informed that, at that time, one of the regions assigned by the Valuation 

Department to Mr K. Jugun was Floréal.  

The value of the property, as declared in the deed was Rs30 m.  On 09 August 2011, 
the  Valuation  Department  sent  a  report  to  the  Registrar-General  in  which  it  confirmed, 
amongst others, that it is satisfied that the value declared for the property may be accepted.  

Regarding part (b) of the question, that is, whether instructions emanating from the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office  were  received  by  the  Valuation  Department  in  relation  to  the 
assessment, I am informed by the Valuation Department that the sale transaction is currently 
under investigation by the Central Criminal Investigation Department. It would be improper 
for me to deal with this matter further. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  state  whether  he  is  aware  that  instruction  was 
given to Mrs Roshni Bissessur from the Prime Minister’s Office to call Mrs Khedun and Mr 
Bhikroo to survey a plot of land purchased by Mrs Nandanee Soornack at Floréal? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I am not aware. I do not have the reply, but I will look into 

it.  

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Minister aware that Mrs Khedun, the Government Valuer 
and  Mr  Bhikroo,  a  Senior  Technician  were  involved  in  the  assessment  of  the  bungalow 
purchased by the former Prime Minister at Roches Noires?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I am not aware.  I will just have to look into it. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  name  of  the  Government 

Valuer who valued the property without carrying out a survey, and is this ethical? 

(Interruptions) 

 Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  don’t  have  a  reply,  but  I  will 

have to review it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

 

 

58 

MAURITIUS & INDIA – DOUBLE TAXATION AVOIDANCE CONVENTION 

(No.  B/377)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Double Taxation Avoidance Convention between Mauritius and India, he will table copy of 
the agreement reached with the competent authorities in India for the amendment thereof and, 
if not, why not. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no protocol amending the Double 
Taxation  Avoidance  Convention  between  India  and  Mauritius  has  yet  been  signed  by  the 
respective Governments.  

Discussions to finalise the amending Protocol are presently ongoing through exchange 

of correspondences. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, until and unless the amending Protocol is signed by the two 
Governments,  the  discussions  are  still  confidential  and  we  cannot  at  this  stage  disclose 
anything. 

Mr Uteem: On 03 July, the Cabinet decision stated, and I quote –  

“(…) the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
to  India  has  successfully  finalised  the  pending  issues  on  the  Double  Taxation 
Avoidance Convention, as well as a protocol amending the Convention between India 
and Mauritius (…).” 

And - 

“Cabinet has agreed to the signing of the protocol (…).” 

That is, the official Cabinet decision of 03 July 2015. So, in these circumstances, may I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  has  been  a  finalisation  of  all  pending  issues  and 
agreement to sign the protocol or not? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Not  yet!  My  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial 
Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of  Technology, 
Communication and Innovation and the Financial Secretary did a great job in Delhi. I have no 
doubt about it. But we need clarifications on certain issues. So, I have written to the Indian 

 

59 

Government to ask for clarification on certain issues. Those issues will need to be looked into 
and when they are finalised, naturally, I will help to seek Cabinet’s approval and then sign it. 

Mr Uteem: From what I understand, the Cabinet was not right. But being given what 
the hon. Minister has just mentioned, in the interest of transparency would the hon. Minister 
be prepared to table a copy of the letters of clarifications sought from the Indian authorities? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I can see no reason to table something which forms part of 
discussions. In fact, there has been a lot of confusion which has been created by those who 
have not understood the background to the decisions we have taken in relation to discussions 
with India. 

I have to remind the House that there has been a joint working group which has been 
working since August 2006. They have had eleven working sessions and all just did not work 
out. There is a situation where the Indians are not that wrong when they say that we are using 
the offshore sector, on one side, to set up shell companies, which is not transparent and, on 
the  other  side,  to  encourage  round-tripping,  meaning  that  Indians  process  their  money 
through  Mauritius  to  invest  in  India  and,  therefore,  are  tax  exempt.  I  understand  fully  the 
Indian Government on those issues and we need to correct them. 

What have we chosen to do since December? We have said that the offshore sector, as 
it is, can no longer survive for long. An offshore sector which is seen as a jurisdiction which 
is on the blacklist, even now, cannot sustain  a long-term development just on the basis of 
information  which  is  concealed  or  on  the  basis  that  it  is  being  perceived  as  a  destination 
where crooks hide their money. When I was in India - I must tell this to the House - when this 
Government of India was in the Opposition, they treated Mauritius in a very bad way. They 
said  ‘infamous’  Mauritius!  Because,  in  India,  we  have  got  the  reputation  of  having 
encouraged a few crooks from India to come to Mauritius and have their money whitewashed 
and we have developed, in the course of years, a very bad reputation in India. 

In fact, we spent most of our time in India explaining to the population that it is not 
because of a few rotten tomatoes in India that the offshore sector should be perceived as a 
sort of jurisdiction that encourages black money whitening. So, the process in which we are 
now is quite different in the sense that I really feel - and we feel also, with hon. Bhadain - that 
the financial sector should become an international financial sector of repute that can be used 
by any country, any institution for business. I’ll take one example, in the negotiation we are 

 

60 

having  now  with  Ghana,  Ghana/Mauritius  G2G  means  we  are  setting  a  special  purpose 
vehicle  in  the  offshore  that  will  then  canalise  billions  of  dollars  of  investment  on  Ghana.  
There is no doubt that this type of project G2G makes sense in the sense that there will be a 
lot of business in the international financial sector, which will benefit much more in terms of 
job creation and contribution to GDP also.   

Therefore, this is a different approach we are having.  The House must  understand 
that those who have benefitted from this incredible situation made a lot of money.  Well, the 
fiesta is over!  I need to tell those offshore migrant companies that the fiesta is over, that they 
have  now  to  do  what  we  have  done  in  the  sugar  sector.    We  knew  that  the  privilege  was 
disappearing  in  the  sugar  sector;  we  had  to  survive.    We  reinvented  the  whole  sector 
beautifully.  Now,  the  offshore  sector  will  have  to  evolve  with  time  and  become  more 
transparent. So, it is on this basis that we are now working. And if we have now discussions 
with India on issues of clarification, it is because those issues we are asking for to be clarified 
are  linked  with,  on  one  side,  our  decision  that  we  want  a  transparent  financial  sector  in 
Mauritius and that we are abandoning all that is round-tripping, all that was shell companies, 
and all that was business link to secrecy and opacity.  

Mr  Uteem:    I  won’t  comment  on  what  the  hon.  Minister  has  said  which  is  quite 
shocking about the state of our offshore and how he wants to kill the sector. I would ask a 
very  specific  question.  We  are  not  talking  about  exchange  of  information  which  will  get 
around the problem of round-tripping. We are not talking about that. We are talking about 
Article 13, which, henceforth, according to the protocol, if this goes ahead, I understand that 
that would mean that India would be able to tax capital gains. This is the single Article that 
for years, whether it is this Government - each Government that has come, including the one 
between 2000 and 2005 – we have always resisted amending Article 13 because that will kill 
all business going through Mauritius into India. So, may I ask the hon. Minister whether only 
on that one particular Article 13, he could defend the interest of Mauritius? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  defend  the  interest  of  this  country,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker, 
Sir. If we maintain on the former course, we will be like those sugar barons who refuse to 
admit that the sugar protocol will one day lapse and that they will have to adapt. I am telling 
you, once again, those OMCs, who have made billions out of easy business based on opacity 
and transparency, game is over.  Those sectors will have to adapt, develop and be transparent.  
That is a policy issue.  We agree to it and those who do not agree to it, there is no way now to 

 

61 

backpedal  on  this.    I  have  recently  signed  an  agreement  with  the  OECD  for  automatic 
exchange of information as from 2017.  There is no way moving back on it.  There is no way 
differing since 2006, issues like the capital gains tax, which has to be dealt with.  We have to 
understand  that  now  we  are  a  middle-income  country  and  that  we  are  dealing  with  India 
which has millions of poor people.  We cannot just try to use and abuse of a clause in a DTA 
which dates back - I signed it in 1983 - now 30 or 32 years.  What I am saying is what I feel 
this  sector  will  need  to  do.  The  offshore  financial  sector  has  a  beautiful  future  except  for 
those who do not want to adapt and who do not want to change. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we no longer understand which country 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  defending,  whether  it  is  India  or  Mauritius,  and  which 
jurisdiction he is promoting or not.  But what he said will have serious consequences in the 
years to come.  The hon. Minister said that Mauritius is on the blacklist.  Can I ask him on 
which list Mauritius is and which organisation he showed that list? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We have been put on the blacklist of the EC and the hon. 
Member is aware of it.  I was in France when this happened and I wrote immediately to the 
Commissioner  in  Brussels  to  object  to  it.    Because  EC  just  moved  on  the  basis  that  ten 
member States of the EC have put Mauritius on their blacklist.  So, we form part of a series 
of countries that were blacklisted without any really good reason.  In between that time and 
today,  I  can  tell  you  that  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  has  been  having 
bilateral consultation with those countries which have put us on their blacklist.  And I can 
assure the House that in the next meeting at the EC level, Mauritius will definitely be out of 
this blacklist. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Last supplementary on this! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Being given that the hon. Minister 
of  Finance  has  told  us  that  he  has  decided  to  give  up  on  Article  13,  may  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  that,  at  the  very  least,  we  get  something  in  return  from  India  such  as 
grandfathering clause which would protect all existing structures? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, this forms part of the letter that I have addressed to 
the Government of India which requires clarifications.  I, again, said that we have somewhere 
to agree or to agree to disagree in which case we will return the clock back to 2006.  We have 

 

62 

differed decisions on matters of crucial importance just because we have been hiding behind 
this  truth that  India  could  no  longer  maintain  a  DTA  that  seemed  to  be detrimental  to  the 
country.  This is not a question of loving India; it is a question of equity and justice. 

Mr Bérenger:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I be allowed one question? 

The Deputy Speaker:  Will it necessitate a long answer? 

Mr Bérenger:  Yes.  I wanted to ask the hon. Minister, he has referred to the recent 
so-called list by the European Commission and he is saying that we are fighting to come out 
of  that  list.    Is  that  a  correct  attitude?    In  fact,  the  OECD  itself  threw  out  that  so-called 
blacklist.    So,  it  is  useless.    Will  the  hon.  Minister  agree  with  me  that  we  should  not  be 
fighting to get out of that list?  We should be fighting with others to throw that list where it 
already is, dans le panier. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  You would like to know that this is the stand that we took, 
in  fact  and  the  list  had  to  be  thrown  in  a  dustbin.    That’s  what  my  colleague  did  also  in 
Brussels, but we have to realise that reality is reality.  Mauritius is small and that this list has 
done us a lot of harm.   The whole letter  I  wrote to the Commissioner was that this list is 
doing undue harm to our country and it is totally – I mean it is based on assumptions which 
are not realities.  So, we are fully aware that what has been done should not have been done.  
We are doing everything now for this to be corrected at the next meeting scheduled around 
September. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE CO. (MTIUS) LTD. - SPECIAL 

ADMINISTRATORS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/378)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
appointment  of  special  administrators  for  the  British  American  Insurance  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd. 
and  its  related  companies,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Financial 
Services Commission, information as to the - 
(a) terms and conditions thereof;  
(b) amount paid in relation thereto, and  
(c) criteria used for the selection exercise therefor. 

 

63 

Mr Bhadain:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on 02 April 2015, the Central Bank revoked 
the licence of Bramer Bank as per the provisions of section 17 of the Banking Act 2004, and 
appointed Messrs André Bonieux and Mushtaq Oosman as ‘Receivers’ of Bramer Bank, after 
having identified that the conditions prevailing posed serious risks to the domestic financial 
system.  

The  next  day,  on  03  April  2015,  in  order  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  insurance 
policyholders, the Financial Services Commission (FSC) acted pursuant to section 106 of the 
Insurance  Act  2005  and  appointed  Messrs  André  Bonieux  and  Mushtaq  Oosman  as 
‘Conservators’ of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. 

I  am  informed  by  the  FSC  that  the  appointment  of  Messrs  André  Bonieux  and 
Mushtaq Oosman was related to the fact that they were also the ‘Receivers’ of Bramer Bank. 
In the light of the complexity prevailing within the holding structure of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd, 
which controlled Bramer Bank, there existed a myriad of unusual related party transactions 
within  the  Group  and  having  the  same  persons  appointed  as  ‘Conservators’  would  avoid 
duplication of work and would drive the required level of synergy. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, nine days later, however, on 12 April 2015, the Directors of 
British  American  Investment  Co  (Mtius)  Ltd,  Seaton  Investment  Ltd  and  some  30  other 
companies  in  the  BAI  Group  voluntarily  appointed  an  Administrator,  Mr  Sattar  Hajee 
Abdoula,  under  sections  215  and  216  of  the  Insolvency  Act.  His  mission  to  safeguard  the 
interest of creditors and shareholders of these companies contradicted the protection afforded 
to insurance policyholders under section 63 of the Insurance Act 2005.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  on  28  April  2015,  the  Insurance  (Amendment)  Act  2015  was 
voted by Parliament to protect the interest of insurance policyholders. On 30 April 2015, the 
FSC  appointed  Messrs  Mushtaq  Oosman  and  Yogesh  Rai  Basgeet,  both  PwC  partners,  as 
‘Special Administrators’ of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd, and any of its related companies with effect 
from  01  May  2015.  Due  to  the  prevailing  urgency  and  legal  requirements,  the  Special 
Administrators started work straightaway. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  first  engagement  letter  of  the  ‘Special 
Administrators’ was received by the FSC on 15 June 2015. It included their proposed terms 
and conditions and two attachments –  

(i) 
(ii) 

a schedule showing a breakdown of their proposed fees, and  
 PwC’s terms of business. 

 

64 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  FSC  that,  on  24  June  2015,  the 
Commission rejected the proposed Letter of Engagement of the Special Administrators, after 
making the following observations, and I quote - 

“It was observed that the fees claimed by the Special Administrators are open-ended 
and outrageous and no breakdown is given. Many items quoted are not clear. The draft 
Letter  of  Engagement  contains  an  “indemnity”  clause  which  also  covers  PwC  in 
addition to the Special Administrators who have been appointed. The indemnity clause 
should be assessed as it is too wide in scope and the FSC cannot provide such a vague 
indemnity clause.  

After  discussions,  the  Board  agreed  that  the  legal  team  of  the  FSC  together  with 
management  examine  the  draft  Letter  of  Engagement  and  to  inform  the  Special 
Administrators of the terms and conditions which are not acceptable to the Commission 
and to seek a reply  from the Special  Administrators within the deadline to be set by 
management. The Special Administrators should also be requested to provide details on 
the fees claimed, the time spent and the advice tendered.  It is viewed that the fees to be 
charged by the Special Administrators should be a fixed fee plus any additional fee as 
may be agreed by the Commission.”  

I am now tabling a copy of the First Engagement Letter for the benefit of the House. 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  FSC  that,  following  the 
rejection  of  the  First  Engagement  Letter,  the  ‘Special  Administrators’  subsequently  sent  a 
second  Letter  of  Engagement  which  was  officially  received  on  02  July  2015  and  was 
accepted and signed by the Acting Chief Executive of the Commission.  

I am also tabling a copy of the accepted ‘Letter of Engagement’ which contains the 
terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  of  the  Special  Administrators.  No  schedule  or 
breakdown of fees was attached to the Engagement Letter and the only reference to ‘Fees’ 
stated as follows, and I quote - 

“Our fees for the services will be agreed with the Appointer from time to time.”  
With regard to part (b) of the question, on 17 June 2015, the ‘Special Administrators’ 
claimed an amount of Rs23,862,500 (inclusive of VAT), which the FSC authorised them to 
debit  from  the  account  of  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd  as  an  ‘advance  payment’  which  would  be 
adjusted against their fees on settlement.  

 

65 

Subsequently, on 03 August 2015, the Board of the FSC decided to cap the fees of the 
Special  Administrators  to  Rs28  m.  (inclusive  of  VAT)  and  that  higher  fees  could  not  be 
entertained. 

The  balance  of  Rs4,137,500  has  not  yet  been  charged  to  the  account  of  BAI  Co. 

(Mtius) Ltd.  

With respect to part (c) of the question, Mr Mushtaq Oosman and Mr Andre Bonieux, 
both  PwC  Partners,  were  acting  as  ‘Conservators’  appointed  under  section  106  of  the 
Insurance  Act  2005  to  maintain  continuity,  Mr  Mushtaq  Oosman  continued  as  ‘Special 
Administrator’  together  with  Mr  Yogesh  Rai  Basgeet,  both  PwC  Partners  and  Insolvency 
Practitioners.  

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I know from the hon. Minister whether he 
has  a  breakdown  of  the  fees  that  has  been  claimed  and  is  outstanding  from  the  Special 
Administrators? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I do have at my Office, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I don’t have a 
copy  with  me  now,  but  I  can  inform  the  hon.  Member  that  the  last  claim  that  they  sent 
contained a breakdown and then they have the audacity of coming and saying that they could 
claim 5% under the Insolvency Act which would amount to Rs651 m. fees for work which 
has been conducted from May to now and they have the further audacity of informing the 
FSC that they were giving the FSC a discount of Rs450 m. out of this and, therefore, they 
were claiming only Rs136 m., but I can assure the hon. Member that this Government will 
not tolerate such  abuse  and the fees have been  capped  at Rs28 m., they will pay Rs28 m. 
whether they like it or they don’t like it.  

Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Minister, in order to avoid recurrence of such 
event in the future, instead of having an ad hoc agreement on fees, will there be a schedule of 
fees now attached to the engagement letter whenever the FSC retain Special Administrators? 

Mr Bhadain: I totally agree with my hon. friend Uteem on this, I believe the FSC 
should have done that in the first place, but because of the urgency prevailing and the legal 
requirements,  because  people  had  to  be  paid  their  salaries  and  there  were  so  many  issues 
regarding  all  these  companies  in  the  BAI  group,  the  Special  Administrators  started  work 
straightaway, then they abused the situation by sending the first engagement letter on 15 June 
and when they brought this breakdown of fees which exceeded Rs100 m., the FSC rejected it. 
By  then,  they  sent  their  second  engagement  letter  which  was  accepted  with  the  line  that  I 

 

66 

have already read but I do agree, I have raised it with the FSC as well; things must be done in 
a more tedious and concrete manner going forward, I do agree.  

NATIONAL PROPERTY FUND - CREDIT FACILITY - BANK OF MAURITIUS   

(No.  B/379)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
credit facility granted by the Bank of Mauritius to the National Property Fund Ltd., he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to the - 

(a)  

terms and conditions thereof, and  

(b)  

amount disbursed in respect thereof as at to date. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding part (a) of the question, I 
am informed by the Bank of Mauritius that it granted, on 29 June 2015, a credit facility of 
three billion and five hundred million rupees to the National Property Fund Ltd (NPFL) at an 
interest rate of 3.75 per cent per annum. The capital and accrued interest are repayable by 30 
June 2016. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, the Bank, as at date, has disbursed three billion and 

five hundred million rupees to the National Property Fund Ltd. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I know from the hon. Minister whether the 
approval of the Board of the Bank of Mauritius was sought and obtained before this loan was 
disbursed. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I will think so. The Governor of the Central Bank will not 
take a decision of this magnitude without consulting its lawyer or consulting those who are 
close  to  him  unless,  you  have  some  information  contrary  to  this.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
Governor has followed strictly procedures. 

Mr  Uteem:  Given  the  answer  of  the  hon.  Minister,  maybe  he  can  verify  with  the 
Governor of the Central Bank whether the procedures have been followed and whether they 
have received any legal advice before they disbursed Rs3.5 billion to a company which is not 
a financial institution. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  It  is  not  but  it  is  Government.  Well,  we  are  dealing  with 
Government  and  this  money  had  to  be  –  we  had  the  cash  flow;  cash  flow  was  not  good 

 

67 

enough to fulfil our obligations towards those we have taken commitments, against those who 
have  lost  in  the  Ponzi  Scheme.  So,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
requested the Bank of Mauritius to make these facilities available to the National Property 
Fund. 

Mr Bérenger: This is very serious what had just been said in the House. I heard the 
hon.  Minister  saying  he  thinks  that  the  Board  gave  its  green  light  and  then  he  added 
comments  that  indicated  clearly  that,  if  that  was  not  the  case,  the  Governor  was  at  fault. 
Being given the seriousness of what we have just heard, can I ask the hon. Minister whether 
he will seek confirmation from the Governor that the Board did give its approval? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  will  certainly  look  in  the  matter,  as  I  have  said  I  am 
convinced,  I know the Governor personally.  I  am convinced that all procedures have been 
followed.    I  am  sure  he  has  even  consulted  the  legal  advisers  of  the  Central  Bank  before 
moving.  I think he has done this in the course of the whole business of the Central Bank.  
Why we did it? We did it because the National Property Fund has been set up by Government 
to fulfil its obligation vis-à-vis those who have lost money in the Ponzi Scheme. 

Mr  Uteem:  Other  than  the  Government  guarantee,  was  there  any  security  given  to 

secure this line of credit of Rs3.5 billion? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  No,  but  we  are  the  security.  Government  is  the  security. 
When we stood up and guaranteed to those who have lost money in the Ponzi Scheme that we 
are going to pay back the money that they have lost, it was the commitment of Government. 
Government decided at the most proper moment that we guaranteed the employment in both 
the Bramer Bank and BAI; we guaranteed all depositors in the Bramer Bank that their money 
would be safeguarded and we guaranteed also that those who have lost money in the Ponzi 
Scheme  will  be  repaid.  We  took  these  commitments.  We  have  fulfilled  them  and  we  are 
Government. 

Mr Uteem: The money has been advanced to the National Property Fund. So, may I 
know  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  what  was  the  exact 
purpose for the line of credit, what are they supposed to use this Rs3.5 billion for? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: My colleague Minister spelt out this morning that the money 
was provided to regulate the cash flow problem at the level of the National Property Fund. 
We had to fulfil our engagement, we have fulfilled our engagement, but there is  a cost to 

 

68 

everything. In this case, if we tried to sell Britam - Britam was valued at Rs4.2 billion - on the 
stock market, maybe we would have got even less than half of it. So, we didn’t want to take 
the risk of selling such properties just because we had a cash flow problem. It is in view of 
the above, we think that Britam will pick up. We think that the NCB will pick up beautifully 
as  well  as  the  insurance  company  that  we  decided  to  provide  cash  flow  facilities  to  the 
National Property Fund. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he will check and tell us 
whether there was not a firm offer to buy Britam, BAI Investment in Kenya for a sum above 
Rs4 billion? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: There was nothing firm to it. We, in fact, requested Barclays 
to see if they could help us secure one buyer for the whole lot. They said there might have 
one but no one secure. In fact, I can tell the House one thing, if there is a buyer for Britam at 
Rs4.2 billion, we will sell it immediately, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last supplementary question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Being given the excess liquidity in 
the banking system, does the hon. Minister find it correct that the Central Bank should inject 
an additional Rs3.5 billion when there is already an excess cash in circulation? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We  talk  of  what  is  ideal.  I  am  not  talking  of  what  is  the 
ideal. I am talking of crisis management and this is crisis management. There is no doubt that 
the national debt has increased substantially just because of this Rs3.5 billion. So, it is in our 
interest also to ensure that this advance made to the National Property Fund is reimbursed in 
2016. Again, I have to spell out that we don’t want to brader, to just sell off the properties 
that the National Property Fund has presently. So, it is not the best decision, but it is the best 
decision in this consensus we are facing. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

LA NICOLIÈRE DEVELOPMENT COMPANY – STATE LAND - LEASE  
(No.  B/380)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to State land, he 
will state if any agreement for the lease thereof for agricultural purposes has been signed with 
the La Nicolière Development Company and, if so, indicate - 

 

69 

(a) the date of signature thereof;  
(b) the duration thereof;  
(c) the extent thereof;  
(d) the purpose therefor;  
(e) the rental value thereof, and  
(f) if the lessee has pledged his rights in respect thereof and, if so, indicate the - 

(i) name of the bank or financial institution concerned therewith, and  
(ii) consideration of the sum of money for which the land has been pledged. 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that, in regard to State land, 
no  lease  agreement  has  been  signed  with  La  Nicolière  Development  Company  Ltd  for 
agricultural purposes.  

However, a lease  agreement was signed between the Government and  La Nicolière 
Development Company Ltd for the lease of State Lands Nicolière, Desenne, Valet, Jauffret, 
Noël and Jean Pierre in the districts of Pamplemousses and Moka for shooting and fishing 
purposes.  

The replies to the different parts of the question are as follows - 

With regard to part (a) of the question, the lease was initially signed on 03 June 2008 
with  Designer  Development  Ltd  and  was  subsequently  transferred  to  La  Nicolière 
Development Company Ltd on 10 February 2010.  

The duration of the lease was for a period of 7 years from 08 September 2007 to 07 
September 2014. The lease was renewed for another period of 7  years from 08 September 
2014 to 07 September 2021. 

Regarding part (c) of the question, the aggregate extent of the land leased was 233.49 

hectares. 

As for part (d) of the question, the purpose of the lease as stipulated under section 3 of 
the Shooting and Fishing Leases Act was to shoot and to go in pursuit of game and to fish, 
hunt or fowl on the State land. 

As regards part (e) of the question, the rental paid for the first lease was increased 
yearly  from  Rs168,750  in  2010  to  Rs191,250  in  2014  based  on  the  assessment  of  the 
Government Valuer. 

 

70 

As regards part (f) of the question, the lease agreement does not provide for the right 

to pledge and no request was made by the lessee to my Ministry to exercise such a right. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that following a site visit carried 
out on 13 January 2015 by officers of the Forestry Service of my Ministry, it was reported 
that no deer had been introduced yet and no grazing places had been created which clearly 
indicated that no deer hunting activities had been carried out by the lessee since the grant of 
the lease in 2008.  

In view thereof, the lease was cancelled on 25 February 2015 and the lessee was given 

a three months’ notice to vacate the land and restore it to its original state.  

My Ministry has now resumed possession of the State land. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

CEMENT BAOBAB LAKAZ - MAURITIUS STANDARDS BUREAU - 

CLASSIFICATION  

 

(No.  B/381)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in regard to the 
newly  launched  cement  Baobab  Lakaz  on  the  local  market,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Mauritius Standards Bureau, information as to - 

(a) the classification thereof according to the Mauritius Standards Bureau, and  
(b) if it uses sugarcane fly ash mixed with coal fly ash;  
(c) if it has no organic matter, and  
(d) if its loss on ignition is less than 7 per cent. 
Mr  Gungah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Standards 
Bureau that three tests had been carried out on 21 and 29 April and 12 May 2015 on the new 
type of cement under the brand name Baobab Lakaz. This cement is classified as CEM II/B-
Z-  32.5  TU  (Tropical  Use)  under  the  Mauritius  Standards  MS  36-3:2007  Part  3  - 
composition, specifications and conformity criteria for cements for tropical use. 

The tests carried out relate to the following - 

•  The physical and mechanical properties for its compressive strength and soundness; 
•  sulphate and chloride contents, and  
•  heat of hydration.  

 

71 

This new type of cement marketed under the brand name Baobab Lakaz is meant for non-

structural works such as rendering, plastering, block laying and flooring.   

I am also informed that it is more adapted to the climatic conditions of the country 
and reduces formation of cracks. This new product is sold at a lower price compared to the 
normal cement.  

As  regards  parts  (b),  (c)  and  (d)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  Mauritius 
Standards  Bureau  that  the  determination  of  sugarcane  fly  ash  mixed  with  coal  fly  ash,  of 
organic  matter  in  cement  and  of  loss  on  ignition  in  cement  for  tropical  use  is  not  a 
requirement for cement classified as CEM II/B-Z- 32.5 TU as per the relevant standard. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, however, I have contacted the manufacturer of Baobab Lakaz, 
who has informed that no sugarcane fly ash and coal fly ash are used as they are not covered 
under the BS Norms in view of the potential mineral deficiencies. I am also informed that 
very limited organic matter is used and is far from below norms.  

As far as loss of ignition is concerned, I am informed that it is 1.8% compared to the 

required 5%. 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I thank the hon. Minister for his 
reply.  One question which I would wish to ask the hon. Minister since he, himself, in his 
reply, mentioned that this type of cement is used for non-structural works. May  I ask him 
how do we ensure that end users – because this type of cement is lower in price as compared 
to the cement we use for structural works - do not use this type of cement for structural works 
rather than using the other type of cement which is higher in price  and that we might see 
ourselves in the future with serious problems?  

Mr Gungah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, on certain part of the cement bag it is 
very  well  specified,  it  is  displayed  that  this  cement  is  appropriate  only  for  non–structural 
construction. I spoke to the company and they told me that they have had meetings with the 
quincailliers and given them explanation as to when people come to buy the bags of cement, 
they are well made aware of this. 

Mr Lesjongard: I understand the reply of the hon. Minister, but this is Mauritius. You 
might  have  a  contractor  who,  instead  of  using  the  cement  that  he  is  supposed  to  use  for 

 

72 

structural works, uses Baobab Lakaz because it is cheaper. How do we ensure that this does 
not happen? 

Mr  Gungah:    Well,  I  think,  for  the  security,  the  constructor  or  the  owner  of  the 
building should choose the appropriate cement; one for the structural purposes and one for 
the non-structural. As far as it is clearly specified, I think the consumer has to go according to 
specifications.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. May I humbly suggest a solution 
and I wonder whether the hon. Minister will agree with that, that a special team is put in place 
with  Inspectors  that  could  go  and  verify  construction  sites  at  random  and  to  provide  by 
regulations that there would be penalties for any violation? So, at least, that would act as a 
deterrent to address the serious and valid concerns raised by hon. Lesjongard - just a team 
that would act as a deterrent. I humbly suggest that. 

Mr Gungah: I will think about the suggestion of the hon. Member. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, next question! 

TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION – POSTS - SCHEMES OF SERVICE & 

QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS  

(No. B/382) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Science Research 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission,  she  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain therefrom – 

(a) information as to the changes brought to the schemes of service and qualification 
requirements for the posts of Executive Director and Deputy Executive Director 
thereof  respectively,  indicating  whether  there  has  been  an  upgrading  or  a 
downgrading of the entry qualification requirements in relation thereto, and  

(b) copy  of  the  schemes  of  service  for  the  posts  of  Financial  Controller,  Head  of 

Finance and Deputy Finance Controller thereof respectively and table same.  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to section (a) of the 
question, according to information provided by the Tertiary Education Commission (TEC), 
no change has been brought to the scheme of service and qualification requirements for the 
post of Executive Director. 

 

73 

Regarding the post of Deputy Executive Director, I wish to inform the House that, at a 
meeting of the previous  Board held in September 2014, it was decided that the scheme of 
service be amended.   

The main changes brought to the scheme of service are as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the qualification requirement has been revised from the previous ‘‘post 
graduate degree, at doctoral level’’ to a “Master’s Degree in the fields 
of Management or Business Administration or Law or Economics or 
an equivalent qualification”; 
the requirement for prospective candidates to be at Professorial level 
has been removed, and  

(iii)  the experience requirement of “at least ten years teaching and research 
at  tertiary  level”  has  been  amended  to  read  “|at  least  ten  years  post 
qualification experience in a senior management position”.  

I  view  the  situation  with  concern,  and  the  changes  brought  to  the  scheme  of  service 

appear to be indeed a downgrading of the post without any change in salary.  

I am, however, informed that the new TEC Board has recommended that the scheme of 
service  for  the  post  of  Deputy  Executive  Director  be  reviewed  so  as  to  make  it  more 
consonant with the post taking into consideration that the holder will be called upon to, inter 
alia, deputise for the post of Executive Director. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, a copy of the scheme of service for the post of 
Financial  Controller,  Head  Finance  Division  and  of  the  Deputy  Finance  Controller 
respectively is being tabled. 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, do I understand from the hon. Minister that when the 
scheme of service was changed at that time, that is, back in September 2014, it was, like we 
say, taillé sur mesure? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: It would seem so.  I would wish the hon. Member to check 

with his former alliance, maybe this was the case. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  one  supplementary,  please?    I  listened  very  carefully  to  the 
hon. Minister; I thought I heard her saying that for the post of Deputy Executive Director, the 
qualifications will be reviewed.  Would it be for the case of the Executive Director also? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Executive  Director  has  already  been  appointed 

according to the former scheme. 

Mr Ganoo:  What was the requirement needed for the post of Executive Director? 

 

74 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: It was okay. 
Mr Lesjongard:  May I ask the hon. Minister to inform the House, as it is right now, 
how many senior officials are holding posts in an acting capacity at the level of the Tertiary 
Education Commission? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  I  don’t  have  the  exact  figure,  but  I  know  that  for  the 
Finance  Controller,  the  post  is  being  occupied  by  the  Deputy  Finance  Controller  on 
actingship. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 
 
BETAMAX SHIPPING LTD/STC – PETROLEUM PRODUCTS – INTER-

MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE 

(No. B/383) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
contract  between  Betamax  Shipping  Ltd.  and  the  State  Trading  Corporation  for  the 
transportation of petroleum products from India to Mauritius, he will – 

(a) state the terms of reference of the inter-ministerial committee set up to look 

thereinto, indicating the - 
(i) 

composition thereof and the number of sittings held as at to date, and  
(b) for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State  Trading  Corporation, 
information  as  to  if  the  Corporation  had  launched  a  tender  for  the 
recruitment of a Consultant to look thereinto and, if not, why not and, if so, 
indicate -  

(i) 

(ii) 

if  the  Board  thereof  had  approved  the  contract  related  to  the 
tender, and  
the terms and conditions of the contract. 

Mr  Gungah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  in 
September 2009, the then Government set up an inter-ministerial committee to examine the 
various  clauses  of  the  contract  of  agreement  for  the  acquisition  of  a  tanker  vessel  for  the 
conveyance of petroleum products.  

The inter-ministerial committee was set up under the chairmanship of the then Vice-
Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Tourism,  Leisure  and  External  Communications  and 
comprised 
then  Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Empowerment, the then Minister of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping, the 

the 

 

75 

then  Minister  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  and  the  then  Minister  of 
Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives. The committee met on four occasions. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am advised by the STC that it did not launch 
any tender for the recruitment of a Consultant. My Ministry has requested the Police to carry 
out an inquiry into the contract between STC and Betamax Ltd. 

In view of the ongoing Police inquiry into the matter, I am not in a position to provide 
any further information, so as not to cause any prejudice to the smooth running of the inquiry.  
Mr  Lesjongard:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  understand  the  position  of  the  hon. 
Minister. In reply to part (a) of the question, he has mentioned the composition of the inter-
ministerial committee without stating the terms of reference of that committee. May we know 
what were the terms of reference of that committee? 

Mr  Gungah:  In  fact,  the  aim  was  to  examine  the  various  clauses  of  the  contract  of 

agreement for the acquisition of a tanker vessel for the conveyance of petroleum products. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I understand that there is a Police 
inquiry going on. But will the hon. Minister table a copy of the recommendations made by 
the inter-ministerial committee? 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as I have just said, there is a Police inquiry 

going on. I do not want to compromise its integrity and I prefer the inquiry to go on. 

Mr Mohamed: I have been very careful to ensure that whatever question I put, any 
answer that comes from it, would not, in any way, go and jeopardise any Police inquiry since 
it’s  what,  I  think,  the  hon.  Minister  said  so  three  times.  What  about  the  inter-ministerial 
committee? Has it looked into the issues pertaining to arbitration, since it is provided for in 
the contract - that has nothing to do with the criminal matter? Now, where are we at with 
regard to arbitration matter, has Government responded, has the STC responded, or are we 
being left to dry? 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am not aware of any report of what the hon. 

Member is saying. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: The question has been answered. Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

76 

Mr Jhugroo: Is it true to say that the former Prime Minister was in such a hurry to 
give this contract to Betamax that he has not waited for the recommendations of the inter-
ministerial committee? 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is a Police inquiry going on. 

CEB – PLAINE LAUZUN, CAMP CHAPELON & PAILLES – REPRESENTATIONS 

(No. B/384) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  proposed  installation  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  of  four  new  Heavy  Fuel  Oil 
Engines  at the St  Louis  Power Station by  end 2017, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain  from  the  Board,  information  as  to  if  it  is  in  presence  of  representations  made  by 
inhabitants  of  Plaine  Lauzun,  Camp  Chapelon  and  Pailles  complaining  of  the  level  of 
pollution  and  of  the  nuisances  generated  by  Heavy  Fuel  Oil  Engines  and,  if  so,  obtain 
information as to the actions the Board proposes to take to ensure that no inconveniences or 
nuisances are caused to the inhabitants and the other actions that will be taken, as appropriate, 
in the circumstances. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy    Speaker,  Sir,  CEB  has  informed  me  that  it  has  received  a 
number  of  complaints  from  the  Mouvement  Civique  de  Plaine  Lauzun  regarding  pollution 
alleged to being caused by St. Louis Power Station. 

The CEB had a meeting with that ONG on 04 June 2015 and CEB informed that ONG 
that  old  Pielstick  engines  would  be  phased  out  in  2017  with  the  installation  of  the  new 
engines at the St. Louis Power Station.  On 22 June 2015, the Mouvement Civique de Plaine 
Lauzun has served a Mise en Demeure requiring the CEB to stop the installation of the new 
engines. 

The  St.  Louis  Power  Station  is  the  first  diesel  power  station  of  the  CEB  and  is 
operational  since  1955.    Since  then,  the  area,  which  was  originally  dedicated  to  industrial 
development,  has  witnessed  significant  residential  development.    CEB  has  over  the  years 
taken measures to address the environmental concerns of the inhabitants, namely – 

(i) 

the old Pielstick engines are  gradually being phased out.  Today, out of  the 
initial six Pielstick engines, commissioned between 1978 and 1981, only four 
are operational at capacity of 6 MW each, and  

 

(ii) 

77 

3  Wartsila  engines  of  13.8  MW  became  operational  in  2006.    These  were 
subject  to  an  Environment  Impact  Assessment  and  are  in  compliance  with 
environmental norms. 

As  the  House  may  be  aware,  the  old  engines  will  be  phased  out  in  2017  with  the 
installation of the new 60 MW engines.  When Liquid Natural Gas is introduced in Mauritius, 
the new engines may be converted to energy, thus reducing further the environmental risks.  
A  re-tendering  process  has  been  initiated  by  CEB.  In  line  with  the  EIA  Licence, 
environmental safeguards regarding noise, air and other environmental standards have been 
incorporated in the design of the plant. 

I  am  also  informed  that  the  CEB  recently  conducted  an  air  monitoring  with  the 
assistance of the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority and emissions were found to be within 
environmental norms. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  It  is  clear  that  the  meeting  which  the  CEB  has  had  with  the 
organisation  did  not  convince  them  because,  subsequently,  there  was  a  Mise  en  Demeure 
served  on  the  CEB.  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  what  the  actual 
situation is now with regard to the noise and pollution levels, especially when all the engines 
are on? Also, what is the actual level of pollution? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  use  of  the  old  Pielstick  engine  is 
creating environmental hazard, but what can we do? We can’t black out the area because of 
the Pielstick engine, we have to balance. So, we are going on – we know the saga of these St. 
Louis machines - and we are pressing ahead to have these new engines as soon as possible. I 
think I have said it before; the tender is open until October. In October, after it has gone to 
the CPB, we will take a decision because we anticipate many things. 

Mr Mohamed: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is there a practice at the level of the CEB, as 
is the case in many European countries where in places where energy is produced, whereby 
there are measurements of noise levels made at regular intervals where institution can self-
assess  itself  as  far  as  noise  pollution  goes  and  that  those  readings  are  made  available  to 
members  of  the  community  to  try  to  convince  them  that,  at  least,  we  are  aware  of  the 
problems and those are the measures that we are taking, a continuous regular assessment at 
monthly intervals. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Let me check if my information can be confirmed because, to 
my knowledge, regular checks are made for noise and, for air, I know that the Mauritius Cane 

 

78 

Industry Authority (MCIA) has got a specific machine to monitor air and these checks are 
done  as  and  when  required,  but  they  are  not  on  regular  basis.  Let  me  just  add  that  I  am 
informed that the Pielstick engines are in operation since 35 years. 

Mr  Uteem:  Being  given  that  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  just  said  that  these 
Pielstick  machines  have  been  in  operation  for  the  past  35  years,  can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister  reassure  the  House  and  the  people  living  in  this  region  that,  all  scheduled 
maintenance of these engines are carried out properly and there is absolutely no risk to any of 
the inhabitants of this region? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, first of all, let me take this opportunity to pay homage to 
the inhabitants of Camp Chapelon and the vicinity. They are going through tough times. I do 
not  want  to  interfere  in  their  internal  problems  at  local  level,  but  the  majority  of  the 
population,  I  am  sure,  fully  understand  the  situation.  Others,  like  the  Mouvement  Civique 
want to make sure that they get a clean environment, and that is absolutely what they should 
do, but we have to look also at the security of supply for the country. Regular maintenance is 
made.  Of  course,  I  have  answered  this  question  in  the  past.  Every  year  we  have  regular 
maintenance. I have myself, personally, monitored the maintenance plan and that is the issue 
when we talk of border line, because sometimes if you maintain too many machines, that may 
lead you to border line. But now, we have Mr Hébrard and he knows his job. I trust him. I am 
not going to interfere in the maintenance of the machines. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  the  former 
Government had contemplated to take action to tackle this problem of pollution and, if yes, 
when and by what means? 

Mr Collendavelloo: As you know, I don’t like playing the blame game. Whatever has 
been done or not done,  let it be for history to judge. We have to  grapple with the present 
situation. It is true that there was a lack of energy at the Ministry of Energy! 

(Interruptions) 

But what can we do? Let us look forward! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: According to my information, when the four new engines will be in 
operation,  there  will  be  around  162,000  tonnes  of  heavy  oil  burning.  May  I  know  what 

 

79 

precautionary  action  has  been  taken  to  ensure  that  the  actual  level  of  pollution  does  not 
increase? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I have asked this question many a time and I have been assured 
that  the  new  engines,  according  to  the  specifications  which  have  been  worked  out  in  the 
tender,  will  be  according  to  environmental  standards.  I  see  a  piece  of  paper  rushing  in  to 
me… 

(Interruptions) 

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Committee has approved these machines which 
are stated to be in compliance with environmental regulations. They are new machines and 
we trust that this will be the case. 

The Deputy Speaker: A last supplementary question, hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I understand the position of the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister; on one side we have to meet electricity demand, and on the other 
side we have engines that are operating far beyond their lifespan. I appreciate that the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  has  paid  homage  to  the  inhabitants  of  Camp  Chapelon.  Maybe  CEB 
should go further than paying tribute to the inhabitants of that area and try to look into some 
sort of compensation to the inhabitants of Camp Chapelon. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  think  the  appetite  of  the  hon.  Member  has  been  whetted  by 
what appeared in the newspapers on Sunday. I don’t think that this is on. We are going to 
proceed as planned. Let us say that these Pielstick machines have ended their lifespan. But 
what CEB is doing - as the hon. Member knows fully well - is that at night time when the 
national demand is at about 200 MW, then they are not used. So, they are used only at peak 
time when we need about 450 MW that are required. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, next question! 

AIRMATE LTD – WORKERS – RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/385) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard  to  the  recent  allegations  of  discrimination  faced  by  workers  of  Airmate  Ltd.,  a 
subsidiary  company  of  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will  state  the  actions  taken,  if  any,  by  his 

 

80 

Ministry  for  these  workers  to  be  recruited  by  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.,  on  the  same  terms  and 
conditions as the workers of Air Mauritius Ltd. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  following  representations  made  by 
the  Confédération des Travailleurs du Secteur Privé (CTSP), on behalf of its affiliated union, 
the Private Enterprises Employees Union which is recognised as the sole bargaining agent of 
workers  of  Airmate  Ltd.,  to  the  effect  that  the  workers  employed  by  Airmate  Ltd.  are 
discriminated  inasmuch  as  they  are  paid  lesser  wages  than  the  workers  employed  by  Air 
Mauritius Ltd., my Ministry held several tripartite meetings with the parties. 

The hon. Member may wish to note that the claim of the Union is based on section 20 
of  the  Employment  Rights  Act  on  ‘Equal  remuneration  for  work  of  equal  value’  and 
discussion has been held on this issue only.  

I wish to emphasise that I personally met the Union on 27 April 2015 to discuss the 
issue of alleged discrimination. Subsequently, on 06 May 2015, the Permanent Secretary of 
my Ministry chaired a meeting with the Union, the Management of Airmate Ltd. and that of 
Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  where  it  was  agreed  that  further  meetings  would  be  held  between  the 
parties to discuss the matter. 

I am given to understand that – 
(i) 

Airmate  Ltd. considers that it has a different entity from Air Mauritius Ltd. 
and  has  its  own  internal  procedures  and  conditions  of  work  governing  its 
employees  which  are  completely  unrelated  to  internal  procedures  and 
conditions  of  work  of  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  and  as  such,  was  not  prepared  to 
entertain  the  claim  of  the  Confédération  des  Travailleurs  du  Secteur  Privé 
(CTSP); 
Air Mauritius Ltd. considers, on its part, that it applies the equal opportunity 
concept and does not apply any form of discrimination towards its employees. 
The internal procedures and conditions of service governing its employees are 
completely  unrelated  to  the  internal  procedure  and  conditions  of  work  of 
Airmate  Ltd.  As  such,  the  salaries  and  conditions  of  work  of  Air  Mauritius 
Ltd. cannot be compared with the salaries of Airmate Ltd. as both companies 
carry out different objectives and business; 
It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  Airmate  Ltd.,  as  a  Job  Contractor,  has  been 
providing  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  with  manpower  as  and  when  required  by  the 
latter to perform the following duties –  

(ii) 

(iii) 

 

81 

•  cleaning; 
•  clerical; 
•  baggage service; 
• 
•  Passage handling, and 
•  office attendant 

Information Technology; 

My Ministry is closely following the matter and further meetings will be held with a 
view  to  finding  a  solution.  In  case  of  deadlock,  further  inquiry  will  be  carried  out  by  my 
Ministry and in the event that a prima facie case is established, the matter will be referred to 
the Industrial Court for determination. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Throughout  the  world,  companies  like  Air  France  have  set  up 
subsidiary companies with different conditions of employment and so on. I have just heard 
the  Minister  refer  to  Airmate  Ltd.  as  a  job  contractor.  Is  Airmate  Ltd.  a  subsidiary  of  Air 
Mauritius Ltd., is it registered as a job contractor? What is the situation? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Airmate  Ltd.  was  created  in  2006  and  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  is  the 

holder of 100 percent of the shares of Airmate Ltd. It is a subsidiary. 

(Interruptions) 

They provide job contracting services. That is what I have just stated. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 
Mr Rutnah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can the hon. Minister confirm that the problems 
that  Airmate  Ltd.  employees  are  facing  today  vis-à-vis  those  who  are  employed  by  Air 
Mauritius Ltd., whether those problems were not inherent at the time of the incorporation of 
the company in 2006 onwards until the last general elections? 

Mr  Callichurn:  I  don’t  have  such  information.  Will  the  hon.  Member  repeat  the 

question, please? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: Whether the problems  faced by the employees  of  Airmate  Ltd.  at the 
moment  were  not  already  inherent  since  the  incorporation  of  Airmate  Ltd.  since  2006 
onwards up to the general elections when the time when those who are laughing on the other 
side were in alliance for a year with the Labour Party? 

Mr Callichurn: It is without any doubt that the problem was created since 2006 by 
the previous Government. My predecessor himself refused to look into the matter as per a 
letter I received on 13 March 2015. Let me read part of it –  

 

82 

“We believe that the Ministry of Labour, whose first and foremost role is to protect 
the  workers,  cannot  be  waiver  in  this  endeavour.  However,  your  predecessor  went 
against this fundamental role of protecting workers as he went ahead and signed an 
affidavit against them while the Union is fighting at the Supreme Court to correct this 
injustice.” 
Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister inform the House when is the first time that a 
complaint  was  made  by  this  Union  in  relation  to  Airmate  Ltd.  and  Air  Mauritius  Ltd. 
supposed  discrimination  practices?  The  first  official  complaint  made  at  the  level  of  his 
Ministry.  Since  he  has  also  referred  to  an  affidavit  that  his  predecessor,  meaning  me,  has 
allegedly signed, could he just at least table that affidavit? 

Mr Callichurn: I don’t have the affidavit with me, but it is in the letter which was 
addressed to me on 13 March 2015. I believe that the complaint was made well before I took 
office! 

Well before I took office, I said, because… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have a date. The letter was addressed to me on 13 March 2015. So, it was well before I took 
office! 

(Interruptions) 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 
(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, please!  Hon. Baloomoody, any more questions on this?   

Mr Baloomoody: No. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

PRIMATES - EXPORT 

(No. B/386) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the export of 
primates from Mauritius, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the 
names and addresses of the companies specialised in such activities, indicating - 

(a) the turnover of each of these companies in respect of the past financial year and  

 

83 

(b) if he is aware of any adverse reports and/or criticisms from local and/or foreign 

organisations in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

NATIONAL TRANSPORT CORPORATION - LOANS 

(No. B/387) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
National  Transport  Corporation,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to the financial situation thereof in respect of the six months ending 30 June 
2015, indicating the - 

(a) cash flow  

(b) net return and  

(c) quantum of the loans secured from Government, compared to the corresponding 

period over the past two years and table copy thereof and, if not, why not.  

(Withdrawn) 

AFRICAN CONTINENT – TRADE PROMOTION 

(No. B/388) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the Agenda 63 of the African  Union, he will state the initiatives taken by his 
Ministry  for  the  promotion  of  trade  between  Mauritius  and  the  African  continent  through 
bilateral relations with countries of the Regional Economic Community. 

(Withdrawn) 

SUPREME COURT - MACKAY REPORT - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/389)  Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Attorney-General  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mackay  Report  1998,  he  will  state  if 
Government will consider the implementation of the Recommendation thereof in relation to 
the reorganization of the Supreme Court into two sections, namely, into a Court of Appeal 
and a High Court. 

 

84 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with a view to improving the efficiency of 
our Courts and, more generally, our judicial and legal system, the Mackay Report did indeed 
recommend the setting up of a separate Court of Appeal Section of the Supreme Court to hear 
all  appeals  from  subordinate  Courts  and  of  the  High  Court  Section,  as  Judges  who  sit  on 
appeals are themselves Judges of the Supreme Court. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  which  addressed 
the above recommendation of the Mackay Report, clearly states that reforms will be brought 
to the Judiciary to expedite determination of Court cases and improve services to the public, 
and that in line with the Mackay Report, Government will introduce legislation to set up a 
separate Court of Appeal Section in a separate High Court Section of the Supreme Court.   

In order to implement the above recommendation and various other recommendations 
of  the  Mackay  Report,  my  Office  has,  for  some  time  now,  been  working  on,  firstly,  the 
Constitution (Amendment) Bill, and secondly, the Judicial and Legal Services Provisions Bill 
which provide for amendments to be brought to a series of enactments to give effect to the 
proposed changes in the Constitution. 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, in fact, seeks to amend various provisions of the 
Constitution  so  as  to  provide  for  the  recommendations  made  by  Lord  Mackay,  to  which  I 
referred  earlier,  whereas  the  Judicial  and  Legal  Provisions  Bill,  which  seeks  to  amend  a 
number  of  enactments  to  give  effect  to  the  proposed  changes  in  the  Constitution,  is 
consequently being prepared not only to provide for the division of a Supreme Court into a 
Court  of  Appeal  and  a  High  Court,  but  also  to,  inter  alia,  implement  certain  of  the 
recommendations of the Presidential Commission relating for instance to the use of modern 
technology in recording evidence, the non-attendance in Court by law practitioners, parties 
and  witnesses,  the  admissibility  of  evidence  taken  abroad,  the  timely  lodging  of  an 
information in cases involving a juvenile and certain procedural matters in civil cases. Some 
of the various enactments which are thus being amended by the Judicial and Legal Provisions 
Bill in order to cater for the above matters include the following – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Courts Act 
Criminal Code 
Criminal Procedure Act 
District and Intermediate Courts (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 
District and Intermediate Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act 
Interpretation and General Clauses Act  

 

85 

Law Practitioners Act 

• 
Moreover,  consequential  amendments  will  have  to  be  made  to  not  less  than  80 

enactments.  

As already pointed out, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the reforms we are envisaging do not 
limit themselves to the creation of a Court of Appeal. Those reforms are definitely wider and 
concern various aspects of our judicial system and the administration of justice in Mauritius. 
Once the above Bills are finalised, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government intends to 
circulate them so that the views and comments of all relevant stakeholders may be obtained 
in  view  of  the  numerous  implications  of  these  Bills.  Indeed,  the  financial  implications  for 
instance  (in  terms,  of  infrastructural  facilities,  staff  etc.)  will  also  need  to  be  given  due 
consideration. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  once  finalised  and  Government  approval  is  obtained,  the 

above Bills will then be introduced in the National Assembly. 

Dr. Sorefan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Court of Appeal presently takes a very long 
time to hear appeals. Justice delayed justice denied! May we know from the hon. Attorney 
General the time  frame  for the implementation  of the reform? And what  I hear is that the 
Judiciary  does not have enough money to set up the appeal, three judges sitting together. As 
we know, we have voted here Rs600 m. in the last budget. May the hon. Attorney General 
give us a time frame when all these enactment will come to this House? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  my  answer,  I  detailed  the  different 
processes involved before we can actually have the law passed in this House and, therefore, 
implemented. The hon. Member will appreciate that I cannot, therefore, give a definite time 
frame. But I can assure the hon. Member that we are doing everything that is possible with all 
the stakeholders, so that this issue may be addressed at the earliest. 

Mr Ramphul:  Since the whole reform is about getting litigants to settle their dispute 
expeditiously. Can the hon. Attorney General inform the House whether he will consider the 
desirability of also extending mediation services to Lower Courts? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: As the hon. Member would be aware, mediation and ADR is already 
being encouraged at the level of the Supreme Court. I do understand that the Chief Justice is 
canvassing the idea of strengthening the process, and I do understand also that my Learned 
Friend,  the  hon.  Member,  being  a  practising  Barrister,  will  appreciate  that  this  is  being 
encouraged in the day-to-day practice in Mauritius. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    The  hon.  Attorney  General  has  listed  a  lot  of  laws,  even  the 
Constitution  will  be  amended,  but  has  some  groundwork  been  made  already  regarding  the 

 

86 

infrastructure? Where will be the Supreme Court? Where will be the Appeal Court because 
already in the Supreme Court, we do not have space for Judges? So, have this groundwork 
been done? Can the hon. Attorney General inform the House where we will have the Court of 
Appeal, in which building? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: The Master & Registrar is working on the proposals and I will keep 

this House informed as soon as I can. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can I ask the hon. Attorney General when he is contemplating to have 
new structures?  Can he also consider asking the Courts to have more discipline with regard 
to time frame? Sometimes, you can be called at 10.00 hours and you get your verdict at 12.00 
and even after 12.00. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  If  I  understood  the  hon.  Member  correctly,  this  falls  under  the 
Master and Registrar of the Supreme Court, but I am aware that a lot of effort is being put 
with the collaboration of the practising law practitioners to improve the system. I can also tell 
the hon. Member - I alluded to this in my speech on the Budget - that in our District Courts, 
you would see that a sum of money has been voted in the Budget for the rehabilitation and 
construction of new structures. Many practitioners would agree and the public in general that 
often basic facilities such as public toilets, waiting areas, covered waiting areas in District 
Courts  are  not  readily  available  and  lots  of  people  using  our  judicial  system  have  to  wait 
sometimes for long hours after having travelled long distances. Certain remedial measures are 
being  taken,  but  we  are  limited  in  time  and  space  as  well,  but  these  issues  are  being 
addressed.  I  can  tell  the  hon.  Member  that  I  am  aware  that  the  Master  and  Registrar  is 
addressing those issues. 

Mr Rutnah: Following the question of the Second Member of Mahebourg and Plaine 
Magnien, can the hon. Attorney General state to the House whether - while we are dealing 
with discipline and Judges of the Supreme Court, High Court and Court of Appeal - he would 
consider setting up a Judicial Complaints Commission so that the profession of Judges could 
be kept in checks and balances in a modern civilisation, especially when things are supposed 
to be met with transparency, good governance, etc.? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I will give some thought to the suggestion. 

 

SMART CITIES PROJECT - VACOAS & PHOENIX   

(No. B/390) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the proposed Smart 
Cities Project, he will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating if 

 

87 

consideration  will  be  given  for  the  setting  up  of  a  committee  to  study  the  possibility  of 
transforming the towns of Vacoas and Phoenix into a Smart City and consider the – 

(a)  
(b)  

relocation of the Special Mobile Force Quarters, and  
planning  constructions  thereof  according  to  the  guidelines  prescribed  for 
Smart Cities. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the features, components, criteria 
as  well  as  investment  incentives  of  the  Smart  City  Scheme  are  set  out  in  the  Investment 
Promotion (Smart City Scheme) Regulations 2015, which came into force on 18 June 2015. 
The Scheme is managed and administered by the Board of Investment (BOI). The Guidelines 
for Smart City Projects, including environmental guidelines, have already been worked out 
by the Board of Investment and are on its website. 

I am informed by the Board of Investment that, as at to date, 14 Smart City projects 
are currently in the pipeline across the island. Total investment is estimated at Rs140 billion, 
predominantly from private and foreign sources. 

Furthermore,  a  Smart  City  Technical  Committee,  comprising  representatives  of  the 
relevant Ministries and Authorities, has been set up to examine applications for Smart City 
projects and facilitate their implementation.  

With regard to the second part of the question, the Regulations enable an existing site 
or project to be redeveloped as a Smart City provided it meets the set criteria and obligations 
of the Scheme.  

In this respect, I am informed that the Municipal Council has submitted a request to 
the transformation of the Town Centre into a Smart City. The request of the Council is being 
examined by the Technical Committee within the established framework. 

Mr Mohamed: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister talked about the various 
Smart Cities that we’ve been hearing of and that they are all in the pipeline. There are two 
things which I would like to obtain from you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, which is as follows: 
At what part of the pipeline are the projects and how long is the pipeline?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The pipeline has given birth already to four projects mainly 

Mont Trésor, Royal St Louis, Cap Tamarin, Mauritius Yihai Garden and those other ones. 

(Interruptions) 

 

88 

I need to tell you that the Fast Track Committee chaired by the Secretary, is ensuring that all 
those projects are moving as smoothly as possible. 

INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS – COAL/BAGASSE ENERGY 

(No.  B/391)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Independent Power Producers (IPP) producing electricity from coal/bagasse, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to 
- 

(a) the average GWhr produced last year for each IPP;  

(b) the percentage of energy from coal compared to bagasse, and  

(c) if any negotiation is ongoing between the Central Electricity Board and Alteo Ltd. 
regarding the redevelopment of FUEL P/S and unit cost KWhr in rupees proposed 
by Alteo Ltd. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, the CEB 
informs  me  that  in  2014,  the  IPPs  producing  electricity  from  either  coal  or  bagasse  plants 
exported  1454  GWh  out  of  a  total  of  2560  GWh  on  the  grid.    These  IPPs  contributed, 
therefore, 55.9% of the total generation. The contribution of each IPP is as follows -  

•  Consolidated Energy Limited  - coal only as from 2014 
•  Terragen (Belle Vue) - coal/bagasse 

-  162.9 GWh 
-  400.8 GWh 

(coal: 74.2%, bagasse: 25.8%) 

•  Alteo Energy Limited (FUEL) - coal/bagasse 

-  165.9 GWh 

(coal: 45%, bagasse: 55%) 

•  Omnicane (Compagnie Thermique du Sud) - coal only 
•  Omnicane (CTSav) running on coal and bagasse 

-  230.5 GWh 
-  493.6 GWh 

(coal :72.8%, bagasse :27.2%) 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the energy exported by the IPP’s using coal 
and bagasse was 1,125 GWh and 328 GWh respectively. The bagasse based energy excludes 
the 6.3 GWh energy purchased from Médine S.E. which operates on bagasse only. 

 

89 

I am further informed by the CEB that in 2014 the percentage of coal based energy 

was 43% as compared to 13% of bagasse based energy.  

With regard to part (c) of the question, Alteo Energy Ltd. made a presentation with 
regard to a new plant to replace the existing ones which are already 31 and 17 years old.  I am 
informed by the CEB that there are no ongoing negotiations with Alteo Energy Ltd.  

There  having  been  no  proposal  apart  from  a  presentation,  the  question  of  unit  cost 

does not arise. 

Mr Jahangeer: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can the hon. Minister confirm that we will 
not  be  in  a  similar  situation  of  unsolicited  bid  like  CT  Power  when  it  comes  to  the 
presentation given by Alteo to CEB? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I think the hon. Member should be clear as to what he is talking 
about.  We  are  not  talking  of  bidding  in  the  normal  course  of  things.  Alteo  is  here,  their 
contract is terminating in a few months’ time, they need to continue to produce and they want 
to update their machines. So, the question of unsolicited bid does not arise at all.  

Mr Jahangeer: But the hon. Minister will surely agree that they are increasing the 

power and exporting to the network, so it is still an unsolicited bid?  

Mr Collendavelloo: Let us see what we are talking about. I don’t want to take much 
of the time of the House. What do we want? We want energy to be exported on the grid. 
There is this company which is already producing electricity. It tells you that it has got the 
capacity to export more energy than it is doing now. What do I tell them? Do I tell them: ‘no, 
thank you’ and tell them to close down their factory and put people off work? I am not going 
to say that. I have watched the presentation. There is no increase in the use of coal in the new 
machine which they are putting. They are offering, I don’t know whether it works or it does 
not  work,  but  they  are  offering  new  technology,  when  the  time  comes,  these  people  will 
discuss  with  CEB  on  technical  terms  and  we  will  see  how  to  amend  the  PPA.  If  it  is 
outlandish, of course, we will say no, but it did not appear to me to be outlandish. It appeared 
to me, a layman, to be a very good project with new technology. So, we should encourage 
that.  This  is  what  we  are  encouraging,  new  technology.  I  think  that  has  been  sufficiently 
clear.  

 

90 

Mr Lesjongard: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has given figures with 
regard to the production of electricity from coal and bagasse in the country. May I know from 
the hon. Minister how much more capacity will the CEB be allowed to take within its base 
load structure so that it does not disturb the set up in the base load structure? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Let  me  just  wait  for  the  answer  before  I  give  it  to  you.  I  am 

afraid I don’t have that knowledge. It is 16 megawatts more. 

CWA - TENDERS – BAGATELLE WATER TREATMENT PLANT - 

CONTRACTORS 

 (No.  B/392)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  the  Central  Water  Authority  Tenders  CPB/02/2015  for  the  construction  of  the 
pipeline from the Bagatelle Water Treatment to Sorèze and CPB/03/2015 for the construction 
of  the  pipeline  from  the  Bagatelle  Water  Treatment  Plant  to  Belle  Rose,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Authority, a list of the contractors thereof, since ten 
years  having  completed  similar  works  for  the  Central  Water  Authority  worth  more  than 
Million MUR 150. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): I am informed by the Central Water Authority that, over the last ten years, 
the Authority has awarded two contracts for works worth more than Rs150 m. The contracts 
were awarded to Sotravic Ltée. 

Mr Jahangeer: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will remind the House that the background 
of our economy is based on SME. By fixing the ceiling to Rs150 m., we are depriving the 
right of medium-sized contractors to participate in this tender. Can the hon. Minister confirm 
that he will widen the range so that others can participate in the tender exercise? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I take the point. Obviously, I would theoretically agree with the 
hon.  Member.  Let  us  see  what  happened  in  this  case.  We  received  representations  at  the 
Ministry  and  there  were  allegations  of,  at  least,  bid  rigging  or  tailor-made  specifications. 
Faced with this, I decided, together with the Senior Chief Executive of the Ministry, that this 
should be reported to ICAC, quantum valeat, of course, and ICAC is undertaking an inquiry. 
But  apart  from  that,  I  have  myself  made  an  inquiry  and  I  have  interviewed  the  General 
Manager  of  the  Central  Water  Authority  and  his  two  engineers  who  were  involved  in  this 

 

91 

tender. The results are clear. Sotravic has not been preferred because for the moment there 
were, at least, nine or ten tenderers who fitted in the qualifications. 

Now, let us come to the second part of the question which is SMEs. Of course, we 
will encourage SMEs, but I am providing water, 66 million m3 to the population.  Am I going 
to  tell  CWA:  ‘give  it  to  any  small  contractor?’  Not  on  my  life.  I  am  going  to  trust  only 
contractors with experience because that is what we have got to do. We are gone from the 
times when people… 

(Interruptions) 

Long  gone  is  the  time  when  people  who  were  agents  of  a  party  could  secure  that  sort  of 
contract. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Would  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  agree  with  me,  when  we  give 
these  contracts  to  big  contractors,  it  takes  time  and  also  we  cannot  forget  the  traffic 
congestion. So, what will happen if we were to split these contracts to small contractors; there 
will be big traffic hazard everywhere in the country, then the Government will be blamed. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I take it that this is a question. So,… 

(Interruptions) 

Having an accumulation of small contractors, I agree, is not the ideal solution because we are 
going  to  go  into  mayhem.  Now,  that  contract  is  under  my  watch.  This  is  not  the  sort  of 
contract  where  I  can  just  blame  my  predecessors,  etc.  This  has  happened  while  I  am  a 
Minister and I am taking all the care possible and I hope that we are not going to have a crisis 
like we have had in the old contracts. I am monitoring, but I have no right to influence the 
tendering process which is in the hands of the Central Procurement Board. I know there are 
nine or ten tenderers, I know that according to the prices, Sotravic is the one which you are 
trying to gun down, I don’t want to gun down anyone. He is third on the list. It will be up to 
the CPB to decide. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon Rutnah! Last supplementary question! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Is it not right and the hon. Minister 
can confirm that in fact supply of water has been so lamentable at least for the last 10 years 

 

92 

that now that this Government is coming with a plan to revamp the entire island into an island 
where  there  will  be  no  shortage  of  water  that  such  work  should  be  contracted  with  larger 
companies who have got more manpower and resources than small companies? 

(Interruptions) 

I am so sorry. Perhaps the hon. Members should be brought to order. 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Silence!  Silence,  please!  Hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  please 

answer. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the overall issue is what happens to CWA; that is a vexed 
question indeed. It is not only for the last ten years that we have had this problem. It is for 
more than ten years. Even the Government, when we were… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

Mr Collendavelloo: When we were in Government in 2000-2005,  I know how the 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  was  Minister  of  Finance,  the  then 
Minister of Energy were worried about the water situation. It is a structural issue, but  you 
know in Mauritius, when you start shaking a tree contrary to agriculture, it is not the right 
fruit that falls down. So, we have to work it out that we come with a nice development plan 
for CWA. It will take time, but, at the same time, I am pressing up for the works to be done, 
inter alia, this Bagatelle Dam, this Bagatelle Water Treatment Plan together with the water 
pipes. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer!  

CEB - ST. LOUIS POWER STATION - DIESEL POWER PLANT 

(No.  B/393)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Central Electricity  Board Tender  CPB-20-2015 for the Redevelopment of St. 
Louis Power Station - Design, Supply, Installation and Commissioning of Diesel Power Plant 
of  Capacity  60MW  ±10%,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Board, 
information as to why the specifications included only medium speed engines and excluded 
slow speed engines, indicating if the use of slow speed engines would not have been more 

 

93 

appropriate to ensure network stability so as to better accommodate intermittent renewable 
energy sources. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): The hon. Member may be referring to the slow speed engines similar to the 
one installed at the Fort George Power Station which has got a capacity of 30 MW and which 
was installed during the period 1992 to 2000. 

The  CEB  has  opted  for  medium  speed  engines  instead  of  slow  speed  because 

according to the CEB - 

(i)  The technology - and that is the main consideration - allows for conversion to 
Liquid  Natural  Gas  (LNG)  in  the  future  which  is  a  recommendation  of  the 
National  Energy  Commission  to  favour  LNG  for  power  generation.  As  the 
House  is  aware,  we  have  been  working  on  a  preliminary  examination  of  that 
issue; 

(ii)  Secondly,  the  inherent  operational  vibrations  of  slow  speed  engines,  which 
cannot be mitigated, would cause environmental concerns to the residents of the 
region;  

(iii)  Thirdly, modern medium speed engines operate at efficiency very close to low 
speed  engines  and  efficiency  considerations  are  significantly  mitigated  by  the 
price  of  the  equipment.  Moreover,  for  the  same  capacity  rating  (MW),  slow 
speed engines are more costly than medium speed engines. 

The demand pattern in Mauritius with night load as low as 200 MW, warrants the use 
of medium speed engines on account of their operational flexibility to be used as semi-base 
load units. Slow speed units are generally used as base load units only. 

I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  medium  speed  engines,  gas  turbines  and  hydro 
turbines are appropriate technologies to cope with intermittent renewable energy sources such 
as photovoltaic.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House what have been the 
recommendations of consultants with regard to this decision and what has been also the stand 
of the ADB and the World Bank with regard to that same decision? 

 

94 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is, what I have given is a summary of the recommendation, 

is in short the recommendation of the African Bank and the World Bank. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I always rely on experts in the 
field. I understand that they have given reasons why the choice of medium speed as compared 
to slow speed.  But in his reply the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, with regard to the first reason, 
it was the conversion from HFO to Liquid Natural Gas and he stated that it is much easier to 
convert  a  medium  speed  engine  from  HFO  to  LNG  rather  as  compared  to  the  slow  speed 
engine.  I don’t think this is a correct statement, hon. Vice-Prime Minister.  

Mr Collendavelloo:  But I don’t know; Engineers may quarrel forever and ever on this.  
I don’t know. This is what I have read in the reports which have been given to me.  What I 
have is a statement in front of me.  No slow speed engine in the world operates on LNG. 
Well, I mean, this is what I have been told.  I am not an Engineer. In any case, I have read it 
in the National Energy Commission report; I have read it in the report which was tabled in 
the Assembly.  I cannot say more. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr  Jahangeer:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister confirm that the specification for this particular tender has been written for only two 
engine manufacturers, out of which one is disqualified  because they have a litigation in case?  
I  name  the  two  engine  manufacturers:  Wartsila  and  MAN  B  &  W.  Wartsila  will  be 
disqualified according to the illegal procedures, so we are left with MAN, which means that 
we have only one engine manufacturer, who will have to give their price to different bidders 
which  means  also,  we  will  be  at  the  mercy  of  that  manufacturer.  They  will  give  the  price 
differently to each bidder.  So, can you confirm regarding this statement?  

Mr Collendavelloo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are not dealing with motor vehicles. 
We  are  not  dealing  with  cars.  These  engine  manufacturers,  you  don’t  have  many  of  them 
running around the world. A decision was taken on the type of machine. Let us not forget that 
the  first  tender  was  disqualified  and  the  African  Development  Bank  had  told  us  that  we 
should cancel the tender and call for new tenders. This is what we did and we have the green 
light. This has not been commented negatively neither by the World Bank nor by the African 
Development  Bank.  We  turned  to  these  two  institutions.  For  the  moment,  we  have  no 

 

95 

disqualification as the hon. Member suggests and we expect two to three competitors. What is 
the point?  The point of the hon. Member is that, of course, this new tender excludes the slow 
speed engines which are more manufactured in the Asian countries such as Korea, etc.  So, 
that is the only point. But for the point of disqualification, I cannot agree.  There have been 
many  people,  many  manufacturers  who  visited  the  site,  which  is  an  indication  that  the 
specifications are more open than before.  

The Deputy Speaker: A last supplementary question to hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer:   I am very sorry, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is inducing the House 

in error.  

(Interruptions) 

We have a dozen of engine manufacturers around the world.  So, it is not only MAN and 
Wartsila. We have Mitsubishi, we have Toshiba. We have the Korean Manufacturer…. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, please refrain from giving an opinion! Put your 
question to the Minister. I had allowed you a last question, time is running out. So, please, put 
your question!  

Mr Jahangeer:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will reframe the question.  Is the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister aware that there are more than two engine manufacturers for diesel engines in 
the world? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, that’s fabulous! It means that the tender is wide open to the 

world, so what are we complaining about! 

The Deputy Speaker: The Table has been advised that… 

(Interruptions) 

We have run out of time! 

Mr Ganoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, you saw me standing up and then you allowed 

hon. Jahangeer. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo, please sit down! 

Mr Ganoo:  I am just asking you whether…. 

 

96 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  I have allowed four additional minutes on this question! The 

Table has been advised that PQ B/407 has been withdrawn.  Time is over! 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

STATE LAND - SQUATTERS  

(4.47 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, as the House is aware, the problem of squatting State lands is a long-
standing one.  It has existed for decades. The present Government is bent on addressing very 
rigorously  this  problem,  but  in  a  humane  manner  taking  into  consideration  the  socio-
economic implications. 

An  exercise  has  been  carried  out  and  it  has  been  found  that,  as  at  August  2015,  the 
number  of  reported  cases  of  squatters  island-wide  is  1,054  cases,  mainly  localised  in 
Riambel, La Ferme, Le Morne, Dilo Pouri, Port Louis, Plaine des Roches, Poste de Flacq and 
Camp Carol, including 82 reported cases in Tranquebar.  

It has been observed that usually squatters are persons who are economically vulnerable 
and,  who,  without  authorisation,  put  up  CIS  structures  over  State  lands  and  use  same  as 
residential  units.    The  living  conditions  thereat  are  deplorable  and  generally  unhygienic 
conditions prevail thereat; thus, representing serious health hazards to the squatters and their 
families.  Some  of  these  people  may  have  the  option  of  applying  for  a  housing  unit  under 
existing housing schemes of the NHDC or other such bodies. 

I wish to inform the House that with regard to some 332 squatters of State lands in the 
district  of  Port  Louis,  my  Ministry  is  either  relocating  or  regularising  them  in  situ.  As  a 
matter of fact, 110 of these squatters are found on the proposed Ring Road Phase 2 and Phase 
3  Alignment.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  these  include  about  80  squatters  who  come  from 
Rodrigues.  Some  of  whom  are  already  either  private  land  owners  or  State  land  lessees  in 
Rodrigues  

I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  with  regard  to  the  squatters  who  are  being 
relocated to Pointe-aux-Sables, they will be allocated a housing unit provided they meet the 
eligibility criteria thereof. 

 

97 

Furthermore,  with  regard  to  the  squatters  of  State  lands  located  at  La  Ferme,  in  the 
context  of  the  rehabilitation  of  the  La  Ferme  Dam,  126  families  are  being  relocated  as  a 
matter of urgency. 

However,  the  regularisation  of  squatters  in  general  is  subject  to  these  families’ 
satisfying the eligibility criteria which are mainly about the person not being already a land 
owner and of his social and economic conditions being very precarious. 

Once the squatted sites are vacated, the respective Ministries/Departments responsible 
for the implementation of various projects thereon will have to ensure that the sites are kept 
free from any squatting again. 

Besides, I have arranged for regular Police control to be exercised to deter any more 
 
squatting. In this connection, it has been agreed at my Ministry’s level that any new case of 
squatting will not be tolerated and will be severely dealt with. 

The overall exercise being conducted by my Ministry aims at eradicating squatting in 

Mauritius. 

Thank you. 

(4.52 p.m.) 

ELECTRICITY SUPPLY - WORLD BANK REPORT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your  permission,  I  would  like  to  make  a 
statement on the World Bank Report on electricity supply. 

You will recall that on 03 March 2015, in my reply to a PNQ - and I do apologise 
because my statement is a little bit long  -  I informed the House that the World Bank  was 
reviewing  the  capacity  expansion  plan  for  the  medium-term  based  on  updated  economic 
conditions and that the report was expected to reach us by the end of March. 

In my reply to a second PNQ on 01 April 2015, I stated that the final report of the 
World Bank was expected by end of March, but following the Government decision on the 
CT  Power  project,  the  World  Bank  has  had  to  review  its  analysis  of  the  situation.  I  also 
informed the House that my Ministry was pressing the World Bank to submit the final report 
within the shortest delay and that on receipt of the report; I would consult Government as to 
whether the report can be made public. 

 

98 

My  Ministry  received  the  final  World  Bank  report  only  on  15  July  2015.  The 
technical  department  of  my  Ministry  and  the  CEB  subsequently  examined  the  report.  I 
subsequently  submitted  it  to  Government.  Today,  I  am  tabling  a  copy  on  the  Table  of  the 
Assembly. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have given the assurance to the House that all measures are 
being taken to provide uninterrupted electricity supply to the population. It is important for 
the House to know that some of these measures had already been initiated even before we 
received the final World Bank report. 

The World Bank was requested to carry out an independent assessment of our short 

and medium-term electricity supply requirements.  In its report, the World Bank – 

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

has reviewed the demand forecast for the periods 2015-2017 and 2018-2022; 
has adopted an approach relating to expected Gross Domestic Product under 
low, base and high growth scenarios, and 
has endorsed the Central Electricity Board’s “base” forecast for 2015-2017. 

Under the CEB’s base scenario, it is considered that the impact of energy savings and 

structural changes in the Mauritian economy would not significantly affect demand.  

The  Bank  has  additionally  worked  out  a  “sensitised”  option  taking  into  account 
energy efficiency policy measures and structural changes. This “sensitised option”, which is 
lower than CEB’s forecast, would not have any impact over the above period. 

The World Bank recommends five measures for the period 2015-2017, namely – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

optimisation of maintenance of both CEB’s and units of Independent 
Power Producers (IPP’s) ; 

extension of the Power Purchase Agreement with Consolidated Energy 
Limited (CEL) Beau Champ up to 2018; 

fast tracking of the project for the installation of 60MW engines at St. 
Louis Power station so that the units are ready by the second semester 
of 2017; 

extension of the operation of the Pielstick engines at St. Louis Power 
station until the second semester of 2017; 

 

99 

(e) 

implementation  of  emergency  voltage  reduction  on  the  grid  in  2016 
and 2017, if needed when there is a low reserve capacity margin. 

As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  CEB  is  already  implementing  some  of  these  measures. 
CEB is actively  working on the optimisation of its maintenance schedules in collaboration 
with the Independent Power Producers (IPP’s). 

For instance, on 03 July 2015, the CEB invited fresh bids with revised specifications 
as  advised  by  the  African  Development  Bank  for  the  60MW  diesel  engines  at  St.  Louis 
Power station. The closing date is 01 October 2015. The CEB expects to award the contract 
by December 2015/January 2016 for the plant to become operational by June/July 2017. 

Further, CEB has extended the Power Purchase Agreement with Consolidated Energy 
Limited  Beau  Champ  since  16  June  2015  for  a  period  of  three  years  to  provide  22MW 
electricity, effective as from 31 July 2015. 

Regarding emergency voltage reduction on the grid in 2016 and 2017 when there is 
low  reserve  capacity  margin,  actual  tests  are  being  undertaken  by  CEB  to  determine  the 
realistic  value  for  maximum  reduction  during  peak  demand,  if  such  a  measure  becomes 
necessary. 

While  working  on  its  load  scenarios,  the  World  Bank  Consultants  had  not  initially 
taken into account that the extension of the Power Purchase Agreement  with Consolidated 
Energy Limited would allow for 22MW. The 60MW at St. Louis power station is expected to 
be operational by mid-2017.  

With these measures already taken by the CEB and the potential for voltage reduction 
to be confirmed by a study or actual tests, the generation gaps will significantly be reduced 
within acceptable limits over the period 2015-2017. 

In fact, the World Bank underlines that the above measures are expected to reduce the 

capacity gap under the base case scenario – 

• 

• 

from 50.9 MW to 13.5 MW in 2016, and  

from 71.8 MW to 11.5 MW in 2017.  

Such theoretical gaps are considered to be perfectly manageable by CEB, which has known 
more critical periods in the past. 

 

100 

For the period 2018-2022, the World Bank report has considered CEB’s high demand 

forecast instead of a “sensitised” forecast which is lower than CEB’s forecast.  

The main recommendation is that gas turbines of 2 × 36 megawatts [MW] should be 
procured. The plant will initially run on light diesel oil and later to be shifted to LNG in a 
combined cycle mode.  

Such new technology should provide lower costs of production of electricity in the 
medium-term  through  significant  improvement  of  overall  efficiency,  which  is  twofold  that 
presently  experienced  with  gas  turbines  presently  in  operation  at  Nicolay  with  turbines 
operating  in  an  open  cycle  mode.  The  environment  aspects  associated  with  diesel  engines 
operating on heavy fuel oil will also be considerably improved.  

I have mentioned in the House earlier that a prefeasibility study of LNG has already 
been carried out and I also tabled a copy of the report on the Table of the Assembly.  That 
was in March 2015. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that on 14 July 2015, I chaired a 
meeting with my colleague, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, to discuss 
the implementation of the LNG project. The CEB is in the process of appointing a consultant 
for a full feasibility study and a procurement process for a combined cycle gas turbine plant 
at Les Grandes Salines to be operational as from 2018.   

A complete feasibility study on the use of LNG for power generation and other uses 
will as well be undertaken shortly, and it is today expected that the use of same for power 
generation will be a reality by 2021/2022. 

For the longer term, the World Bank recommends the commissioning of – 

• 
• 
• 

90 MW in 2019 
45 MW in 2021 
45 MW in 2022.  

However,  it  does  not  make  any  clear  recommendation  on  any  specific  technology.  It 
considers that the decision on the technology should be the result of detailed planning efforts 
of the CEB, specifically the implementation - ideally before the end of 2015 - of a robust 
initiative to consolidate the modernisation of methodologies, procedures and computational 
tools  used  for  power  system  planning.  Assessing  the  power  requirements  with  the  help  of 

 

101 

modern  methodologies  and  procedures  can  significantly  impact  positively  the  costs  and 
reliability of supply in Mauritius. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  CEB  has  already  engaged  in  the  modernisation  of  its 
planning process with the collaboration of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the 
EDF.  The Agence  Française  de  Développement is  currently  supporting  us  for  the  updating 
and restructuring of the energy sector database, development of energy models for demand, 
supply and network expansion and forecast scenarios and supply options, grid expansion plan 
for future power development and for integration of renewable energy. 

The  World  Bank  also  recommends  that  public  consultations  should  be  critical  to 
policy-making with regard to the expansion of the power sector and to address environmental 
and socially sensitive issues.  

I wish to underline that consultations are held as and when required on major policy 
orientations.  Similarly,  wide  public  consultations  had  been  held  by  the  National  Energy 
Commission  whose  recommendations  reflect  the  views  of  all  stakeholders.  My  Ministry 
recently had consultations with NGOs before issuing the expression of interest for renewable 
energy.  

The  response  to  the  recent  early  market  survey,  expression  of  interest,  for  the 
optimisation of renewable energy undertaken by CEB is very promising and there are still 
some one hundred submissions to be analysed on a total of two hundred and eighty projects 
submitted. Offers corresponding to more than 1200 MW have been received.  

CEB  has  equally  launched  a  new  Small  Scale  Distribution  Generation  project  to 
integrate a total of 5MW using renewable energy in Mauritius and 200 kW in Rodrigues. This 
project  should  enable  2000  small  consumers,  mainly  households,  to  install  grid  connected 
renewable energy and benefit from the deduction of a total investment in solar PV from net 
income as announced in the Budget. 

The  next  step  is  the  grid  consolidation  measures  to  accommodate  the  maximum  of 
this capacity on account of the intermittent nature of those production sources. A study has 
already been carried out on grid strengthening and CEB is working with EDF and AFD on 
this subject. 

 

102 

I also have to add that the Energy Efficiency Management Office and the Programme 
National d'Efficacité Energétique are both working actively on the demand management site. 
In  addition  to  audits,  labelling  of  domestic  appliances,  the  EEMO  will  conduct  awareness 
campaigns at all levels to encourage energy savings. 

I apologise for having taken a little bit more time than I would normally have done 

and I thank you for your attention. 

Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if we could have the statement circulated.  

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the following Bills were read the first time. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

The Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency Bill (No. XI of 2015); 
The Roads (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2015) 
The Pharmacy Council Bill (No. XIII of 2015) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move for the adjournment of 

the House to Tuesday 08 September 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.    

MATTERS RAISED 

(5.07 p.m.) 

EID AL-ADHA - CATTLE - SALE 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): I would 
like  to  raise  a  matter  which  concerns  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer 
Protection. It is in relation to the sale of cattle for Eid-al-Adha which is one of the pillars of 
Islam.  

As the hon. Minister is aware last year there was a regulation which prohibited the 
sale of cattle of less than two years and fixed the price at Rs139.50 per kilo. This year, the 

 

103 

regulation has been amended and the price has been brought down to Rs125 per kilo but only 
with respect to cattle that are imported from South Africa. 

It  has  been  reported  to  myself,  in  the  press  and,  I  know,  to  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister that there are lots of retailers who are selling cattle which have been imported from 
South Africa at Rs140 a kilo, that is, more than what is the  prescribed amount, on the basis 
that apparently they are cattle de race Charolais or what not, whereas the regulation is very 
clear: provided that it is imported from South Africa. it does not matter what type of cattle it 
is, the price is fixed at Rs125 a kilo and also, they can’t sell cattle having less than two years. 

May I humbly request the hon. Minister to ask officers of his Ministry to go and have 
site visits and ensure that those retailers/distributors are not selling the cattle in breach of the 
regulation? 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I thank the hon. Member for the point raised because complaints 
have  been  received  at  my  Ministry  concerning  especially  the  two  issues  that  hon.  Uteem 
raised, that is, the price and age. I had consultations with the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and I 
can  assure  the  hon.  Member  that  we  have  teams  from  my  Ministry,  officers  from  the 
Consumer  Affairs  Unit  and  veterinaries  from  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 
Security who are on sites every day. I get reports and, according to the reports, the situation 
seems  to  have  come  under  control.  But  I  assure  the  hon.  Member  that  this  is  going  to 
continue. 

(5.10 p.m.) 

PORT LOUIS - ROUTE DES PAMPLEMOUSSES & ROUTE MILITAIRE – 

TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): It is in relation to a severe traffic jam problem in my Constituency, more specifically, 
at Route des Pamplemousses and Route Militaire.  

Every  day  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  after  work  there  is  heavy  traffic  and 
people are getting penalised morning and evening. I would request the hon. Prime Minister if 
the Commissioner of Police could send traffic officers there in the morning and evening so as 
to ease the traffic for the people concerned in this part of the region. Thank you. 

 

104 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): May I 

answer this complaint? Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will certainly look into the matter. 

At  5.11  p.m.  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Tuesday  08  September 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

NEW COURT HOUSE – PRESS MEMBERS – ASSAULT 

(No. B/363) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the incident that occurred at 
the New Court House, on 30 June 2015, whereby members of the press were assaulted, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 
if an inquiry has been carried out thereinto and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 
(b) 

number of arrests effected in connection therewith as at to date, if any, and 
actions taken by the Police to avoid the recurrence of such incidents in Courts 
of Law. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that on 30 June 2015, one Mrs 
M. P., Press Photographer, reported to Pope Hennessy Police Station that earlier on that day, 
whilst  she  was  on  duty  at  the  New  Court  House,  she  had  allegedly  been  assaulted  by  an 
unknown  person  whom  she  could  identify.  She  was  thereafter  conveyed  to  Dr.  Jeetoo 
Hospital by her colleagues and was admitted after examination. She was discharged after four 
days. Police have initiated an inquiry into the matter. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the inquiry is ongoing.  A suspect has been identified.  No arrest has been made by the 
Police. 

As  for  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that 
there already exists standing operating procedures insofar as maintenance of law and order at 
all Courts is concerned. An adequate number of officers from different units are posted in all 
Court buildings. Additionally, whenever the need arises, the services of the Police Dog Unit 
are resorted to and metal barriers are put in place for crowd control purposes.  According to 
the Commissioner of Police, so far no major incident has occurred in any of these places. 

 

 

105 

HOLD-UP CASES – JANUARY 2015-AUGUST 2015 

(No. B/364) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases of 
hold-up,  since  January  2015  to  date,  indicating  the  actions  taken  or  that  will  be  taken  to 
reinforce security in relation to the conveyance by vehicles of cash and/or other valuables. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the term ‘hold-up’ is not 
defined in our laws.  However, I assume that the hon. Member is in fact referring to serious 
offences of larceny, for  example, cases of  robberies committed using threat or violence or 
robberies  committed  by  armed  and/or  masked  offenders  in  financial  institutions  or  on 
vehicles conveying large sums of money. 

From January 2015 to date, five cases of larceny committed with violence have been 
reported to the Police.  In one of the cases, five suspects have been arrested and thereafter 
released on bail after inquiry. 

With a view to reinforcing security for conveyance of cash and/or other valuables by 
vehicles, a series of measures have already been taken by the Police Department, including, 
inter alia, the following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

free escorting services by the Emergency Response Service for cash in transit 
(e.g. conveyance of cash to banks) to business operators; 

provision of Police escort to financial institutions against payment; 

visible policing at/or in the vicinity of financial institutions, pump stations and 
other places of business, particularly during peak hours; 

targeted patrols by regular Police and CID, in high risk zones/areas, and 

intelligence  gathering  and  monitoring  of  the  movements  of  persistent 
offenders. 

HORSE RACING – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY – RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/365) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry 

 

106 

on  Horse  Racing  in  Mauritius  which  was  set  up  on  24  September  2014,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain information as to the – 

(a) 

quantum of the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

fees paid to the Commissioners thereof, and 

related  expenses  incurred  in  relation  thereto,  until  the  submission  of 
the final report thereof in March 2015, and 

(b) 

measures  taken  or  that  will  be  taken  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  the 
recommendations thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

AIR MAURITIUS LIMITED – AIRBUSES A350-900 – PROCUREMENT 

(No. B/366) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the procurement of six airbuses A350-900 
by Air Mauritius Limited, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the company, 
information as to where matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

H.E. THE VICE-PRESIDENT – OFFICIAL RESIDENCE – RENT 

(No.  B/367)  Mr  M.  S.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the premises rented to 
serve as official residence for H.E. the Vice-President of the Republic of Mauritius, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to if tender procedures have been followed 
for the renting thereof and, if so, indicate the – 

date the bid therefor was launched; 
name of the bidders therefor, indicating the name of the successful bidder; 
extent thereof, and 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d)  monthly rental thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

107 

ALLEGED ARM TRAFFICKING – INQUIRY 

(No.  B/368)  Mr  M.  S.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent request made 
to the Government of Mauritius by Mrs K. L. A., Director of the Conflict Awareness Project, 
to re-open the inquiry concerning the alleged arm trafficking network in Mauritius, he will 
state if he will consider acceding thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIIS SOVEREINGTY 

(No.  B/369)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Chagos Archipelago, he 
will state if the Committee set up to look thereinto proposes to meet the leaders of the groups 
of Chagossians based in Mauritius or in the United Kingdom to discuss the issues recently 
attributed  to  the  British  Government,  particularly  in  ‘The  Guardian’  of  05  August  2015, 
referring to ongoing consultations by London with the Chagossians and in a statement given 
by Mr Olivier Bancoult of the Chagos Refugees Group, in ‘Le Defi Quotidien’ of 14 August 
2015, to the effect that the Chagossians may be allowed back to their islands, the Mauritian 
Chagos Archipelago, as  recommended by  an official report ordered in 2014 by the United 
Kingdom authorities. 

Reply:  The  Chagos  Archipelago,  including  Diego  Garcia,  forms  and  has  always 
formed an integral part of the territory of Mauritius.  Mauritius does not recognise the so-
called  “British  Indian  Ocean  Territory”.    Nor  does  Mauritius  recognise  the  legality  under 
international law of any acts that the United Kingdom has purported, or is purporting, to take 
in  respect  of  the  Chagos  Archipelago.    This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the  purported 
feasibility  study  on  resettlement  in  the  Chagos  Archipelago  commissioned  by  the  UK 
Government, as well as any action taken on the basis of that purported study, including the 
so-called consultation exercise which the UK Government launched on 4 August 2015. 

Government  has  on  numerous  occasions  conveyed  to  the  United  Kingdom  that 
Mauritius is the only State which has the lawful authority to determine issues relating to the 
Chagos Archipelago, including resettlement. 

 

108 

I wish to reiterate that the Government of Mauritius rejects the purported consultation 

exercise currently being run by the UK Government. 

In this respect, I had a meeting yesterday with representatives of the Chagos Refugees 
Group, led by its Chairman and Leader, Mr Olivier BANCOULT.  Mr BANCOULT informed me 
that  members  of  the  Chagos  Refugees  Group  have  expressed  their  strong  opposition  to 
resettlement,  as  proposed  in  the  purported  FCO  consultation  document  and  have  strongly 
reaffirmed their support for the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago. 

The conditions of living of Mauritian citizens of Chagossian origin, if resettled in the 
Chagos Archipelago as proposed in the purported consultation document, will be in flagrant 
violation of their most basic human rights. 

As far as Government is concerned, we shall relentlessly pursue our struggle to ensure 
the effective exercise of our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.  Once we are able to 
effectively exercise our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, our citizens of Chagossian 
origin who resettle in the Chagos Archipelago can rest assured that they will be able to live in 
dignity and enjoy their basic human rights as they currently do in Mauritius. 

Government  will  maintain  close  contact  and  collaboration  with  the  Chagossian 
community to ensure that we continue to be on the same wavelength as regards the plight of 
our Mauritian citizens of Chagossian origin and the effective exercise of our sovereignty over 
the Chagos Archipelago. 

The House will recall that in reply to PQ B/257 on 07 April 2015, I had said that I 
would welcome any views or proposals which our fellow countrymen of Chagossian origin 
might  have  on  the  way  forward  with  regard  to  the  Chagos  Archipelago  issue.    I  had  also 
indicated that such views or proposals could be submitted in writing to my office and would 
be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Committee  on  the  Chagos  Archipelago  issue  which  has 
been  set  up  under  my  chairmanship.    I  reiterate  that  such  views  and  proposals  are  still 
welcome. 

I propose to convene shortly another meeting of the Committee which comprises the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition as well as a representative of each political party represented in 
this House. 

 

 

 

109 

POLITICAL PARTIES – FINANCING – LEGISLATION 

(No.  B/370)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  financing  of  political 
parties, he will state if Government is considering introducing legislation in relation thereto 
and, if so, indicate the expected date of introduction thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION – REPORT – IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/371)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  last  report  of  the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission, he will state if Government is considering recommending 
the implementation thereof. 

Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  section  39  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission shall review the boundaries of the constituencies at such 
time as will enable them to present a report to the Assembly 10 years after presentation of 
their last report. 

The  last  Report  of  the  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission  on  a  Review  of  the 
Boundaries  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  was  tabled  in  the  National  Assembly  on  10 
November 2009. 

However, the National Assembly was dissolved on 31 March 2010 and there was no 
resolution  brought  in  the  Assembly  before  its  dissolution  to  approve  or  reject  the 
recommendations of the 2009 Report. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission  proposes  to  embark  on  a 
fresh exercise for a review of the boundaries of the constituencies and present a new report, 
in view of the fact that a new Housing and Population Census has been carried out in 2011 
and there have been many housing developments in some constituencies and the constituency 
boundaries run across such developments in some instances, with the result that some electors 
of a particular housing development may find themselves in two different constituencies. 

In 

the  circumstances,  Government  does  not  propose 

to 

recommend 

the 

implementation of the 2009 Report of the Electoral Boundaries Commission. 

 

110 

DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – VICTIMS 

(No.  B/372)  Mrs  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to synthetic drugs, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the – 

(a) 

types  thereof  identified  by  the  relevant  authorities  as  being  presently  in 
circulation in the country; 
number of arrest effected in connection therewith as at to date, if any; 
number of reported victims thereof, indicating the age thereof, and 

(b) 
(c) 
(d)  measures that are being taken to prevent the proliferation thereof countrywide. 

(Vide reply to P,Q. No. B/359) 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES - TEAM SPORTS - PERFORMANCE 

(No. B/394)  Mr  F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  following  the  last  Indian  Ocean  Island 
Games held in Réunion Island, he will state the immediate measures his Ministry proposes to 
take in the light of the bad performances of all the teams’ sports which participated therein. 

Reply: It is true that Mauritius has not performed to expectation in team sports during 
the Indian Ocean Island Games (IOIG) 2015.  However, it is to be reckoned with the fact that 
preparation  in  team  sports  started  quite  late.    In  volleyball,  handball  and  basketball,  the 
national teams did not participate in any regional and international competitions.  It is only 
when  I  assumed  office  as  Minister  that  they  were  given  the  possibility  to  play  friendly 
matches with teams from abroad.   Besides, in volleyball and basketball, I had to intervene 
personally to have the services of a National Technical Director and this also was some three 
months before the games.  As regards football, the 12 matches played by Club M before my 
nomination  as  Minister  resulted  in  12  defeats.    After  December  2014,  Club  M  played  11 
matches out of which the very young team having an average of 22 years recorded 2 wins and 
2 draws with no other teams like Burundi and Togo.  

 
I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  after  the  IOIG  2015,  I  have  started  meeting  the 
President  of  all  National  Sports  Federations  of  team  sports  along  with  their  respective 
National Technical Directors (NTD) to - 

 

111 

(i) 

express  my  dissatisfaction  in  respect  of  the  performance  of  their  teams  at  the 
games; 

(ii)  urge upon them to come up with a plan of action to address the weaknesses in 

(iii) 

their respective sports, and 
ensure that they fulfil their obligation for the development and promotion of their 
sport at grass root level in accordance with section 4(a) of the Sports Act.  

Further, my Ministry is presently working on a recruitment plan for NTDs and is also 

 
reviewing the responsibilities of coaches. 

 
The  only  way  to  ensure  a  brighter  future  and  improve  performance  in  any  sport 
including team sports is through training as from the grass root level.  I am therefore coming 
forward  with  a  programme  of  talent  identification  and  training  of  youngsters  as  from  the 
basic level who would eventually be diverted to écoles de sport and the National Training 
Centre. 

It is worth pointing out that since I assumed office as Minister, I am working in close 
 
collaboration with my colleague, the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 
Education and Scientific Research for the promotion of sports at primary level and also for 
the revamping of inter-college games. 

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY - CLUBS & FEDERATIONS 

(No.  B/395)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the funds  obtained from the 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  he  will  state  if  sports  clubs  and  federations  are  eligible 
thereto and, if so, indicate the eligibility criteria applicable therefor.  

Reply: As announced in the Budget Speech 2015-2016, the structure of the Corporate 
Social  Responsibility  (CSR)  system  has  been  revised  to  make  it  more  effective.    In  fact, 
following concerns  raised by several organisations on the constraints being encountered to 
access  support  under  the  CSR  system  as  was  the  case  previously,  Government  decided  to 
review the CSR system in depth. 
 
free to decide on how to allocate the 2% of CSR according to their own set of priorities. 
 
companies that its action and programmes deserve support. 

It  will  be  incumbent  on  any  organisation  looking  for  support  to  convince  the 

Under  the  new  system,  there  are  no  eligibility  criteria  whatsoever.    Companies  are 

 

112 

FOOTBALL - ÉCOLES DE FOOT 

(No.  B/396)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to football, he will give a list of the 
existing Écoles de Foot, indicating in each case, the - 

(a) names of the coaches thereof;  

(b) training schedules and pitches used;  

(c) budget allocated thereto for financial year 2015-2016, and  

(d) responsibility of the Mauritius Football Association in the functioning thereof, if 

any.  

Reply: As the hon. Member may be aware, all Écoles de Foot were dormant at the 
time I assumed office as Minister.  The Mauritius Football Association (MFA) has, on several 
occasions,  only  expressed  the  wish  to  take  over  these  Écoles  de  Foot.    However,  this  has 
never materialised.  I could not leave the situation as such and I have initiated appropriate 
action. 
As from the beginning of August 2015, the 24 Écoles de Foot, 12 Centres Techniques 
 
Régionaux  and  the  Centre  Technique  National  François  Blaquart  are  operational.    A 
communiqué was published to that effect in the local press.  I am tabling a list of the Écoles 
de  Foot  with  the  names  of  the  responsible  coaches,  the  training  schedules  as  well  as  the 
pitches used.  An amount of Rs752,000 has been allocated for this project up to December 
2015.  
 
In  a  meeting  I  had  with  the  President  of  MFA,  he  has  agreed  to  collaborate  in  the 
project  by  appointing  representatives  who  will  follow  up  with  responsible  officers  of  my 
Ministry  for  the  smooth  running  of  the  Écoles  de  Foot,  Centres  Techniques  Regionaux  as 
well as the Centre National de Formation. 

YOUTH CENTRES - OPENING HOURS 

(No.  B/397)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the youth centres, he will, in 
each case, state the - 

(a) opening hours thereof;  

 

113 

(b) number of officers attached thereto, and  

(c) budget allocated thereto for the organisation of activities for financial year 2015-

2016, indicating the activities organised thereat, since January 2015 to date.  

Reply: I am tabling the information regarding the operation of Youth Centres.  
With regard to part (c) of the question, an amount of Rs10 m. has been earmarked for 

organisation of youth activities for financial year 2015-2016.   
 

BASIC INVALIDITY PENSION - ELIGIBILITY 

(No.  B/398)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 

regard to the grant of benefits to medically handicapped persons, she will state the number of 

representations received at her Ministry in relation thereto, indicating - 

(a)  the  number  of  medically  handicapped  persons  whose  pensions  have  been 

discontinued over the past six months, and  

(b)  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  a  review  of  the  composition  and  of  the 

functioning of the Medical Board. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  receives  an  average  of  2,000 

applications per month pertaining to the grant of benefits to persons with disabilities.  

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  since  January  2015  to  August  2015,  the  total 
number  of  persons  whose  invalidity  pensions  have  been  discontinued  amounts  to  464. 
However,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  this  figure  is  in  respect  of  persons  with  disabilities  whose 
pensions have been discontinued following medical re-boarding as they were no longer found 
to satisfy the eligibility criteria as set out in the National Pensions Act.  

In this respect, I wish to point out that pursuant to section 8 of the National Pensions 
Act a person with disabilities is eligible for an invalid pension, that is, the Basic Invalidity 
Pension of Rs5,000 monthly, provided he or she has or is likely to have a disability of not less 
than 60% for a period of at least 12 months. In addition to the Basic Invalidity pension, a 
person with disabilities is also eligible to receive a Carer’s allowance of Rs2,500 monthly for 
a specific period of time if he or she is medically assessed to be in need of the constant care 

 

114 

and  attention  of  another  person.  If  the  person  is  aged  more  than  60  years  and  is  severely 
handicapped requiring the constant care and attention of another person he or she receives 
Rs3,000  on  a  monthly  basis  for  a  specific  period  of  time  after  assessment  by  the  Medical 
Board. 

In line with the National Pensions Act, the Basic Invalidity pension is awarded for a 
period of not less than one year after which the person is re-examined by the Medical Board 
to determine whether the said pension should be continued or discontinued. It is of utmost 
importance to note that at the time of awarding the pension, the duration for which the person 
will receive the said pension is clearly specified. Furthermore, two months preceding the date 
on which the pension is due to stop, a letter is sent to the beneficiary to notify him or her that 
a medical re-boarding will be carried out with a view to determining whether he or she is still 
eligible  for  the  pension  or  not.  Persons  with  disabilities  are  therefore  duly  notified  before 
their pensions are discontinued.  

In the event that a person feels aggrieved by the decision of the Medical Board with 
respect  to  Basic  Invalidity  pension  and/or  Carer’s  allowance  or  severely  handicapped 
allowance, he or she may appeal against such decision to the Medical Tribunal.  

With respect to part (b) of the question, I wish to state that the composition and the 
functioning  of  the  Medical  Board  are  being  reviewed.  We  are  currently  recruiting  new 
medical  practitioners  to  ensure  that  medical  assessments  made  by  the  medical  board  are 
performed in a more efficient and timely manner.  

Currently, the extent of disability suffered by persons with disabilities is determined 
in accordance with the Sixth Schedule of the National Pensions Act as well as with the help 
of comprehensive medical guidelines prepared by medical specialists. We intend to include 
these guidelines in the National Pensions Act to give it “force de loi” in the near future. This 
will not only ensure transparency but will also make it mandatory for medical practitioners to 
comply with these guidelines. 

 

D’EPINAY & MARE D’ALBERT - HOUSING UNITS 

(No. B/399) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the social housing units recently delivered at D’Epinay and at Mare d’Albert, he will, for 

 

115 

the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  National  Housing  Development  Company  Ltd., 
information as to – 

(a) the starting dates of the construction thereof;  
(b) the type, size and number of rooms thereof, and  
(c) a list of the sites where similar social housing units -  

(i)   were delivered in 2014, and  
(ii)  have  been  constructed,  indicating  the  dates  of  award  of  contract  for  the 

construction thereof and the expected delivery dates thereof. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the NHDC Ltd. that 
the start date of construction at D’Epinay site is March 2014 and at Mare D’Albert site, it is 
June  2014.  Each  of  these  two  housing  estates  consists  of  21  and  55  housing  units, 
respectively. 

As for part (b) of the question, the houses at D’Epinay and Mare D’Albert are single 
units, ground floor only, each of 39m2 and comprising two bedrooms, kitchen, living/dining 
and a toilet block. 

I welcome this Parliamentary Question as it allows me to inform the House about how 
this  Government  is  doing  things  differently.  Unlike  the  previous  Government,  we  are  not 
dumping people in cubicles deprived of basic amenities.  We are providing them a decent 
house and, more importantly, with necessary amenities and facilities. As a matter of fact, the 
scope of the works was reviewed such that on-site leisure and recreational facilities have been 
included,  namely  a  well-equipped  children  playground,  pétanque  court,  greenspace  and 
landscaping works. Additionally, a solar water heater, a roof water tank and a compost bin 
are being made available to each of the families. 

In our endeavour to enhance the dignity and self-esteem of the beneficiaries of social 
housing  units,  we  are  actively  discussing  with  private  sector  agencies  for  the  latter’s 
involvement in providing other facilities like a polyvalent hall for holding of numeracy and 
literacy  sessions  and  other  such  accompaniment  to  promote  educational  activities  for  the 
benefit of the resident children and development of backyard gardens and so on. 

After allocation of the housing units to beneficiaries, workshops were organised by the 
NHDC Ltd in collaboration with my Ministry and various stakeholders including the Police, 
Local Authorities, various Ministries and representatives of the Legal Profession, to sensitise 
the beneficiaries on their rights and responsibilities. 

Regarding part (c) of the question, the information is being compiled and will be placed 

in the Library of the National Assembly at the earliest possible. 

 

116 

PINEAPPLES – EXPORT – ETHEPHON  

(No. B/400) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the  Minister of Agro-Industry  and Food Security whether, in regard to the 
recent refusal of entry by the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed of the European Union 
of  two  consignments  of  Mauritian  pineapples  for  an  excessive  use  of  Ethephon  in  the 
production thereof, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the – 

(a) excess level thereof;  
(b) fate of these rejected pineapples;  
(c)  impact  thereof  on  the  exportation  of  Mauritian  pineapples  into  the  European 

market, if any;  

(d) level of Ethephon in pineapples available for consumption locally, and  
(e)  progress  achieved  in  the  implementation  of  the  Green  Agriculture  Certification 
Scheme initiated by the Maurice Ile Durable Commission, his Ministry and the 
Mauritius Standards Bureau as part of the MID Policy, Strategy and Action Plan. 
Reply: I am informed that the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed of the European 
Union issued two notifications in June 2015 regarding excessive presence of Ethephon in two 
consignments of pineapples exported from Mauritius. The level of Ethephon was 3.0 mg/kg-
ppm  in  one  consignment  and  2.9  mg/kg-ppm  in  the  second  consignment  compared  to  the 
permissible level of 2.0 mg/kg-ppm. 

As regards part (b),  I  am advised that the pineapples from these two consignments 

 
were destroyed in the Netherlands by the importer, namely Roveg Fruit B.V.  

 
Regarding part (c) in case of repeated alert notifications from the Rapid Alert System 
for  Food  and  Feed,  the  European  Authorities  may  take  action  against  Mauritius  under  the 
European  Commission  Regulation  669/2009.    The  European  Commission  can  accordingly 
increase  the  level  of  controls  at  the  point  of  entry  of  consignments  of  pineapples  from 
Mauritius into the European Union or impose a temporary ban on imports from Mauritius. 

 
In  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  I  am  advised  that  the  Food  and  Agricultural 
Research  and  Extension  Institute  (FAREI)  which  operates  under  the  aegis  of  my  Ministry 
generally collects samples of food products from farm gate for analysis of pesticide residues 
by the Food Technology Laboratory.  However, no analysis could be undertaken regarding 
the level of Ethephon specifically because of the unavailability of the appropriate equipment 
and consumables at the Food Technology Laboratory.  This situation is now being addressed 

 

117 

and  the  required  equipment  to  upgrade  the  Liquid  Chromatograph  Mass  Spectro  Meter 
(LCMSMS) and consumables to perform the analysis of Ethephon have been purchased.  The 
procedures and protocol for the detection of Ethephon is being worked out in collaboration 
with  two  experts  from  the  Food  and  Environmental  Research  Agency  (FERA)  Science 
Limited,  U.K.  under  the  EDES/EU  programme.    As  soon  as  the  method  is  validated, 
analytical works will start for the detection of Ethephon for local producers and exporters to 
the  European  Union,  by  October  2015.    A  modus  operandi  is  being  identified  for  the 
monitoring of the level of Ethephon with producers and exporters regarding all consignment 
destined for export as well as for local consumption. 

As regards part (e), I am informed that the Mauritius Standards Bureau has already 
 
finalised the Standard on MauriGap which has been published as MS 184-1 “ Specifications 
for Good Agriculture Practices for Crop Production” MauriGap Part 1-Basic Requirements. 
The  MauriGap  Standard  will  be  used  as  a  basis  for  Green  Agriculture  Certification. 
Currently, the Mauritius Standards Bureau is working on the Level 2 Standard.  

 
It is relevant to point out that this is not the first time that the Rapid Alert System for 
Food and Feed has issued notifications in regard to the excessive presence of Ethephon in 
pineapples from Mauritius. In fact, such notifications were received in the past in March 2010 
and January 2012. 

I  would  like  to  reassure  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  deeply  concerned  with  the 
usage of chemical inputs in our agricultural products meant for local consumption and export. 
Following the notification of the report on the excessive use of Ethephon, my Ministry has 
engaged in discussions with all stakeholders, including producers and exporters of pineapples 
to  take  stock  of  the  situation  and  to  establish  a collaborative  approach  to  ensure  that  such 
problems do not recur in future. In that context, two meetings were held on 08 July and 11 
August 2015 respectively. My Ministry will follow the situation closely. 

ROADS – SPEED CAMERAS - CONTRATOR 

(No.  B/401)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the fixed 
speed  cameras,  he  will  state  the  number  thereof  presently  installed  on  the  road  network, 
indicating the – 

(a)   

locations thereof;  

 

(b)  

118 

name  of  the  contractor  therefor,  indicating  if  the  same  contractor  is  also 
responsible for the maintenance and servicing thereof, and  
cost thereof. 

(c)   
Reply: I wish to inform the House as follows -  
(a)  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  52  Automatic  Speed  Enforcement 
Cameras  have  been  installed  at  20  identified  black  spots  and  at  32  speed 
related/accident  prone  areas  around  the  island.    I  am  tabling  information 
relating to the location thereof. 

Out of the 52 speed cameras, 3 previously located at Medpoint, Terre 
Rouge  and  Paillotte  have  been  removed  and  re-located  at  Nalletamby  (near 
Jumbo), Melle Laure and Bonne Terre respectively. 

Additionally,  two  speed  cameras,  one  located  at  Midlands  and  the 
other one at Flic en Flac near Morcellement Anna are being re-located at Mare 
D’Albert  and  D’Epinay  respectively.    The  total  number  of  Fixed  Speed 
Cameras would then be 54. 

The relocation of these speed cameras are being carried out in the light 

of new infrastructural development and new road accident trends. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  contract  awarded  to  Messrs 
Proguard Ltd on 25 September 2012 includes maintenance during the warranty 
period of 3 years from July 2013 to July 2016. 

With regard to part (c), the total initial contract value was Rs149,795,314.00, 
excluding  VAT  and  provided  for  the  supply,  installation  and  operation  of  50  fixed 
Speed Enforcement Cameras and 6 mobile speed cameras. 

In November 2014, 11 additional fixed speed cameras were ordered and the 
increase in cost amounted to Rs20,547,608.00.  The revised contract value was thus 
increased to Rs167,998,032.80, excluding VAT. 

In April 2015, a decision was taken to cancel the order of 6 out of the 11 fixed speed 
cameras ordered in November 2014, as consideration would be given later to the introduction 
of  sophisticated  Speed  Enforcement  Cameras  of  latest  technology  capable  of  measuring 
average  speed  and  also  speed  violations  by  motor  vehicle  categories.  The  revised  contract 
value to date is Rs159,205,314.00. 

 

119 

The contract includes maintenance services to cover for attending to faults detected, 
replacement of spare parts, routine checks, testing software licence fee and also for associated 
costs  related  to  the  processing  of  speed  violations  for  an  annual  payment  of  Rs4,000,000 
during the three-year warranty period. 

It  was  subsequently  decided  to  entrust  responsibilities  relating  to  the  processing  of 
speed violations to the Police Force.  Consequently, in November 2013, with the reduction 
in scope of work, the cost was adjusted as follows - 

Year One 
Year Two 
Year Three 

- 
- 
- 

Rs3,546,829.00 
Rs3,099,140.80 
Rs3,099,140.80 

METHADONE SUBSTITUTION THERAPY - DISTRIBUTION 

(No. B/402) Mr J. N. Aliphon (Third Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Methadone 
Substitution Therapy Programme, he will state when the distribution of methadone started, 
indicating the – 

(a)   cost incurred by Government in relation thereto as at to date; 
(b)  number  of  distribution  centres  therefor,  indicating  if  complaints  have  been 
received from the public in the regions where the centres are located and, if so, 
give details thereof; 

(c) actual number of beneficiaries thereof, and  
(d) percentage of success in terms of drug addicts who have been weaned. 
Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy  Programme  was 
introduced  in  November  2006  to  curb  the  trend  of  the  HIV  epidemic  among  the  injecting 
drug use population. 

Since that date till end 2014, the programme has cost Government almost Rs250 m.   

With  regard  to  part  (b),  I  presume  that  the  question  relates  to  the  number  of 
dispensing centres at the inception of the project.  The House may wish to note that at that 
time, dispensing was done at only one centre, namely the Brown Sequard Mental Health Care 
Centre.  This figure gradually increased over the years to reach 18 by 2014.  It is to be noted 
that the dispensing centres were found essentially in our health services. 

 

120 

In December 2014, when I took office as Minister of Health and Quality of Life, I was 
informed that the dispensing of methadone was  quite problematic and repeated complaints 
were received from all over the country. 

 I  personally  conducted  visits  at  some  of  the  dispensing  points  and  took  note  that 

besides the complaints received, there were also - 

•  overcrowding at methadone dispensing sites;  
loitering in the vicinity of the dispensing sites, and    
• 
•  anti-social behaviour and even thefts on passers-by. 

I  was also informed that methadone dispensing  has been a constant social problem 
due to the concentration of high number of methadone beneficiaries attending the different 
dispensing  points.    Some  beneficiaries  were  involved  in  trafficking  and  others  were  not 
swallowing their doses properly by keeping cotton swabs in their mouths.  Some would even 
take  their  doses  and  walk  away  without  ingesting  their  methadone  on  the  spot,  which  is 
contrary to the protocol of Direct Observed Therapy (DOT).  

In view of the numerous problems, Government decided to decentralise  methadone 
dispensing  as  from  January  2015.    Since  that  date,  42  methadone  dispensing  points  are 
operational  daily  between  6.00  to  8.00  a.m.,  including  3  within  the  prison  services.  The 
House may also wish to note that most of the dispensing points are within the compound of 
Police Stations thereby reinforcing security measures and strict control at dispensing sites. 

It is to be noted that following the decentralisation, just a few minor complaints have 
been received regarding methadone dispensing.   Appropriate and timely actions have been 
taken to address them. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  House  may  wish  to  note  that  presently 
there are 4,715 beneficiaries receiving their daily doses of methadone at the 42 dispensing 
points.    At  the  end  of  2014,  over  6,000  beneficiaries  were  on  the  programme.  With  the 
decentralisation,  additional  control  measures  were  introduced  thus  eliminating  many 
malpractices in the programme which were ongoing for some time.  This led to a decrease in 
the number of beneficiaries from over 6,000 to 4,715.  

With regard to part (d) of the question, I regret to have to inform the House that so far, 
less than 1% of those who have been induced on methadone have managed to be weaned off 
successfully, despite the involvement of 5 NGOs in the programme. The role of the NGOs in 

 

121 

the programme was essentially to give psycho-social support services to the beneficiaries and 
to provide counselling and assistance so that they were not dependent on methadone for life.  
In  fact,  the  initial  aim  of  the  programme  was  to  put  injecting  drug  users  on  methadone 
treatment for a period not exceeding 2 years after which detoxification would be resorted to.  

FISHERMEN INVESTMENT TRUST - SHAREHOLDING 

(No.  B/403)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the Fishermen Investment Trust, he will for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to where matters stand in respect of – 

(a)  the shareholding thereof; 
(b) the amount invested therein;  
(c) how the interests accrued are distributed and  
(d) the mechanism put in place in regard to the shares of the fishers who have passed 

away. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the authorised share 
capital of the Fishermen Investment Trust (FIT) is Rupees 65 Million, made up of 6.5 million 
shares of 10 rupees each as follows - 

• 
• 

1.5 million shares fully subscribed by Government; and  
5 million shares to be subscribed at such time, in such manner and by 
such persons as the Board may determine. 

The Government had subscribed 1,500,000 shares in the Fishermen Investment Trust 
(FIT) on 27 June 2007 at a par value of Rs10.00 per share for an amount of Rupees Fifteen 
Million.  In line with Government’s decision, the Board of the FIT at a meeting held on 18 
December  2007  decided  to  allocate  300  shares  freely  to  each  registered  fisherman  of 
Mauritius and Rodrigues.  The effective date of the allocation was 31 January 2006.  As at 
date,  a  total  of  4,461  fishermen  from  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues  have  been  allocated  their 
shares, for a total value of Rs13,383,000. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, an amount of Rs15 m. was allocated to FIT in 

2007.  An additional amount of Rs2 m. was injected in 2011. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, owing to losses incurred by FIT, no interest 

and/or dividend has been distributed to its shareholders. 

 

122 

With regard to part (d) of the question, section 11(3)(b) of the Fishermen Investment 
Trust Act 2006 provides for the transfer of shares by way of succession on the death of a 
shareholder. 

MAURITIAN EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE - FOREIGN FISHING VESSELS 

(No. B/404) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the Mauritian Exclusive Economic Zone, he will state the number and 
types of  foreign fishing  vessels which have been exploiting same over the past five  years, 
indicating in each case, the – 

(a)  size of the vessel, and  
(b)  fees paid to the Mauritian Government in respect thereof. 

Reply: I am tabling the information on the number, types and size of foreign fishing 
vessels that have been fishing in the Mauritian Exclusive Economic Zone for the past five 
years as well as the fees that have been paid to the Mauritian Government in respect thereof. 

MAHEBOURG - AQUACULTURE PROJECT 

(No. B/405) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the Aquaculture Project of Pointe aux Feuilles, in Mahebourg, he will 
state the quantity of fish produced over the past five years, indicating the - 

(a) quantity thereof sold on the local and on the foreign markets, respectively, and  
(b) approximate amount of income generated in connection therewith.  

Reply:  I am tabling the information in respect of the Aquaculture Project of Pointe aux 

Feuilles in Mahebourg. 

SEA CUCUMBER - EXPLOITATION 

(No. B/406) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether in regard to the sea cucumber, he will state where matters stand as to the exploitation 
thereof respectively in – 

(a) mainland Mauritius;  
(b) Rodrigues, and  
(c) Agalega. 

 

123 

Reply: The exploitation of sea cucumber in Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega has been 
banned since 01 October 2009 up to 29 February 2016 in order to allow for the replenishment 
of the stock. 

An assessment of the stock of sea cucumber will be carried out in October 2015 with a 

view to enabling my Ministry to take a decision as to whether to maintain or lift the ban. 

In parallel, my Ministry in its strategy to develop aquaculture, is encouraging promoters 

to engage in farming or the culture of sea cucumbers. 

PORT AREA - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS – STORAGE FACILITIES 
(No. B/407) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in 
regard to the Port area, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Port 
Authority, information as to if new storage facilities for Liquefied Petroleum Gas have been 
constructed and commissioned thereat, since 2011 and, if so, indicate – 

(a) the name/s of the promoter/s thereof, and  
(b) if same have been constructed on freehold land or on land belonging to the Authority 

and, if in the latter case, further indicate the - 

(i)  extent and location thereof;  
(ii) procedures followed and terms and conditions thereof, and  
(iii) shareholding  of  the  company/ies  at  the  time  of  application  therefor  and 

subsequent thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

METHADONE SUBSTITUTION THERAPY PROGRAMME –REVIEW  
(No. B/408) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Methadone 
Substitution  Therapy  Programme,  he  will  state  if  the  discontinuation  thereof  is  being 
envisaged and, if so, indicate where matters stand and further indicate if other substitution 
therapies are being identified for implementation in the near future. 

Reply:  As  explained  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/402,  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy 
Programme  was  introduced  in  a  specific  context  relating  to  the  alarming  situation  of  the 
increase  in  the  number  of  HIV  detected  cases.  The  Programme  was  based  on  the 

 

124 

recommendations  of  WHO  Consultant,  Dr.  Martha  Torrens,  Associate  Professor  in 
Psychiatry and Head of Drug Abuse Unit in Barcelona, Spain.   

According to her recommendations, the aim of the programme was to allow injecting 
drug users to remain on methadone for an initial period of 2 years, after which detoxification 
had to be resorted to. 

However,  since  its  introduction,  the  programme  has  been  implemented  as  a 
maintenance therapy only.  The House may wish to note that this Government firmly believes 
that  injecting  drug  users  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to  come  out  of  their  life  long 
addiction to drugs, be it hard drugs or any other substitutes with an ultimate goal to become 
drug free. 

In this respect, the methadone programme is being reviewed and a new plan is being 
worked  out  with  a  view  to  giving  an  opportunity  to  those  injecting  drug  users  to  work 
towards detoxification, rehabilitation and ultimately to reintegrate the mainstream society. 

The House may wish to note that the new programme is as follows - 

(i)  all methadone beneficiaries already on the programme will continue to receive 
their  daily  doses.    Other  components  like  psychological  support  including 
detoxification will be introduced to facilitate their integration in the mainstream, 
and 

(ii) injecting drug users who wish to be enrolled on a treatment and rehabilitation 
programme will be screened and offered a new therapy based on international 
standards.    This  treatment  will  be  a  combination  of  suboxone,  a  highly 
recommended detoxifying agent followed by naltrexone as a relapse prevention 
medication.  

I am advised by my medical staff that after 6 months, a person will be given the chance 

to achieve a drug free status with good social and family support. 

It is noted that according to the press, there are around 200 drug addicts on the waiting 
list for a drug treatment programme.  However, I would like to point out that after a screening 
carried out by officers of the Harm Reduction Unit of my Ministry, only 53 persons have, so 
far, been found eligible for the treatment.   My Ministry is liaising with all relevant referral 
NGOs, for a list of persons on their waiting lists. 

Pending  the  introduction  of  the  new  programme,  which  is  expected  shortly,  the 
potential  beneficiaries  are  being  offered  continuous  counselling.  Those  who  are  unable  to 
cope are being referred to psychiatrists for appropriate treatment. 

 

125 

 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS - 

RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/409)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed 
recruitment  of  one  hundred  medical  practitioners  on  the  permanent  establishment  of  his 
Ministry,  as  announced  in  the  last  Budget  Speech,  he  will  state  the  number  of  medical 
practitioners recruited as at to date. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  Public  Service  Commission  has  already  started  the 
recruitment and selection exercise for the post of Medical and Health Officer/Senior Medical 
and Health Officer.  

The post was advertised by the Commission on 07 April 2015. The closing date for 

the submission of applications was 27 April 2015. 

It is expected that all the vacancies will be filled once the recruitment and selection 

exercise is completed by the Public Service Commission. 

SCHOOLS - SYNTHETIC DRUGS 

(No. B/410) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the schools, colleges and tertiary institutions, she will state 
and obtain information as to the number of reported cases of use or otherwise of synthetic 
drugs (synthetic cannabinoids) thereat, indicating the measures taken, if any, to deal with the 
issue and prevent the proliferation thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  3  cases  of  use  or  otherwise  of  synthetic  drugs  (synthetic 
cannabinoids)  in  respect  of  educational  establishments  have  been  reported  to  the  Police.  
These  involve  four  students  aged  12  to  16  years  from  2  Private  Secondary  Schools  and  1 
State Secondary School. 

The appearance of new synthetic drugs in Mauritius is a relatively new phenomenon 
and is a matter of serious concern for my Ministry, particularly with regard to their adverse 
effects on the health of the students and the youth at large. 

At  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  action  has  been  initiated  to  exercise  greater  control  at 
school  level.    The  Ministry  had  issued  a  Circular  to  Zone  Directors  on  sensitisation  of 
students  about  the  risk  associated  with  drugs  and  to  ensure  vigilance.    A  Sensitisation 

 

126 

Coordination  Team  for  Actions  against  Drugs  has  been  set  up  to  coordinate  anti-drug 
sensitisation and other actions. A protocol has moreover been established to handle cases of 
drug  at  schools.    Following  preliminary  enquiry  at  school  level,  the  student  concerned  is 
placed in isolation and under supervision. The ADSU is immediately informed as well as the 
Responsible Parties. Disciplinary action is taken while pastoral care and counselling services 
are also dispensed.  A close monitoring of the behaviour and conduct of the student ensues.  

In  its  endeavour  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  drugs,  my  Ministry  works  closely  with 
different organisations namely the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Brigade Pour la 
Protection des Mineurs, ADSU, NATReSA and other stakeholders.  

As  part  of  preventive  measures,  Rectors  of  schools  and  educational  institutions  are 
called upon to inform and sensitise students during Morning Assembly and in classes on the 
risk of using the drugs, and on the fact that drug trafficking is a criminal offence.  Students 
are also made aware of the adverse impact of drug consumption on their health and wellbeing 
and that the penalty associated with the consumption and possession of drugs is very severe.  
I  am  further  informed  that,  in  its  commitment  to  further  prevent  illegal  drug 

proliferation, the Police has adopted a series of proactive measures which includes - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

sensitisation of its personnel on the New Psychoactive Drugs and the negative 
effects; 
involvement  of  ADSU  personnel  to  create  awareness  among  the  vulnerable 
groups  including  youngsters,  students  and  aged  persons  about  the  advent  of 
such New Psychoactive drugs and the serious threat they may pose to health; 
enhanced  focus  by  the  ADSU  on  the  new  emerging  drugs  and  their  actual 
trend, as part of their intelligence network island wide; 
conduct of regular police patrols on the vicinity of the University campuses. 

(d) 
 
My Ministry will enlist its full support in this endeavour.   
The Ministry is also fully participating in a high level meeting set up by the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life and comprising representatives of the Police, State Law Office, 
Forensic  Science  Laboratory,  NATReSA  and  relevant  Officers  from  different  hospitals  to 
discuss the prevailing situation regarding synthetic drugs and remedial actions to be taken.   

My Ministry is actively engaged in this national endeavour to combat this new scourge, 
particularly among the youth.  Sensitisation programmes will be pursued.  I will rely on the 
collaboration  of  parents,  students,  school  staff  and  the  community  at  large  including  the 

 

127 

authorities  concerned  to  extend  their  full  support  in  the  fight  against  drug  and  substance 
abuse. 

UNIVERSITY OF MAURITIUS – ENROLMENT  

(No. B/411) Mr D. Ramful  (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the University of Mauritius, she will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the closing date for the enrolment of students for 
the courses run thereat for academic year 2015-2016, indicating if consideration will be given 
for  an  extension  of  the  closing  date  so  as  to  allow  students  having  received  their  General 
Certificate of Education (A level) the opportunity to enroll therefor. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  University  of  Mauritius  that  the  closing  date  for  the 
initial  advertisement  for  the  University  programmes  for  academic  year  2015-16  was  23 
March  2015.  This  advertisement  provided  for  potential  enrolment  in  both  non-tuition  fee-
paying and tuition fee-paying (part time) programmes.   

 
A  second  call  for  applications  was  made  for  tuition  fee-paying  programmes 
exclusively with a deadline set for 08 July 2015.  Same was subsequently extended to 27 July 
2015. 

 
At  the  time  the  students  submit  their  applications  to  follow  programmes  at  the 
University of Mauritius, they are required as well to submit their qualifications to determine 
their eligibility.  The deadline of 23 March 2015 was so decided upon with a view to enabling 
the University to rank all candidates according to their examination results obtained prior to 
March 2015 as admission is based solely on merit given the limited seats per programme. 

 
I  am  also  informed  by  the  University  of  Mauritius  that  a  further  extension  of  the 
deadline for non-fee-paying courses cannot be envisaged since the results of GCE ‘A’ level 
are official only in August 2015.  In addition, offers have already been made to meritorious 
candidates in the wake of the March 2015 advertisement and same cannot be cancelled just to 
accommodate any late enrolment.  Besides, delivery of most programmes has already started 
since beginning August 2015. 

  
Nonetheless,  those  candidates  who  have  obtained  GCE  ‘A’  level  results  in  August 
2015 may exceptionally be allowed to submit late applications on tuition fee-paying part-time 

 

128 

programmes if there are vacant seats or they may be directed to the UoM Trust which runs 
tuition fee-paying programmes.  

 
PRIMARY SCHOOLS – EDUCATORS & TEACHERS – SALARY SCALE 
(No. B/412) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  decision  taken  by  Cabinet,  on  05  September  2014,  to 
correct  the  anomaly  whereby  Educators  (Primary),  a  grade  created  following  the  Pay 
Research  Bureau  Report  2008,  obtained  a  higher  salary  scale  than  the  grade  of 
Teachers/Senior Teachers who were serving prior to 2008 and reckoning more experience as 
well  as  possessing  the  Teacher’s  Diploma,  she  will  state  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
implementation thereof. 

Reply:  At  the  very  outset,  I  would  like  to  inform  that  the  Staff  Associations 
representing Teachers of Primary Schools had for long been making strong representations 
for  the  alignment  of  the  salary  of  Teachers  of  primary  schools  to  that  of  teachers  of 
Secondary Schools on the basis that they hold the same qualifications (Teacher’s Diploma) 
and are performing duties of the same nature.   

The Ministry, in an attempt to address the matter had referred it to the Pay Research 

Bureau (PRB) for examination in the context of its 2013 Report. 

As the PRB 2013 report did not make any recommendation in regard to this case, the 
Ministry submitted same to the Errors, Omissions and Anomalies Committee (EOAC).  After 
considering the representations of the Staff Associations and the Ministry’s submission, the 
EOAC made a generic recommendation in its Report to the effect that the Salary Scale of 
Educators (Primary) be aligned with that of Educators (Secondary) (Diploma Holders). 

This  recommendation  however  gave  rise  to  an  anomalous  situation  whereby 
Educators (Primary), a grade created following the PRB Report of 2008, would be getting a 
higher salary scale than Teacher/Senior Teachers servicing the sector prior to 2008 and who 
reckon more experience while also possessing the Teacher’s Diploma.  It is to be noted that 
the Educators (Primary) recruited post PRB 2008 were already in possession of the Teacher’s 
Diploma (Primary). 

On  05  September  2014,  Government  agreed  to  a  proposal  of  the  Ministry  for  the 
salary of Teachers/ Senior Teachers possessing the Teachers Diploma (Primary) to be aligned 

 

129 

to that of Educators (Primary) as recommended for that grade in the 2013 Errors, Omissions 
and Anomalies Committee Report (EOAC Report).  This decision of Government was on the 
basis of the clearance of the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reform (MCS & 
AR) and that of Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

The MCS & AR had advised that specific guidelines be adopted for the adjustment of 
the  salary  of  the  Teachers/Senior  Teachers  which  involves  the  application  of  a  specific 
conversion table which  do not provide for point to point system.  The same principle was 
applied for the conversion of the salary of those Educators (Primary) in post, subsequent to 
PRB report 2008. 

An exercise which was carried for the implementation of the decision for alignment/ 
adjustment revealed that some 200 Teachers/ Senior Teachers would benefit from payment of 
increments in line with the conversion. 

The  union  concerned,  i.e.  GTU  was  apprised  of  the  situation  in  October  2014  and 
during the discussions the GTU proposed that payment to the Teachers/ Senior Teachers be 
withheld pending the matter be examined by the MCS & AR.  The GTU had, however, again 
reiterated its request for addressing the issue.   This would however imply a point to point 
conversion which is not in line with guidelines issued by the MCS & AR. 

Meanwhile,  my  Ministry  has  received  several  representations  from  Teachers/Senior 
Teachers  for  payment  of  increments  due.    After  examining  the  matter,  the  Ministry  has 
already decided to effect payment to those Teachers/Senior Teachers concerned.   

In the event of further representations, the PRB would be requested to look into the 

matter in the context of the forthcoming review. 

 

FOOD - PESTICIDE - CONTROL 

(No. B/413) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  locally 
produced food and imported food respectively, he will state the measures taken at the level of 
his Ministry to control the quality thereof in terms of pesticide contents or otherwise before 
allowing same to be available for consumption on the local market to ensure the safety and 
security of the consumers thereof. 

 

130 

Reply: The Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute (FAREI) which 
operates under the aegis of my Ministry regularly collects samples of fruits and vegetables at 
farm gate level which are then analysed by the Agricultural Chemistry Division of the Food 
Technology Laboratory to detect the presence and level of pesticide residues. 

Whenever pesticide residues in samples collected are found to be above the maximum 
residue level allowable by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the planters concerned are 
sensitised on Good Agricultural Practices and on the quantity of pesticides to be used in their 
fields. To ensure that such malpractices do not recur, the fields of these planters are regularly 
monitored.  Moreover,  Officers  of  my  Ministry  and  FAREI  regularly  sensitise  the  farming 
community on the importance of adopting Good Agricultural Practices and on minimising the 
use of agro-chemicals and pesticides in their fields. 

I  am  informed  that  only  potatoes,  onions  and  garlic  are  imported  in  bulk  for  local 
consumption.  Vegetables which are imported in small quantities are mainly meant for hotel 
use.    However,  the  importation  of  all  agricultural  products  is  strictly  monitored  for 
compliance with phytosanitary regulations both from country of origin and locally. 

Moreover, I am also informed by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life that all 
imported  foodstuffs  are  accompanied  by  appropriate  health  certificates  from  the  health 
authorities of the exporting country.  Random samplings are taken from these foodstuffs and 
sent for analysis to the Government Analyst Division to ensure compliance with permissible 
level of pesticide/fitness for human consumption and compliance with the relevant parts of 
the  Food  Act  1998  and  Food  Regulations  173/1999.    As  for  locally  produced  pre-packed 
foodstuffs which are listed in the 3rd Schedule of the Food Regulations 1999, these require a 
pre-market approval permit and have to comply with the provisions of the legislation before 
being offered for sale to consumers. 

MINISTRIES & GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS – PREMISES – RENT 

(No. A/1) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the advisor/senior advisor appointed in his 
Ministry, since 22 December 2014 to date, he will give a list thereof, giving details of the 
terms and conditions of appointment thereof in each case. 

 

131 

Reply: There are only two persons who have been appointed as senior advisers in the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office  since  22  December  2014  to  date.  The  details  of  their  terms  and 
conditions are being placed in the Library. 

BUSINESS PARK OF MAURITIUS LTD - LEGAL ADVISERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No. A/2) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister of 
Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to legal advisor/s presently 
attached at the Business Park of Mauritius Ltd, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
information  as  to  the  name/s  thereof,  indicating  the  date  and  terms  and  conditions  of 
appointment thereof, in each case. 

Reply: I am informed that the names and terms and conditions of appointment of the 

Legal Advisors retained by the Business Parks of Mauritius Ltd are as follows - 

 

Name of Legal 

Date of 

Terms and Conditions 

Advisor 

Appointment 

of Appointment 
retainer 

fee 

of 

Me D. Dabee 

Me G. Ramdewar 
 

Me R. Unuth 

Me M. Gobin 
 

July 2007 

June 2007 

A 
Rs15,000 per month. 
 
Services  retained  for 
debt recovery purposes. 
Paid  on  a  case  to  case 
basis.  No  monthly 
retainer fee. 
for 
the 
21 January 2010  Appearing 
the  Case 
BPML  on 
OSHI 
Solpro 
v/s 
Suppliers  Ltd  &  Anor. 
Rs90,000  have  been 
paid so far.  
Services retained on an 
Ad hoc basis. 

 
 

 

 
 

Me S. S. Murday 
 
Me. N. Appa Jala 
 
Ghose Chambers 

132 

May 2015 

 

 

There is no payment of 
a monthly retainer fee. 

Will  be  paid  on  a  case 
to case basis. 
No  payment  has  been 
effected so far. 
 

NATIONAL TRANSPORT AUTHORITY - LEGAL ADVISOR  

(No. A/3) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the National 
Transport Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
the name/s of the legal advisor attached thereto, indicating the date and terms and conditions 
of appointment thereof, in each case. 

Reply: The National Transport Authority has no legal advisor attached to it.  Legal 

advice and assistance, if required, is sought from the State Law Office. 

CWA, CEB & WMA - LEGAL ADVISERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No. A/4) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Central  Water  Authority,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  and  the  Wastewater  Management 
Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom in each case, information as 
to  the  name/s  of  the  legal  advisor  attached  thereto,  indicating  the  date  and  terms  and 
conditions of appointment thereof, in each case. 

Reply:  The  legal  advisors  attached  to  the  Central  Water  Authority,  the  Central 

Electricity Board and the Wastewater Management Authority are as follows - 

Institution 

Legal advisor/s 

Date of 

Terms and conditions 

appointment 

133 

Central  Water 
Authority 

Mr André Robert  

01 May 2015 

Wastewater 
Management 
Authority  

Mr Rashid 
Daureeawoo 
 
Mr Yash Bhadain 

May 2015 

May 2015 

Mr Sheffick Sookia  

April 2015 

Central 
Electricity 
Board 

Mr Ravin Chetty 
 

June 2015 

 

 

fee 
of 
+  VAT 

fee 
of 
+  VAT 

adviser 

Retainer 
Rs40,000 
monthly 
 
Retainer 
Rs18,000 
monthly 
No retainer fee 
Legal 
for 
restructuring of WMA  
 
Retainer 
Rs40,000 
monthly 
 
Retainer 
Rs34,783 
monthly 
 

fee 
of 
+  VAT 

fee 
of 
+  VAT 

