 

 

 

No. 19 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 03 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 19 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 03 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.    Office of the Speaker  ‒ 

The  Annual  Report  and  Audited  Accounts  of  the  Independent  Commission 
Against Corruption for the year ended 31 December 2015. 

B.    Ministry of Tourism and External Communications ‒ 

The  Tourism  Authority  (Prohibited  Zone  for  Motorised  Crafts)  (Mon  Choisy) 
Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 148 of 2016)  

C.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

(a)    The Excise (Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 152 

of 2016)  

(b)    The  Eastern  and  Southern  African  Trade  and  Development  Bank  (PTA 
Bank)  Privileges  and  Immunities)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 
(Government Notice No. 155 of 2016)  

(c)    The Double Taxation Convention (India) (Amendment) Regulations 2016. 

(Government Notice No 156 of 2016)  

(d)    The Professional Quantity Surveyors’ (Code of Practice) Regulations 2016. 

(Government Notice No. 157 of 2016)  

D.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

The  Local  Government 
Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 150 of 2016)  

(Remuneration  of  Councillors) 

(Amendment) 

E.    Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation ‒ 

(a)    The  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority  (Amendment  of  Schedule) 

Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 153 of 2016)  

(b)    The  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority  (Licence  Fees)  (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 154 of 2016) 

F.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The  Cane  (Specification  of  Varieties)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 
(Government Notice No. 149 of 2016) 

G.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

The  Annual  Report  of  the  Mauritius  Telegu  Cultural  Centre  Trust  for  the 
Financial Year January – December 2014. 

 

 

 
 

8 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

(11.33 a.m ) 

Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  
Madam Speaker, just like previous Budget presented last year, this Budget is also full of good 
intentions, full of promises, full of measures that are music to the ears.   

This  Budget  has  been  applauded  for  its  social  measures  and  the  hon.  Chief  Whip 
made sure that the Government gave a standing ovation at the end of the speech of the hon. 
Minister. 

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has tried to touch the hearts 
of people by announcing a series of measures to eradicate poverty.  He is introducing a new 
scheme  effective  from  01  December  of  this  year  under  which  every  adult  on  the  Social 
Register will be entitled to a monthly subsistence allowance based on a minimum threshold 
of  Rs2,720  and  a  maximum  threshold  of  Rs9,520.    An  amount  of  Rs500  m.  has  been 
earmarked for this measure.  Now, how this measure will be implemented in practice remains 
to be seen, but, at least, it is a step in the right direction.  

9 

 
However, in implementing this measure,  I would urge the Government  not to limit 
itself  to  the  net  monthly  income  of  families  because  there  are  many  families,  Madam 
Speaker, in this country who may be earning above this maximum threshold but they are so 
indebted that, at the end of the day, their disposable income fall well below poverty line.  So, 
I would ask the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, when implementing 
this Budget, to have some flexibility, to look also on a case by  case basis people who are 
maybe in relative poverty, but when we take into consideration all their debts, they become in 
absolute poverty and require also social benefits, social assistance. 

The  cash  award  for  students  who  have  achieved  higher  level  education  is  also  a 
welcome measure. But here again the hon. Minister must indicate whether, when he talked 
about students from poor families, he meant only students from families in absolute poverty 
or also families from relative poverty? 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development was also 
not insensitive to the plea of the hon. Leader of the Opposition in favor of disabled persons 
which he made in his PNQ of the 12 July of this year.  He has removed an injustice with 
regard to the allocation of basic invalid pension to children.  Henceforth, a child even below 
the age of 15 would be entitled to basic invalid pension.  But I would urge the Government to 
go a step further and review the eligibility criteria which requires the beneficiary to have, at 
least, 60% incapacity. This is a very arbitrary figure, Madam Speaker, and many deserving 
disabled persons are left out because, according to the medical panel, they do not satisfy this 
60% threshold.  There should be some flexibility to grant the invalidity pension in deserving 
cases  even  where  there  is  no  consensus  among  doctors  as  to  whether  the  person  has  60% 
incapacity or not.   

It  is  also  unfortunate,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  did  not  correct  another  injustice  with  regard  to  basic  invalidity 
pension which is that only persons below the age 60 are entitled to basic invalidity pension. A 
disabled  person,  Madam  Speaker,  does  not  cease  to  be  disabled  when  he  reaches  60.  
Although he is entitled to a Basic Retirement Pension when he reaches 60, he still has special 
needs.  At  the  very  least,  we  should  consider  granting  albeit  a  reduced  Basic  Invalidity 
Pension to these people as a top-up to their Basic Retirement Pension. 

10 

 
Madam  Speaker,  we  also  welcome  the  decision  of  the  Government  to  increase  the 
grant-in-aid to NGOs dealing with children with Special Education Needs. I am not sure if 
the amount earmarked is sufficient, but at least it is a good start. 

Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  much  remains  to  be  done  to  ensure  that  Mauritius 
fully  meets  its  obligations  under  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons 
with Disabilities. Much remains to be done, and I quote - 

“to eliminate the physical, socioeconomic  and cultural barriers that prevent the full 
inclusion of disabled persons in schools and in society” 

As  observed  by  the  Committee  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities  in  its  report  of 
September last year. 

Madam  Speaker,  if  we  generally  welcome  the  various  measures  announced  in  this 
Budget  to  fight  poverty,  we  are  far  more  sceptical  when  it  comes  to  the  decision  of  the 
Government to set up the National CSR Foundation, and more importantly, the decision to 
compel businesses to contribute at least 50% of their CSR Fund this year to that Foundation 
and at least 75% of their CSR Fund to that Foundation as from next year. 

In a way, the Government has gone from one extreme to the other. 

You  will  recall,  Madam  Speaker,  that  last  year,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  who  is  not  present  today,  decided  to  remove  all  existing  CSR 
guidelines thereby allowing companies to freely allocate their 2% CSR Fund as they thought 
fit. 

Last year, we criticised that measure because we knew that there would be abuses and 
it  would  be  harder  for  NGOs  to  benefit  from  CSR  funds.  Time,  Madam  Speaker,  has, 
unfortunately, proven us right and there is absolute anarchy as regards the utilisation of CSR 
funds today. 

It was high time, we agree, for Government to put some order. We need to have CSR 

guidelines. We need to have a register of NGOs who are eligible to receive CSR funds. 

But what is proposed in this Budget, Madam Speaker, goes beyond that. Companies 
have now to give a substantial part of their CSR Fund to this National CSR Foundation and it 
is that Foundation which will decide how to allocate the funds. 

What the Government is doing effectively, Madam Speaker, is to impose a CSR tax, a 
CSR tax of 1% this year and of, at least, 1.5% as from next year.  What the Government is 

 

11 

doing,  Madam  Speaker,  is  going  against  the  very  rationale  of  what  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility is about. 

Corporate Social Responsibility is meant to cause businesses to act in a way that is 
beneficial to society, beneficial to consumers, beneficial to the environment. It causes them – 

• 
• 
• 

to think about non-business related issues; 
to think about welfare of others; 
to think about how their decision can make a difference to the life of others. 

But now, this National CSR Foundation,  I am afraid, will take over this crucial Corporate 
Social Responsibility function! 

Madam Speaker, we already have provision in our Income Tax Act which provides 
that any unspent CSR funds will be remitted over to the MRA. We have absolutely no issue if 
the MRA were to remit those unpaid CSR funds to the National CSR Foundation. In fact, I, 
myself, suggested in a supplementary to a PQ, earlier this year that any CSR funds collected 
by the MRA should be used for CSR purposes. 

We would have no qualms, Madam Speaker, if companies were given the choice to 
freely decide what amount to put in that Foundation, but making it compulsorily for them to 
do so would surely put an end to most CSR initiatives of the private sector. I know that many 
groups have already set up their own Foundation. Many groups have already embarked on 
long-term projects such as the construction of social housing. We need to have flexibility to 
allow them to continue to implement those projects. 

Therefore, I am urging the Government, Madam Speaker, to reconsider its decision 
about the compulsory contribution to the National CSR Foundation and instead reintroduce 
CSR guidelines which companies would be using in deciding how to spend their CSR funds. 

And whilst we are still on the issue of poverty eradication, Madam Speaker, and since 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has announced that this Budget is 
concretely  launching  the  Marshall  Plan,  may  I  ask  him  to  table  a  copy  of  the 
recommendations made by the UNDP Expert Team for the Marshall Plan? 

I also hope that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, during his 
summing-up, would enlighten us as to whether he proposes to continue with the concept of 
parrainage which was so dear to the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

12 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  also 
announced some measures to enhance the purchasing power of consumers. The Government 
is removing customs duty on a series of items. Fair enough! That will result in lower cost of 
living.  But has the hon. Minister held discussions with his colleague, the hon. Minister of 
Business  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives?  Has  he  held  discussions  with  local  SMEs  which 
manufacture those very products for the local market? Has he assessed how such a decision 
will impact on the turnover of the local SMEs that manufacture garments, diapers and other 
items which has now become duty free? 

Madam  Speaker,  among  the  popular  measures,  there  is,  of  course,  the  decision  to 
reduce the price of cooking gas which was way overdue since the crash in the price of gas on 
the world market and with the State Trading Corporation making billions of gains on the fall 
of the price.  For months, in the Opposition, we have been calling for a reduction in the price 
of cooking gas, but like the Rt. hon. Prime Minister likes to say: ‘better late than never’. So 
much for the social Budget! 

Madam Speaker, the Budget is also an opportunity to reflect on the performance of 
the Government, an opportunity to analyse what measures that were announced last year were 
implemented, an opportunity to assess how effective those measures have been. And it comes 
as no surprise that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development did not say a 
word about the  economic performance of this Government since it was  elected 20 months 
ago. Fair enough!  

It has only been two months since the hon. Minister has resumed office and he was 
not  in  Cabinet  for  the  better  part  of  the  financial  year  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  held 
responsible for the performance of the Government. But like the hon. Minister of Health and 
Quality of  Life likes to say: ‘Government is Government’. So, we could legitimately have 
expected the hon. Minister to defend ‘le bilan du gouvernement’ après 20 mois. But not a 
word!  Not  a  word  either  on  the  second  economic  miracle  which  was  promised  during  the 
electoral campaign! And I state what one could read in the Electoral Manifesto – 

« Nous prenons le pari de réaliser un deuxième miracle économique.» 

A whole chunk of the Electoral Manifesto was devoted to « façonner un deuxième miracle 
économique»,  a  pledge  that  was  repeated  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019.  For 
example at paragraph 7, one can read – 

13 

 
“The ultimate aim is to shape a second socio-economic miracle in the interest of one 
and all.” 

In August 2015, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, while announcing his vision 2030, stated 

and I quote – 

“As Prime Minister, I am not here to make promises. I am here to say to the Nation 
that the second economic miracle is well within our reach.” 

20  months  later,  where  is  the  second  economic  miracle?  Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker, 
promises… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Uteem: ...unfortunately, Madam Speaker, promises have not been kept. Except 
for  inflation,  all  economic  indicators  have  actually  deteriorated  since  this  Government  has 
assumed office. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall last year, under… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Uteem: You will recall, last year under thunderous applause the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development announced for 2015-2016 GDP growth would go up to 
5.3 per cent and for 2016-2017 it will go further up to 5.7 per cent. 5.3 per cent for 2015-
2016, 5.7 per cent for 2016-2017.  In his Vision 2030 Speech, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
stated and I quote –  

“Within our vision, we are targeting an average growth rate of 5.5 per cent annually 
as from 2017.” 

Adding –  

“I am confident that with the concerted effort of one and all, we shall achieve it.” 

Promises!  Promises,  projections!  Now  the  facts  and  I  am  grateful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development to have circulated a Supplement to the Budget Speech 
which has very interesting facts and figures and analysis on the state of the economy. And, 
we can read at page 3 of that Supplement to the Budget Speech – 

14 

 
“Mauritius continued to grow at a moderate rate of 3.0 per cent in 2015 due to weak 
external demand and protracted decline in the construction sector. In 2016, growth is 
expected to pick up to 3.9 per cent.” 

These are the official figures that were deposited, 3.0 per cent in 2015, 3.9 per cent in 2016. 
3.0 per cent instead of 5.3 per cent promised. That is almost 40 per cent below target, Madam 
Speaker! We are not talking about a 5.0 per cent, a 10 per cent missing target, we are talking 
about an under performance by 40 per cent on the projection of growth for last year. And, I 
am  not  saying  that;  this  is  what  is  stated  in  the  Supplementary  Budget  although  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  was  a  bit  more  generous.  He  stated  that 
GDP  growth  for  2015-2016  would  be  3.4  per  cent  and  not  3.0  per  cent  as  announced  by 
Statistics  Mauritius  and  4.1  per  cent  for  2016-2017  and  not  3.9  per  cent  as  announced  by 
Statistics Mauritius. 

However much I would like to believe the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Madam Speaker, no one, no economist, no report from local bank, not even the 
Bank of Mauritius is expecting GDP growth to exceed 4.0 per cent. And, with the full effect 
of  Brexit  yet  to  be  felt,  with  a  downward  revision  of  global  growth  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund, I am afraid that the 4.1 per cent growth is likely to be a mirage. Why am I so 
pessimistic, Madam Speaker, because of the figures provided by the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development himself. Everyone with a basic knowledge of economics knows 
that in order to achieve growth, we need investment. 

At page 5 of the Supplement to the Budget it is stated and I quote, under the heading 

“Investment” –  

“Investment rate has been trending downwards since 2009 to reach a low of 17.5 per 
cent in 2015. It is expected to increase to 17.9 per cent in 2016 due to higher public 
investment.” 

So, even the projection is only a minimal increase in investment and every economist knows 
that in order to have sustainable growth you need to at least have between 22 and 25 per cent 
investment  rate  in  the  country.  There  is  not  going  to  be  even  1.0  per  cent  increase  in 
investment  following  this  Budget!  Worst,  Madam  Speaker,  when  we  analyse  the  ratio  of 
private investment to GDP it was only 12.7 per cent. Only 12.7 per cent in 2015! By way of 
comparison it was 20.5 per cent in 2008. 

15 

 
According  to  Statistics  Mauritius,  in  2015  the  private  sector  investment  actually 
contracted by 7.3 per cent under this Government. What does that mean? The private sector is 
not  investing  or  is  not  investing  as  much  as  it  should  and  that  is  why  the  economy  is  not 
taking  off.    Yet,  Madam  Speaker,  last  year  when  the  then  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development spoke about Mauritius, he referred to it as being un vaste chantier de 
développement. He announced 13 megaprojects that would mobilise some Rs120 billion of 
private and foreign direct investment. Where are the 13 megaprojects? Where are the smart 
cities?  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  dedicated  only  one 
paragraph in his Budget at paragraph 180 and he states –  

“Concerning the smart cities, three will start construction this year.” 

That is the only reference about the megaprojects which were supposed to convert Mauritius 
into a vaste chantier! What happened to the billions of rupees which the Chinese and other 
investors  were  supposed  to  invest  in  Jin  Fei, Riche-Terre,  in  Domaine  les  Pailles?  What 
happened to the billions of rupees which the Saudi Government and Dubai were supposed to 
invest? 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister in his Vision 2030 Speech states and I quote –  

And that was in August –  

“There are, right now, some 40 major private sector investment projects to the tune of 
183 billion rupees, of which foreign direct investments represent 140 billion rupees.” 

140  billion  rupees  worth  of  foreign  direct  investment  announced  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  last  year  in  August!  Promises!  Now  the  facts,  in  2015  foreign  direct  investment 
amounted to only Rs9.6 billion not Rs140 billion! Only Rs9.6 billion! By way of comparison, 
in 2014, FDI according  to figures in the Supplement was Rs18.4 billion,  year to  year that 
represents a drop of almost 50 per cent in foreign direct investment, that are the results! Not 
the billions promised, 50 per  cent  reduction in  foreign direct investment! So much for the 
private sector investment and foreign direct investment, these are beyond the control of the 
Government. It is the private sector, the foreigners. What about the public sector investment? 
This is within the reach of the Government. This is within the control of the Ministries of 
Government.  

16 

 
Madam Speaker, you will recall last year, we, on this side of the House, criticised the 
then Minister of Finance and Economic Development for favouring recurrent expenditure at 
the  expense  of  Capital Budget.  We  stated  that  the  budgeted  amount  of Rs12.6  billion  was 
way  too  low  to  have  any  meaningful  impact  on  the  economic  growth.  But,  looking  at  the 
other document which has been circulated, Public Sector Investment Programme 2016-2017 
to  2020-2021  the  Government  has  not  even  been  able  to  spend  the  budgeted  capital 
expenditure. I will take just a few examples. If we turn to the National Development Unit, for 
example, the amount budgeted for land drainage, Rs900 m. were budgeted in the Estimates. 
Provisional actual, the amount actually spent is only Rs195 m. that represents only 20 per 
cent of funds that were earmarked for land drainage projects have been implemented by this 
Government. 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer Islands, under the item Upgrading Sea and Air Transportation and Other Infrastructure, 
Rs500  m.  were  earmarked.  That  was  for  the  Agalega  project.  What  is  the  actual  amount 
spent? Rs7 m. Not even 1.0 per cent of the amount earmarked for Agalega was spent!  

When  we  come  to  wastewater  management  again,  Pailles,  Guibies  Sewage  Project 
which  is  dear  to  the  people  from  Constituency  No.  1,  amount  budgeted,  Rs370  m.  and 
amount  spent  is  only  Rs24  m.  For  the  Plaines  Wilhems  Sewerage  Project,  the  amount 
budgeted  was  Rs520  m.  and  the  amount  spent  is  only  Rs330  m.  In  fact,  for  the  total 
Environment Protection Project, from a budgeted amount of Rs12 billion, only Rs1 billion 
has been spent. 

Construction of social housing - the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is not here; he is busy 
negotiating  in  Saudi  Arabia.    There  was  an  amount  of  Rs1.1  billion  earmarked  for 
construction of social housing.  Only, Rs700 m. has been spent! The Rs400 m., which was 
meant to construct 1,225 Housing Social Project Batch III, has not been implemented.  And 
the list is long! 

But,  Madam  Speaker,  the  champion  of  champions,  the  champion  of  underspending 
goes  to  the  Central  Water  Authority.    Again,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is  not  here  to 
defend the performance of his Ministry and parastatals falling under his purview, but I will 
just give you some figures.  The Central Water Authority was supposed to spend Rs2 billion 
in  2015/2016.    How  much  did  it  end  spending?    Only  Rs382  m.!  Out  of  Rs2  billion 
earmarked,  only  Rs382  m.;  that  is,  CWA  has  spent  only  20%  of  funds  earmarked  for 

 

17 

2015/2016.  There is underspending everywhere; underspending on existing treatment plant, 
underspending in the construction of new treatment plant, underspending on pipe replacement 
programme.  Madam Speaker, not a cent on Rivière des Anguilles - the hon. Members from 
Constituency No. 13 will appreciate - Dam and nothing on upgrading of La Ferme Dam. 

I  only  used  these  two  examples,  Madam  Speaker,  because  last  year,  I  specifically 
referred to these two projects and the hon. Vice-Prime Minister took strong objection to my 
comments.  Unfortunately, time has proven how right I was and how wrong he was.  So much 
so  that,  answering  to  a  PNQ  on  07  June  2016,  even  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  had  to 
concede that it is unacceptable that we are being late for a number of projects in the water 
supply sector.  We are not spending, Madam Speaker.  The money is there.  There are billions 
of rupees in the Build Mauritius Fund for water replacement, for water project, but the CWA 
is under spending.  They promised 24/7 water supply.  Today, they dare talk about raising the 
price of water.  They dare talk about privatising the CWA.  I am glad that, at least, the Budget 
is completely silent about increasing the price of water supply to customers, Madam Speaker.  
That would have indeed, Madam Speaker, added insult to injury. 

Madam Speaker, the list of projects that were earmarked in 2016, but which were not 
materialised, are long, and  I do not propose to  go through  each one of  them. But  I would 
encourage  each  hon.  Member  to  read  carefully  this  Public  Sector  Investment  Programme 
because  it  concerns  projects  in  their  constituencies,  and  they  will  have  to  answer  to  their 
constituents why projects have not been implemented. 

For example, I am sure the hon. Chief Whip would like to know why the Rs30 m. 
earmarked to set up a MITD Centre at Petit Bel Air, Mahebourg, has not been implemented.  
I am sure hon. Members from Constituency No. 9 would like to know why the synthetic track 
at Auguste Vollaire Stadium has not been upgraded.  Just like I am sure that students and 
parents of students will eagerly await the speech of the hon. Minister of Education for her 
explanation as to the delay in the construction and upgrading of various primary schools and 
secondary schools which were supposed to be implemented in 2015/2016.  I see, for example, 
that none of the gymnasiums promised last year has been constructed. 

Madam Speaker, why am I laying emphasis on public sector investment? It is because 
we need public sector investment for economic growth.  Last year, this was sacrificed.  The 
reason why there was a cut in public spending was to reduce public sector debt.  That was the 

 

18 

rationale.  You will recall, Madam Speaker, in his Budget of last year, the then hon. Minister 
of Finance, referring to the level of public sector debt in 2014, stated, and I quote – 

“Public sector debt for the purpose of the statutory debt ceiling, increased to 54.2 per 
cent of GDP by end 2014. When measured, using IMF definition, (…)” 

which is the real definition - 

“(…) it has reached an alarming (…)” 

That was the term used - 

“(…) level of 61 per cent.” 

Therefore,  what  he  proposed  was  to  reduce  public  sector  debt  to  58.6%  of  GDP  when 
measured  by  the  IMF  standards.  61%  in  2014  was  alarming.    So,  he  was  cutting  capital 
expenditure to reduce public debt to 58.6% of GDP.  Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, once 
again, the Government has badly missed the target.  Instead of a reduction in the public sector 
debt measured by IMF standard, it has, in fact, increased from 61% to 65% in 2015.  I am not 
saying  it.  These  are  the  figures  that  are  published.  Not  down  to  58.6%, but  actually  up  to 
65%.  The hon. Minister of Finance has announced that for 2016/2017, it will be 62.8%; still 
way below the targeted 50%, still way below the situation when the Government took office. 
Once again, Madam Speaker, we have to thank the Government of India for coming 
to our rescue by providing us financial support of USD353 m., that is, some Rs12.7 billion 
over the next four years.  Without the Rs12.7 billion of grant, our public sector debt would 
have been significantly higher, and so would our budget deficit.  So, we are grateful to the 
Government of India. 

The hon. Minister of Finance has spelt out how he intends to use this grant of Rs12.7 
billion.  We do not have any issue, Madam Speaker, with money being used to finance Metro 
Express, to provide digital tablet, to construct new hospital, to construct social housing.  But 
should we be using Rs2.7 billion to finance the construction of Heritage City?  Is that the 
priority for the Government?  We have spent hundreds of millions of rupees to refurbish this 
Government House, to refurbish this Parliament.  This is a jewel of architectural design.  It is 
very much part of our national heritage.  Do we really need, today, to have a new Parliament 
House? 

We know from the Public Sector Investment Programme that the Heritage City will 
cost Rs13.5 billion and will be financed partly through equity and loan.  I am glad that the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  cut  down  to  size  the  30  billion  project  announced  by  the 
Minister of Good Governance to Rs13.5 billion.  But do we have all this money now to spend 

 

19 

on this iconic project?  Is it fair to burden our existing and future generation of Mauritians 
with more public debt to finance such a project? 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t this Rs2.7 billion grant not being better spent in building 
more houses, in building more schools or in making more roads instead of being plunged into 
this prestigious project of Heritage City? Madam Speaker, we all know the timing for this 
grant. It coincided with the renegotiation of our double taxation non avoidance treaty with 
India. A treaty that was, and I maintain, negotiated to our detriment. The full effect of the 
renegotiated treaty will only be felt after next year, after the grand fathering clause will cease 
to apply in 2017. 

The  rating  agency  Moody’s  estimates  that  the  double  taxation  changes  with  India 
could curtail net financial flow by between 1% and 2% of GDP annually. The IMF in its Staff 
Report for 2015, Article IV Consultation stated, and I quote – 

“Revision of the DTAA Treaty with India (…) could worsen Mauritius’ balance of 
payments position, lead to exchange rate pressure, a weakening of reserves, and rising 
inflation and external debt servicing costs.” 

Both  Moody’s  and  the  IMF  have  also  highlighted  the  risk  to  our  banking  system  due  to 
exposure of banks on movement of funds via Mauritius into India.  

The hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development has increased the budget for 
the  Financial  Services  Promotion  Agency.  This  is  a  welcome  step,  but  this  is  not  enough, 
Madam Speaker. We need a whole new game plan for this sector. We can no longer rely on 
taxation  as  the  primary  factor  to  induce  companies  to  relocate  to  Mauritius,  to  induce 
companies  to  use  Mauritius  as  a  base  for  investment  outside  of  Mauritius.  Yet,  this  is 
precisely what the hon.  Minister Finance  and Economic Development is doing when he is 
announcing  tax  holidays  for  companies  who  would  set  up  their  global  headquarters  in 
Mauritius  or  providing  treasury  management  services,  fund  management  services  or  legal 
services in Mauritius. 

Surely,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is  aware  of  the 
OECD/G20 initiative to curtail Base Erosion and Profit Shifting. Providing tax holidays in 
Mauritius may well result in these companies not being taxed in Mauritius, but being taxed 
on  the  same  income  elsewhere.  So,  providing  tax  holidays  in  itself  will  not  be  enough, 
Madam Speaker. We need a whole package of fiscal and non-fiscal incentives to attract these 

 

20 

businesses.  We  need  to  provide  them  an  environment  which  will  be  conducive  for  their 
employees to relocate to Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I have taken the time to go through the economic indicators to show 
that there has been a net - and I say it quite sadly - deterioration of the economic situation 
since  the Government assumed office 20 months ago. 

The former Minister of  Finance and Economic  Development stated in  an interview 
last year that he does not believe in figures. Unfortunately, figures matter, Madam Speaker! 
Without economic growth there is no prosperity. Without sustain economic growth there is 
no meaningful employment. Unemployment is a scourge. It represents a waste of resources at 
national level and an affliction at personal level. 

in 

the  supplement 

to 

According 

to  figures  provided 

the  Budget  Speech, 
unemployment rate was 7.9% in 2015, slightly up from 7.8% in 2014. But when we look at 
the  composition,  the  profile  of  the  unemployed,  the  unemployment  rate  is  highest  among 
women and young persons.  For example, for the first quarter of 2016, according to figures in 
the supplement to the Budget Speech, 43% of jobseekers were aged between 16 and 24. We 
have an ageing population, Madam Speaker. And we will need increasingly to rely on our 
youth  to  support  our  pensioners.  We  simply  can’t  afford  to  have  such  a  high  rate  of 
unemployment amongst our youth. And we know that with globalisation, if we are unable to 
retain our youth, they would simply migrate, hoping for a better future elsewhere. 

The hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development has made an effort to keep 
them busy by encouraging them to undergo training programmes and by extending the Youth 
Employment Programme (YEP). But we all know, Madam Speaker, the rate of retention of 
young people once they have completed the 12 months placement under the YEP Scheme; it 
has never really worked. 

In  any  event,  all  these  training  schemes,  the  YEP  programme  are  only  temporarily 
measures and soon the youth, after a few months, will be back on the labour market.  Unlike 
what some hon. Members would like us to believe, there is no magic  recipe.  There is no 
magic  wand.    If  we  want  to  stimulate  growth,  there  is  only  one  way;  we  need  to  have 
investment and we need growth to have employment. 

So,  let  us  see  what  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is 

proposing to stimulate the economy, to generate growth, to generate employment.   

21 

 
SME:  Just  like  in  last  year’s  Budget,  the  Government  is  betting  on  entrepreneurs. 
“Fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs” is the new slogan. Last year it was “Ile Maurice 
Nation D’entrepreneurs”; the SME Bank. Rebranding exercise, to quote hon. Baloomoody!  
But what is interesting, last year the slogan was “Ile Maurice Nation D’entrepreneurs”; the 
SME Bank. The SME Bank!  The SME Bank that was promised last year never materialised. 
Instead, we have had MauBank and the Government has already injected Rs3.1 billion in that 
MauBank.  And  during  my  intervention,  Madam  Speaker,  on  the  Supplementary  Bill,  you 
would recall that I demonstrated how MauBank lamentably failed in its mission as an SME 
Bank.  And I was not the only one saying so, even the hon. Minister of Business, Enterprise 
and Cooperatives expressed his frustration at the lack of funding provided by MauBank to the 
SME.  SMEDA and MyBiz, which were supposed to be a one-stop shop to facilitate access to 
SME  to  finance,  had,  to  date,  not  live  up  to  say  the  least,  not  to  say  that  it  has  been  a 
complete failure. 

Madam  Speaker,  last  year,  the  then  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development announced that Rs10 billion were being earmarked for the SME Bank with Rs2 
billion every year allocated to SME Bank to help stimulate the SME sector and, this year, in 
this Budget Speech, not a word about what is happening to that Rs10 billion fund. Will the 
Government continue to inject Rs2 billion in the SME sector this year?  Not a word on that!  
Not  a  word  also  on  MauBank  which  falls  under  the  responsibility  of  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development! Worse, Madam Speaker - I would never think I would 
live to hear that day – we are now told that the Development Bank of Mauritius will set up a 
dedicated fast track desk for micro entreprises.  Le Summum du ridicule!  This DBM Bank, 
which was on the brink of bankruptcy, a bank crumbling under non-performing debt, a bank 
which has laid off most of its experienced staff, that DBM bank will now be resuscitated and 
will now go and look after micro credit, despite the fact that we have put Rs3.1 billion in 
MauBank.   

So,  now  we  have  to  go  back  to  DBM  to  save  the  SME  sector!  Is  this  how  we  are 

going to bring confidence to the SMEs?   

(Interruptions) 

Then again, Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

…after announcing that DBM is going to look after micro projects, not a word in this Budget 
as to how much money will the hon. Minister put at the disposal of DBM to help those micro 
entrepreneurs.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  Government  simply  cannot  be  zigzagging  like  this!  If  we  want 
SMEs to be the driver of the economy, which they should be, we need to be more serious 
about affording SMEs access to funding.  Suspending the payment of trade fees for licenses is 
a good measure, but it is not enough. Setting up a national SME incubator scheme is not a 
new idea. It has been tried by other Minister of Finance with no or very limited success. What 
we really need, Madam Speaker, is for the Government, once and for all, to take a chance on 
SMEs, to take more risks on SMEs.  

What  we  need  is  to  provide  them  with  funds;  to  provide  them  with  funds  where 
commercial banks are unwilling to provide them funds; to provide them funds whenever they 
have a viable project even if they do not have any collateral to give as guarantee. Only then 
will we be able to stimulate the SME sector. And unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development is not telling us how much funds he will 
make available to the SMEs. Surely, it can’t be just the Rs100 m. line of credit to provide 
factoring services! 

Next, Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is 

banking on the manufacturing sector. 

You will recall, Madam Speaker, that in his Vision 2030 Speech, the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister stated that the Government aims to increase the share of manufacturing significantly 
to 25% of GDP within the next three years. 

Today,  Madam  Speaker,  thanks  to  the  supplement  to  the  Budget  Speech,  we  know 
that  the  manufacturing  sector  only  accounts  for  15%  of  GDP,  still  the  leading  sector,  but 
15%. Having read the Budget Speech, I am afraid that there is no measures in this Budget 
which would lead me to believe that the manufacturing sector would be booming again, that 
the share of the manufacturing sector will increase from 15% to 25% of GDP as promised by 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister last year. 

The  only  new  manufacturing  base  announced  was  the  production  of  bicycles  and 
motorcycles.  And  then,  again,  no  figures  were  announced  as  to  the  amount  of  expected 
investment. Gold business and pharmaceutical industry are certainly no new concept. There 

 

23 

are for years, I should say, existing entrepreneurs who manufacture gold and involve in the 
pharmaceutical sector. So, that’s not a new sector. 

As far as the mobile oil refinery and onshore storage facilities in Albion is concerned, 
already,  Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  protest  from  local  inhabitants  and  environment 
protection groups. I am afraid that this project may very well end up like the infamous CT 
Power Project. 

But I need to commend the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for 
his decision to introduce the Air Freight Rebate Scheme to allow 40% reduction in air freight 
cost to Europe on Air Mauritius. That will certainly help our manufacturing sector, our export 
sector. 

But then, again, Madam Speaker, why limit it to only Europe? With Brexit, we all 
agree that we should diversify our market. So, why give the rebate only to those exporting to 
the European market? Why not extend it to other markets which we want to promote? And 
why  just  Air  Mauritius?  Has  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
considered  the  possibility  of  his  decision  being  challenged  in  Court  as  being  unfair 
competition by other carriers? 

We  know  that  Air  Mauritius  does  not  fly  to  all  destinations.  Why  not  extend  this 
rebate to all or to other airlines, which service other destinations, which are not serviced by 
Air Mauritius? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Uteem: We want to stimulate… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Uteem:  We want to stimulate the export sector. Well, if we want to protect our 

national airline in breach of all our international… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem,  you don’t have to reply to them! There need to be 

order in the House! You address the Chair and continue with your speech! 

Mr Uteem:  Yes, Madam Speaker. If this measure was not meant to encourage export 
enterprises,  but  meant  to  protect  Air  Mauritius,  then  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

 

24 

Economic  Development  should  have  said  so  and  faced  the  consequence  before  the  WTO 
Agreements. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is  also 
increasing capital expenditure in this Budget to Rs19 billion. We definitely need public sector 
investment  to  boost  the  economy.  And  I  can  only  hope  that  this  time  we  will  spend  the 
budgeted amount. 

Métro léger is back on track, although now it is called ‘Metro Express’. Which begs 
the question: why has the Government taken so long to come up with this project, which was 
already on the agenda of the then MSM-MMM Government more than a decade ago? 

Be  that  as  it  may,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  glad  that  after  having  sent  a  letter  to  the 
Indian Prime Minister during the electoral campaign warning India against the Métro léger 
project, the Government has today come back to its senses. 

Let’s  move  forward!  Enough  time  has  been  lost.  I  only  hope  that  the  delay  in 

implementing this Metro Express will not cost taxpayers more money. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  also  note  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development is going ahead with the Road Decongestion Programme parallel with the Metro 
Express.  However,  he  has  not  set  out  all  the  projects  which  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure  enumerated  when  he  answered  an  earlier  PQ.  In  particular,  he  has  not 
mentioned  what  will  happen  to  the  Ring  Road.    And  I  hope,  in  his  intervention,  the  hon. 
Minister of Public Infrastructure can shed more light as to what projects would be done under 
the  Road  Decongestion  Programme,  and,  more  importantly,  how  these  projects  would  be 
financed because most of them are not covered in the supplement to the Budget. 

Madam Speaker, if there is one decision which  has been announced in this Budget 
and which I consider to be bold and daring, it is the decision of the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development to reform the public sector by merging various institutions. Bold 
and daring! 

Et c’est tout un symbole que cette annonce ait été faite alors que le ministre de tutelle 

brillait par son absence. 

(Interruptions) 

Minister Wong was not here. It is a daring measure, Madam Speaker, because there is bound 
to be resistance from within. Indeed, such a measure which eliminates a lot of seats. So, many 

 

25 

petits copains, petites copines who have been appointed to various Boards as Chairperson or 
simply  members  will  not  be  too  happy  with  this  decision.  But  only  time  will tell,  Madam 
Speaker, if these measures, these daring measures would be implemented or would remain as 
wishful thinking. 

Madam Speaker, there are a number of technical issues in implementing the proposed 
changes to Value Added Tax and Corporate Tax. I am not going to take the time of the House 
to  go  through  these  because  I  know  that  several  accounting  firms  have  already  made 
representations to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Suffice it to say that 
when  we  are  making  non-remittance  of  VAT,  PAYE  and  other  tax  deduction  at  source,  a 
criminal offence, we should ensure that there are clear and detailed provisions and guidelines 
to prevent any abuse by the Mauritius Revenue Authorities and to ensure that innocents are 
not penalised. 

Madam Speaker, I started my intervention by stating that this Budget is full of good 
intention and promises. But this Government will not be judged by what it says, it will be 
judged by what it does. This Government will not be judged by its intentions but by its deeds. 
This Government will not be judged by its promises but by its achievements. 20 months have 
gone by since this Government assumed office. Except for inflation, all economic indicators, 
unfortunately, are in the red, have deteriorated. Will this Budget reverse the trend? I really 
hope so for the sake of the nation. But I am, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, not convinced 
that  the  Budget  has  gone  far  enough  to  boost  the  economy.  Only  time  will  tell  if  this 
Government will live up to expectations. In the meantime, we would have lost 20 months. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

(12.26 p.m.) 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  time  the  first  Budget  of  this  Government  was 
presented,  we  were  at  the  crossroads.  Indeed,  when  this  Government  took  office,  GDP 
growth stood at 3.6% compared to 4.5% in 2010. Total investment as a percentage of GDP 
fell from 24.2% to 18.9% from 2010 to 2014. A similar trend followed in the savings rate as a 
percentage of GDP with a continuous plunge from 12.9% to 10.5% from 2010 to 2014.  

These  are  also  figures  from  Statistics  Mauritius.  The  last  cries  of  joy  after  the 
landslide victory in December 2014 had not yet subsided, that there was already a crisis of 

 

26 

expectations, for this Government to deliver on cleaning up the country, restoring integrity, as 
well as reducing unemployment and building a stronger economy.  

The  pressure  to  deliver  promptly  increased  exponentially  over  the  months.  In  a 
democracy this is fair game, Madam Speaker. There is no room for complacency, no time to 
reply unjust criticisms; our results indeed will answer the critics. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  announcement  of  this  Budget,  there  has  been  renewed 
confidence,  the  feel-good  factor  is  back.  This  Budget  shows  that  with  a  sense  of  trust, 
discipline  and  hard  work,  we  can  overcome  any  situation  which  may  have  seemed 
unfavourable. It shows that we have learnt the hard lessons through the mistakes of others. 
The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has put forward his positive plans. 
We are all united and we are working for the people!  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  first,  wholeheartedly,  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  his  remarkable  Budget.  The  choice  of  theme:  “A 
New Era of Development” is clear. The measures he announced were essential to create the 
right ecosystem, to bring much awaited vibrancy and resilience to our economy.  

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has left no stones unturned 
to introduce measures to stimulate economic growth, to kick-start major capital projects, to 
bring  reforms;  whilst  at  the  same  time  committing  unprecedented  resources  to  alleviate 
poverty.  

This  type  of  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  is  indeed  very  rare!  It  enhances  credibility.  
Credibility  in  terms  of  our  motives,  credibility  in  terms  of  the  strength  of  Government’s 
economic management policies.  

It is no surprise that ordinary voters when asked if they are better or worse off as a 
result of this Budget, have all answered positively. At the same time, Business Mauritius also 
praised the Budget and its CEO stated and I quote –  

«(…)  la discipline macro-économique est maintenue, avec un déficit budgétaire 
à  3.3%  et  une  dette  en  baisse.   La  réforme  se  poursuit  aussi  au  niveau  des 
mesures  annoncées  pour  la  facilitation  des  affaires,  qui,  par  répercussion, 
encourageront l’investissement privé, ce qui amènera croissance économique et 
création d’emploi» 

27 

 
Madame  Speaker,  captains  of  the  private  sector  and  professional  firms  have  been 
unanimous in concluding that the 2016-2017 Budget has enlarged space for wealth creation; 
it  has  empowered  key  sectors  of  our  economy;  it  has  provided  for  innovation  and 
modernisation of infrastructure and working practices; it has reinforced social inclusiveness 
of  vulnerable  groups  and  most  importantly,  it  has  introduced  bold  public  sector  reforms 
aimed  at  bringing  efficiency  in  our  public  service.  It  is  no  wonder  that  Deloitte,  BDO, 
KPMG, Ernst & Young have all been very positive in their 2016-2017 Budget highlights. 

Madam Speaker, true it is, that if we did not have to face a major financial and social 
crisis,  after  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  revoked  the  license  of  Bramer  Bank  with  direct 
consequences of the insurance side, we could have achieved more in our first 18 months. An 
overwhelming amount of time, energy and resources have been spent in finding solutions for 
the victims of this BAI scandal.  

Challenging decisions and swift actions were taken to firstly, prevent the prevailing 
economic  situation  from  worsening  and  secondly,  create  the  impetus  to  take  economic 
indicators  back  into  the  green  zone.  If  ever  there  was  a  contrived  perception  that  the  first 
Budget of this Government had politically limited its movement, this Budget now enhances 
the agility of this Government. 

Madam Speaker, the path for redress has been paved, our economy is turbocharging 
in its next era of development. In two years’ time, we will be celebrating the 50th anniversary 
of  our  Independence  and  our  beloved  country  will  be  moving  towards  a  high  income 
economy, with excellent opportunities for our youth, in a new Mauritius, où il fait bon vivre. 
Madam Speaker, I will focus my intervention today on three aspects -  

(i) 

why this Budget will boost economic growth - la relance de l’économie; 

(ii) 

some of the key budgetary measures which will alleviate poverty, and  

(iii) 

the implementation of measures which are specific to my Ministry. 

With  regard  to  la  relance  de  l’économie,  Madam  Speaker,  much  has  been  said  by 
prophets of doom and gloom that this Budget is insufficient to achieve an economic growth 
rate of 4.1 per cent. Comparison has even been made with a prior announcement by the Bank 
of Mauritius to the effect that their foreseeable growth rate was 3.8 per cent for 2017. It is 
obvious that, in its forecast, the Bank of Mauritius did not and could not have anticipated all 

 

28 

the  budgetary  measures  which  have  been  announced  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, unless they had a crystal ball! Also, the 3.8 per cent mentioned by 
the  BOM  is  based  on  a  different  time  period,  which  is  a  calendar  year  basis,  whilst  this 
Budget  has  been  prepared  on  a  fiscal  year  basis.  Would  the  BoM  anticipated  percentage 
growth rate for the year ending December 2017 have remained the same if it had taken into 
account everything which has been announced in this Budget? That is the question!  

Moreover,  the  numerous  measures  announced  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development will, in themselves, boost economic growth in the coming year, by 
making  use  of  the  spare  capacity  and  the  untapped  potential  currently  prevailing  in  our 
economy. Of course, following that, the increasing flow of demand for goods and services 
will  necessitate  businesses  to  invest,  make  new  investments  which  will  then  increase  the 
potential output of the economy and further boost economic growth to the 4.1 per cent which 
has been announced in this Budget. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  measures  announced  to  put  people  in  jobs  and  reduce 
unemployment, of course, will boost consumption. It will boost consumption by creating a 
higher  demand  for  goods  and  services  which  will  in  turn  contribute  to  the  growth  of  the 
economy.  

Furthermore,  can  we  realistically  say  that  all  the  capital  projects  announced  in  this 
Budget  will  have  no  effect  on  the  economy?  In  fact,  4.1  per  cent  has  been  announced  for 
fiscal  year  2016-2017,  but  these  capital  projects  will  boost  economic  growth  to  a  very 
achievable 4.6 per cent for the fiscal year 2017-2018. This is also in the Budget! What about 
all the facilities which have been provided to boost FDI? What about the innovative measures 
to enhance the digital economy? What about all the measures to open up our economy? What 
about the 15 or so measures to implement the new vision of the financial services sector - 
Global Headquartering, Regional Treasury Management, Family Offices, Investment Banks, 
Global  Law  Firms,  Assets  and  Funds  management  and  it  goes  on  and  on?  What  about  all 
these measures to boost the SMEs, the manufacturing sector, the construction industry? Have 
all of these fallen on deaf ears? Il n’y a pas plus sourd que celui qui ne veut pas entendre, 
Madam Speaker!  

Madam Speaker, I shall elaborate on these key measures later on. Let us now come to 
the social measures. Not very much has been said about these, because I guess this is the part 
of the Budget which the Opposition referred to as being intéressant.  

29 

 
Poverty  alleviation,  Madam  Speaker,  is  a  central  theme  of  this  Budget  and  the 
measures  proposed  for  an  all-inclusive  society  are  unprecedented.  A  small  percentage  of 
every generation seems to be stuck in a lifetime of disadvantage and amongst them are the 
excluded of the excluded, the deeply  excluded.  Their poverty  is, not just about poverty  of 
income,  but  poverty  of  aspiration,  of  opportunity,  of  prospects  of  advancement.  This  is 
absolute poverty!  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  proud  to  stand  in  this  House,  as  a  Member  of  a  political 
alliance  which  has  come  up  with  a  variety  of  measures  to  empower  poor  families  in  our 
country.  6,400 families living below the absolute poverty threshold will now see the light of 
day.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  to  be  commended  for 
allocating Rs500 m. to these new schemes to eradicate absolute poverty. Every adult on the 
Social  Register  will  be  eligible  to  a  monthly  subsistence  allowance  based  on  a  minimum 
threshold  of  Rs2,720  and  a  maximum  of  Rs9,520  for  a  family  of  two  adults  and  three 
children. This will assist families to break away from the poverty cycle and stand on their 
own feet.  

Similarly,  the  monthly  grant  under  the  Crèche  Voucher  Scheme  increased  from 
Rs1,500 to Rs2,000 per child will also assist these families. The cash awards of Rs25,000 and 
Rs35,000  provided  will  help  students  from  these  poor  families  to  achieve  higher  levels  of 
education. They pass both SC and HSC, Madam Speaker, they get Rs60,000. The 18 per cent 
reduction in the price of 12 kg gas cylinder from Rs330 to Rs270 is yet another testimony of 
Government’s unflinching support, as vulnerable families will now have greater access to a 
basic necessity.  

Families whose monthly household income do not exceed Rs15,000 and have borrowed 
from NHDC and Mauritius Housing Corporation will be entitled to a waiver of their arrears 
on  interest.  This  will  alleviate  their  financial  burden  and  protect  them  from  the  trauma  of 
'Sale by Levy’ experience.  

On top of all of that, Madam Speaker, Rs1.1 billion has been provided for low income 
families to benefit from social housing. 1,900 units will be constructed on 16 different sites 
across the island.  

Still it does not stop here, children under 15 years with disabilities, will now be entitled 

to ‘Basic Invalidity Pension’. Rs100 m. will be spent for 3,130 such cases. 

 

30 

Such a package of measures for poor families in Mauritius is indeed unprecedented in 
our history, Madam Speaker. But, this Budget is not confined only to social measures which 
alleviate the sufferings of ‘ti dimounes’. It also provides, as I said before for strong measures 
‘pour la relance de l’économie’.  

Madam Speaker, every meeting in which I have participated, where the private sector in 
Mauritius has been called upon to let us know, what would they like us to do, to unlock the 
potential of their businesses and boost private sector investment, the unanimous answer has 
always  been  to  improve  business  facilitation  procedures  and  to  reduce  unnecessary 
bureaucratic procedures and red tapism. 

Now, the hon. Member mentioned that private sector investment has fallen to 12.7% 
in 2015 as compared to 20% in 2008. Madam Speaker, let me say to this House that from 
2010 to 2014, private investment fell from 18.3% to 14.1% of GDP.  We can use figures in 
whatever way we want, but the truth is in the trend.  If it was 20% in 2008, it was, of course, 
18.3% in 2010, 14.1% in 2014 and 12.7% in 2015.  That is the truth.  And to take figures in a 
selective manner, to come and show that this Government in one year has pressed a switch 
on/off and disturb the whole economic process is a huge stretch of the imagination. 

Ease of doing business, being one of the key drivers of investments, is a sine qua non 
condition  to  boost  our  level  of  economic  activity.  The  measures  announced  by  the  hon. 
Minister  with  regard  to  business  facilitation  will  undoubtedly  tackle  the  cumbersome  and 
highly onerous bureaucratic procedures in existence.  

• 

• 

• 

The abolishment of the requirement for approval of the Executive Committee 
of a local authority and allowing for online applications for all area exceeding 
150 square metres, will certainly expedite Building and Land Use permits and 
clearances.  
The enforcement of the Silent Agreement Principle with respect to necessary 
clearances  being  obtained  where  statutory  deadlines 
for  processing 
applications  have  lapsed,  will  indeed  provide  a  new  impetus  to  the  way 
businesses have been done so far.  
Non-citizens  will  be  able  to  acquire  apartments  and  business  spaces  in 
buildings  after  registration  with  the  Board  of  Investment.  This  will  further 
open  our  economy  and  provide  a  new  momentum  for  job  creation  in  our 
construction industry. 

 

• 

31 

Madam Speaker, the proposed e-licensing platform to centralise applications 
for permits and licences will certainly contribute to growth. As is the case in 
the  UK,  Singapore  and  Australia  amongst  others,  the  introduction  of  the 
'Regulatory Sandbox Licence' will speed up investments in innovative projects 
in Mauritius.  

Madam  Speaker,  never  before,  have  such  bold  measures  been  taken  to  boost  our 
Manufacturing and SME sector. As the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
has  stated,  the  revamping  of  this  sector  starts  with  the  fostering  of  a  wave  of  modern 
entrepreneurs. 

Indeed,  the  SME  sector  has  been  provided  with  incentives  to  flourish,  namely:  the 
suspension of trade fees for licences of Rs5,000 and below for a period of 3 years; start up 
enterprises registered with SMEDA will not pay taxes for 8 years; other enterprises registered 
with SMEDA will not pay taxes for 4 years; an injection of Rs150 m. in an SME Venture 
Capital Fund; reduction of interest rates under the SME Financing Scheme from 7.4% to 6% 
and a line of credit of Rs100 m. for factoring services to small businesses. 
 
The introduction of the Leasing Equipment Modernisation Scheme (LEMS) together 
with the increase in tax credit from 5% to 15% over the three years, will further allow these 
businesses to invest in new equipment, thereby increasing their productivity and, of course, 
profitability. 
 
As  part  of  our  industrial  diversification  strategy,  three  new  niches  have  been 
identified namely, the construction of a near shore oil refinery with onshore storage facilities 
at  Albion,  the  gold  refinery  and  trading  of  gold  and  precious  metals  within  the  MINDEX 
project, and thirdly the production of bicycles and motorcycles for the African market. These 
projects will certainly boost the manufacturing sector and create new job opportunities. 

When  it  comes  to  making  products  accessible  to  markets,  bid  price-preference  for 
‘Made in Moris’ products increased from 10% to 20% in respect of the procurement exercise 
by public sector bodies and the reduction of 40% in air freight costs to Europe for textile and 
apparels  over  a  two-year  period  will  again  boost  the  competitiveness  of  our  Mauritian 
products  in  particular  the  manufacturing  sector  which  I  must  again  remind  the  House  had 
fallen from 16% of GDP in 2010 to 14.4% of GDP in 2016. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  decision  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development to invest the grant of Rs12.7 billion, which I negotiated with the Republic of 
India, in development priorities, shows his wisdom and foresight to bring the highest returns 

 

32 

both in terms of economic and social benefits. As he stated in his Budget Speech, and I quote 
-  

“(…) the money should be invested so that our children and their children as well can 
benefit”. 
Indeed, Madam Speaker, the legacy of 10 years of Labour Government has left this 
country  in  such  a  state  of  indebtedness  that  borrowing  for  capital  expenditure  has  become 
impossible without raising public debt beyond the limit we have committed ourselves vis-à-
vis international organisations.  And here, it is interesting to note that the hon. Member of the 
Opposition  has  been  saying  that  we  have  to  spend  more,  we  have  to  increase  the  level  of 
expenditure. But then, we must reduce debt. I mean, maybe he believes in a magic wand now. 
Revamping  our  towns  and  villages  requires  a  durable  solution  to  traffic  jams  and 
better town and country planning. The previous Labour Government would have spent Rs24 
billion  on  what  they  called  a  “Métro  Léger”  project,  which  seemed  more  like  a  "Métro 
Lourd"  project,  Madam  Speaker,  not  only  because  of  the  excessive  and  abusive  costs,  but 
also  the  time  wasted  to  conceptualise  their  project,  with  excessive  elevations  and  stations 
which were not priorities and therefore, like the Labour Government, not required. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  "Metro  Express"  will  be  implemented  at  a  much  lower 
expenditure level than what the Labour regime had envisaged. The grant obtained from India 
will provide Rs7.2 billion to the "Metro Express" which will include a network of modern 
integrated urban terminals with appropriate provision made for parking facilities … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No interruptions! 
Mr Bhadain: … food courts, commercial spaces, dedicated hawker areas and green 

spaces.  

With regard to Heritage City, Madam Speaker, need I say more! The hon. Leader of 
the Opposition had gone on record previously to say that this landmark project will not go 
ahead. Well, I must say, Madam Speaker, that he was not the only one to be skeptical, there 
are many others. Well, Madam Speaker, I can reassure all the doubters not only the project is 
going ahead full steam, but as stated by Government, it will be completed within the mandate 
of  this  Government.  Rs2.7  billion  has  been  allocated  in  the  Budget  for  phase  1,  which 
includes  the  public  buildings,  while  the  private  side  which    includes  the  residential  and 
commercial parts, termed generically as phase 2, will be undertaken by private developers. 

(Interruptions) 

33 

 
Madam Speaker:  No interruptions, please! 
Mr Bhadain:  But I must say, Madam Speaker, the forecasted investment in airport 
infrastructure is also crucial in Government’s strategy to welcome more tourists and increase 
trade links. This includes the setting up of a new Integrated Government Clearance Centre in 
the Cargo village and a modern Control Tower at the cost of Rs770 m., the setting up of a 
Regional Aviation Training Academy with the help of the Chinese Government to serve the 
African and Indian Ocean Rim region, and also an investment of Rs425 m. by the CEB to set 
up a sub-station to cater for Cargo and Freeport power requirements. 

Madam Speaker, there are so many positive measures in this Budget that enumerating 
them  may  indeed  take  a  very  long  time.  I  will  limit  myself  to  the  Rs316  m.  for  the 
construction of pavements, rehabilitation of hard shoulders, setting up of handrails…. 

(Interruptions) 
Madam Speaker:  I said no interruptions, please! 
Mr Bhadain:… restoring road markings and repairing lighting along our motorways. 
These were much needed to mitigate the rising number of road accidents, Madam Speaker, 
which has reached an unacceptable level. 

The sizeable increases of 12% and 11% in the budgets allocated for both the Health 
and Education sectors are undoubtedly, testimony  of Government’s commitment  to further 
improve our Welfare State for the benefit of our citizens. 

I  shall  now,  Madam  Speaker,  come  to  the  budgetary  measures  with  regard  to  my 
Ministry for the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms.  
Madam Speaker, the vision of this Government is to develop Mauritius into an International 
Financial  Centre  of  excellence,  along  the  same  line  with  reputed  and  recognized  financial 
centres like Singapore, Dubai and London.  

The  setting  up  of  my  Ministry,  dedicated  to  Financial  Services  and  linking  Good 
testimony  of  Government’s  unflinching 

Governance  with  Institutional  Reforms 
commitment to take Mauritius forward to this end. 

is 

To achieve our vision, it is imperative that the appropriate fundamentals are in place. 
Such  fundamentals  include  the  creation  of  new  opportunities  and  segments,  as  well  as 
addressing impediments that have for a long time held back growth and potential of Mauritius 
as an IFC. 

The state of affairs left by the former Government with regard to our financial services 

sector, was not rosy at all -  

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

34 

two  crucially  important  Double  Tax  Treaties,  with  South  Africa  and  India, 
were jeopardized by never-ending discussions, spanning over four  years and 
10  years,  respectively.  The  key  aspects  of  these  treaties,  Madam  Speaker, 
namely the residency requirements and the tax determination requirements had 
to  be  addressed.    We  had  to  align  with  our  obligations  towards  the 
international community, including the European Union, the United Nations, 
the OECD and the G20 countries. 
the  European  Union  had  included  Mauritius  in  a  list  of  non-cooperative 
jurisdictions; 
the sector was stifled by pure treaty-centric activities and our operators were 
servicing clients who mostly needed back-office operations over year; 
our  young  professionals  were  condemned  to  the  administrative  work,  at  the 
expense of the high qualifications they held and the prospective career they 
were destined to; 
Mauritius  was  aggressively  labeled  as  a  'tax  haven'  by  a  number  of  NGOs, 
international media and the civil society; 
despite  the  fact  that  we  were  home  to  nearly  20,000  global  business 
companies, only around 2,800 persons were directly employed in this sector, 
with indirect employment of about 5,000 persons; 

We committed ourselves to expand our financial services sector and move away from 

this bleak outlook. In the past 18 months we have managed to – 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

conclude the long overdue DTAAs with India and South Africa and provide 
international investors with much needed certainty, predictability and clarity. 
We have reactivated and made operational the Financial Services Promotion 
Agency to promote and develop Mauritius as an IFC of substance and repute.  
The  Financial  Services  Institute  has  been  set  up  and  is  addressing  the 
mismatch skills in this sector; 
We have launched the Mauritius  IFC brand and teamed up with the City of 
London to promote financial services together. 
We brought in the Captive Insurance Act to create a niche market and a new 
product; 

 
6. 

7. 

8. 

35 

We linked up with the Dubai Multi Commodities Centre, the National Stock 
Exchange  of  India,  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  to  re-invigorate  the 
capital markets segment in our IFC. 
We linked up the FSC with the DFSA, Dubai Financial Services Authority to 
ensure best practices are shared, and expertise are transferred. 
The  Surveillance  Functions  of  the  FSC  were  reinforced  and  enforcement 
actions increased by 60% in 2015; 

Madam Speaker, we are committed to pursue our strategy in terms of implementing 

our new vision for the financial services sector, based on, inter-alia, five core principles – 

(i) 

setting  up  a  clean  platform  for  doing  business  in  Mauritius  and  turning  our 
jurisdiction into a reputable IFC;  

(ii) 

opening up our financial services industry to global players and flagships; 

(iii) 

diversifying the financial product offerings into a new MIFC; 

(iv) 

attracting professional legal firms and high net worth investors, and 

(v) 

most  importantly,  linking  principles  of  Good  Governance  with  Financial 
Services and introduce institutional and legal reforms to enhance transparent 
activities and create value for our jurisdiction. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  elaborate  on  the  specific  measures  announced  in  this 
Budget  which  will  bring  substantial  growth  to  our  financial  services  sector  leading  to  the 
desired economic growth of 4.1% in 2016/2017 and 4.6% in 2017/2018. 
 
Derivatives & Commodities Exchange’ (MINDEX).  

Measure 101 of the Budget provides for the creation of a new ‘Mauritius International 

A vibrant exchange, offering a  full suite of solutions, is at the heart of  any  IFC of 
repute.  Currently,  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  (SEM)  only  covers  equity  and  bonds, 
which is mostly focused on the local market. The MINDEX project will span over three years 
with  Government  injecting  seed  capital  of  Rs50  m.  and  the  remaining  will  be  financed 
through a consortium of private investors. MINDEX will provide a derivatives’ platform, and 
a  commodities’  platform  for  spot  trading  of  gold,  diamonds  and  other  precious  stones. 
Government will also establish the regulatory framework and issue the required licenses, and 
after which private investors will  take over, like was the case with the Stock Exchange of 
Mauritius when it was set up.   

MINDEX will fulfill a vacuum in the region with regard to - 

 

• 
• 

• 

• 

36 

Provide for a platform to hedge African currencies; 
Allow  high  net  worth  from  the  region,  especially  South  Africa,  to  trade  in 
gold, diamond and other precious stones; 
Encourage jewelry manufacturers to be based in the dedicated zone adjacent to 
the exchange, and 
Develop  state  of  art  vaulting  activities  in  Mauritius,  which  will  generate 
revenue. 

MINDEX  will  be  set  up  in  the  Rose  Belle  BPML  park,  an  ideal  location  due  to  its 
proximity to the airport. MINDEX will equip Mauritius with the first combined derivatives 
and  spot  trading  platform  of  the  region  and  complement  the  offerings  of  SEM.  It  will 
generate new investments and create jobs such as brokers, traders and analysts. 

Measure  96  provides  that  GBC2  companies  will  now  be  allowed  to  invest  in  listed 
securities. This goes in line, Madam Speaker, with our diversification strategy and also brings 
more substance for GBC2s using Mauritius as an IFC. At the same time, this measure will 
have the benefit of increasing trading activities on the SEM and address the liquidity issue 
that the Stock Exchange of Mauritius currently faces. 

Measure B.2 (b) in the annex to the Budget provides for the introduction of Preferential 
Offer Rules, including Private Placement Schemes for 25 investors or more who individually 
invest Rs1 m. Private placements, as approved by the FSC, will also be allowed to list on the 
local stock exchange.  

This measure, Madam Speaker, will help avoid cases that Mauritius has experienced in 
the  past  where  money  has  been  taken  from  ordinary  citizens  to  further  fraudulent  Ponzi 
schemes such as the case of Hennessy Capital Ltd. in the whole BAI saga. 

With regard to Overseas Family Corporation, Madam Speaker, over the last years, a 
number of recommendations have been made to introduce a family office license in Mauritius 
to  enhance  wealth  management  activities.  STEP,  the  Society  for  Trust  and  Estate 
Practitioners, has also been recommending this. 

A number of high net worth families from Africa, Asia and Europe have expressed 
strong interests in shifting their wealth to Mauritius, within an appropriate structure. With the 
incentives provided for by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development in his 
Budget, their wealth will be managed now in Mauritius. 

37 

 
To  this  effect,  Measure  98  of  the  Budget  provides  for  the  creation  of  a  new  OFC 
licence  with  a  5-year  tax  holiday  and  allows  for  high  net  worth  foreigners  and  their 
dependents to benefit from residency.   

An  OFC  will  be  a  pure  financial  services  product  for  wealth  to  be  managed  from 
Mauritius instead of through Mauritius. The benefit of opening up our economy will lead to 
an increase demand for goods and services which will also increase consumption locally.  

At  this  stage,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  address  one  point  which  has  been 
raised by hon. Uteem in relation to our international obligation and BEPS.  For years, Madam 
Speaker, we have faced all these difficulties at international level in terms of being labeled as 
a non-compliance jurisdiction, being labeled as a tax haven and in terms of NGOs protesting 
against Mauritius publicly in places like Kenya and other countries saying that, “dirty money 
is  going  through  Mauritius.    We  are  using  round  tripping  techniques  for  money  to  flow 
through.”  And  these  people  who  are  working  in  that  sector  including  hon.  Reza  Uteem 
himself  as  Director  of  Consilex,  they  knew  that  this  system  was  bringing  bad  repute  to 
Mauritius.   

They knew that this system was tarnishing our image and everything we had built up 
over the years to promote at international level, including our tourism sector, but they were 
making money. They were making a hell of a lot of money. 

Some of these management companies were paying dividends up to USD30 million a 
year and he says, ‘li bon’.  Because this money was not finding its way to the economy; this 
money was not creating jobs; this money was not bringing tax revenue to the extent that we 
needed  it  to  bring.  This  money  was  putting  us  in  a  situation  where  our  image  was  being 
blackened. That’s what this system was doing, and that’s why we need to move forward. 

We were facing all sorts of difficulties with one our closest partners, the Republic of 
India, in terms of 10 years of negotiations. Sithanen went there; so many people were looking 
at that, joint working groups and what not. Nobody found a solution. We found the solution. 
We brought the grandfathering provisions. We brought the transitional provisions. We came 
up with the Rs12.7 billion grant, which is going to help the country create jobs and assist 
families  in  Mauritius.  Yet,  I  hear  the  hon.  Member  saying  that  we  have  to  be  careful  of 
BEPS. What is BEPS - because we are giving tax holidays?  Base erosion and profit shifting. 
Where is profit being shifted? We are telling people to come and invest here, to operate here 
domestically, create jobs here, bring substance here, make the economic activity happen over 
here. There is no breach of any obligation at any level, whether it is in relation to G20 or in 

 

38 

relation to OECD or in relation to all the other agreements that Mauritius has signed. These 
tax holidays are measures which have been given by a sovereign nation to boost economic 
activity  in  Mauritius  with  substance  as  compared  to  the  dirty  system  that  was  operating 
before. 

Madam Speaker, what Asset and Fund Managers have told us is very simple. Give 
them  the  appropriate  incentives,  as  well  as  a  fast  track  mechanism  to  set  up  operations  in 
Mauritius, and they will bring their network and manage their clients’ funds from Mauritius 
and employ our young professionals. This is the substance! This is the job creation! This is 
boosting the Financial Services Sector into a new era. Measure 98 of the Budget caters for 
this  and  provides  a  tax  holiday  of  five  years  to  ‘Asset  and  Fund  Managers’  who  will  be 
managing a minimum asset base of USD100 million, Madam Speaker. 

This measure is important to create the new ecosystem of the MIFC. ‘Asset and Fund 
Managers’  will  bring  important  capital  flows  to  be  managed  and  investment  banks  and 
private banks – We did not have all of this, Madam Speaker, before.  Now we will have it 
through the measure announced by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
-  will  soon  follow.  At  the  same  time,  through  this  measure,  we  will  further  diversify  the 
Financial Services sector and graduate towards more value added services to enhance product 
offerings. 

treasury  management. 

  In  view  of 

Global  headquartering  and 

international 
developments like BEPS and the growing need for us to move towards more substance, it is 
important  that  international  and  regional  companies  conduct  meaningful  and  value  added 
activities here in our Financial Services sector. This is what this Budget provides for! To this 
end, measures 97 and 98(a) of this Budget will henceforth allow regional and international 
companies  serving  regional  markets  to  set  up  full-fledged  offices  in  Mauritius  –  not  file 
sitting on the desk of a Management Company and billions of rupees going through a bank 
account  because  of  that  file  -  in  view  of  centralising  their  administrative  and  business 
outsourcing functions for their Africa investments in Mauritius. 

At  the  same  time,  these  measures  will  attract  the  central  treasury  activities  of 

companies operating in the region to be undertaken in our island 

Madam  Speaker,  the  existing  Global  Headquarters  Administration  Licence,  which 
was available at the FSC, was not attractive enough. The incentives announced in this Budget 

 

39 

will  now  allow  Mauritius  to  welcome  a  number  of  players  to  set  up  their  regional  offices 
locally. 

Investment Banking and Corporate Advisory License, Madam Speaker.  Investment 
banks remain one of the key intermediaries of reputed and developed International Financial 
Centres. We want to be like Luxembourg, we want to be like Singapore, we want to be like 
Dubai. We need to have all these products. We need to have all these new offerings.  So far, 
Mauritius has not been successful in attracting investment banks. 

The functions of investment banks are not to take deposit or to provide loans. Rather, 
they  are  high-end  professional  intermediaries  which  facilitate  mergers  and  acquisitions, 
listings,  IPOs,  cross-border  investment  structuring  and  also  provide  financial  advisory 
services. 

Measure  98(d)  of  the  Budget  and  measure  B.1(e)(i)  of  the  annex  to  the  Budget 

provide for this, and the Financial Services Commission can now regulate this business. 

The  5-year  tax  holiday  incentive  provided  through  this  measure  will  no  doubt  be 
helpful in starting a whole new segment of activities to create further jobs and to boost the 
economy to the desired 4.1% this year and 4.6% in 2017/2018. 

Global Legal Advisory Services License, Madam Speaker.  International and cross-
border  investors  have  a  preference  to  deal  with  International  Law  Firms  as  they  bring 
synergies and comfort in their investments and structuring strategies. 

A number of law firms like Norton Rose, Clifford Chance, Allen & Overy, Herbert 
Smith, Carey Olsen and Dentons, amongst others, have all approached us saying they want to 
set up in Mauritius and service their clients from Mauritius, and fill a vacuum that currently 
exists in our IFC. Their requirements were to have a flexible structure to ring-fence their risks 
in line with their global risk management policies. 

With Measure 98(c) of the Budget and Measure B.2.(b)(i) of the Budget annex, the 
Minister of  Finance  and Economic  Development has  announced the introduction of  a new 
‘Global  Legal  Advisory  License’  with  a  tax  holiday  of  five  years.  He  has  sent  a  fantastic 
signal to the global players that we are opening up our economy.  Still, we had to listen this 
morning to issues like why the 3.8% in terms of growth rate is right as compared to the 4.1% 
which has been announced in this Budget, Madam Speaker. 

40 

 
This new measure is a major step towards diversification of legal advisory services 
linked with financial services. These international law firms represent flagship names, and 
once they set up in Mauritius, they will bring their network of clients, meaning more financial 
services related economic activities in Mauritius. 

For us to successfully welcome such international firms to set up in our country, the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has also announced the introduction of 
a  ‘Limited  Liability  Partnership  Act’  through  which  global  law  firms  can  structure  their 
operations  in  Mauritius  without  affecting  legal  practitioners  who  are  currently  working  in 
Mauritius and going to court every day. This is currently the practice in major financial cities. 

Foreign Ultra High Net worth Individuals.  Measure 99 of the Budget provides for a 
5-year tax holiday to foreign ultra-high net worth individuals investing a minimum of USD25 
million in Mauritius, not through Mauritius. This is a measure which is aimed at opening up 
the economy to a new category of investors. The Euro Zone, the UK with Brexit, the BRICS 
countries  and  even  some  ASEAN  block  countries  are  facing  major  challenges  in  retaining 
wealth and capital from flying out. This creates an opportunity for us – and that’ why I said 
the other day in this House, Madam Speaker, that for the Financial Services sector, Brexit is 
an opportunity, and we must be able to take those opportunities, even it might be an adverse 
situation  for  other  sectors  –  to  tap  into  and  we  should,  therefore,  explore  ways  to  attract 
quality investments while adopting a responsible approach to opening up our economy. With 
this new budgetary measure, we are confident that we will attract a select group of ultra-high 
net worth individuals to invest in key projects in Mauritius, thus contributing positively to 
Foreign Direct Investment flows and creating economic activities in the country. At the same 
time, this measure will also give boost wealth management and private banking activities in 
the country. It all works in an interlocked and intertwined manner, Madam Speaker. It is the 
big picture that we need to see, but not everybody can see the big picture. Some people will 
go down into a certain level of details only to use figures in a manipulative way, selectively, 
to come and say, “Look, how drastic the situation is!” But this is why they are sitting there 
and we are sitting here! 

International  Arbitration  Centre,  Madam  Speaker.    The  process  of  establishing 
Mauritius as a venue for international arbitration reached its climax in May, last year, when 
we hosted the International Council for Commercial Arbitration congress. It was gratifying to 
note  that  some  of  our  colleagues  attended  the  congress,  which,  according  to  feedbacks 
received, was one of the most successful congress organised by ICCA so far. Of course, the 

 

41 

Secretary General of the United Nations was here, Noble Peace Laureate, and 800 delegates 
from so many countries. 

The  professionalism  with  which  this  Congress  was  hosted  was  emphasised  by  the 

Board of Governors of ICCA. 

Now, Madam Speaker, measure 102 of the Budget provides for Rs57.5 m. to set up 
the Hearing Centre for Arbitration in Mauritius which will be the only Hearing Centre which 
is an emanation of the Permanent Court of Arbitration from The Hague and that is going to 
be set up here, and all of that is linked with bringing the global law firms; it is linked with 
creating this momentum in the financial services industry with all these products that I have 
been mentioning, because now whenever you have a dispute the Hearing Centre will be here, 
in  Mauritius,  and  all  the  international  lawyers  are  here  and  you  have  the  vibrancy  in  the 
sector as well. This is the vision that we want to create instead of a system that had been 
operating to blacken our name. 

The LCIA-MIAC would manage this facility on behalf of Government and the FSPA 
will work with LCIA-MIAC in further promoting our jurisdiction for international arbitration. 
We have also been looking at ways to reinforce our regulatory framework, Madam Speaker.  

Measure B.2.(a) in the Annex makes provision to enhance business facilitation in the 
financial  services  industry.  A  standardised  centralised  online  KYC  database  will  be 
introduced for the non-bank financial services sector. And also, an online licensing platform 
will  have  the  benefit  of  significantly  reducing  the  lead  time  in  processing  application  for 
licences and make Mauritius competitive vis-à-vis competing ICFs. So, the licences are given 
quickly,  the  KYC  and  the  verification,  the  due  diligence  is  also  done  quickly  and  it  is  all 
based on new technology  and this will facilitate greatly the process of investment flowing 
into the country. 

Measure  B.2.(c)  provides  for  amendments  to  the  Financial  Reporting  Act  that  will 
strengthen  our  regulatory  framework  while  at  the  same  time  enhance  accountability  of 
finance professionals in the delivery of their statutory duties.  

The  introduction  of  penalties  and  fines  on  licensees  of  the  Financial  Reporting 
Council,  that  is,  auditors  and  audit  firms,  is  a  major  step  in  the  right  direction  to  enhance 
financial  reporting  responsibilities  towards  investors  and  users  of  financial  statements. 
Investment decisions are taken on the basis of opinions provided by auditors and audit firms. 

 

42 

The BAI case is a real example where auditors became complacent, became too familiar with 
their audit clients and they lacked objectivity and, of course, it increased the risk of issuing 
the incorrect audit opinions.  

 
Madam Speaker, this measure, together with the mandatory audit firm rotation policy 
of every 7 years for listed entities and 5 years for banks, sends a strong signal that Mauritius 
will  not  tolerate  any  sort  of  complacency  when  it  comes  to  financial  reporting.  It  was 
necessary, Madam Speaker. I know many audit firms have said that they would have wished 
that  the  system  remained  the  same  but,  we  have  to  move  in  line  with  practices  of  good 
governance.  We  have  to  prevent  cases  like  BAI  and  what  happened  in  other  places  from 
happening again. We have to protect people in this country. And, by bringing this measure, 
this is going to make sure that now we have a system where there is rotation and also when 
they mess up, there are fines and penalties to be paid, which was not there in the law before. 
Madam  Speaker,  India,  EU,  Turkey,  Brazil,  China,  Italy  have  already  adopted  mandatory 
audit rotation firms. So, we are not doing anything new. 

Madam Speaker, there are a number of reforms which have been introduced in this 
Budget. I am not going to go through all of them but, just to say that the mandate of a number 
of  our  public  bodies  overlap.  Some  are  operating  with  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  while 
others are not contributing as they should to efficient public service delivery. This Budget 
provides  for  bold  sectoral  reforms  which  will  be  undertaken  in  a  phased  manner  with  the 
merger or restructure of State-owned enterprises with a view to reducing wastage, creating 
synergies,  improving  processing  time,  enhancing  effectiveness  in  the  decision-making 
process. 

Measure  352,  the  supporting  institutions  in  the  SME  sector,  namely,  SMEDA, 
Enterprise  Mauritius  and  National  Women  Entrepreneur  Council  will  be  merged  into  one 
organisation  for  greater  coherence,  more  efficiency  and  effectiveness.  Like  that,  Madam 
Speaker, there have been many other measures announced regarding SPDC, BPML, SLDC 
and also in terms of ICTA, IBA. I am not going to go into the detail of all of that, I am sure 
that all hon. Members realise that it was high time to bring reforms in the public sector in 
terms of how these institutions were working, and I can assure the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development  that  we  are  going  to  make  that  priority  at  the  level  of  the 
Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and work on all 

 

43 

these measures so that we can deliver before the next Budget on all the proposals as to how 
these mergers or streamlining will be done. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that my Ministry will provide full 
support to the ambitious vision and for the future of our country that has been presented by 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development in his Budget.  

I am proud and privileged, Madam Speaker, to stand before this House as an elected 
Member who believes in Mauritius and believes in the Mauritian people. This Budget has set 
the right tone to make Mauritius an ideal place to live, to invest, to do business, to raise our 
children and to grow old. 

A lot has been said about rupture, Madam Speaker.  With this Budget, the chains of 

mediocrity have been broken. This is the rupture. And we are free to innovate once again. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.16 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.45 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

Mrs D. Boygah (Second Member for Vieux Grand Port & Rose Belle): Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, a budget is the fundamental of any Government, a determining factor, it revises 
and bearing hopes for the better.  

It is indeed a hard nut to crack, especially when the wave of uncertainty clouds the 
future economic well-being of a nation and a population together with the gloomy external 
and worldwide economic outlook. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the task was robust indeed, difficult and challenging, but yet 
with all the courage, challenges from the Opposition leaders, pressures from all sides with 
accusations and allegations, but however braving the dark clouds, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  came  up  by  spinning  the  gossamers  and 
creating  a  magnum  opus  on  29  July  to  present  the  2016/2017  Budget  with  all  the  hopes 
revived instantly and specially the hopes that were placed on us in December 2014.  

Congratulation hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development!  

 
Congratulation Leader! 

44 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  really  feel  privileged  today  for  being  the  first  woman 

Member of this House to participate in the 2016/2017 Budget debate.  

On this auspicious occasion, I would avail myself of this opportunity to express my 
deepest appreciation to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for having 
given  so  much  of  importance  on  women  and  children  during  his  laudable  exercise  of 
preparing the 2016/2017 Budget. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  others  were  expressing  their  will  to  bring  gender 
equality, but only on paper, the place that women occupy on this present budget, is crystal 
clear that we walk our talk. We mean business. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  probing  deeper  into  the  provisions  for  women  and 
children  in  the  present  budget,  I  do  feel  extremely  proud  of  myself  being  a  woman,  a 
housewife  and  a  mother.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
understood and wants to prove that women should be honoured in our society. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, coming to the provisions and measures in this budget, it is a 
clear indication that the hon. Minister wants to prove to the nation that if we emancipate the 
woman, we are emancipating not an individual, but a nation. For example – 

•  by decreasing the price of gas cylinder, it is for the woman to rejoice because 

she is the housewife; she runs the kitchen; 

•  by exempting duty on children wears, it is again the woman to rejoice because 

she is the mother; 

•  by exempting duty on kitchen utensils, it is once more the woman to be happy 

because she is the kitchen runner at home; 

•  by  involving  at  least  one  woman  on  the  Board  of  Directors  in  public 
companies  listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  by  setting  up  a  Parliamentary 
Woman Caucus, by allocating funds to five main Ministries to conduct gender 
analysis  of  services  and  by  introducing  a  Gender  Development  Index  for 
Mauritius  to  measure  progress  in  gender  equality,  it  is  clear,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  present  budget  wants  to  prove  that  this  Government 

 

45 

wants to walk what it talks, wants to practise what it preaches as far as gender 
equality aspect is concerned. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  you will agree with me that if the man is the head of the 
house,  the  woman  is  the  heart  of  the  house.  By  bringing  the  price  of  kitchen  gas  cylinder 
from  Rs330  to  Rs270  is  not  merely  a  decrease  of  Rs60,  but  a  good  dose  of  hope  for  the 
kitchen runner, that is, the mother, the housewife.  

In the name of the whole woman folk in this country,  I would avail myself of this 
opportunity,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  heartily  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development to have harboured in his thoughts the everyday pains of a housewife. 
Because it is, you wish it or not, the job of the mother at home to light the cooker, to prepare 
the  meal,  to  welcome  guests  for  dinner,  to  prepare  children’s  school  meal  early  in  the 
morning, let alone her hectic work and office life! In the same context, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, to make matters easier and home life more comfortable, to exempt duty on items such as 
kitchen  utensils  and  baby  products  and  cereals,  is  yet  another  welcoming  move  for  the 
housewife, the mother and the would-be mothers. 

So,  being  a  woman,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  representing  the  mothers,  the 
housewives of this country, further representing the modern Mauritian woman who wants to 
show that our place is not only within the four walls of the kitchen, but to actively participate 
in the progress and development of this country, we would thank the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development for such a prominent place given to women in the provisions and 
measures in this budget. I will also convey the blessings and wishes to the hon. Minister from 
the deepest core of the heart of every mother, every housewife and the whole woman folk of 
this country on your step, hon. Minister, towards primeministership.  

God bless you, hon. Minister! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would qualify this budget as a “dream come true” budget, a 
budget  to  take  off  beyond  imagination,  a  budget  not  merely  a  compilation  of  figures  and 
numbers,  but  an  expression  of  values  and  aspirations.  A  budget  that  came  with  a  pack  of 
measures that will, beyond dispute, set the foundation of a new economy, indeed a concrete 
change.  

If  we  read  within  the  lines  of  it,  the  2016/2017  Budget  embarks  itself  on  a  deeper 
exercise of reorganising and assessing Government departments, their functions, their roles, 

 

46 

their efficiencies, managing public funds, among others. The budget is full of aspirations and 
the nation’s expectations that go right to the ground root of the Mauritian society.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no stone has been left unturned. All the expected priorities of 
the  population,  including  economic  growth,  job  creation  and  especially  improving  the 
standard of living and mainly social issues, amongst others, have been given a fine-combed 
exercise while preparing this Budget.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, considering the unavoidable hurdles and obstacles ahead, the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been wise before the event. This is 
perhaps the reason why almost all stakeholders qualify this budget as courageous, good, full 
of hopes, and even the hon. Leader of the Opposition qualifies it as ‘intéressant’! Thank you. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the House will agree with me that the mother aspect of any 
country  remains  the  social  aspect.  All  other  aspects  of  any  fast  growing  society  like  ours 
depend fundamentally on the social well-being of the population. In line with that, I find in 
this budget much stress laid to cure social ills and evils of our society.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  say  hats  off  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development to have given thought to the scourge ravaging our society, especially 
the  youth  and  school  children,  that  is,  cigarettes  and  alcohol.  This  is  the  root  cause  of  all 
social  evils  -  indiscipline,  robberies,  addiction,  drug  addiction,  etc.  By  highly  taxing  these 
two  ‘killer  items’  this  budget  serves  its  purpose  to  deter  and  kill  such  scourge.  Alcohol 
remains the major cause of domestic violence, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, which is yet another 
social evil menacing, threatening and weakening our Mauritian society. Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, this is where the hon. Minister has been wise before the event. This will, at least, deter 
the  smokers’  rate  not  only  among  our  youngsters,  our  younger  generation,  but  the  whole 
smoking  population  and,  obviously,  taxing  alcoholic  products  will  drastically  reduce 
consumption and the number of so-called bottle breakers in our society. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  I  said  earlier,  no  stone  has  been  left  unturned  in  this 
budget.  I  would  like,  here,  to  lay  stress  on  a  very  important  measure  inserted  thereby  - 
education. 

Education remains, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the mother institute of any society. It is 
indeed the vehicle of a nation. We are living today in a rat-race competitive world where the 
motto is ‘the survival of the fittest’. It is the only avenue of this modern era to integrate the 

 

47 

wider society.  Great integration disparity exists, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, however, between 
a  normal  young  growing  individual  and  an  economically  handicapped  person.  While 
preparing this Budget, again the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development had a 
special  thought  on  this  issue.  By  providing  a  cash  prize  of  Rs15,000  to  pupil/student 
competing the 9th grade is again a measure to relish and rejoice. 

Again  a  cash  reward  of  Rs25,000  and  Rs35,000  to  those  completing  SC  and  HSC 
respectively is another incentive to children coming from poor family background. This is not 
only a boost up, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the literacy rate, but helping integration in the world 
of work for those students. This is how everybody will get the opportunity to contribute to the 
economic growth of Mauritius, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as it is in other countries. This is the 
notion of Modern Mauritius, isn’t it? This is real social integration, alleviating poverty! 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  just  as  my  fellow  parliamentarian  colleagues,  the  Budget 
presentation is also an occasion to see and rejoice what is being proposed and provided to our 
respective Constituency, which is very obvious indeed. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on my own behalf and on the behalf of my two colleagues 
hon. Mahen Seeruttun and hon. Prem Koonjoo from Constituency No. 11 and especially on 
behalf  of  all  residents  of  Rose  Belle-Vieux  Grand  Port  and  nearby,  I  would  like  again  to 
express my gratitude to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to bring so 
many promising and praiseworthy projects in Rose Belle to enhance its further development 
like –  

1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

A pharmaceutical village to cater for local as well as African markets; 
by introducing the application of 3D printing technology with the coming up 
of Rose Belle Technopoles; 
by allocating Rs50 m. for the initial setup of MINDEX at Rose Belle Business 
Park, and also 
by investing to solve water problem in Rose Belle, replacing old and defective 
pipes. 

Thank you again, hon. Minister. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  where  the  shoe  really  pinches  in  the  social  aspect  of  a 
country is the employment sector. What brings social stability is no doubt creation of jobs. 
We must be grateful and praise wholeheartedly the Minister for the laudable task he has done 
in strategy two of the Budget 2016/2017, that is, creating job opportunities in various sectors. 

 

48 

The figures speak for themselves, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 21,400 jobs for youth, men and 
women; 7,200 in the Civil Service, 4,000 under the National Skills Development and 2,000 
under  Youth  Employment  Programme,  including  new  recruits  in  the  Police  Force,  Health 
Sector and mainly the Education sector where the Nine-Year Schooling Programme is to be 
implemented as from next year. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this was indeed the population expectation since long and 
here comes ‘the dream comes true budget’ as I said earlier.  It is a Budget by the people, for 
the people, the very fundamental of a democratic State like ours. Shouldn’t we be proud of 
the expertise and outstanding professionalism of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will fail as a PPS if I miss to thank the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development for his strong belief that the National Development Unit 
along with the 35 Citizens Advice Bureaus around the island to be re-organised.  As we all 
know, in the 1980s, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth created the NDU, he 
created the Citizens Advice Bureaus around the island. The motive, the vision was to create a 
bridge between the Government sectors and the other authorities.  The vision is that the CAB 
was and is the eyes and the ears of the citizens. Unfortunately, for the past two mandates, 
these Citizens Advice Bureaus were underutilised, but with the blessing and the good faith of 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the CABs have a new face, a new vision.  
Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to sum up, I will say, the Budget 2016-2017 is the second-to-
none Budget.  It is indeed a Budget based on facts and realities; a Budget to bring sustainable 
growth  and  the  measures  taken  are  real  yardsticks  to  build  the  future  of  our  Motherland, 
Mauritius. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon! 

 (3.03 p.m.) 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Merci,  M.  le 

président.  Merci de m’avoir accordé la parole sur le budget 2016-2017. 

49 

 
Même  si  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  et  de  l’économie  n’a  pas  mentionné 
l’expression  ‘miracle  économique’  dans  son  très  bon  discours  du  budget,  une  vigoureuse 
renaissance  économique  du  pays  n’est  pas  impossible  dans  les  3  à  4  ans  qui  viennent.  La 
raison  en  est  que  le  récent  remaniement  qui  a  amené  la  nomination  du  ministre  était  bien 
inspiré.  

Il  y  a  eu  trois  périodes  d’extraordinaire  renaissance  économique  dans  l’histoire 
nationale, et elles n’ont pris que peu d’années. Si on étudie comme il faut ces trois périodes 
qu’on  peut  qualifier  de  ‘miraculeuses’,  la  promesse  que  nous  avions  faite  aux  dernières 
élections générales d’une renaissance économique spectaculaire deviendra réalisable en peu 
d’années. 

Ces trois périodes de renaissance sont les suivantes et sont toutes marquées par une 

formidable diversification économique - 

La première :  

La deuxième : 

La troisième : 

Au  18ème  siècle,  de  1735  à  1740,  sous  le  gouverneur  Mahé  de 
Labourdonnais  qui  a  transformé  une  colonie  en  faillite  en  une  colonie 
prospère avec une économie très diversifiée. 

Au 20ème siècle, de 1971 à 1977, sous la direction du Premier ministre Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam et de Sir Gaëtan Duval de 1971 à 1974, soit en 4 
ans,  à  la  tête  d’un  Cabinet  ministériel  exceptionnellement  qualifié.  Pas 
moins de 74,000 emplois furent créés, le nombre d’usines passa de 9 à 89 
et  la  valeur  de  la  production  passa  de  R  4  millions  à  R  433  millions  de 
1971 à 1977 dans la zone franche. 

Au 20ème siècle, de 1982 à 1987, en 5 ans, sous la direction de Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, lui aussi avec un Cabinet ministériel composé de ministres aux 
qualités exceptionnelles. En 2009, l’ex-Premier ministre Paul Bérenger a 
déclaré,  selon  une  citation  reprise  dans  un  livre  sur  l’histoire  de 
l’entreprise privée à Maurice intitulé, ‘In Search of Excellence’’, je cite,- 

"one  of  the  reasons  for  the  success  of  Mauritius  was  that  economic 
development was accompanied by the creation of employment.”  

Le chômage avait alors disparu presque totalement.  

Trois parmi les objectifs essentiels de l’honorable ministre sont les suivants - 

50 

l’éradication de la pauvreté qui est un des piliers du discours du budget; 
une relance formidable du secteur des PME, et 
la relance et l’expansion de la production de l’agro-industrie.  

 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Qu’est-ce que je pense du budget 2016-2017? Tout d’abord, je me dois de féliciter 
l’honorable ministre des Finances pour avoir bien choisi son siècle, c'est-à-dire le 21ème. Cela 
alors que trop de personnes au sein de l’appareil d’État et du gouvernement, en sont restées 
au siècle dernier. Le ministre a démontré cela en présentant au pays un bon budget qui aurait 
dû, en fait, avoir été présenté l’année dernière comme premier budget du gouvernement issu 
des élections générales de décembre 2014. 

Ce budget rejoint dans sa philosophie et ses objectifs, les idéaux pour lesquels je me 

bats comme députée depuis mon élection sur au moins trois points essentiels – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

l’éradication de la pauvreté, une priorité dans ma circonscription 
 et dans tout le pays comme je le répète souvent;  
la protection et l’expansion des petites et moyennes entreprises,  
les  PME  qui  constituent  collectivement  le  plus  gros  créateur  d’emplois  du 
pays, et  
Le souci légitime exprimé au paragraphe 292, page 40 du discours  
du  budget,  d’assurer  le  financement  des  efforts  de  Maurice  pour  récupérer 
l’archipel des Chagos. 

Aucun budget,  je dis bien, aucun budget n’a été aussi loin auparavant dans le combat 
contre la pauvreté et pour la prospérité du secteur des PME. Je note que le ministre a eu une 
attention particulière pour l’économie informelle et mentionné deux fois son désir de reloger 
les  marchands  de  rue  que  le  gouvernement  de  Singapour,  pour  ne  citer  qu’un  exemple, 
considère, respecte et traite décemment comme un secteur qui accueille surtout les gens qui 
perdent leurs emplois ou qui n’en ont jamais eu, aidant les autorités à contenir le chômage.  

Aujourd’hui,  la  Grande  Bretagne,  selon  l’Office  for  National  Statistics,  compte  un 
nombre croissant de home businesses dont le nombre, en juin 2014, était de 4,2 millions de 
personnes  gagnant leur  vie en travaillant  à la maison ou ailleurs à partir de la maison. Ce 
nombre,  qui  représente  près  de  14%  du  work  force  britannique,  continue  de  croître 
rapidement. 

Le ministre, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, meets my expectations dans son discours 

du budget. Je cite maintenant ces points de convergence avec mon combat. 

51 

 
Le  premier  point  de  convergence  -  dans  mes  interventions  au  Parlement,  dans  ma 
circonscription  et  dans  les  rues  depuis  mon  élection,  j’ai  exprimé  ma  révolte  contre  la 
pauvreté et je me suis mise à la défense des petits et des sans voix, tout en défendant aussi les 
petites et moyennes bourgeoisies dont la stabilité et la paix sociale dépendent énormément. 
Concernant  l’éradication  de  l’extrême  pauvreté,  j’ai  envoyé,  en  février  2016,  une  motion 
privée, en mon nom, à l’Assemblée Nationale, demandant aux honorables membres de voter 
en faveur d’une allocation-chômage décente. La presse en a déjà parlé d’ailleurs. Le ministre 
a  proposé,  lui,  une  allocation  sans  précédent  allant  jusqu’à  R  9,520  par  mois  aux  familles 
recensées comme étant les plus pauvres, avec, en plus, d’exceptionnelles mesures incitatives 
pour que les enfants de ces familles aillent à l’école et fassent des études pour sortir de la 
misère.  Le  ministre  rejoint  indirectement  ma  proposition  d’allocation-chômage  car  c’est  le 
chômage surtout qui est la racine de l’extrême misère. 

Si je félicite le ministre ici, c’est que je comprends parfaitement ce que veut dire avoir 
certains jours un estomac creux qu’on ne peut pas satisfaire et des larmes qu’on ne peut pas 
essuyer. Et que je sais ce que ces facilités offertes par le ministre représenteront pour ces gens 
vivant dans le plus grand dénuement et parmi lesquels se retrouveront un  jour, je l’espère, 
des  députés, des avocats, des médecins, et d’autres professionnels.  

Deuxième  point  de  convergence  -  le  ministre  me  rejoint  encore  avec  l’action 
vigoureuse proposée pour les PME. Dès le début de son discours, le ministre annonce une 
série  de  mesures  en  faveur  de  ces  entreprises,  y  compris  les  micro-industries  et  micro-
commerces comme celles des ‘hawkers’ qu’il mentionne à deux reprises et qu’il envisage de 
reloger décemment. Je souhaite que ses décisions soient scrupuleusement respectées, dans les 
délais prévus, par les ministères et autres organismes publics concernés. Malheureusement, 
les  derniers  chiffres  sur  les  PME  datent  de  2007  alors  qu’à  cette  date,  les  PME  avaient 
augmenté  par  23%  en  nombre  en  5  ans  depuis  2002,  se  chiffrant  à  94,000  unités  de 
production avec une valeur ajoutée de près de R 84 milliards. Le recensement est maintenant 
‘long overdue’ et la méthode statistique devrait être améliorée et plus inclusive des business 
non inclus en 2007. 

Concernant les PME, j’avais opposé une première version d’une loi contre le crime 
financier. J’estimais que, sans amendements de cette loi, plus de 100,000 petits et moyens 
entrepreneurs 
injustes 
d’enrichissement.  Des  changements  nécessaires  ont  été  effectués  pour  protéger  les 
entrepreneurs honnêtes et j’ai voté les fameuses lois Bhadain. Le ministre des Finances vient 

seraient  vulnérables 

accusations 

en  permanence 

à  des 

 

52 

aujourd’hui, apporter bien plus que ce secteur attendait, en proposant de multiples mesures 
incitatives et facilitatrices, et des réformes sans précédent. 

En  associant  la  lutte  contre  la  pauvreté  à  la  promotion  des  PME  et  des  micro-
entreprises nous ferons un travail positif d’ingénierie sociale qui, dans quelques années, aura 
renversé la tendance actuelle, selon la Banque mondiale, d’un rétrécissement dangereux des 
classes moyennes. Car, comme tous les historiens le savent, le déclin des classes moyennes 
entraîne  des  révolutions  violentes  –  ce  fut  le  cas  de  la  Révolution  Française  comme  des 
révolutions communistes. La Banque Mondiale nous dit, dans un rapport de septembre 2015 
sur Maurice intitulé ‘Mauritius - Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity’, je cite - 

“Historical  studies  have  pointed  to  the  importance  for  overall  economic  growth  of 
having a middle class that earns a larger share of a country’s income. For example, 
an expanding middle class was a driving force behind the growth of many of today’s 
high  income  countries  in  Western  Europe.  A  number  of  studies  have  shown  that 
economic growth is higher in countries with larger middle classes.” 

Troisième point de  convergence - la mention officielle des Chagos  et de Tromelin, 
territoires illégalement retranchés du patrimoine mauricien qui m’a beaucoup touchée parce 
que le ministre des Finances adhère ici complètement à la lutte du pays pour compléter son 
indépendance et son  intégrité nationales. 

Je  conseille  à  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  de  s’attacher  à  la  mise  en  œuvre 
rapide et efficiente, par l’ensemble du Cabinet ministériel, des centaines de mesures qu’il a 
annoncées dans son discours du budget. Car ce qui doit compter avant tout, c’est la capacité 
d’agir vite et bien, en l’occurrence, l’efficience et les compétences ministérielles - sinon, le 
Premier  ministre  aura  à  procéder  à  d’autres  remaniements  ministériels  salutaires  pour 
l’efficience gouvernementale. 

J’en viens maintenant à des suggestions. Le challenge pour les ministres est de savoir 
choisir dans quel siècle ils opèrent, soit le 20ème, soit le 21ème. Il faut vite choisir son siècle 
pour une renaissance économique spectaculaire, telle que l’envisage le Premier ministre avec 
son projet de nouveau miracle économique. La classe du 20ème siècle doit être éliminée de 
l’exécutif. 

Ma première suggestion est qu’il faut rétablir Maurice comme une source importante 
de fibres naturelles. La COP 21, citée dans le discours du ministre, a donné au produit bio, à 

 

53 

l’économie verte, et à l’agro-industrie verte en général une renaissance qui se fait sentir en ce 
moment  sur  les  marchés  internationaux.  L’industrie  sucrière  est  menacée  par  une  chute 
dramatique  des  prix  en  2017.  On  sait  aussi  que  des  dizaines    de  milliers  d’arpents  de 
plantations  de  cannes  à  sucre  ont  été  abandonnées,  y  compris  environ  12,000  selon  Mme 
Jacqueline Sauzier dans une interview donnée à L’Express le mercredi 15 juin.  

Un  budget  post-COP  21  devrait  tenir  compte  du  fait  que  le  marché  des  fibres 
naturelles explose et qu’on en a besoin pour un très large éventail d’applications industrielles. 
Le ministre des Finances devrait envoyer une délégation dans les  pays comme l’Australie, 
notamment dans l’immense Etat tropical du Queensland, voir ce que font le gouvernement de 
cet  Etat  et  les  planteurs  de  cannes  à  sucre  pour  cultiver  des  plantes  complémentaires  à  la 
canne. Ils ont une longue liste de ces cultures, entre autres la ramie, la pistache, le soya et le 
chanvre. La ramie procure six récoltes par an, et le chanvre, c'est-à-dire Cannabis sativa non-
intoxicant, est cultivé partout dans les pays riches pour leurs fibres naturelles, un marché qui 
s’accroit en ce moment. La presse australienne accueille le chanvre industriel comme le ‘Holy 
Grail’, le Saint Graal des planteurs de cannes à sucre.  

A  Maurice,  certains  ne  semblent  pas  comprendre  la  différence  entre  le  cannabis-
industriel  et  le  cannabis-drogue.  Il  y  a  en  France  et  aux  Etats  Unis  des  fédérations  et 
associations nationales de planteurs de cannabis non-intoxicant, c'est-à-dire à faible dose de 
THC. C’est dans la loi de ces pays. Le Trinidad a dû changer sa Dangerous Drugs Act pour 
introduire cette distinction obligatoire pour ne pas pénaliser le business du chanvre.  

Encore jeune et bien conseillé, le ministre doit enfin accepter les réalités scientifiques, 
juridiques et historiques concernant le cannabis industriel non-intoxicant, qui est déjà importé 
à Maurice, pour la nourriture humaine et celle des animaux, et exporté par notre industrie de 
vêtements. 

Mais il n’y a pas que le chanvre, il  y  a la ramie.  Il  y a aussi les fibres des plantes 
comme le cocotier, le vacoas, le raphia, l’aloès (qui fut jadis une industrie florissante), et le 
vétiver. Les fibres naturelles sont nécessaires pour remplacer à Maurice 300 millions de sacs 
en plastique par an par du bioplastique. Sans compter que certaines des plantes mentionnées, 
dont le chanvre, produisent également des huiles naturelles recherchées et du biocarburant et 
des bioplastiques. Au lendemain de la loi interdisant le plastique à Maurice, la panique régna 
à la Mauritius Duty Free Shop de Plaisance parce que les responsables n’avaient pas encore 

 

54 

trouvé  des  sacs  biodégradables  en  quantité  suffisante,  soit  des  dizaines  de  milliers  pour 
remplacer les sacs en plastique. 

Des  centaines  d’unités  de  production,  de  ‘cottage’  ou  ‘home  industries’  et  de 
fabriques  industrielles  de  fibres  et  d’huiles  et  autres  produits  cosmétiques,  ainsi  que  de 
produits  de  médecine,  tous  des  produits  naturels,    pourraient  révolutionner  l’économie 
mauricienne en relativement très peu de temps si le gouvernement le veut. Le ministre ayant 
posé les bases pour un développement rapide du secteur manufacturier et de celui des agro-
industries, les entrepreneurs n’ont qu’à passer à l’action. 

Je  pense  qu’il 

faut  s’assurer  que  plusieurs  projets  de 

l’ex-ministre  de 
l’Environnement, l’honorable Raj Dayal, de plantation massive de plantes à fibres comme le 
cocotier et de plantes médicinales à travers le pays soient mis en  pratique. Il faut ouvrir la 
voie à la production de plantes médicinales sur une grande échelle, notamment pour créer une 
industrie pharmaceutique de tradition ayurvédique, qui pourrait exporter ses produits à travers 
le monde à une époque où les médecines douces et non-invasives sont en demande croissante. 

Une  deuxième  suggestion  que  je  fais  au  ministre  des  Finances  est  de  formaliser 
l’économie informelle. Si nous formalisons l’économie informelle, autant que faire se peut, 
on  pourrait  enregistrer  peut-être  une  croissance  supérieure  à  celle  prévue  par  Statistics 
Mauritius en 2016-2017 et à l’avenir. 

Une troisième suggestion concerne le secteur ‘bio’. La production des produits ‘bio’ 
allait exploser à Maurice d’après l’ex-ministre des Finances Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo.  Le  
nouveau ministre des Finances a  abordé la question de manière plus efficace et a parlé de 
laboratoires. Nos légumes regorgent de pesticides selon L’Express du 15 novembre 2014, et 
nos ananas, selon L’Express du 15 juillet 2015, ont été refusés par l’Union Européenne pour 
leur  teneur  excessive  d’hormones  mûrisseurs,  toutes  ces  substances  chimiques  étant 
hautement dangereuses pour la santé humaine. Les mesures de contrôle de qualité annoncées 
par le ministre devraient déboucher sur un label ‘bio’ bien structuré et légalement imposé aux 
producteurs de ‘bio’. 

Quatrième suggestion: en ce qui concerne les produits de mer, on pourrait orienter les 
pêcheurs, surtout leurs épouses, vers l’élevage d’huîtres, la culture d’algues, et de bénitiers de 
mer … 

(Interruptions) 

55 

 
Bien  Sûr !  Pourquoi  pas ?  Ces  derniers,  en    voie  de  disparition,  devant  être 
réintroduits et cultivés en grandes quantités à Maurice avec une aide française (ils sont très 
appréciés  comme  mets  en  Nouvelle  Calédonie).  Toujours  est-il  qu’un  assainissement 
drastique de nos lagons pollués est nécessaire à ces cultures. Nos lagons demandent aussi une 
‘plantation’ massive de corail comme projeté par l’honorable Dayal et comme cela se fait aux 
Seychelles.  Par  ailleurs  il  faut  réduire  drastiquement  l’écoulement  massif  des  pesticides 
provenant  des  plantations  vers  les  lagons.  On  doit  contrer  cette  pollution  par  le 
développement rapide, que propose d’ailleurs l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, de la production 
du compost. On doit aussi s’assurer que l’aquaculture intensive ne soit pas polluante au point 
de menacer la survie de nos lagons. 

Cinquième suggestion: enfin, concernant le traitement des déchets électroniques, au 
Canada  je  sais  qu’il  y  a  des  cas  où  des  gens  ramassant  des  ordinateurs  usagés  dans  les 
poubelles, en ont extrait de l’or pour une valeur allant jusqu’à 5,000 dollars, dans des  cas 
individuels.  Il  y  a  même  des  vidéos  expliquant  comment  faire  pour  extraire  de  l’or  des 
appareils électroniques. Ma suggestion est que le ministre s’assure que les responsables du 
projet  à  La  Brasserie,  Forest-Side,  mettent  rapidement  à  exécution  le  projet  de  recyclage 
d’appareils électroniques dont on peut extraire  divers matériaux, y compris l’or. 

Sixième  suggestion:  j’ai  été  le  premier  des  parlementaires  à  demander  le  mardi  5 
juillet  2016,  à  l’ajournement,  que  le  gouvernement  produise  un  plan  pour  le  retour  des 
Chagossiens  dans  leurs  îles  avec  un  projet  agro-industriel  respectueux  de  l’environnement 
fragile de ces îles. Je suggère cette fois au ministre d’insérer dans le budget un token sum 
pour un item spécifique de développement socioéconomique des Chagos.  

Un  plan  pour  Les  Chagos  devra  comprendre,  en  plus  d’une  renaissance  de  l’agro-
industrie,  comme  j’ai  mentionné,  un  projet  d’éco-tourisme  et  aussi  une  réinsertion  des 
habitants de ces îles. 

Septième suggestion. Je souhaite aussi que le ministre crée dans le budget, avec une 
somme  symbolique,  un  fonds  qui  servirait  éventuellement  à  une  visite  parlementaire 
mauricienne  dans  les  îles  principales  de  l’archipel  des  Chagos.  Et,  sous  l’accord  de  1965 
entre  Londres  et  Maurice,  inclus  maintenant  dans  la  loi  internationale  par  le  Tribunal 
international  sur  le  droit  de  la  Mer  une  tournée  d’inspection  parlementaire  de  la  mer 
environnante  où  nous  avons  déjà  récupéré,  devant  le  Tribunal  international  du  droit  de  la 

 

56 

Mer, nos droits que l’Angleterre a voulu nous enlever sur la pêche et les autres richesses du 
plateau continental. 

Je crois que l’honorable Leader de l’opposition a raison de nous inviter à y aller, car il 
n’y  a  rien,  là,  d’une  violation  territoriale,  l’île  Maurice  ayant  obtenu  déjà  du  Tribunal 
international du droit de la Mer une souveraineté différée, voire alternative, sur l’archipel. Je 
recommande fortement la suggestion de l’honorable Paul Bérenger. 

J’aurais  voulu  suggérer  au  ministre  d’introduire  un  impôt  gradué,  et  juste  sur  la 
fortune, pour remplacer la défunte taxe sur les campements. En Italie, il y a deux impôts sur 
la fortune. L’une de 0,76 pour cent sur les real assets des citoyens italiens à l’étranger, dont 
peut être déduite toute taxe immobilière dans le pays concerné. Et l’autre, de 0,15 pour cent 
sur les financial assets overseas, y compris des plans individuels de pension à l’étranger. En 
Suisse, une wealth tax est imposée sur tous les assets des citoyens suisses worldwide au taux 
allant  de  0,13  à  0,94  pour  cent,  mais  n’est  pas  imposable  pour  les  résidents  étrangers  en 
Suisse. 

J’ai  été  inspiré  en  cela  par  le  grand  économiste  et  best-seller  mondial,  Thomas 
Piketty,  dont  le  travail  gigantesque,  "Capital,  In  the  21st  Century",  environ  un  millier  de 
pages, est devenu aujourd’hui la Bible de la nouvelle gauche et a conquis beaucoup à droite 
et au centre de l’échiquier politique. Je demanderai tout simplement au ministre d’y réfléchir 
ou  d’ordonner  une  étude  avec  l’objectif  d’uniformiser  et  rendre  plus  équitable  envers  les 
citoyens  les  taxes  sur  la  propriété,  et  de  réduire  éventuellement  l’income  tax,  tout  en 
augmentant et en diversifiant les revenus de l’Etat. 

En  bref,  Piketty  a  découvert  que  le  monde  évolue  à  une  vitesse  grandissante  et 
dangereuse vers une inégalité de plus en plus énorme entre les riches et les pauvres. Et son 
analyse est fondée sur 2 siècles de données statistiques sur les revenus et les fortunes à travers 
la  planète.  Piketty  a  prouvé  que  la  cause  fondamentale  de  l’inégalité  n’est  pas  celle  des 
revenus, mais celle de la fortune. Je laisse ceci à la réflexion des uns et des autres. 

M.  le  président  et  aussi  tous  les  honorables  Membres  de  cette  Chambre,    je  vous 

remercie de votre attention. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

 

 
(3.31 p.m.) 

57 

Hon. D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE): Thank you, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for giving way. Before I start my intervention, I would like to thank 
the hon. Member, Mrs Selvon, for her interesting speech on the Budget and also on Chagos. 

First of all, I would like to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance for his excellent 
work. There is much to commend on this excellent Budget, which has been widely acclaimed 
by one and all, by the common people, by the private sector, by the business community; in 
brief, by the whole nation. The hon. Minister has been greatly successful in the ways he has 
balanced the interests of all stakeholders, and this has been much appreciated. 

History  will  recall  that  every  time  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  has  been  Minister  of 
Finance, he has had a special eye,  a special attention for the poor and the needy. We will 
recall that in his first Budget presentation, he re-established subsidies on school fees. He has 
always had this special attention to the poor and the needy. 

The Budget contains a series of measures in favour of the unemployed and the poor 
families, which is simply unprecedented in history. It has really created a feel good factor, to 
borrow  a  term  of  hon.  Ganoo,  who  is  a  seasoned  politician;  he  has  assisted  many  budget 
presentations. 

A  Budget,  which  is  also  very  interesting,  according  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition. A Budget, which is bold and daring, according to the words of the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister. And today, looking at l’Express, the headline is: ‘Le budget crée un feel good factor 
pour la communauté des affaires.’ This is a statement made by the senior partner of Ernst & 
Young.  So, we can see that this Budget has really set a new platform, a new start for the 
development of our country. 

Coming from a financial background, I will obviously focus my intervention on the 
key  economic  indicators.  I  will  talk  about  figures.  I  will  also  try  to  clarify  certain  points 
which have been raised by the opposition, mainly by the hon. Leader of the Opposition who 
has, in his press conference last Saturday, mentioned three key areas where he is probably not 
fully satisfied. For instance, he mentioned that – 

(i) 

he doesn’t think that this budget will rekindle the economy, will dynamise the 
economy and will have the estimated growth; 

58 

he is concerned with the high level of current account deficit, and 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

he is concerned about the national debt level. 

But, before coming to - I have also listened to the points made by hon. Reza Uteem 
this morning, who has painted a very bleak picture of our economy - all these points, let me 
just summarise a few of the measures, which I feel is really sensible and which I feel will 
really give businesses a real mood to invest, will give entrepreneurs a real dynamism to go 
into  business.  There  are  many  measures;  for  instance,  the  investment  tax  credit  which  has 
been  reintroduced, which gives incentives to businesses. We also have tax holidays which 
have been given to small entrepreneurs, and also other fiscal and financial incentives which 
are included in the Budget. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before I dive into the subject matter, I would have to put the 
Budget in its context, in its medium perspective, because yesterday the Leader of the Labour 
Party, at his press conference, raised a point, whereby he said that ‘this Budget lacks vision; it 
does  not  prepare  our  country  for  the  medium  to  long  term,  and  it  lacks  original  ideas’.  I 
would  immediately  point  to  Members  of  the  Labour  Party  that  the  Labour  Party  has  been 
power for the last nine to 10 years.  And if the Leader of the Labour Party had vision, he 
would have really made a tangible change to the economic scenery.  But due to their lack of 
vision, due to their lack of ideas, this is where we stand today with a really messy situation 
which  we  are  fixing  today.  So,  I  don’t  think  that  the  Leader  of  the  Labour  Party  is  in  a 
position  to  give  us  lessons  how  we  should  lead  this  country,  how  we  should  plan  our 
economy. I think we are well placed, given that we have the information, the statistics at our 
disposal to make more informed decision rather than just making lavish declaration and just 
saying  that  they  could  have  done  this,  they  could  have  done  that,  but  when  they  were  in 
power they didn’t do anything.  

(Interruptions) 

So, all political parties in advanced economies face the challenge of translating their values 
into action. This is a problem with all parties.  

We have listened to hon. Uteem.  He has expressed his wish that we could have done 
this, we could have done that, but we all know that we are in a chicken and egg situation; we 
want  to  invest,  but  where  do  we  get  the  money.    People  say  Government  should  do  this, 
Government should give so much to this sector, Government should pay so much attention to 

 

59 

that sector without thinking about the financial implications.  And we all know that we are in 
a very messy situation in terms of our finance.  Our debt situation is really chaotic and it is 
not something which has been created by us.   

So,  this  Budget  includes  a  number  of  sensible  ideas  in  terms  of  its  philosophy.  It 
contains measures to ensure a stable macroeconomic environment which will re-dynamise the 
productive  sectors  and  restore  confidence  in  our  development  potentials  which  I  have  just 
demonstrated.   

Many of our economic experts like Pierre Dinan have also welcomed this Budget. Raj 
Makoond of Business Mauritius and most of the senior partners, most of the accounting firms 
have warmly welcomed the measures which have been put in this Budget. 

The Budget also includes measures that lay building blocks for  achieving medium-
term  goals  in  terms  of  higher  growth  rates.  It  contains  measures  which  re-establish  fiscal 
discipline and financial health. It includes measures to improve the productivity of our nation 
and  our  international  competitiveness.  It  includes  measures  which  initiate  reform  of  our 
social welfare system and our administrative system, like the Revenue Collection Department 
which the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development announced and which will 
be facing major reforms at that level. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, despite all the rhetoric one hears from politicians, the truth is 
that Government do not create jobs, businesses do.  At the heart of this Budget, Government 
wants a business-led economy in which hard work is rewarded, entrepreneurs are encouraged 
and aspiration is applauded.  It is only when businesses are thriving that the people of our 
country can thrive too.  

In  this  same  context,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  a  number  of  fiscal  and  financial 
incentives have been given to SMEs through the DBM, the Venture Capital Fund as SMEs 
have a high employment generating potential. It is only a strong and growing economy that 
allows  us  to  invest  in  health,  in  education  and  in  social  security.  It  is  only  a  strong  and 
growing economy that allows us to spend money on protecting our most vulnerable citizens. 
Government will, therefore, act more as trail blazer, a facilitator, a regulator, a catalyst and 
not as a direct producer of goods and services.  What we are seeking is to establish a new and 
more effective Public Private Partnership.   

60 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have heard it all before: every year the Opposition warns 
of catastrophe around the corner, the usual prediction of doom and disaster. The actual fact is 
that, every year, the economy is improving and, we, as a responsible Government, keep on 
giving more and more hope to the nation and we keep on improving the living standards of 
the population. 

Coming to the points raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition about the economic 
growth,  I  think,  we  should  all  have  faith  in  our  country  and  we  know  that  the  economic 
prospect,  the  development  of  our  economy  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  international 
economic environment. It is only when the international economy is doing well and there is 
demand, it is only then that our entrepreneurs, our businessmen, our industries which produce 
goods  and  services  can  sell.    But  when  the  international  economic  environment  is  not 
conducive, when there is disruption, when we have unprecedented events, unexpected events 
like we just had recently, like Brexit, it is difficult to predict. And businessmen don’t like 
uncertainties; they like to have real visibility on what will happen.  It is only then that they 
invest their money. But I am happy that despite all these adverse situations prevailing at the 
international level, our economy is growing and this is the most important thing. 

GDP  growth  is  expected  to  pick  up  to  3.9%  in  2016,  fuelled  mainly  by  growth  in 
tourism,  financial  services,  retail  trade  and  ICT.  I  heard  this  morning  that  hon.  Uteem 
expressed  his  pessimism  about  the  target  of  4.1%  growth  which  is  targeted  in  the  Budget 
2016/2017.  I must say that two sectors which had really not contributed, which had, in fact, 
absorbed a large part of the positive result generated by other sectors are the agriculture, and 
the construction sector.  

These two sectors are expected to contribute positively in 2016-2017. So, that’s why 
we believe that with these two sectors doing better, we are hopeful, we are optimist that we 
will attain this objective of crossing the 4% rate of growth that everybody expects. 

Why economic growth is so important? I think most people would like to know: why 
do  we  spend  so  much  energy,  so  much  attention  on  economic  growth? Because  economic 
growth is the measure of the total volume of transaction in a country. It is the wealth of the 
economy.  So,  when  we  say  that  our  current  economy  which  is  estimated  at  around  Rs430 
billion, will grow to 4.1%, it is estimated that there will be higher volume of transaction and 
the growth will represent approximately Rs18 billion in terms of volume that it will generate 
in  the  next  12  months.  So,  it  creates  more  wealth  and  when  we  get  more  wealth,  we  can 

 

61 

redistribute. So, that is why we have to be very careful and we have to ensure that we meet 
this target. As I explained, the target is achievable because we believe that construction and 
agriculture  will  be  doing  better  in  the  coming  months.  So,  we  hope  that  the  growth 
momentum will be sustained and we are hopeful that our country will have a better prospect 
in terms of economy. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  economic  growth  and  development  need  high  quality  and 
reliable Government services ranging from water to electricity  generation, to  transport and 
infrastructure.  That  is  why  Government  is  making  a  special  effort  to  invest  massively  in 
terms of improving water supply, in terms of improving our energy supply and there is an 
amount of Rs153 billion which is projected to be spent in terms of capital expenditure in the 
next  five  years  and  for  the  next  12  months,  it  is  expected  that  Government  will  spend 
approximately Rs35 billion. This is a very substantial increase compared to the previous year. 
It is approximately 130% increase in Capital Expenditure. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, prosperity is strengthened when everyone has the capacity to 
participate effectively in the economy and benefits of growth are widely shared. This is what 
this Budget has tried to achieve. We know that if we are to bring prosperity, this will require 
providing the right conditions for investments in skills, infrastructure and innovation. This is 
why  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  laid  so  much  emphasis  on 
training  of  the  unemployed,  on  training  of  the  youth.  This  is  why  we  are  putting  a  lot  of 
emphasis on innovation like digitalisation of our economy, like developing other productive 
sectors. So, these are measures which are expected to fuel productivity, to fuel growth of our 
economy. 

We know that there has always been an expectation gap in terms of what the Budget 
measures contain, what the Minister announces and how it takes shape in reality, how it is 
implemented,  and  often  people  say:  “But  measures  which  were  announced  are  never 
implemented and we don’t see anything.” But this time, the Minister is farsighted and he is 
providing  for  a  number  of  other  measures  like  simplifying  the  procurement  of  goods  and 
services by Ministries which will definitely ease the process of procurement and will make 
projects much faster in terms of the implementation. So, I think there are a number of things 
which are contained in the Budget, which will change the way we have been doing things in 
the past and which have proven to be a bit slow and counter-productive. 

62 

 
I  just  mentioned  the  measures  which  have  been  provided  for  the  training  of 
unemployed so that they acquire other skills which make them employable in other sectors 
where  they  can  get  a  productive  job.  So,  this  is  something  which  will  definitely  improve 
productivity  because  it  will  put  people  back  to  work  and  these  people  will  be  able  to 
contribute in the development of the nation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it has always been  generally accepted that at the times of 
economic  downturn,  we  should  train  people  with  the  skills  necessary  to  bring  about  the 
upturn. Many countries have done that. Germany has been doing that. If we want Mauritius to 
become a prosperous major economy by 2030, we will have to raise the productivity and this 
will  be  achieved  by  giving  people  the  skills  they  need  to  secure  a  better  job.  Higher 
productivity  means  higher  income.  When  productivity  rises,  standard  of  living  rises. 
Ultimately, the best way to cut the deficit and the debt is to ensure that we have better paid 
jobs, which will increase tax proceeds and reduce people’s need for extra support from the 
State. 

Coming to the point raised regarding the current account, the current account deficit 
means the value of import is greater than the value of export. It means that our total import 
exceeds our export. The current account deficit was at its highest in 2011 when it stood at 
13.5% of GDP. This has improved substantially. In 2015, our trade deficit was only 4.8% of 
GDP. This is not something which is satisfying. We still have to make progress on that. We 
want  to  export  more,  but,  as  I  explained,  the  international  economic  environment  is  not 
conducive.  The  current  account  deficit  improved  due  to  lower  commodity  prices.  As  we 
know, there has been a drop in the price of petrol internationally. So, this has also helped. 
According to the Bank of Mauritius, the current account deficit was adequately financed by 
the direct investment flows and surplus of our Balance of Payment. 

In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Balance of Payment registered a surplus of 20 
billion in 2015 representing 4.9% of GDP. Gross Foreign Exchange Reserves of the country 
maintained its upward trend to reach 168.6 billion at the end of June 2016, thereby providing 
a comfortable buffer. We all agree that Mauritius has to export almost the size of its GDP. 
Hong Kong and Singapore do even better because their exports exceed their GDP. 

The  risk  of  capital  flight  which  has  been  expressed  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition has been monitored by the Central Bank and, in its report issued in May 2016, the 

 

63 

Bank of Mauritius reassures that this risk has been mitigated because we have taken measures 
to ensure that sudden capital flight due to panic does not affect our financial system. 

We  are  aware  that  the  surplus  on  the  capital  account  means  foreigners  have  an 
increasing  claim  on  our  asset.  This  is  a  good  point  raised  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition but, again, the Central Bank, in its Financial Stability Report, mentioned that the 
country has accumulated sufficient foreign reserves to deal with any unanticipated external 
shock.  Risks  to  financial  stability  stemming  from  transactions  with  non-residents  are 
currently  deemed  to  be  contained.  So,  I  think  the  concern  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition regarding the current account deficit is something which is being tackled by the 
authorities, by the Government. The situation is being monitored and there is no real cause of 
concern at this stage because we have assessed that, in case there is massive exit of capital 
from Mauritius in terms of forex, we have sufficient reserve to meet these kinds of situation 
and this is precisely what is contained in the Stability Report. 

Coming  to  the  situation  of  debt,  I  think  again  here  there  has  been  significant 
improvement in our debt monitoring because the report produced by the Central Bank covers 
a lot of the issues which would have arisen if the situation had not been monitored. We have 
improved  credit  worthiness  at  the  international  level.  We  have  improved  our  maturity 
structure of the debt. We have enough time to repay our debt. In case we have an urgency to 
raise capital, we can raise capital and, most importantly, a large part of our debt is in terms of 
debts which have been contracted locally. So, we have sufficient room for manoeuvre in case 
we have such a situation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before I end, I would like to cover a few points which were 
raised  by  hon.  Uteem.  He  has  mentioned  that  this  Government,  in  fact,  over  the  past  20 
months, has only collected failures and that our economic situation has deteriorated. He has 
asked our bilan and he has made a really bleak forecast for our country. But, we have to be 
fair  and  just.  Hon.  Uteem  is  supposed  to  be  the  shadow  Minister  of  Finance  of  the 
Opposition. He knows very well that in 20 months we cannot do a miracle; we cannot come 
up with a bilan. Had he been the Finance Minister, we just have to imagine what would have 
been his bilan! So, we cannot as if, on one hand, say that Government should invest, should 
do a lot more to dynamise the economy and, at the same time, express our concern on why 
the debt level is going up, why don’t we manage this. So, it is as if you are tying our hands 
and legs and you ask us to run. We cannot do that. We have to be realistic. We have to be 

 

64 

very fair in our  analysis and we know that the international economic situation is not that 
conducive for us to have a faster rate of growth. Nevertheless, our economy is growing and I 
know that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has set his target really 
high.  As  the  l’Alliance  Lepep  Government,  we  are  really  ambitious.  We  want  to  do  an 
economic  miracle;  we  want  our  people  to  live  better  and  there  is  nothing  wrong  to  be 
ambitious in life. We have to be ambitious. We have to aim high so that we can get better 
results. This is what we are doing.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the sky is the limit. Rightly said! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Budget does not just fix the roof while the sun is shining. It 
fixes the foundation too and that is why I commend this Budget to the House. We pray as 
patriots that God bless our beautiful little country. I have seen the pride of the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister after the speech of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. He has 
made  his  father  proud  of  him  and  I  will  end  on  this  note.  There  is  no  happiness  equal  to 
fulfilment. 

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Sawmynaden! 

(4.05 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  (Mr  Y.  Sawmynaden):  M.  le  président, 
permettez-moi dès le début de féliciter l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, ministre des finances et 
du développement économique pour la présentation d’un budget audacieux, innovant d’autant 
plus qui fait l’unanimité. Dans la lapse de temps très limité mon collègue, colistier et leader 
s’est attelé à la tâche herculéenne de préparer ce budget déterminant pour ce pays.  

Il est également important de souligner le rôle joué par le Chef du gouvernement, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. N’oublions pas qu’il occupa le portefeuille des finances pendant quelques 
temps et qu’il avait fait le ground work en menant des consultations prébudgétaires lui-même. 
En fin de compte, ce budget est en ligne avec la Vision 2030 dessiné par le Premier ministre 
l’an dernier. Il met en évidence la volonté du gouvernement de lancer de grands projets en 
vue  de  soutenir  notre  développement  économique  qui  plus  est  toujours  avec  cette  volonté 
d’innover  et  de  répondre  aux  attentes  de  la  population,  saluant  l’initiative  de  l’honorable 

 

65 

Pravind Jugnauth d’inviter le public à faire ses suggestions via le portail du gouvernement. 
Cette démarche a été un vrai succès et certaines propositions ont été incluses dans ce budget.  

M. le président, vendredi lors de son Budget Speech, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a 
situé  les  enjeux  et  les  priorités  d’une  manière  très  claire.  Face  à  la  situation  économique 
mondiale incertaine et au lendemain du Brexit, ce budget fait preuve d’audace et s’écarte des 
chantiers battus afin de rallumer le moteur de la croissance. Le budget comprend un ensemble 
de  mesures  visant  à  redonner  espoir  aux  Mauriciens,  en  priorité  aux  jeunes  et  aux  plus 
démunis.  On  ne  pouvait  faire  autrement  en  tant  que  truly  caring  government.  C’est  donc 
véritablement un budget Lepep de l’Alliance Lepep.  

Je  vais  accès  mon  intervention  sur  quatre  éléments  majeurs  de  ce  budget.  Tout 
d’abord la lutte contre la pauvreté. M. le président, ce gouvernement est l’alternatif plébiscité 
voulu par la population pour que les années où le Parti travailliste était au pouvoir ont été 
celles de l’exclusion aux profits des petits copains.  

En vue de corriger tout cela, l’Alliance Lepep avait, dès l’entame de son mandat, mis 
l’accent  sur  l’amélioration  du  quotidien  des  mauriciens  en  augmentant  la  pension  de 
vieillesse et en introduisant des tarifs sociaux pour l’eau et l’électricité. L’honorable Pravind 
Jugnauth va encore plus loin avec la mise en action du Plan Marshall contre la pauvreté -  

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

d’abord en allouant un revenu mensuel entre R 2,720 et R 9250 aux familles 
figurant sur le registre social du ministère de l’Intégration Sociale ; 
de plus, le montant accordé aux ONG passe à R 90 m.; 
ceux  âgés  de  moins  de  15  ans  sont  désormais  éligibles  à  la  pension 
d’invalidité ; 
le grant pour la crèche passe de R 1,500 à R 2,000, et 
last but not least, le prix du gaz ménager passe de R 330 à R 270 

Ces mesures prouvent encore une fois que l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a donné un nouveau 
souffle au combat contre l’extrême pauvreté. Il ne suffit pas de le dire que les choses vont 
mal, il faut venir de l’avant avec des mesures concrètes. C’est ce que le Grand Argentier a 
fait, he has walked the talk! 

M.  le  président,  j’en  viens  maintenant  à  une  autre  priorité  de  ce  budget  -  faciliter 
l’accession  au  logement.  Procurer  un  logement  décent  aux  familles  mauriciennes  est  une 

 

66 

nécessité.  Pour  que  la  famille  puisse  s’épanouir  et  vivre  en  harmonie,  c’est  un  élément 
primordial.  

Nous  le  savons,  beaucoup  de  nos  concitoyens    vivent  dans  la  promiscuité,  une 
situation engendrant bien des problèmes. Il était impératif de revoir la politique de logement 
social de ce pays. Le ministre des Finances a répondu à l’appel en accordant - 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

1 milliard de roupies pour construire 1,900 maisons sur 16 sites à travers le 
pays ; 
155 millions de roupies à la réhabilitation des complexes NHDC. 
8,000 maisons sur les 3 prochaines années à l’intention des familles à faibles 
revenus ; 
le salaire d’éligibilité passe de R 15,000 à R 20,000 pour une maison NHDC, 
et 
en  rayant  la  dette  de  ceux  devant  des  arriérages  sur  les  intérêts  pour  des 
emprunts  contractés  auprès  de  la  MHC  et  de  la  NHDC,  si  le  capital  dû  est 
payé. 

Ce budget fait provision aussi de toute une batterie de mesures en vue d’encourager 
les mauriciens à  être propriétaires de leur maison.  L’exemption des frais d’enregistrement, 
jusqu’en  2020,  pour  la  première  acquisition  d’un  appartement  ou  d’une  maison  permettra 
ainsi l’économie de R 300,000 pour une maison ou appartement valant R 6 millions. 

Nous vivons dans une île et nous faisons face à un problème d’espace. Il est clair que 
tout le monde ne pourra avoir un terrain avec jardin. Ce pourquoi petit à petit, nous voyons 
beaucoup  de  jeunes  couples  investir  dans  un  appartement.  C’est  aussi  l’évolution  de  la 
société. Le gouvernement devait réagir et il l’a fait. 

Avec l’exemption des frais d’enregistrement pour ceux prévoyant d’acquérir pour la 
première fois est une vraie aubaine. L’investissement dans une première résidence sera aussi 
déductible  de  la  taxe.  Je  note  aussi  que  ceux  ayant  une  maison  sur  un  terrain  municipal 
pourront désormais l’acquérir pour, tenez-vous  bien, la somme symbolique de R 2,000. Si 
cela  n’est  pas  une  caring  measure,  ça  y  ressemble  en  tout  cas!  Toutes  ces  mesures  vont 
relancer la construction et quand ce secteur va bien, tout va bien. 

M. le président, le 3eme volet de mon intervention concerne l’Education. Comme vous 
le  savez,  le  développement  d’un  pays  passe  automatiquement  par  un  système  éducatif 

 

67 

adéquat.  La  famille  mauricienne  a  toujours  mis  l’accent  sur  l’éducation  et  c’est  ce  qui  a 
permis à ce pays d’évoluer  rapidement. En vue de concrétiser this new era of development, 
tel  qu’il  le  préconise,  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  brasse  large.  Il  ne  veut  pas  d’une 
éducation à deux vitesse, avec d’un côté l’élite et de l’autre ceux et celles qui ne bénéficient 
pas d’une formation. 

Dans  le  sillage  de  la  réforme  majeure  enclenchée  par  notre  collègue  et  colistière 
l’honorable  Madame  Dookun-Luchoomun,  le  ministre  des  Finances  accorde  plus  de  R  16 
milliards à un véritable upgrading du secteur éducatif. Beaucoup de pédagogues le disent, la 
période de la petite enfance est celle où l’enfant emmagasine le plus de connaissance. A cet 
effet, le Nine-Year Continuous Basic Education fait la part belle à ces premières années de 
scolarité par le biais de nouvelles méthodes d’évaluation.  

De  ce  fait,  340  Trainee  Educators  seront  recrutés  pour  aider  au  développement 
holistique  des  enfants.  75  autres  enseignants  viendront  renforcer  le  remedial  education  au 
primaire sans oublier l’embauche de 600 professeurs pour le primaire et le secondaire. Faites 
le compte: déjà un millier d’emplois générés pour nos jeunes diplômés! 

Il  était  important  aussi  de  rééquilibrer  notre  modèle  de  société  en  donnant  plus  de 
poids à la formation pré-vocationnelle. N’oublions pas que c’est Sir Anerood Jugnauth qui 
lança  le  concept  en  faisant  voter  l’IVTB  Act  en  1988.  Il  fut  le  Premier  ministre  de  la 
Formation  qui  inaugura  des  écoles  pouvant  accueillir  des  milliers  de  jeunes  éjectés  du 
système académique. Hélas, ces écoles ne furent point une priorité sous le régime travailliste 
qui hélas a fait beaucoup de tort à nos jeunes. 

Aujourd’hui, le MITD a pris le relais et ce gouvernement investit à nouveau avec le 
projet de construire trois nouvelles institutions polytechniques. De plus, la considération des 
special  needy  children  est  présente  avec  la  construction  de  deux  écoles  à  Moka  et  Allée 
Brillant  à  l’intention  des  enfants  autrement  capable.  D’un  autre  côté,  l’extension  de  la 
distribution de tablettes tactiles est une mesure visant à réduire le digital gap par rapport à 
d’autres pays. 

D’autres mesures significatives à l’intention des enfants et des étudiants - l’exemption 
de la TVA sur les céréales et l’augmentation du meal allowance de R 40 à R 60 pour ceux 
fréquentant les écoles ZEP.  

68 

 
Je note aussi la volonté de l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth d’encourager les étudiants 
provenant de familles pauvres à compléter leurs études, car trop souvent ils abandonnent les 
bancs de l’école par faute de moyens. A Maurice, il existe encore des familles n’arrivant pas 
à se procurer le minimum essentiel pour que leurs enfants aillent  à l’école. 

juvénile  et 

On le sait tous, maintenir un enfant dans le système scolaire c’est la meilleure solution 
contre 
les  mauvaises  fréquentations.  Imaginez-vous,  ce 
la  délinquance 
gouvernement va récompenser ceux et celles qui auront compléter le nine-year schooling par 
une somme de R 15,000, R 25,000 pour un SC ou un autre certificat d’études vocationnelles 
et R 35,000 pour le HSC! Là-aussi, c’est une première dans les annales de l’histoire de ce 
pays et encore une fois, c’est une mesure résolument Pro-Lepep! 

M.  le  président,  éduquer,  c’est  une  chose,  mais  créer  des  emplois  pour  nos  jeunes, 
c’est  encore  mieux.  Je  ne  peux  m’empêcher  d’évoquer  la  politique  prônée  à  cet  effet  par 
l’ancien régime - un gradué/diplômé par famille! Le mot est grand! Nous savons aujourd’hui 
que  cette  stratégie  visait  à  remplir  les  bogus  universities  que  les  petits  copains  du  Parti 
Travailliste avaient créées. Combien de familles ont vécu un véritable drame en découvrant 
que les études qu’elles avaient payé à leurs enfants ne valaient rien?  

Il  ne  fait  aucun  doute  que  notre  ministre  des  Finances  a  compris  l’urgence  qu’il  y 
avait à sortir ces milliers de jeunes du chômage. C’est pour cela qu’il a concocté toute une 
série de mesures afin que près de 21,000 jeunes trouvent un emploi au plus vite. Une entité 
unique,  la  National  Employment  Agency,  aura  pour  tâche  de  canaliser  ces  jeunes  vers  une 
formation rémunérée ou un emploi. 

M. le président, j’arrive maintenant au dernier volet de mon intervention - les mesures 
concernant mon ministère. Je suis ravi de voir que l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a répondu 
favorablement à nos demandes et je le remercie vivement.  

Comme vous le savez tous, le sport est l’élément unificateur d’un peuple et le sportif 
est le plus grand travailleur social d’un pays et aussi ambassadeur de la paix. Le sport est 
aussi  considéré  comme  une  belle  vitrine  pour  Maurice  tel  que  l’ont  prouvé  le  tournoi  de 
Rugby, de Golf, les Trails et tout dernièrement le Kite Surfing à Rodrigues.  Cela prouve que 
le sport contribue à l’économie du pays.  

Ma  première  année  à  la  tête  du  ministère  a  été  marquée  par  une  série  de  résultats 
sportifs extraordinaires. Vous vous souviendrez que lorsque la responsabilité du ministère de 

 

69 

la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports  m’a  été  confiée,  nous  étions  à  la  veille  des  9e  Jeux  des  Iles  de 
l’Océan Indien.  

Certains oiseaux de mauvais augure prédisaient le pire. Mes détracteurs disaient que 

j’étais un marchand de rêves! Moi je prévoyais un déclic du sport mauricien…. 

Non. Ce n’est pas l’honorable Quirin ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

… car six mois avant les jeux, j’avais mis en place une nouvelle méthode de travail, 

axée sur le bien-être des athlètes. Il fallait qu’ils soient au cœur de nos préoccupations.  

Dans  ce  contexte,  un  nutritionniste  et  un  psychologue  avaient  été  rajoutés  à 
l’encadrement  des  sportifs  au  sein  du  Medical  Unit.  Nous  leur  avons  accordé  des  stages 
d’entraînement à l’étranger et recruter des DTN pour mieux les encadrer. Tout cela a eu un 
impact positif sur leurs performances. 

Maurice  a  enregistré  une  performance  sans  précédent  en  remportant  66  médailles 
d’or, 49 d’argent et 70 médailles de bronze à la Réunion. Ceci est la meilleure performance 
jamais réalisée par Maurice à ces Jeux depuis sa première édition en 1979. 

(Interruptions) 

Juste  après,  on  a  fait  encore  mieux  aux  11ème  Jeux  d’Afrique  au  Congo,  Brazzaville  en  se 
classant 7ème sur 54 pays participants… 

(Interruptions) 

…en raflant 7 médailles d'or, 2 d'argent et 5 médailles de bronze. Et là dans quelques 

jours, douze de nos sportifs vont participer aux Jeux Olympiques à Rio, au Brésil. 

(Interruptions) 

Pour  ces  Jeux,  le  ministère  à  travers  le  High  Level  Sports  Unit  leur  a  accordé  une 
indemnité supplémentaire de Rs10,000 en sus de leur allocation mensuelle à tous ceux qui 
ont obtenu leur qualification sur la base de leur performance. Et de Rs5,000 à ceux qui vont 

 

70 

participer sur la base d'une invitation du Comité International Olympique. Sans compter nos 
deux athlètes qui vont participer aux Jeux Paralympiques du 7 au 18 Septembre. 

Les faits sont là, le sport mauricien revit à nouveau. Mais sans investir massivement, 
nous  n’aurons  pas  de  tels  résultats.  Je  félicite  mon  leader,  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth 
d’avoir pensé à la remise à niveau de nos infrastructures sportives en vue des Jeux des Iles 
2019,  qui  se  tiendront  à  Maurice.  La  construction  d’un  complexe  multisports  à  St-Pierre 
s’insère dans la politique gouvernementale de démocratiser les pôles sportifs.  Pourquoi St 
Pierre? Est-ce- que c’est la circonscription du ministre ou la circonscription du ministre des 
finances? Non, M. le président. Désormais, St Pierre est le centre du pays, bien desservi avec 
l’axe Verdun-Terre Rouge… 

…. qui est névralgique.  

(Interruptions) 

Ce complexe inclura une piscine, une infrastructure de qualité qui ne permettra pas 
qu’aux cohabitants de St Pierre de s’adonner à la natation mais aussi aux habitants d’Ebène, 
de Phoenix, d’Hermitage, de Montagne Longue, de Crève-Cœur et de la région de Flacq de 
par sa position centre de l’île. Avec la natation inscrite au programme scolaire des écoles, il 
fallait une piscine pour la population de cette partie de l’île. Même philosophie avec le projet 
de construction d’une piscine à Rivière des Anguilles qui accueillera les mauriciens habitant 
le sud de l’île.  

(Interruptions) 

Le but de ce gouvernement est de construire des infrastructures afin de permettre à 
tout le monde de s’en servir. Je note avec satisfaction que l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a 
aussi  répondu  à  l’appel  de  mon  ministère  en  vue  de  doter  le  stade  de  Camp  du  Roi  à 
Rodrigues d’une piste d’échauffement. Vous le saviez Rodrigues est un vrai vivier de talents 
sportifs. Une telle mesure va aider à dénicher d’autres espoirs de l’athlétisme.  

M. le président, le soutien du gouvernement est plus que nécessaire pour la survie du 
football professionnel. Seule, la Mauritius Professional Football League ne peut assurer la 
pérennité du sport roi. Il est intéressant de noter que plus de 300 emplois directs ont été créés. 
Chaque week-end, une moyenne totale de 5,000 spectateurs assistent aux matches de football 
dans cinq stades.  

71 

 
Nous  avons  aussi  relancé  les  écoles  de  foot.  C’est  là  que  proviendra  la  prochaine 
génération de footballeurs. Toutes les écoles de foot qui étaient en sommeil quand j’ai pris 
mes fonctions ont été réactivées en août 2015.  

En  raison  des  contraintes  budgétaires,  il  n'a  pas  été  possible  d'assurer  le 
fonctionnement de toutes ces structures. Ainsi, dans un premier temps, 24 écoles de foot, 12 
centres  techniques  régionaux  et  le  Centre  Technique  National  François  Blaquart  sont 
redevenus opérationnels. 

Comme je l'ai annoncé récemment, dans cette même assemblée, une somme de R 5 
millions sera  consacrée à assurer leur fonctionnement à plein régime dans toutes les régions. 

M. le président, à l'heure actuelle, 105 athlètes y compris ceux ayant un handicap sont 
répertoriés au sein du High-Level Sports Unit du ministère. La performance de chaque athlète 
est étroitement surveillée et la liste est revue sur une base trimestrielle pour inclure, retirer ou 
remettre à jour les athlètes sur la base des performances enregistrées au cours du trimestre 
précédent. 

Ce système garantit un revenu régulier à l’athlète. Mais que se passe-t-il à la fin de sa 
carrière sportive ? Pendant trop longtemps cette question est demeurée sans réponse. Du jour 
au lendemain, ces athlètes qui ont fait la fierté du quadricolore se retrouvent abandonnés. J’ai 
décidé que cette situation avait assez duré. 

Voilà pourquoi nous projetons de mieux encadrer l’après-carrière de nos sportifs. Le 

plan inscrit dans ce budget vise à assurer leur développement professionnel.  

A cet effet, le Trust Fund for Excellence in Sports sera revu et reformé en profondeur 
et  nous  viendrons  sous  peu  avec  un  nouvel  organigramme  qui  aura  pour  but  de  faciliter 
l’employabilité des sportifs. 

(Interruptions) 

Vous l’aurez aussi noté que provision a été faite pour soutenir nos projets en faveur de 
la  pratique  sportive  de  masse  que  nous  promouvons.  L’ouverture  gratuite  au  public  des 
infrastructures se trouvant dans des écoles et collèges d’état est un vrai succès, et bientôt le 
public aura accès aux gymnases. Cette action fait suite au succès populaire remportée par les 
Jeux des Quartiers initiés l’an dernier. Ce type d’événement tient à encourager les mauriciens 
à pratiquer le sport en famille. 

 
En ce qu’il s’agit de la section Jeunesse, nous finalisons le plan SMART Youth 2020. 

72 

Il préconise une nouvelle approche face à une jeunesse qui a beaucoup changé.  

le 

Il  existe  déjà 

trident  formation-sensibilisation-loisirs  mais  nous  devons 
impérativement revoir nos actions. Afin de lutter plus efficacement contre les fléaux comme 
la drogue et les grossesses précoces, il est primordial de conscientiser d’une nouvelle manière 
avec de nouvelles méthodes car les causeries et autres forums ne marchent plus. Nous devons 
aujourd’hui miser sur le visuel, via des spots plus percutants. Et là les habitants de Cité La 
Cure sont contents de voir le Centre de Jeunesse de la localité déjà en construction car dans le 
passé ils ont été témoins de plusieurs poses de première pierre sans rien après, tout comme le 
camping  site  à  Bel  Ombre.  Je  voudrai  aussi  informer  la  Chambre  suite  au  speech  de 
l’honorable Reza Uteem que le Stade Auguste Volaire est aussi en rénovation et le travail a 
déjà démarré.  

(Interruptions) 

M.  le  président,  en  conclusion,  je  dirai  que  ce  budget  tombe  à  pic  pour  une  île 
Maurice qui avait grand besoin d’un nouveau cap. Le ministre des Finances est un homme de 
dialogue. Il a consulté, au sens le plus large, avant de préparer ce budget. En proposant toutes 
ces mesures réalisables, il active le Plan Marshall contre la pauvreté, il répond à l’attente des 
jeunes chômeurs, il soulage le porte-monnaie des Mauriciens. 

Pravind  Jugnauth  nous  a  livré  un  budget  à  visage  humain,  centré  sur  l’urgence  à 
tendre la main aux plus démunis. Ce n’est pas un budget de technocrate. C’est pourquoi la 
population  en  général  et  le  secteur  privé  sont  unanimes  à  l’applaudir ;  d’autres  le  trouve 
même intéressant. Bref, c’est un budget qui a du cœur, car il est à l’image de mon leader, 
Pravind Jugnauth. 

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour! 

At 4.30 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.07 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Mr R. Rampertab (Second Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Madam Speaker, 
thank you for allowing me the floor this afternoon, in this august Assembly, to address this 

 

73 

House after our second Budget Speech which was delivered by our Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development, hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, at the last sitting. 

First and foremost, I must congratulate him for a great Budget Speech. It was, indeed, 
an inspirational moment for us all to be favoured with such a broad socioeconomic insight on 
the instructive, objective and mission of the Budget 2016-2017.  It is all about a sincere and 
faithful  essence  to  boost  our  economic  landscape,  to  enhance  the  lives  of  our  people,  and 
more importantly, to focus on our shared vision to build a greater Mauritius. This Budget is 
all about accomplishments and not speculations. 

Now, Madam Speaker, I would like to share some of my views on this Budget Speech 
made by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development. Today, Madam Speaker, one 
of the challenges facing Mauritius, as outlined in Chapter X, page 47, paragraph 363 of the 
Budget Speech, is the implementation of the Public Sector Reform Programme when it comes 
to the National Development Unit along with the reorganisation of the 35 Citizens Advice 
Bureaus around the island. Only lately, our Rt. hon. Prime Minister had just inaugurated the 
36th one on Rodrigues, and we all know that our Rt. hon. Prime Minister has got a special 
place in his heart for the people of Rodrigues. 

The concept of our Citizens Advice Bureaus, Madam Speaker, is based on the British 
model,  which  was  introduced  in  1989  by  our  present  Prime  Minister.    The  vision  was  to 
bridge the gap between urban and rural developments, as it was noticed at that time that there 
was  a  great  disparity  between  urban  and  rural  regions  at  different  levels,  namely  the 
infrastructure and social developments. I can say presently, Madam Speaker, that the services 
offered  by  the  CAB  office  are  not  many  but  they  are  there  mainly  to  provide  firstly, 
assistance and guidance to members of the public on facilities extended by the Government 
and the public sector. It also acts as a facilitating agency. It serves as forum for cooperation 
and collaboration between NGOs and stakeholders to promote developments in the regions. It 
also  organises  sensitisation  campaigns  on  pertinent  themes  based  on  prevailing  needs  and 
other  emerging  issues  to  create  a  well-informed  society  oriented  towards  developments.  It 
also organises stakeholders meeting to facilitate communication with service providers. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  we  took  Government  in  2014  we  have  seen  and  witnessed 
some developments as far as the functioning of  the CAB office is concerned and with the 
help  of  my  colleagues  PPS  the  CABs  are  now  working  very  closely  with  the  Ministry  of 
Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare,  the  National  Human  Rights 

 

74 

Commission,  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  and  the  Ombudsperson  for  Children 
Office. Many talks have been organised in the past 16 months in our 35 bureaus in Mauritius, 
dealing with rights and responsibilities of citizens, domestic violence, the child and elderly 
protection,  human  rights  in  general  and  equal  opportunities  perspective  in  general  and 
cleanup campaigns as well. 

Madam Speaker, having worked with the CAB offices in my Constituencies, namely 
Nos. 8, 9 and 10,  I would humbly direct the following proposals for the revamping of the 
Citizen’s Advice Bureaus. It is high time for CAB organisers to get appropriate and relevant 
training both at local level and at international  level on customer services. The UK model 
may be served as guidance. 

 It is also good to know, Madam Speaker, and I must say that, in the United Kingdom 
for  someone  to  be  allowed  to  serve  or  to  work  in  a  Citizen’s  Advice  Bureau,  it  is  a 
prerequisite that he or she needs to go for dedicated and customised training whereby each 
one gets a personal learning training at the end. They have to cover topics like, for example, 
family  and  personal,  information  system,  responding  to  clients,  interviewing  skills,  credit 
debt, social policy, income tax, housing and many others. Furthermore, each volunteer has to 
go  through  the  structured  training  before  being  allowed  to  serve  in  a  Citizen’s  Advice 
Bureau.  

Here,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  paragraph  99  of  our  Government 

Programme 2015–2019, whereby it states that – 

“The role of the Citizen’s Advice Bureau (CAB) as the interface between government 
and the public will be reviewed and improved.” 

And,  accordingly,  I  would  like  to  propose  that  Citizen’s  Advice  Bureau  provides  the 
following new services and I can’t see why we should not have legal service which should be 
provided definitely by the CAB office like in the United Kingdom. It is proposed to provide a 
similar  service  to  enhance  access  to  legal  services  to  vulnerable  citizens  such  as  cases 
regarding  family  law,  landlord  and  tenant  disputes  and  property  law  which  should  be 
considered. Also, we can look at providing a counselling service to vulnerable groups. Social 
development comprises physical and infrastructural as well as soft and human development. 
Deprived  areas  and  vulnerable  people  also  need  social  accompaniment  and  psychological 
support  for  their  optimal  social  functioning.  Madam  Speaker,  having  said  that,  I  must 

 

75 

highlight that they are constrained by staff shortage. The present staffing is not commensurate 
with the ambition of the new Government and the society at large. We definitely need to give 
further training to our staff.  

Madam Speaker, now, I will take the opportunity to refer to the Budget Speech of the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development at paragraph 221 in relation to the plan 
set up of a dedicated Land Drainage Authority. In light of the climate change and its impact 
on our island whereby floods have recently disrupted the everyday life of the whole nation, I 
am  relieved  to  know  that  our  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
allocated  the  amount  of  Rs940  m.  for  the  year  2016-2017  to  cater  for  drain  works  in 
Mauritius and in Rodrigues, not to forget the additional Rs270 m. that have been provided to 
the Ministry of Local Government to carry out drain works across the island.  

On behalf of my constituents I would like to convey my special thanks to the hon. 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development for adding this item into the Budget. 

Madam  Speaker,  furthermore,  I  also  note  that  Government  has  been  to  date  very 

active in my constituency, namely with the following projects like the – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

St Julien D'Hotman by-pass,  
Bel Air Mediclinic; 
Pont Lardier Water Treatment Plant; 
replacement of old and defective water pipes; 
drain projects, which are already on their way and it will take only a few 
weeks probably to start working on them in Saint Pierre, St Remy, Cité Argy 
in Flacq and in Clementia and Lesure near Bel Air. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development and the Minister of Health and Quality of Life, hon. Gayan, for his 
recommendation on behalf of my colleagues, hon. Dayal and hon. Minister Roopun and of 
my constituents again for including in his Budget  the construction of a new hospital in Flacq. 
It is very important to point out that this hospital, Madam Speaker, was long overdue as there 
is currently a huge pressure on the present hospital to cater for the needs of approximately 
300,000 inhabitants for Constituency Nos. 8, 9, 10 and partly 11. Today we cannot have a 
hospital which is lacking so much in facilities whereby patients have to be transferred either 
to the SSRN Hospital, Dr. Jeetoo Hospital or Rose Belle Hospital for scanning or MRI every 

 

76 

day.  So,  it  is  very  alarming  and  I  am  so  grateful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development  and the hon. Minister of Health  and Quality of  Life for including 
that in our Budget. 

Now, Madam Speaker, I will come in the light of Brexit and its immediate challenges 
for our economy. There is an urgent need to reposition our manufacturing sector in order to 
improve its competitiveness. This point has been well argued by the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development in his Budget Speech and I shall demonstrate its relevance to our 
rural economies, the SME sector and the national macroeconomic perspectives. Accordingly, 
lately  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Organising  Committee  of  the India-Mauritius  Global 
Partnership Conference which was held on 24 and 27 of July of this year in Mauritius, I am 
pleased to inform that the theme is all set to welcome a series of projects that will give a 
dynamic boost to our economic growth in several areas. As at today, at least 25 firm project 
intents have been earmarked and several high-profile discussions have taken place followed 
by concrete MoUs duly being signed by the Indian delegates with our private sector. There 
are potentially additional more MoUs in the pipeline. 

As  stated  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  at  page  8, 
paragraph 62 that there has already been expression of interest by the said Indian delegates in 
setting up of several manufacturing projects in Mauritius with the aim of using Mauritius as a 
Freeport  zone  and  as  a  hub  for  exporting  to  Africa.  This  initiative  will  certainly  bring 
considerable  value  to  our  economy,  namely  to  the  SME  sector  with  suitable  chance  of 
technology, our FDI will definitely grow up and sideline business opportunities for our young 
entrepreneurs in search for new horizons. Here, I wish to thank the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development  for  taking  the  initiative  to  implement  new  measures  to  boost 
activities in the Freeport as per page 9, paragraph 70 of the Budget Speech. 

Madam  Speaker,  again,  in  my  capacity  as  Chairman  of  this  Conference  I  am  very 
pleased  to  inform  the  House  that  the  CEO  of  Bombay  Stock  Exchange  attended  the 
conference in Mauritius, whom I met during my road show in India and during the opening 
ceremony of the conference. 

A historic MoU has been signed between the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and the 
Bombay  Stock  Exchange  that  will  open  a  new era  of  cooperation  with  one  of  the  world’s 
prime stock exchange. And today, Bombay Stock Exchange is ranked third in the world.  So, 

 

77 

it is really a great pleasure to have them helping us. I am sure, as they have promised, they 
will help our local stock exchange to go up.  

Today,  if  you  will  see,  Hong  Kong  is  only  about  eight  kilometres  from  North  to 
South.  Look how they are operating!  Look at Singapore, how they are operating! But why 
can’t Mauritius? Why are we lagging behind these countries?  We have got all the abilities; 
we have got the potential to do well. Today, I am proud to say that Bombay Stock Exchange 
is willing to help us to go up. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  intervention  with  the  following 
reflection.  The  Budget  2016/2017  should  be  highly  praised  by  all  the  Members  of  the 
Assembly because it is a demonstration of economic bravery. The measures elaborated by the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development are daring only to those who have at 
heart the development of our country. It is our turn now to drive these measures to successful 
heights. We cannot sit back as mere spectators and wonder who and how to take the lead and 
execute them.  

A  budget  is  an  act  of  faith.  Each  citizen  of  this  country  should  adhere  to  its  core 
values and visions. We all have a shared responsibility for the positive transformation of our 
nation. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has set the target high up in 
the  skies  and  each  and  every  player  of  our  economy  has  been  provided  with  a  suitable 
package of incentives. It is now the challenge to convert these same measures into dynamic 
growth metrics. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

(5.19 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 

Speaker, I will start by saying one good thing about this budget. 

(Interruptions) 

I said one good thing. The one good thing only… 

(Interruptions) 

 

…which is that the … 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

78 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ramful: … current Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been 
able, through his budgetary gymnastic, to hide under the carpet the mess that his predecessor 
has left the country. This is the only one good thing about the budget. He has, through his 
budgetary gymnastic, blinded the population out of the turmoil that his predecessor left this 
country. I am talking here about the previous budget, the Budget 2015/2016. 

There is wide  consensus in the population that the previous budget, unfortunately, 
was a non-starter; it was a non-event. What was not promised by the previous Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development! If I go through the number of promises that were made 
in the last budget, the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development – well, sweet 
talker as usual - promised to the population the following –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

GDP  growth  for  2015/2016  would  be  5.3%  and  2016/2017  would  be  5.7%, 
instead the reality is that growth fell down to 3.6% in 2014 to 3% in 2015;  
we  were  promised  high  investment  –  Maurice,  un  vaste  chantier  de 
développement. However, when we look at the figures, both public and private 
investment followed a downward trend from 19.4% in 2014 to 17.5% in 2015; 
Foreign Direct Investment plunged from approximately Rs18 billion in 2014 
to Rs9 billion in 2015, approximately half the amount;  

(iv)  we were promised high employment; we were promised Ile Maurice, nation 

(v) 

d’entrepreneurs – Rs10 billion were earmarked for new entrepreneurs; 
we  were  promised  the  setting  up  of  an  SME  Bank,  but  we  ended  up  with 
MauBank - not no bank, MauBank; 

(vi)  we were told that 3,000 gradués chômeurs would be enlisted to follow tailor-
made crash courses, but the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, 
Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, in a question that I had put to her, 
stated  that  there  were  only  76  gradués  chômeurs  who  had  enrolled  for  the 
crash courses; 

(vii)  we  were  seduced  by  the  concept  of  parrainage  of  the  cité  ouvrière  and  we 
know  the  results.    The  concept  of  parrainage  has  failed  and  the  current 

 

(viii) 

79 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development has had to change the whole 
concept, and 
lastly,  we  were  told  that  they  will  change  the  nation  from  une  nation 
zougadère  to  une  nation  d’entrepreneurs.  But  what  has  happened?  Ten 
additional betting licences were granted!   

So, this was what was … 

(Interruptions) 

Thank you for the answer. Well, I can go on, Madam Speaker, citing numerous examples of 
broken promises. 

Now, we are being told that the potion magique n’a pas marché.  The magician has 

gone; he has left. 

(Interruptions) 

From the post! Now, we have a lifesaver.  The lifesaver will take us from this turmoil and 
will lead the way for the population, for all the Mauritians.  But we should not forget that we 
have wasted one and a half years. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr  Ramful:  And  now  we  are  being  told  that  this  present  budget  is  a  budget  de 
rupture.    Let  me  quote  just  to  make  it  more  interesting!    When  I  spoke  about  nation 
zougadère, let me quote what the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development said. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ramful: Let me quote what he said during his summing-up! Very touching!  He 

said – 

“This concept, (…).” 

Referring to the concept of nation zougadère. 

80 

 
“(…)  which  has  developed  through  the  years,  that  life  is  a  jackpot  is  not  in  our 
tradition; Opposition or Government. Our forefathers never came here to teach us that 
life is a jackpot, if you know how to play it, you win. We have been sent here to work 
hard and to earn what we have. So, people will understand that the cleansing process 
is  also  putting  order  in  this  ‘mentalité  zougadère’  that  developed  in  the  country 
because some people made a lot of money giving licences.” 

And we know what this Government has done with gaming and betting licences! 

So, now we are being told that this new budget is un budget de rupture.  I’ll refer to 

the introduction at page 1; I’ll quote from the Budget Speech, paragraph 7 to paragraph 11 – 

“7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

If we decide on a new course, we can change things for the better and come on 
top.  

The choice is clear. 

Today we choose to come on top - to move forward and up.  

Today we choose to break with the past that has stifled development for the 
last decade and see the future in a new light.  

The  challenges  of  tomorrow  cannot  be  met  with  our  mindset,  policies  and 
actions locked in the paradigm of yesterday.” 

Very well said!  There is only one phrase which, however, is very awkwardly placed.  I think, 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development should be fair in his analysis. He 
said – 

“Today  we  choose  to  break  with  the  past  that  has  stifled  development  for  the  last 
decade (…)”.   

Well, by saying so, unfortunately, he is blaming all the Ministers of Finance and Economic 
Development  who  have  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  the  last  ten 
years including himself, including the Deputy Prime Minister.  

But I will refer him… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Order! 

Order, please! 

81 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order!  Everybody will have the opportunity to address the Chair.  Everybody will have the 
opportunity to have their speech. So, you will have ample of opportunities to reply to what 
the hon. Member is saying! 

Mr Ramful:  Well, he should be fair in his analysis. Well, he should not forget that, 
in the last decade, we have had the loss of the textile preferences. We have had the soaring 
price of oil. 100$ barrel, not 40$! We have had the reduction in the price of sugar and we 
have had more particularly the Euro crisis. I will refer to a document published by the present 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  back  in  2010  when  he  was  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development. It was during the last ten years. ‘Facing the Euro Crisis: 
Restructuring for Long Term Resilience’, the hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth in August 2010 –  

“The Mauritian economy is once again buffeted by a major external shock, this 
time by the euro zone crisis. Once more, and in a relatively short span of time, 
Mauritius  is  called  upon  to  demonstrate  its  capacity  to  respond  effectively,  to 
adapt its policies and even to rethink its strategies” 

And he goes on to congratulate his predecessor, hon. Sithanen.  He said – 

“The  country  is  well  positioned  to  respond.  The  economy  has  already  shown  a 
considerable degree of resilience and has built an environment already conducive 
to  dynamic  entrepreneurial  activity.  Our  institutional  advantages  have  been 
noticed  by  international  investors  who  have  responded  positively  to  our 
transparent and well defined investment code and legal system.” 

So,  this  is  what  I  am  saying.    I  think  when  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development refers to this sentence, he should be fair.  He should consider in what position 

 

82 

the  country  was  or  the  external  factors  that  were  influencing  the  economy  during  the  last 
decade. 

Now, be it as it may, we are being told that this Government with his third Minister 
of Finance in one and a half years and endless economic statements should be trusted once 
again.  The population unfortunately has no choice.  They have voted.  They will have to wait 
for the mandate of this Government. 

(Interruptions) 

But then, I will say one word of caution to the present Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development - ‘Don’t fool the population again!’ 

‘Don’t fool the population again!’ 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, Madam Speaker, I will not deal in all the issues. There have been many issues 
that have been raised in the Budget, but I will focus on three main issues:  Education, Poverty 
Alleviation and Unemployment which I feel should be given due consideration.  I will start 
with Education. 

On Education, we are unfortunately rushing to a reform with our head buried in the 
sand. And I will say why?  Let us look at the statistics! CPE on average yearly, we have 20% 
to  25  %  of  students  who  cannot  get  through.  Form  III  National  Assessment,  recently 
published, 41.5 % in Mathematics succeeded. Chemistry, only 50% of our Form III students 
in colleges today are passing the Chemistry exams. Physics, only 32.5% of our students today 
in colleges are passing the Physics exams.   

(Interruptions) 

I will come to the reform!  We are not against the reform.  I will come to it.  Just give me 
some time!   

SC, average 25% fail every year.  HSC, average 35% fail every year and if we want to 
measure our educational system with other countries, if we want to measure the quality of 
education that was delivered in our schools with other countries, then we have to refer to the 

 

83 

PISA results, Programme for International Students Assessment in 2012.  I am going to fair, 
it  was  in  2012.    And  what  we  see,  out  of  65  countries,  including  all  OECD  countries, 
Mauritius  came  out  56th,  not  even  in  the  upper  half.    This  is  the  measurement  of  our 
educational achievement on international level.  

So, we agree.  I have never been against the reform.  I have always said, we have to 
reform  our  current  educational  system.  We  have  to  reform,  but  we  have  to  put  in  place  a 
system that would be able to give opportunity to all our children irrespective of their social 
background, but, at the same time, providing good quality education that reflects the need of 
the  industries  and  the  economy.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  has  taken  bold  decisions.  I  have  always 
encouraged her.  She has decided to implement the reform and we are actually in this process, 
reforming and restructuring the educational system which is the nine-year schooling.  

What this reform is going to entail? What structural changes are going to happen? In 
the next three years, because the first cohort of students who are presently in Standard V, next 
year they will be sitting for Grade VI and in three years Grade IX, they will be eligible for the 
Academies. So, we have three years to start the reform and to complete the reform. For the 
first cohort of students who are actually in Standard V, in three years’ time they will be in 
Form III, Grade IX.  

What do we have to restructure?  We have to bring about a new mode of assessment 
both at primary and secondary level. We need to introduce the Primary School Achievement 
Certificate at the end of Grade VI. We have the National Assessment at the level of Grade IX. 
We have to create the Academies. We have to revisit the entire syllabus, including primary 
and secondary. We have to be ready with all the textbooks, including primary and secondary. 
We  have  to  bring  about  the  infrastructural  changes  within  three  years.  We  have  to  recruit 
educators, train them so that they can deliver quality education to our children. We have to 
bring in all the stakeholders, including the BEC and the private sectors and we need to know 
their stand. All these have to be done in three years 

But  when  we  look  at  the  budgetary  provision,  I  feel  sorry.  I  feel  sorry  to  say  that, 
unfortunately, this Government is giving the impression that they are not serious about the 
reform. They are giving the impression as if… 

(Interruptions) 

 

84 

Well, I will go through the budgetary provisions! They are giving the impression as if they 
are not ready yet with the reform. So, if we are not ready, why are we rushing through? I will 
make  an  appeal  to  the  present  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 
Education  and  Scientific  Research.  Being  a  Minister  and  a  parent,  a  child  has  only  one 
opportunity in his lifetime to go through the educational system. Let us not, with this reform, 
bring  about  changes  that  will  make  this  child  regret  for  the  whole  of  his  life!  Let  us  be 
careful! If we are not ready, let us be ready, let us get prepared, then we go smoothly with the 
reform! 

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development estimated the cost of the 
reform to be Rs2 billion over a span of five years. We are not told where he got that figure 
from. I have asked a question and I was told that there were experts from the World Bank 
who  were  here,  in  Mauritius,  and  they  were  involved  in  the  evaluation  of  the  cost  and 
financial implications, etc., but we are not told in the Budget where he got that figure from. I 
said we have to be ready in three years. I see in the Public Sector Investment Programme that 
only Rs700 m. have been voted for the next three years. Now, I don’t know where we are 
going to dish out money for the reform. Regarding the Academies, the Minister of Education 
and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, unfortunately, has so far 
said very few about the Academies. Well, she is aware that such a reform cannot be done 
piecemeal,  there  must  be  visibility,  and  more  importantly,  parents  should  know  what 
educational system their children would be facing in the future. At the moment, when I talk to 
parents, they seem to be confused. The BEC appears to have some reservations on the idea of 
setting up the Academies. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, go back to the recent press interview … 

Madam Speaker: Address the Chair, please!  

Mr Ramful:…of the Director of the BEC! She made it clear. Go and look at what the 

BEC, l’Eglise Catholique, has published on the website, you will know the stand! 

We were told that with the introduction of the Primary School Assessment Certificate, 
private  tuitions  will  be  considerably  reduced.  Well,  we  seem  to  be  living  away  from  the 
reality! Go and see! Private tuitions have increased. Now, we have students of Form I, Form 
II and Form III taking private tuitions. We have primary schools students of Standard III and 
Standard IV taking tuitions illegally. Go and look at the reality out there! 

85 

 
Regarding  competition,  we  were  told  that  cut-throat  competition  would  be  reduced 
with the advent of the reform. Cut-throat competition! Now, students at Grade VI level will 
have to compete to get the best secondary school in their region. So, I can’t really understand. 
There will be regionalisation and still students from a particular region will have to compete 
to get the best secondary school in the region. So, this competition is still there and to add to 
this, now we will have competition at the level of Grade IX to get into the Academies. So, we 
are increasing competition. 

Books  are  not  ready.    I  had  to  intervene  during  Adjournment  Time  the  other  day. 
Books  were  not  ready  for  Standard  III  students.    As  I  have  said,  we  need  to  reform  the 
system, but we need to get the required financial resources, the appropriate human resource 
and the infrastructure ready. What we should not do is that we should not rush into the reform 
if we are not ready, and more importantly, I will make a humble request to the hon. Minister, 
don’t use our students as guinea pigs. Please, don’t! 

If you are not ready, be ready, then you come with your reform. 

(Interruptions) 

Now, I’ll come to the second issue, Madam Speaker, poverty alleviation. We give the 
impression – I am not referring to the current Government, all Governments – that we are 
ruling from an ivory tower. We don’t know, when we come to poverty, it is not a political 
issue. For me, it is not a political issue. It is a human right issue. We give the impression that 
we,  politicians,  are  living  in  an  ivory  tower,  away  from  the  realities  on  the  ground.  I  am 
asking  a  question:  this  Government  has  been  recruiting  people  in  the  Civil  Service, 
Policemen, people in the hospitals, in duty free and in the Port, how many of them come from 
those 6400 families who are in absolute poverty?  How many of them? Why are they not 
given the opportunities to come and secure employment in the public service? Why not? 

I have just said it is not a political issue, for me it is a human rights issue… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ramful: Giving money is a good thing, giving social aid is a good thing, but it is 

not enough and I will request the hon. Minister… 

 

I am going to tell the hon. Minister… 

Well, we are… 

We are coming with… 

86 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ramful: We have the Youth Employment Programme now extended to the public 

service! 

That is one way of doing it… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, if we have to come with positive discrimination for these 6400 families we have to do 
it… 

…in all fairness… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! Order! 

Mr Ramful: To coffre la en or mo tan dire! 

(Interruptions) 

I am going to quote… 

 

87 

(Interruptions) 

It is good here that I quote what Mandela said. He said –  

“Overcoming poverty is not a task of charity, it is an act of justice. Like slavery and 
apartheid poverty is not natural. It is man-made and it can be overcome and eradicated 
by the actions of human beings.” 

So, we have to act… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, we will see. I know he has got good intentions. 

(Interruptions) 

Successive  governments  have  taken  numerous  decisions  and  I  have  to  congratulate 
the present Deputy Prime Minister when he was Minister of Finance, so many decisions, the 
CSR  programme,  the  creation  of  a  Ministry  for  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment… 

(Interruptions) 

Rs130m. for hot meals in the ZEP schools, Rs100 m. for child allowance benefiting some 
20,000  children,  free  transport  for  students,  the  setting  up  of  the  Social  Register,  Income 
Support Programme Rs100 m. to support 8000 families… 

Several housing units for the needy… 

Well, we have to be… 

We have to congratulate him! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And all this under the Labour Government!  

 

88 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ramful:  You see I try to be constructive as well. I will request the hon. Minister 
of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment there is the Malta example. In 2014 they 
had come up with a report which is called a Framework for Poverty Reduction and for Social 
Inclusion 2015-2024. It is a ten-year strategy. I will request him to go and look at that report. 
What  is  more  important  when  we  talk  about  alleviation  of  poverty?  It  is  not  only  about 
dishing out money. It is about creating opportunities. It is about giving them employment. So, 
there must be a holistic and result-oriented approach. I request the hon. Minister to go and 
have a look at that document. 

Well, we will see… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes. Yes, we are still waiting for the Marshall Plan. We will see.  

Unemployment,  unfortunately  I  have  to  say  it,  we  are  creating  fictitious  and 
precarious jobs and taking palliative measures instead of secured permanent and long-term 
opportunities.  When  we  look  at  the  statistics,  I  remember  I  had  asked  a  question  on  this. 
When we look at the statistics, out of the 46,300 unemployed, 31 per cent do not have an SC, 
13 per cent do not hold a Certificate of Primary Education, making a total of 44 per cent not 
qualified at SC level. There are about 20,500 people.  

Now, these unemployed people are mainly low skilled people. What is being done in 
this Budget to upgrade their skills? Instead of creating secured employment through growth 
and  investment,  we  are  putting  them  on  dole  and  we  are  creating  a  disguised  way  of 
unemployment benefit. I remember in a question that I had put to the Minister of Labour, the 
House was informed that since 2013 some 14,984 people have been placed under the Youth 
Employment Programme. 14,984 which is a two-year programme and they are being paid a 
monthly  stipend  by  Government.  We  don’t  have  the  statistics  and  God  knows  how  many 
people are on workfare programme getting a stipend from Government!  

89 

 
So, what is Government doing?  We are putting those people on dole. We are giving 
them  monthly  stipend  without  creating  opportunities,  without  providing  them  a  permanent 
employment. Now, in this Budget we see that there is a new programme called the National 
Skills Development Programme for about 4000 youths. Again, they will be paid a monthly 
stipend and again they will be on contract, temporary jobs! Now we are extending this to the 
Civil Service and questions are being  raised about the legality of this, whether we are not 
bypassing the prerogatives of the PSC.  

In  last  year’s  Budget,  series  of  measures  were  announced  with  regard  to 
unemployment and unskilled workers and today, Madam Speaker, those low skilled jobless 
have the right to ask the following questions –  

(i) 

where is the chambre des métiers that was promised in order to recognise the 
skills and competencies of the trade persons and other technicians; 

 (ii)  where is the promise to revisit the role and functions of the MITD with greater 

emphasis on training of electricians, welders, etc.; 

(iii) 

the HRDC, unfortunately, has been changed into a revenue collection agency 
collecting levy grants from employers and paying back the money to them for 
training costs. We see the burgeoning of many training institutions nowadays 
without control with the sole objective of having a share of the levy grants at 
the expense of proper and targeted training; 

(iv)  what about the career guidance still in the pipeline? And we are talking about 

an educational system linked with the industry. 

(v)  What about the gradués chômeurs contributing to the problem of mismatch? 
Those  gradués  chomeurs  who  have,  unfortunately,  made  the  wrong  choice. 
What  about  them?  And  we  know  that  the  so-called  Graduate  Training  for 
Employment Scheme has not delivered the required result. 

So, all these issues require urgent attention in order to deal, in my humble opinion, 
with the issue of unemployment.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, we are being told, as I have 
said, that this new Finance Minister, unlike his predecessor, is a lifesaver and that this new 
Budget will be creating this time, not a second miracle économique, but that it is going to be 
a new era of development.  Now, whether this is really a budget de rupture with the past or a 

 

90 

budget de rupture with reality, only time will tell.  In the meantime, I say good luck to the 
new Finance Minister. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baboo! 

(5.58 p.m.) 

The Minister of Arts and Culture (Mr S. Baboo):  Madam Speaker,  

“Art washes away from the soul the dust of everyday life.” 

This quote is from Pablo Picasso. 

With your permission, let me first congratulate the Minister of Finance … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Baboo: … and Economic Development for the presentation of a budget geared 

towards the improvement of the quality of life of the citizens. 

In  a  context  where  the  global  economy  is  in  serious  crisis,  where  countries  are 
struggling very hard to survive, the hon. Minister of Finance has stood against all odds and 
prepared a Budget that answers the call for the eradication of poverty. This is a Budget for the 
people! 

The  gap  between  the  haves  and  the  have-nots  cannot  be  enlarged;  it  has  to  be 
narrowed. We want our citizens to lead a decent life in an all-inclusive society.  No one can 
be left out in the margin of development. This  Government is embarking on  a new  era of 
development.    A  wind  of  change  is  blowing.    Everyone  is  being  taken  on  board  of  the 
expressway of progress in this Budget.  We are all equal, and equal opportunities are being 
given to one and all. This is the mandate of this Government, Madam Speaker! This Budget 
has a transformative agenda with ten key strategies that will bring comfort and security to the 
population. 

Difficulties  and  challenges  are  being  turned  into  opportunities.  The  risk  of  further 
global slow-down will continue to be a threat given that as a Small Island Developing State, 
we face a lot of challenges - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

91 

limited  natural  resources  in  commercially  exploitable  minerals  and  financial 
resources to carry out socioeconomic development; 

vulnerability  to  natural  disasters  having  a  severe  impact  on  the  economy, 
which is dependent on few products as the main export; 

(iii) 

heavy dependence on external and internal institutions; 

(iv) 

(v) 

vulnerability  to  world  price  fluctuations;  we  are  price-takers  and  not  price-
makers, and 

lastly, the geographical location of Mauritius makes transport of cargo more 
expensive,  leading  to  diseconomies  of  scale,  high  transportation  costs,  and 
increased costs of goods. 

However,  in  view  of  its  strategic  geographical  location,  Mauritius  is  a  gateway  to  Africa, 
India, Asia and Europe, and this is a potential to be explored. 

   Despite our vulnerability, we are maintaining our resilience and arming ourselves to 
fight  the  scourge  of  poverty  and  control  public  expenditure.  Taxpayers’  money  will  be 
judiciously  used  for  the  development  of  the  Nation.  We  are  preparing  ourselves  by 
strengthening  our  firewalls  against  these  risks,  ensuring  macroeconomic  stability  and 
judicious fiscal management. 

Creativity  and  innovation  are  being  enhanced  to  make  our  society  a  model  of  self-
sustenance. The way the Budget has been presented is an innovation in itself.  It is not only a 
rational exercise of income and expenditure, but it has been prepared with a heart and soul, 
where our citizens have been placed at the centre of development of this country. As trustee 
of the population, this Government is honouring its obligation towards the Nation. 

The Budget for 2016-2017 is dynamic and innovative. 

(Interruptions) 

Let it be! 

The country will enter a new phase of development with project reforms in the agricultural, 
educational,  manufacturing,  ICT  and  financial  sectors.  Madam  Speaker,  as  per  Abraham 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, food, housing and clothing are of utmost importance, and this 

 

92 

has been given priority, as illustrated by the measures taken in this Budget. There is no doubt; 
this Budget reflects our determination to cross the poverty line in a sustainable way and fight 
against  social  exclusion.  The  adoption  of  a  Marshall  Plan  for  Poverty  Alleviation  will 
improve the lives of people living in conditions of extreme poverty. Hence, cash incentives 
are being provided to ZEP students in a bid to encourage those from poor families to achieve 
higher levels of education, and their meal allowance will be increased by 50 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, we have to produce our own food to reduce importation and save 

our foreign currency for the purchase of other products of necessity. For example - 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

unused and bare agricultural land will be made productive; 
grant  for  sheltered  farming  will  be  increased  to  encourage  planters  to 
undertake crop production under these structures; 
a Bio-Farming/Organic Zone will be set up in Britannia; 
a  new  orientation  will  be  given  to  animal  husbandry,  dairy  production  and 
bee-keeping; 
schemes  for protective nets for pest  control will  be provided to  ensure crop 
security for small scale fruit plant growers; 
cash  incentives  will  be  provided  to  farmers  for  boosting  the  production  of 
dairy products, and 
12.5  million  rupees  will  be  provided  for  the  purchase  of  floating  cage 
structures to promote aquaculture. 

These measures will shift our focus from a monocrop-diversified economy to bio- farming, as 
per the global trend. We will encourage our citizens to go back to cultivating their lands and 
producing food that we consume. 

The dedication of Government to rehabilitate existing housing units and  to provide 
some 2,700 houses, amounting to more than Rs1 billion, in the short term, as well as new tax 
exemptions for first-time buyers, bear testimony to our commitment in improving the lives of 
our  citizens.  It  enables  the  population  to  purchase  land  and  construct  houses  without  tax 
hurdles.  Clearly,  this  Government  is  committed  to  adopt  a  people-centric  approach  by 
providing  decent  housing  to  the  needy  and  most  vulnerable.    Moreover,  the  removal  of 
customs duty on several clothing items will attain the objectives of meeting the basic needs of 
the population. 

93 

 
Madam Speaker, to be able to lead a decent life, one need to earn a living.  A job 
gives  dignity  to  a  person,  and  we  have  the  moral  obligation  to  provide  this  dignity  to  our 
people.  This Budget upholds the dignity of our citizens.  It will bring happiness to the life of 
our people by creating more job opportunities and by upskilling their aptitudes in different 
areas that are required in our development process. It encompasses all sectors and caters for 
people from all walks of life, namely - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Tourism and hospitality; 
ICT; 
Nursing and paramedics; 
Construction, and 
Sea Faring. 

For instance - 

• 

• 

a  special  scheme  for  200  trainee  engineers  in  the  public  sector  is  being 
provided to enable their registration as professional engineers, and 
Youth Employment Programme and the Service to Mauritius Programme for 
young graduates to gain experience in various sectors to prepare them for the 
job market. 

With the setting up of a Skills Development Authority, I am personally convinced that 
the problem of skills mismatch, which is one of the main reasons for unemployment today, 
will be addressed.  

7,200 posts will be filled in the public sector. With these bold initiatives, Government 

will be providing some 21,400 persons with jobs in the private and public sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  will  lay  the  foundation  for  a  nation  of  modern 
entrepreneurs through measures that will enable them to improve capacity, enhance access to 
capital and markets, adopt technology, encourage innovation and develop human capital. 

SMEs will be given a new impetus with the abolition of trade fees for  licenses for 
three  years.  The  creative  genius  of  our  young  entrepreneurs  will  be  supported  and  put  to 
productive use.  In this regard, the suspension of Trade Fees, the introduction of 8-Year Tax 
holiday, the creation of a National SME Incubator Scheme, the SME Venture Capital Fund 
and an agri-Business Park, as well as the decreasing of interest rate from 7.4% to 6% and 

 

94 

access  to  leasing  are  strategies  that  will  set  the  tone  for  the  development  of  a  nation  of 
modern entrepreneurs. These measures reveal to the goodwill of the Government in getting 
businesses up so that they contribute actively to the national economy as quickly as possible.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  living  in  a  world  of  texts,  images,  SMS,  WhatsApp, 
Facebook, Twitter and many other applications.  I want to stress that we fully recognise the 
pervasive  challenges  that  new  technologies  play  in  our  economy  and  our  way  of  life.  We 
cannot  afford  to  lag  behind  in  the  digital  world.  We  are,  thus,  ever  more  committed  to 
providing the resources required in terms of equipment, technology and people to improve 
our competitiveness, stimulate activity and create jobs.  

Increased  connectivity  measures,  including  the  setting  up  of  an  additional  250  free 
Wifi Hot-spots and the ‘Third Undersea Cable’ project is a quantum leap towards the making 
of our Republic into a digital society.  An information highway among public sector agencies 
will help in the provision of a timely and quality information sharing to the population.  Our 
children will be initiated to the digital world as from primary school and digital tablets will be 
provided to them. 

Compared to other newly  developing countries,  our children have access to  IT and 
telephone  facilities.  This  has  been  made  possible  due  to  our  standard  of  living  which  has 
increased, as well as our educational system.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  is  off  the  beaten  track.  It  faces  the  critical  economic 
climate without imposing hardships on the population. Thus, the development of this country 
has reached a cruising speed. The road to the second economic miracle is gaining impetus 
and a new destiny is being forged for the population.  

As stated by the late Mrs Thatcher, former Prime Minister of UK – 

“The World does not owe us a living”.  

Therefore, the contribution of each and every citizen of the country, the commitment of the 
public and private sector are of paramount importance to make things happen. Together, we 
can achieve our objectives to shine as a developed nation and be a role model for this region.  

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  thank  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, for the soft spot that he has in his heart for arts and culture. In fact, I 
am happy to note that many of the proposals of my Ministry have been retained.  

95 

 
The  cultural  policy  of  this  Government  is  mainly  characterised  by  our  cultural 
diversity  based  on  the  principles  of  unity,  tolerance  and  mutual  understanding.  While 
upholding our common values and heritage, we are also creating the appropriate conditions 
for the development of the creative economy. 

Cultural  diversity  is  a  common  heritage  for  humanity.    It  is  the  main  spring  of 
sustainable  development,  a  source  of  innovation  and  creativity.  Arts  stimulate  the 
imagination and creativity, thereby, enhancing the self-confidence and cultural engagement 
of the population. 

The Ministry of Arts and Culture has the mission to foster a balanced and harmonious 
Mauritian  society  through  consolidation  of  existing  pluralism,  promotion  of  creativity  and 
adherence to our cultural values. 

We are an example for the world towards sustainable peace, based on our successful 
experience with multi-culturalism. Now is the time to promote Mauritius as a Capital City of 
cultural diversity.   

Madam Speaker, Mauritius is a land of diverse tangible and intangible heritage.  We 
value what we have inherited from our ancestors. Our cultural and natural environment, our 
values and traditions are the major elements that make us unique in the League of Nations. 

Mauritius  has  many  natural  treasures  and  a  rich  cultural  heritage  which  must  be 
preserved for future generations.  We have some one hundred and ninety-six (196) sites listed 
as National Heritage. 

Government has been at the forefront… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please be seated properly! 

Mr  Baboo:  ….by  undertaking  and  supporting  activities  and  projects  in  order  to 
identify  and preserve our national heritage as  well as to educate and sensitise citizens and 
tourists thereon.  

A provision of Rs50 m. has been made in the Budget to rehabilitate our historical and 

cultural heritage sites and structures listed under the National Heritage Fund Act. 

96 

 
We have undertaken a national inventory of our intangible cultural heritage and one 
of the elements, namely the traditional Mauritian Sega has been inscribed on the UNESCO 
representative list of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. 

The  next  one  which  is  on  the  agenda  of  the  nomination  committee  is  the  Bhojpuri 

Geet Gawai and subsequently the Sega Tambour of Rodrigues.   

(Interruptions) 

Preserving cultural heritage is vital for every nation. We cannot deny our past as our present 
and future are built on the foundation of the past. 

As  this  August  Assembly  may  be  aware,  this  Government  has  listed  not  less  that 
twelve  religious  sites  as  national  heritage  in  May  this  year.    This  is  a  grande  première, 
Madam Speaker! 

It recognises the spiritual maturity of the nation. It acknowledges the contribution of 
the civil society in the development of a serene environment to enable our people to go the 
extra mile and to give the best of themselves for moving ahead together as one People, one 
Nation. 

Two Cultural Villages will be set up at Trianon and Black River respectively, with a 
view  to  acknowledging  our  ancestral  values  and  to  provide  a  platform  for  our  artists  to 
promote their creativity and sell their products. 

The  safeguarding  of  our  archives  has  been  the  subject  of  great  concern  for  years. 
Attention has been drawn on the location of the building and the legitimate apprehension of 
the population on the fate of the memory of the nation.  This heritage will now finally be 
safeguarded for posterity! 

Rs105 m. have been provided in this budget to kick-start the construction of this long-
awaited building to house the National Archives Department and the National Library.  This 
was a very long struggle. In fact, this project was initiated since the 1990s but never took off. 

I must stress that finding a solution to this perpetual threat to our common heritage 
was very high on my agenda. It took us only 20 months to find a solution, with the support of 
the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

(i) 

At the international level, my Ministry has enhanced the visibility of the 
country through the inscription of the Records on Indenture Immigration on 

 

(ii) 

97 

the Memory of the World International Register of UNESCO in October 2015. 
This is another fitting tribute to the 
hard work of our ancestors in the making of Mauritius as a symbol of peace 
and progress. 
In June 2016, Mauritius has been nominated as a member of the UNESCO 
Inter-governmental Committee for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage. 
Madam Speaker, this is the first time that Mauritius will form part of the Inter-
governmental  Committee  comprising  twenty-four  member  States,  including 
three new members, namely Mauritius, Senegal and Zambia. 

Mauritius will now have voting rights on the Committee and will be allowed 
to participate in the decision-making process. 

(iii) 

(iv) 

Furthermore, for two consecutive years, Le Bocage International School and 
Le Chou College of Rodrigues won the ‘Coupe du Monde de Slam’ 
competition held in Paris in 2015 and 2016 respectively. 
A number of concerts are organised with artists from different countries. The 
private sector is also involved in the organisation of paid artistic and cultural 
activities, with the regular support of my Ministry. 

These events have a positive impact on the population. They keep them away from 
societal ills and give them the opportunity to appreciate artistic and cultural performance of 
International Standard. 

Madam  Speaker,  art  is  a  soothing  balm:  it  brings  solace  and  tranquillity;  it  helps 
individuals  to  relax  and  reduces  stress  at  a  time  when  the  world  is  living  under  perpetual 
threat of stress and its deriving illnesses. 

Art  therapy  improves  the  quality  of  life  of  individuals.  It  is  an  index  to  measure 

human happiness. 

Here, I would like to quote George Bernard Shaw who said – 

“Without  art,  the  crudeness  of  reality  would  make  the  world 
unbearable.” 

Literary works are the vehicles of thoughts and knowledge. They act as a guide in our 

daily life from our tender age. 

98 

 
Reading  stimulates  the  imagination  and  encourages  creativity.    It  broadens  our 
intellectual  horizon  and  helps  to  develop  independent  critical  thinking.    It  transcends  the 
benefits  to  individual.  As  long  as  the  pen  exists,  the  book  will  continue  to  be  our  faithful 
companion throughout our life. 

The  pleasure  derived  from  the  pen  and  of  holding  a  book  in  the  hand  cannot  be 
compared to a soft version of a piece of writing. Though e-books have numerous advantages, 
the physical books still have their importance. To this end, a substantial increase has been 
made  in  the  budget  for  the  operation  of  the  Centre  de  Lecture  et  d’Animation  Culturelle, 
operating under my Ministry.  

Madam Speaker, Cultural Tourism is a highly economic activity which is being given 
the  attention  it  deserves.  It  is  a  fact  that  culture  is  connected  to  tourism.    It  attracts  and 
appeals.  We  have  a  rich  history,  a  variety  of  cultures  and  traditions,  music  and  dance, 
architecture, museums, galleries, historical and World Heritage Sites. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  budget  has  brought  an  innovative  touch  in  the  form  of  a 
Mauritian Calendar.  In fact, my Ministry organises at least one artistic/cultural event every 
week.  Some  two  hundred  activities  are,  hence,  organised  yearly,  comprising  national 
festivals,  exhibitions,  cultural  shows,  drama  festivals,  international  days,  concerts  by  local 
and foreign artists, including the activities of the twenty-eight parastatal bodies falling under 
the purview of my Ministry. 

The participation of foreign artists in our events has been made possible due to the 
excellent ties/diplomatic relations with other countries under Cultural Exchange Programmes 
(CEP).  The  CEP  enhances  links  with  other  countries  as  well  as  regional  and  international 
organisations. 

The  Mauritius  Calendar  will  bring  together  and  highlight  all  the  events  in  a 
chronological  way  and  enable  the  population  to  be  aware  of  what’s  happening  as  well  as 
attract tourists. Entrance to most of the events and activities is free. 

We  have  all  the  ingredients  to  attract  the  interest  of  tourists  who  are  in  quest  of 
adventure  and  novelty.    Mauritius  being  a  multi-cultural  country  has  the  advantage  of 
providing a glimpse of African, Asian, European arts and cultures on one platform. 

We can make the stay of tourists memorable and more meaningful. We will provide a 
good mix of our tangible and intangible resources in the culture value chain to attract more 
tourists, in collaboration with the Ministry of Tourism and External Communications. 

99 

 
The  Heritage  Industry  is  being  given  a  new  impetus  with  the  growing  Tourism 
Industry.  Madam Speaker, even though the social status of artists has improved considerably 
and the importance of quality performances and the creativity are valued, legal protection of 
artists’ rights has not been fully accomplished. 

There is a wrong perception that creative workers are people who live a life of fame, 
glamour and riches. Unfortunately, for the vast majority of artists, this is not so. In fact, it is a 
lifetime of hard, unstable, fluctuating work, long hours and inadequate income. Artists cannot 
only live by their art. They have to rely on a second employment for their subsistence. 

In  line  with  the  recommendation  concerning  the  status  of  artists  adopted  by  the 
General  Conference  of  UNESCO  in  Belgrade  in  September-October  1980,  my  Ministry  is 
working on the status of Artist Bill to acknowledge the contribution of artists, creators and 
performers in the socio-economic development of Mauritius. 

In this context, the assistance of UNESCO has been obtained for the services of an 
expert for drafting the legislation taking into consideration the pluricultural and multi-lingual 
realities  of  the  Mauritian  population.  This  exercise  will  be  done  in  consultation  with  all 
stakeholders. 

This Bill will regulate the working conditions of artists including social security and 
insurance  amongst  others.  The  concerns  of  artists,  as  per  the  Belgrade  Declaration  of  the 
Status of Artist, will be included in the legislation as follows - 

•  Public recognition by an established system and the opportunity to form Trade 

Unions to represent and defend their interests; 
•  Training and promotion of artistic creativity; 
•  Development of artists’ professional skills;  
• 

Incentives to increase the participation of under-represented artistic fields such 
as poetry, design, and others; 

•  Acknowledgement of their social and professional status. 

Now is the time to set up a mechanism which will help emerging as well as established artists 
and creative workers to continue with the process of creativity without having resort to other 
jobs to sustain a living. Hence, we are setting the pace for further development of the cultural 
industry as a new economic pillar. In the wake of the Creative Economy, it is imperative that 
artists,  creators  and  performers  are  given  the  appropriate  incentives  to  enable  them  to 

 

100 

continue with the process of creation. Therefore, the new legislation will acknowledge their 
positive contribution in the socio-economic development of the Society.  
Artistic  creativity  is  an  engine  for  growth  and  prosperity.  The  Rights  Management 
  
Society,  formerly  MASA,  has  been  a  source  of  dissatisfaction  for  artists  for  years.  The 
Copyright Act 2014 is being reviewed, in consultation with artists, to meet their  changing 
needs and aspirations. The amendments to the Act will be brought to the National Assembly, 
this  year  itself.  Moreover,  Government  is  increasing  the  grant  to  the  Rights  Management 
Society.  

With  a  view  to  creating  the  appropriate  environment  for  the  development  of  the 
Creative Industry, the National Heritage Fund Act 2003 is being amended to meet the needs 
and  aspirations  of  players  in  the  arts  and  culture  sectors.  Furthermore,  a  new  Film 
Commission Bill will be introduced, to replace the Mauritius Film Development Corporation 
Act 1986. 

As stated by our Right Honourable Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth in ‘Vision 

Madam Speaker, the creative economy is not only one of the most rapidly growing 
sectors  of  the  world  economy  but  also  a  highly  transformative  one  in  terms  of  income 
generation, job creation and export earnings. 
  
The Film Industry is one of the growing sectors. In order to leverage the economic 
potential of the film industry, appropriate infrastructure will be put up in the form of a Film 
City to service this sector. 
  
2030’, the Cinema Industry is rapidly emerging. 
One stop-shop facilities will be provided to attract foreign film makers for shooting in 
  
Mauritius. To this end, the Film Rebate Scheme has been increased from 30 to 40 percent. 
This strategy will no doubt demarcate Mauritius from other countries; promote film-induced 
tourism whilst giving a competitive edge. 
  
Foreign film producers are unable to seek logistic assistance for their film production 
as  the  Mauritius  Film  Development  Corporation,  which  operates  under  the  aegis  of  my 
Ministry, does not possess any film shooting equipment. These film crews have to transport 
their own equipment when coming to Mauritius and the heavy cost of freight that they have 
to  pay  acts  as  a  major  disincentive.  One  film  company,  specialized  in  the  rental  of  film 
shooting equipment, has stopped its operation in Mauritius. It is, therefore, essential that the 
MFDC be provided with all the required film shooting equipment, which is indispensable to 
encourage and attract both local and foreign producers to produce films, serials, and reality 
shows. 

101 

 
The provision of 10 million rupees for the purchase of equipment in this Budget is 
therefore, most opportune. The film shooting equipment would be rented to both public and 
private  organisations.  This  would  allow  the  MFDC  to  generate  revenue;  create  immediate 
employment  such  as  camera  operators,  technicians,  sound  engineers,  crane  operators,  and 
graphic editors, amongst others. 
 
Capacity building is essential in this highly technical world. The setting up of a Film 
Training  facility  will,  therefore,  enable  local  cine-makers  to  acquire  skills  and  updated 
knowledge in this sector, as well as develop local talents in all phases of filmmaking. 
  
Madam Speaker, just as a painter starts with a blank canvas, a filmmaker starts with 
an  unlit  space.  Light  is  the  filmmaker’s  brush  and  palette.  Lighting  is  an  important 
component of cinema's visual design. The basic tools needed to create masterpieces by our 
local  filmmakers;  both  professionals  and  amateurs  have  long  been  undermined  because  of 
high costs involved in purchasing lighting equipment.  

We  want  to  ease  this  situation.  Some  local  producers  have  been  relying  solely  on 
natural light to shoot and they have had to pay a heavy price for quality. Now, that customs 
duty  on  lighting  equipment  has  been  removed,  I  am  convinced  that  the  quality  of  local 
productions will go up while cutting down on production costs. Film-makers are not the only 
ones to benefit from this measure. As a matter of fact, the very same lighting equipment is 
also  used  by  photographers  for  outdoor  shooting  as  well  as  in-studio  setups.  We  have  the 
required  potentials  for  film  making.  This  has  been  clearly  illustrated  during  the  7-Day 
Challenge  and  Inter-College  Film  competitions.   The  potential  of  our  youngsters  in  film 
production has been unleashed. It was a real challenge and they made it.  Out of nothing, they 
produced short films of high quality which met with resounding success.  We have sowed the 
seeds for the film industry to germinate. We want to be a major player in this sector from pre-
production to post-production. 

Madam Speaker, the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust, which operates under the aegis of 
my  Ministry,  has  as  mandate  to  deal  with  matters  relating  to  the  organizing,  facilitating, 
monitoring and supervision of Islamic pilgrimage to the holy places. 
  
As Members of the House are aware each  year, thousands of Mauritians of Islamic 
faith  go  to  Saudi  Arabia  for  Umrah  and  Hadj;  a  number  of  students  are  enrolled  in 
Universities in Makkah and Madinah, and professionals are working in different sectors such 
as education, health and banking.  
  
The setting up of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia, a promise kept by this Government, 
will  contribute  in  providing  greater  security,  comfort  and  opportunities  to  our  citizens 

 

102 

travelling to Saudi Arabia. This will significantly improve communication and the visibility 
of the Republic of Mauritius in Saudi Arabia.  
Madam  Speaker,  the  Budget  provides  for  studies  and  project  preparation  for  the 
  
Intercontinental Slavery Museum. This is in line with one of the key recommendations of the 
Truth and Justice Commission Report. The Museum will give more visibility to slavery and 
the slave trade in the Indian Ocean; will promote slave history and emphasise the contribution 
of  the  African  Diaspora  throughout  the  world.  The  Budget  has  also  made  provision  for  a 
Maroonage Museum, which will be located at Le Morne.  

Although Le Morne Cultural Landscape was listed as a world heritage site in 2008, 
there  was  no  public  access  to  the  mountain.  UNESCO  had  expressed  concern  that  the 
descendants of slaves did not have the opportunity to pay tribute to their ancestors. 

Several attempts were made by my predecessors to provide public access, but these 
remained unsuccessful. With the support of hon. Xavier Luc Duval Deputy Prime Minister 
and  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications;  and  that  of  hon.  Showkutally 
Soodhun,  Vice  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  public  access  to  the 
mountain has been made possible since Sunday 24 July 2016. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is providing different types of financial assistance to 
the artist community such as the International Travel Grant to enable artists to get exposure 
on the international scene.  Furthermore, at the grassroots level, my Ministry provides a grant 
to  upcoming  artists  for  the  production  of  CDs.  Artists  organising  concerts  are  also  given 
financial assistance to enable the display of their artistic talent. 

There  is  a  pressing  need  for  empowering  our  artists  to  enable  them  to master  their 
careers and churn out a  living in this competitive industry. Arts and culture can become a 
major driver of the economy and provider of employment, the more so with the increasing 
number of tourists coming to Mauritius. 

The measure to finance projects of artists from the Lotto Fund will address this issue. 
This will also provide the means of achieving the long desired target of professionalising our 
artists  and  making  Mauritius  a  bubbling  artistic  and  cultural  scene.    The  power  of  arts 
enriches our lives.  Artists through their creations, contribute to our happiness.  It is crucial 
that the artists themselves are content to contribute to our artistic and cultural tapestry.  And 
here, I would like to quote Thomas Merton from the book ‘No Man is an Island’ - 

 
“Art enables us to find ourselves and lose ourselves at the same time” 

103 

Madam Speaker, the creation of a Mauritius National Troupe will highlight our rich 
cultural  diversity  -  “culture  unites,  it  does  not  divide”.  The  National  Troupe  will  be 
instrumental  in  reinforcing  our  social  fabric.    It  will  bring  unity  in  diversity  in  our  multi-
cultural society. The National Troupe will encourage positive change in everyday behaviour 
as a means for developing inter-cultural dialogue and mutual respect towards other cultural 
components. 

The Mauritius National Troupe will also encourage the discovery and development of 
talents in the performing arts and the achievement of high artistic productions. It will derive 
its relevance and significance in showcasing creativity, cultural diversity and also realigning 
the  various  psycho-social  aspirations  of  our  people 
towards  national  growth  and 
development. 

Madam Speaker, the year 2017 will mark an event of historic importance – the 25th 
Anniversary of the accession of Mauritius to the status of Republic. An additional amount 
will be provided to celebrate this Silver Jubilee.  

These new measures will undoubtedly thrust arts, culture and creativity on a higher 

pedestal.  Artists, performers and creators will be the main players. 

Our main objective is to ensure that the appropriate environment is created to enable 
“un épanouissement total de nos artistes” thus, contributing in the economic development of 
Mauritius. We are stepping on the highway of cultural development. We are consolidating 
national unity and we want to be a strong partner in the League of Nations for the harmonious 
development of humanity in all its aspects.  

Madam  Speaker,  to  end,  I  would  like  to  quote  Jacob  Lew,  former  Secretary  of  the 

Treasury of the United States - 

“The  Budget  is  not  a  collection  of  numbers  but  a  collection  of  our  values  and 
aspirations”. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  meets  the  aspirations  of  our  people.  We  all  have  a 

colourful life ahead! 

Thank you for your attention. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

104 

(6.43 p.m.) 

Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière): Madam 
Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to thank and congratulate the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, for the very good Budget which 
I fully support. Low growth, high unemployment, extreme inequality and heartfelt fractures 
in our society, these are unacceptable to all of us. 

I have a simple message.  We are strong enough, resilient enough and creative enough 
to manage and overcome our economic challenges.  All of us want jobs, thriving businesses, 
engaged professionals, narrowing inequality, fewer in poverty.  All of us want a new valued 
paradigm, a society at peace with itself, a nation energised by the task of building stronger 
foundations for our future society and economy. 

Madam Speaker, we want our Government to function effectively, our people to work 
in dignity, with resources for their families, decent homes and opportunities for their children.  
We want to see progress throughout our island in agriculture, manufacturing, construction, 
tourism, science and research, sports and leisure, trade and commerce.  It is within our grasp 
to achieve these futures.  It requires bold and constructive leaderships in all sectors, a shared 
vision, a common purpose and the will to find a common ground.   

Above all, we need action not just words.  Let us unite as a team, sharing our skills 
and  resources,  building  social  solidarity,  defending  the  institution  of  our  democracy  and 
develop other economy inclusively.  We have a plan to - 

(i) 

manage our finance in a prudent and sustainable way; 

(ii) 

gain confidence and mobilise the resources of all social partners; 

(iii) 

 collectively invest more infrastructure to increase potential growth; 

(iv) 

give hope to our youth through training and economic opportunities; 

(v) 

protect Mauritius from the effects of the drought; 

(vi) 

continuously improve our education and health system; 

 
(vii) 

105 

accelerate transformation towards an inclusive economy, and participation by 
all, and 

(viii)  strengthen social solidarity and extend our social safety net. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Budget  rests  on  an  idea  of  an  inclusive  social  contract 
encompassing of equitable burden of tax and progressive programmes of expenditures.  The 
Budget relies on institutions of good governance and a public ethnic that values honesty and 
fairness.    If  we  act  together  on  these  principles  as  public  representatives,  civil  servants, 
business  people,  youths,  workers,  Parliament  Members  and  citizens,  we  can  overcome  the 
challenges of tough economic times and difficulties adjustment.   

In acting together, we can address declining confidence and retreat of capital and we 
can combat emerging patterns of predatory behaviour and corruption. We are conscious of 
the difficulties we face, our resilience as a nation can propel us to a better future if we make 
the right choices. 

Madam  Speaker,  concerning  the  Marshall  Plan  to  the  fight  against  poverty  since  I 
have joined this Government is something that is near and dear to my heart and the heart of 
many of our constituents.  Madam Speaker, to address one dimension of inclusive growth, 
which is the protection of the disadvantage and marginalised group of society, Government 
will continue to put in place measures to improve the efficacy of social welfare programmes.  
These measures will ensure food security, availability, social safety nets  to reduce poverty 
and the promotion of opportunities for special growth such as women, the elderly and people 
living in disabilities.  It is therefore pleasing to note that the poverty eradication effort by 
Government continues to yield result as indicated by the decline in the population living in 
poverty.   

The  increase  of  the  budget  of  the  Ministry  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment  is  a  sign  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  not 
forgotten those people living in disabilities.  This Ministry has been created in 2010 where 
our actual Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier Duval was the first Minister of this Ministry, 
since a lot has been done and more is to come. Meanwhile, Government is in the process of 
formulating a Mauritius Poverty Eradication Strategy which is expected to be reducing by the 
end  of  our  mandate.  This  strategy  will  serve  to  guide  all  efforts  of  Government  towards 

 

106 

poverty  eradication  across  sectors  to  ensure  consistency  of  actions  and  results  as  well  as 
fostering in our economic development agenda. 

It is recalled that Mauritian Government has  announced in a medium and long-term 
Marshall  Plan  to  combat  poverty  and  social  exclusion  in  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues.    The 
Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment is leading the population of the 
Marshall  Plan  while  the  UNDP  is  providing  technical  assistance  for  its  development.  The 
services  of  a  national  consultant  have  been  enlisted  by  the  UNDP  to  support  overall 
coordination  of  the  preparation  of  the  plan  including  organising  national  consultation, 
supporting the experts’ team and the setting of an implementation plan. 

The Marshall Plan will, inter-alia, cover the following areas - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

social protection; 
social housing; 
social inclusion and community development; 
access to education; 
development and competencies; 
employment and sustainable livelihood opportunities for the most vulnerable 
groups including people with disabilities;  
Women employment and feminisation of poverty; 
Youth Economic Empowerment; 
access to  services including electricity, water, sanitation, transportation, ICT 
facilities 
environmental protection and its relation with social integration 

Madam  Speaker,  as  mentioned  in  the  Budget  Speech,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life have got an increase of 12% in the Budget 2016-2017.  I would like to make a 
request to my colleague, hon. Gayan, that part of the cake can be shared in our Constituency 
where we have different institutions which are concerned by health and quality of life such as 
the BS Hospital, Prison of Beau Bassin, school for deaf and school for blind people.  

Before the election of December 2014, the distribution of methadone was being made 
at the BS Hospital which causes a lot of problem.  During our electoral campaign, we had lots 
of complaints by people living in this area where the distribution of methadone was doing 
lots of harm. Then, my two colleagues, hon. Aliphon and hon. Gayan and myself promised to 

 

107 

find a solution according to the problem.  After election, our promise has been realised.  This 
action has been very much welcomed by all people of our Constituency. But to my surprise, 
when I read the newspaper of last weekend where hon. Dr. Zouberr Joomaye in an interview 
said that it is not a good decision to do the distribution at police stations in all localities.  If 
hon. Dr. Joomaye has a better solution, it would be good he could this to this to us, otherwise 
he could ask the hon. Minister of Health and Quality… 

(Interruptions) 

…to ignore this interview and leave it as it is… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Lepoigneur:  … as people of our Constituency are very happy… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Lepoigneur: …with the new system.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

Mr Lepoigneur:  I would like to make another request to my colleague, hon. Gayan to 
take  into  consideration  in  the  Budget  for  financial  year  2016-2017  of  one  of  our  electoral 
promises which is the construction of a mediclinic at Coromandel. I make a humble request 
for that project to be realised before the end of our mandate. 

To  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  congratulate  once  more  the  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development, hon. Pravind Jugnauth for this Budget which will bring 
fresh  breath  for  people  living  in  disabilities,  and  as  I  said  before,  let  us  unite  as  a  team, 
sharing our skills and resources, building social  solidarity, defending the institution of our 
democracy and developing the economy exclusively. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Teeluckdharry! 

 
(6.52 p.m.) 

108 

Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  &  Triolet):    Thank 

you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to address this august Assembly.  

My thanks to the staff of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development for this 
laudable budget.  My thanks to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for having done the background 
work and my thanks equally to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for 
having conceived such a Budget within such a short lapse of time after having assumed office 
within two months’ period only.   

This is an outstanding Budget, a Budget which will be remembered in history as it is a 
Budget that contains, if I may be allowed to use his own words, powerful actions to deal with 
complex issues.  These were his words in his conclusion, but even outspoken critic on the air 
has said that – “le ministre des finances a préconisé des mesures révolutionnaires et ceci sans 
ambages”.  We will remember last week, in all sincerity - what we say in his usual manner, 
that  is  –  truthfully,  with  all  courtesy,  avec  toute  la  gentillesse,  he  presented  this  Budget 
containing a number of revolutionary measures.  

I  have  heard  orators  during  the  day  today,  and  especially  my  friend,  hon.  Ramful.  

Today, he said that this Budget and he quoted to this House that –  

“Today,  we  choose  to  break  with  the  past  that  has  stifled  development  for  the  last 
decade and see the future in a new light.”   

The word that has been used is ‘rupture’.  What should one understand by ‘rupture’.  It 
is not ‘rupture from reality’.  ‘Rupture’ here is to rethink, se remettre en question.  A learned 
author had this to say – 

Ce n'est pas le plus fort de l'espèce qui survit, ni le plus intelligent. C'est celui qui sait 
le mieux s'adapter au changement. 

And this was Charles Darwin who had said this.  That is, constantly, one has – what 
we say in French – de se remettre en question.  And what is the goal of this budget?  We are 
not at the end of the mandate.  Our itinerary has started since September 2014.  We are today 
20 months.  We are left with 40 months to go ahead.   

 

109 

An athlete in any competition is not judged, that is, until he has not passed the goal 
post. So, we have to give this Government time to complete its Government programme and 
to judge it by the end of this mandate.  But this Budget here is to reassure the population, 
unlike what my friend, hon. Ramful has said. This is not an exercise to fool the people. This 
is an exercise to put ourselves to the test of the people and to see whether they are with us, 
whether they acclaim this Budget.  This Budget has been acclaimed by one and all, be it the 
business sector, be it the private sector.  

My friend has earmarked three issues on which he has paced his speech: education, 
poverty alleviation, and unemployment. Regarding education, he has gone a long way to say 
that the nine-year schooling is aimed at eliminating competition. He has not understood the 
rationale  of  nine-year  schooling,  but  this  will  be  dealt  in  depth  by  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research in due course. 
But the aim of nine-year schooling is to postpone the competition, not at the age of 11 years, 
but  at  a  later  stage,  when  the  child  is,  at  least,  15  years.  It  is  not  the  aim  to  eliminate 
competition absolutely. It is to reduce what we call ‘the rat race’, ‘the cut-throat competition’ 
that exists in the present educational system. I won’t delve further into the issue of education. 

My friend also said that the measures that were taken for poverty alleviation are not 
sufficient or do not aim at alleviating poverty. This is the first time that a Government has 
decided to come forward, boldly, to affirm its intention to eradicate absolute poverty. He also 
said why persons coming from the 6,400 families do not get job, why there is no positive 
discrimination made for them for access to jobs, be it in the private sector or public sector, I 
understand. This does not solve the problem of poverty. On the other hand, this will create 
further inequality in our society. 

This  Government  proposes  to  attack  the  problem  of  poverty  at  its  root,  that  is, 
providing  education,  providing  cash  awards  to  encourage  persons  coming  from  this 
vulnerable group to encourage their children to study, cash awards, and there is a whole, une 
panoplie, un arsenal de mesures regarding poverty alleviation, including  social housing as 
well. 

My friend, hon. Ramful, also said that the measures taken to reduce unemployment 
are not sufficient. But, if we look at the Budget Speech, we can see that measures are taken 
even in the public sector, that is, creation of  employment to fill vacancies within the civil 
service, that is, some 7,200 vacancies will be filled. We know from the Budget Speech that 

 

110 

Police Officers will be recruited; around 900. We know that some 700 to 800 Educators will 
be recruited. We know that Doctors will be recruited in the Health Sector. So, these whole 
measures concern how to reduce unemployment, which is actually a burning problem. 

There  are  also  provisions  made  about  training.  In  the  National  Skills  Development 
Programme, some 4,000, and in the year, around 2,000. These are, indeed, measures which 
are aimed at reducing unemployment. 

Another criticism against this Budget this morning was that this Budget contains no 
measures  to  promote  economic  growth.    On  the  contrary,  there  are  numerous  measures 
regarding  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises,  the  manufacturing  sector,  the  construction 
industry,  infrastructure  such  as  harbour,  airport,  road  network,  construction  of  schools, 
construction of ENT hospitals, construction of Police Stations. Besides, if 7,200 persons are 
getting  jobs  in  the  civil  service,  there  are  persons  getting  opportunities,  that  is,  under  the 
National Skills Development Programme and under the YEP. 

Furthermore,  with  regard  to  facilities  that  are  given  to  SMEs  to  create  further 
employment,  all  these  will  have  what  we  call  in  Economics  ‘a  multiplier  effect’,  that  is, 
consumption  will  increase;  there  is  construction  industry,  infrastructure,  there  is  spending, 
public  expenditure.  All  these  added  together  will  promote  economic  growth,  so  that  it  is 
wrong to say that there are no measures contained in the Budget regarding economic growth. 

This  Budget,  indeed,  contains  monetary  and  fiscal  measures,  besides  other 
Government policies aimed at creating and promoting economic growth. This Budget, unlike 
other  Budgets,  has  provided  for  all  spheres,  all  sectors  of  the  economy:  water,  electricity, 
even civil aviation, laying emphasis on the environment.  One sector that has been constantly 
neglected in the past that is, a sphere of life which we do not consider as a vote catching area, 
unlike  sports,  unlike  education,  unlike  health,  is  the  Judiciary.  This  Budget  does  contain 
provisions  regarding  rehabilitation  of  the  District  Courts:  the  District  Court  of  Flacq,  the 
District Court of Rose Hill; there is the setting up in the SIFB premises of the Pamplemousses 
Court and the Souillac Court.  As well, this Government has provided for the construction of 
the Supreme Court Tower in Port Louis, I am given to understand. 

Our colonial masters have left us with the premises of the Supreme Court, which was 
partially  renovated  over  the  years.  But  this  does  not  answer  to  the  aspiration  of  a  modern 
Judiciary, and it is high time, so that the Judiciary does not have to relocate its premises and 

 

111 

its  offices  into  rented  premises,  that  the  Judiciary  has  its  own  building.    This  is  a  very 
laudable measure contained in this Budget. 

This Budget will have a lasting effect, be it on the education system, be it in the health 
sector, be it regarding protection for the environment, be it for the alleviation of poverty and 
reducing unemployment. I recall that, last week, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development launched un appel in the following terms – 

“At times in our nation’s history we must dare to push the boundaries. This time has 
come for us.  Let us all join hands and come together as a nation to take our country to 
this new era of development.” 

I must say, as a Member of this Assembly, that I and all the hon. Members we do respond to 
this patriotic call of time. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank all hon. Members for their attention.  

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Oree! 

(7.08 p.m.) 

Mr G. Oree (Second Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, it is for the first time that I saw the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition so relaxed and informal in this House. 

(Interruptions) 

Maybe, it is because of the side-effect of this very interesting Budget! 

(Interruptions) 

In fact, this Budget is not only interesting but extremely stimulating and historic. 

(Interruptions) 

Rarely do we have such a feel-good atmosphere in the population after the presentation of a 
Budget.  This  reminds  me  of  the  golden  era  in  Mauritian  history  when  Prime  Minister  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth had made this country a success model in Africa. I am proud to express 
my views on the measures elaborated in the Budget Speech as a member of this Government. 

112 

 
Madam Speaker, we all should agree that in a mixed economy like ours private sector 
businesses  play  vital  roles  in  achieving  economic  development.  We  need  modern  and 
innovative  entrepreneurs  as  well  as  business  leaders  to  be  globally  competitive  and 
sustainable. It is equally crucial to be resilient in order to survive in the actual turbulence and 
often degradable business environment. The package of incentives mentioned in this Budget 
is extremely encouraging and favourable for local businesses. 

Madam Speaker, the SMEs of today can become the corporates of tomorrow. They all 
have potential for growth and must be natured and supported by this Government. In turn, 
these  successful  enterprises  can  themselves  help  achieving  higher  living  standard,  full 
employment and economic growth. In brief, the action mentioned in this Budget will further 
empower local entrepreneurs by implementing different funding schemes for addressing the 
financial  requirement,  promote  self-employment  and  in  an  environment  which  renders 
business easy. 

Madam Speaker, as a teacher I am glad to notice how caring hon. Ramful is vis-à-vis 
our  education  system  and  youth  unemployment.  But,  let  me  reassure  him  that  youth 
unemployment is not the making of this Government! 

(Interruptions) 

Our country has around 45,000 jobseekers, including young graduates. On one hand, we have 
lots  of  vacancies  available  and  on  the  other  we  have  jobseekers  with  unmatching  profiles. 
This leads us to questioning the past Government’s policy of one graduate per family from 
any university of no reputation and in whatever field and then sitting idle! 

(Interruptions) 

We  are  in  a  real  dilemma,  Madam  Speaker.  The  employment  of  foreign  workers, 
namely from Bangladesh further aggravated this problem. In fact, ‘universités marron’ and 
employment  of  foreign  labour  were  means  for  enriching  some  Members  of  the  previous 
Government! 

(Interruptions) 

To  curb  this  problem  this  Government  is  promptly  recruiting  thousands  of  people  under  a 
new programme and in the Civil Service. Most of these vacancies in the Civil Service ought 
to have been filled by the previous Government but nothing was done. 

113 

 
Being a Member of Parliament, it is very touching and disturbing to witness people in 
tears  and  frustrated  as  they  are  jobless.  I  profoundly  appreciate  the  reinforcement  of  the 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training Programme. This action will lead to more 
job prospects and avoid youth taking careers which have become saturated. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget will make Mauritius business and investment friendly. 
The aim, I would say, is to make Mauritius the Singapore of Africa. Currently, the procedures 
for  permits  and  licenses  are  too  time-consuming  and  constraining  despite  the  Business 
Facilitation  Act  of  2006.  Some  institutions  instead  of  acting  as  facilitators  have  been 
ineffective  and  thus  have  reduced  the  pace  of  business  and  property  development. 
Administrative hassles often abort projects and give rise to illegal street vending, in turn, a 
headache for Government. The reform brought forward in this Budget will certainly change 
the rule of the game. The deadline of 8 working days will definitely give more satisfaction to 
potential entrepreneurs. Justice will be done to people who are investing, creating jobs, taking 
risks and paying taxes to authorities.  

Madam Speaker, the culture of l’Alliance Lepep in favour of uplifting the people from 
the lowest rung of the social ladder has been maintained in this Budget. I really appreciate the 
measures announced in this Budget to alleviate poverty and provide social aid and housing 
facilities to the needy. This will not only ease the life of people in need  but also help me 
better solving my mandates’ problems in suburbs like Cité La Cure, Roche Bois, Riche Terre 
and Sainte Croix.  

I would like to point out, Madam Speaker, that most victims of the flooding of last 
February  were  from  Constituency  No.  4  and  the  disaster  exposed  the  acute  poverty  and 
related  housing  problem.  I  recommend  the  House  to  reflect  on  the  length  of  time  during 
which there has been no policy for constructing houses for the landless. This Government is 
taking up the challenge with the project of 800 houses for the most vulnerable section of our 
society and this is a momentous move which should be noted. 

In an era where we are all talking about broadband connectivity, it is unacceptable to 
see thousands of people still not connected to the basic utilities like water and electricity. I 
personally congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for having 
taken bold measures to combat absolute poverty and name his Budget Speech “A New Era of 
Development” in which the lion share is dedicated to creating enhanced opportunities for the 
lowest income group. As we go with implementing the package of measures for eradicating 

 

114 

poverty, we should not forget the fact that poverty is a complex condition which requires a 
holistic approach and a synergy of resources and knowledge bases for sustainable impact.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  various  fusions  proposed  for  public  sector  reforms  are  firm 
decisions  which  would  promote  efficiency,  ensure  economies  and  reinforce  the  concept  of 
one-stop shop which makes sense for everyone when it is a question of connecting related 
services. 

Finally,  I  am  going  to  take  the  time  of  this  august  Assembly  to  give  my  personal 
views on the reorganisation of the NDU and the 36 Citizens Advice Bureaus from which we 
have expectations. My proposals for revamping CABs are as follows –  

(i) 

(ii) 

Government to openly request the public to report their day-to-day problems 
to the CAB for facilitation, thus, an awareness campaign can be launched; 
different agencies to adopt a fast track for addressing cases referred by the 
CAB; 

(iii)  CAB to work with community-based organisations to ensure optimal use of 

infrastructures; 

(iv)  CAB to initiate social projects based on needs of citizens specific to localities, 

(v) 

and finally 
CAB to have the necessary information base for acting as a development 
communicator. 

To end, allow me to say that with this Budget  this Government is accomplishing a 

divine task by transferring wealth from coffers to sufferers! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gungah! 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the debates. 

Mr Seeruttun rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

 

 

115 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House to 

tomorrow Thursday 04 August 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. Hon. Ameer Meea! 

MATTER RAISED 

(7.17 p.m.)  

LIVE CATTLE - IMPORTATION 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Tonight  I  am  raising  an  issue  and  it  relates  to  the 
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection. It is about the importation of live 
cattle.  

Recently, the hon. Minister, through a Parliamentary Question put by myself, stated 
that ‘x’ number of cattle has been imported for the festival of Eid-ul-Adha. And one of the 
conditions is that the age of the cattle should be two years old so that it can be used for the 
festival.  But there has been growing concern from the Muslim community that these cattle 
do not fit in this age group, that is, two years.   

Therefore,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  use  his  good  office  and  the  Veterinary 
Services of the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security to ensure that this criterion is 
being  respected?  The  Minister  and  his  Ministry,  through  a  press  conference  together  with 
hon. Soodhun, announced the prices of bouc et mouton.  Last year, in December 2015, the 
price was Rs185 and Rs200 per kilo respectively.  That is some six months back.  This had 
been brought down from Rs300 from previous years, which was a good measure.  But for this 
year, that is, after six months, the price has gone up to Rs220 per kilo, that is, from Rs185 to 
Rs220.    So,  it  is  around  15%  increase  in  six  months,  which,  I  think,  is  not  a  reasonable 
increase.  The more so the sea freight has decreased because of the fall in fuel prices. 

Therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister to look into it -  as we are aware, there is a 
monopole and there is only one company importing the sheep - through his Ministry so that 
they do not abuse on the prices?  

 
In December, there has been an import of around 1,000 sheep, whereas this time, in 

116 

August, only some 400 have been imported.  Therefore, it is causing a pénurie artificielle.  

Voilà le problème que j’avais souhaité soulever. J’espère que le ministre va prendre 

bonne note. Merci. 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  can  assure  hon.  Ameer  Meea  that  following  a  communiqué  that  my 
Ministry issued a few weeks back, we clearly stated that live cattle should be more than two 
years old, especially for qurbani. As for sheep and goat, I think it is more than one year.  

Like last  year, officers of my Ministry together with the Veterinary Services of the 
Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security will carry out checks in a strict way to ensure 
that the animals are of the required age. 

Concerning  the  price  that  the  hon.  Member  has  just  stated,  I’ll  get  my  officers  to 
check at the retail outlets, but I must say that price of beef or other meat is not controlled by 
my Ministry, but still we will try to see how to sustain what the hon. Member has just said. 

At 7.23 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 04 August 2016 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

