No. 11 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 07 JUNE 2016 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MOTIONS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 11 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 07 June 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 
 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 
 

A.    Prime  Minister’s  Office,    Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs  Ministry  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit ‒ 
Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills. (In Original) – 
(i)  The President’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Bill (No. X of 

2016); 

(ii)  The National Assembly Allowances (Amendment) Bill (No. XI of 2016);  
(iii) The Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2016); and  
(iv) The Supplementary Appropriation (2015) (No. 2) Bill (No. XIII of 2016). 

B.    Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities ‒ 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Central Water Authority. 

C.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

The Estimates of Supplementary Expenditure (6 months ended 30 June 2015) of 
2016. 

D.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  17)  Regulations  2016  (Government 
Notice No. 117 of 2016) 
 

(b)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  18)  Regulations  2016  (Government 
Notice 
118 
of 2016) 

No. 

E.    Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 

Outer Islands ‒ 
The  Fisheries  and  Marine  Resources  (Automatic  Identification  System) 
Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 116 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BUILD MAURITIUS FUND - MONEY DISBURSED 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether  in  regard  to  the  Build  Mauritius 
Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the amount of 
money –  
(a) 

(b) 

contributed thereto from the price of diesel and petrol by the State Trading 
Corporation since January 2015 to date,  
 available  therein  as  at  to  date,  indicating  the  amount  of  money  disbursed 
therefrom –  
(i) 
(ii) 

to reduce the public debt, if any, and  
for the replacement of the defective water pipes of the network of the 
Central Water Authority since January 2015, indicating the sums that 
have  actually  been  utilized  therefor  and  the  kilometres  of  pipes 
replaced. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker,  the  setting  up  of  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  was  announced  in  the  2014  Budget 
Speech  with  the  objective  of  financing  infrastructure  projects,  including  road,  transport, 
utilities,  and  development  schemes.  The  Fund  was  created  as  a  Special  Fund  under  the 
Finance and Audit Act to execute the various projects under the Build Mauritius Plan. 

The Build Mauritius Plan was elaborated in the Budget Speech 2014 with focus on – 

(i)  

Infrastructure for greater connectivity with the rest of the world; 

(ii)   More fluid traffic flows; 

(iii)   Efficient and safe public transport, and 

(iv)   Regular supply of water and electricity at competitive prices. 

Furthermore,  mention  was  made  in  the  Budget  Speech  2014,  that  the  following 
projects would form part of the Build Mauritius Plan which would be financed partly by the 
Build Mauritius Fund - 

(i)   World Class Airport to promote the development of Aviation Hub; 

(ii)  

Port Development; 

(iii)   Maritime Services Hub; 

9 

 
(iv)   Petroleum Hub; 

(v)  

Land Transport; 

(vi)   Bus Replacement Mechanism; 

(vii)   Mauritius Light Rail Transit (MLRT) Project; 

(viii)   Public Utilities, and 

(ix)   Water Sustainability. 

The  Build  Mauritius  Fund  was  set  up  by  way  of  the  Finance  and  Audit  (Build 
Mauritius Fund) Regulations 2013, and is under the purview of the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development.  

Initially 
billion 

the  Fund  was  set  up  with  financial  resources 

tune  of  
Rs4.7 
comprising  
Rs4.3 billion as a loan  and Rs0.4 billion as contribution from Government. An amount of 
Rs300 m. out of the loan of Rs4.3 billion has so far been refunded to the Consolidated Fund. 

transferred 

from 

the 

Consolidated 

the 

to 
Fund, 

Subsequently,  in  January  2014,  the  Consumer  Protection  (control  of  price  of 
petroleum products) Regulations was amended to provide for a contribution of Rs1 per litre 
on  both  Mogas  and  Gas  Oil  to  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  (BMF)  to  finance  the  Bus 
Replacement Scheme announced in the Budget Speech 2014 as part of the Build Mauritius 
Plan.  

The STC price structure for petroleum products was further amended on 16 January 
2015 to increase the contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund from Rs1 to Rs4 per litre. The 
additional Rs3 per litre is to be used essentially for investment to upgrade and modernise the 
water supply and distribution network.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the total amount contributed 

by the State Trading Corporation from January 2015 to April 2016 totalled Rs2.09 billion. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, the amount of money available in the Fund as at 

31 May 2016 was Rs4.758 billion. 

As regards part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that no money from the Build 

Mauritius Fund has been used to reduce the Public Debt.  

10 

 
Concerning investment to upgrade and modernise the water supply and  distribution 
network, an amount of  Rs3.6 billion for  the period 2015-2018 has been earmarked in the 
Build Mauritius Fund for Central Water Authority (CWA) to undertake -  

(i) 

(ii) 

17 priority projects involving the replacement of about 200 kms of pipes, and 

construction  of  five  service  reservoirs  to  ensure  water  distribution  at  the 
required pressure. 

I am informed by the Central Water Authority that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

contracts  for  replacement  of  8  kms  of  pipes  have  been  awarded  for    two 
projects,  namely  Alma  Reservoir  to  Alma  Hill  and  distribution  main  from 
New Bosquet Reservoir to Coromandel for a contract value of Rs114 m.; 

contracts for replacement of 83.5 kms of pipes will be awarded by November 
2016 for an estimated value of Rs763 m.; 

contracts  for  replacement  of  133.3  kms  are  expected  to  be  awarded  by 
December 2016 and the works will be completed by 2018, for an estimated 
value of Rs1.275 billion, and 

contracts for five service reservoirs at Cluny, Riche en Eau, Balisson, Alma 
and Riviere Dragon are expected to be awarded in early 2017 for an estimated 
value of Rs125 m. and the works will be completed by 2018. 

I  am  informed  that  an  amount  of  Rs1.034  billion  has  been  used  from  the  Build 

Mauritius Fund for the water sector in respect of the Bagatelle Dam Project.  

It is to be pointed out that during the current financial year, CWA has replaced about 
80 kms of defective water pipes at a cost of Rs650 m. which have been financed from its own 
funds. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  from  my  question,  of  course,  I  wanted  figures  to 
date;  the  latest  figures  that  we  have.  But  if  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  rightly,  he  gave  us 
figures going back month and month.  Can I ask him again, therefore, what has been the total 
sum collected by the STC on essence and diesel and paid to the Fund since January 2015?  
We had a figure of Rs2 billion, but I understand it is not for that period.  It goes months back. 

Mr  Jugnauth:    Well,  I  have  given  the  figures  that  have  been  collected.    For  the 
period of January to June 2015, we have  collected Rs207 m. and from July 2015 to April 

 

11 

2016, we have collected Rs380 m.  Now, that is the levy for the bus modernisation scheme. 
The  levy  for  the  water  sector,  from  January  to  June  2015,  it  is  Rs362  m.  and  for  the  ten 
months of July 2015 to April 2016, it is Rs1.141 billion.  Now, I have the figures for April 
2016. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I have also the reserves at the Fund? How much is standing to the 
credit as reserves of the Fund to date again because the former Minister of Finance had stated 
in November 2015 that the Fund had reserves of Rs4 billion.  So, can I know now where we 
stand? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, again in my reply, I have stated that as at 31 May 2016, a sum of 

Rs4.758 billion is available in the Fund. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, we had new figures now.  From what I understand - because it is 
still not clear - the total sum collected by STC and paid into the Fund since the multiple by 
four increase in the levy, is more than Rs2 billion.  I am sure that the Ministry of Finance 
must have worked out even today when the baril de pétrole stands at USD50 per baril.  Can 
we  know  the  estimates  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  for  the  year  2016  and  how  much  is 
expected to be paid as compared to the previous estimates?  How much in 2016 is estimated 
to be paid into the Fund for that levy in spite of the USD50 price on the petroleum products? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  Madam  Speaker,  the  question  is  about  the  contribution  since 
January  2015  to  date.    Now,  of  course,  we  surely  must  have  estimates  of  projection  with 
regard to 2016, but I am not in a position to give that amount.  I can, of course, inform the 
House about the figure that is likely to be contributed. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I am bit surprised, but I will wait for the estimates to 
be  obtained  and  circulated.    Why  I  am  asking  is  that  we  have  more  that  Rs4  billion  of 
reserves in that Fund.  Therefore, will the Minister – although he does not have the estimates 
of what will be collected this year, even when the baril de pétrole is at USD50, I believe it 
would  be  billions  again  out  of  the  pockets  of  consumers  of  diesel  and  essence  -  give  the 
guarantee in that kind of situation that there will be no increase in the  price of diesel  and 
petrol,  being  given  that  we  have  all  this  money  taken  out  of  the  pockets  of  consumers  of 
diesel and essence? If ever there is a need to rectify the situation and if the price of petrol 
keeps  on  going  up,  consideration  will  be  given  to  bring  it  down  that  Rs4  per  litre  of 
petroleum products and not again passing whatever increase to the consumers? 

12 

 
Mr Jugnauth: Well, Madam Speaker, we will have to see how the situation unfolds 
in the future. We are right now preparing the Budget, we are working on figures, estimates 
for the future and in the light of what we assess as being the economic situation for the future, 
we will take decisions accordingly. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister say that no money has come 
from the Fund to repay our public debt, but he did point out that - I did not hear the figure 
again - a lot of money has been paid from the Fund, in the period of time that we are talking 
about, into the Consolidated Fund. Can we have the figure and can I know whether it has not 
been un truc du metier, that is, instead of repaying the public debt, of course, it is put in the 
Consolidated  Fund  and  then  Government  uses,    not  in  a  regular  way,  that  device  to  bring 
down  the  public  debt?  Can  we  have  the  figure?  How  much  has  been  transferred  to  the 
Consolidated Fund over that period and by how much, combien a été puisé du Consolidated 
Fund to bring down the public debt? 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, as far as I am informed, when the Fund was set up, 
Rs4.3 billion were taken out of the Consolidated Fund for that Build Mauritius Fund as a loan 
and  Rs400  m.  have  been  contributed  by  Government  to  that  Fund.  Therefore,  it  is  quite 
normal  that  when  it  is  a  loan  it  has  to  be  refunded  and,  up  to  now,  Rs300  m.  have  been 
refunded  by  the  Fund  to  Government  and  when  it  is  refunded  it  goes  to  the  Consolidated 
Fund.  So,  I  can  assure  the  House  that  there  has  been  no,  what  you  call  truc  du  métier  or 
technicality, because a loan is a loan. 

Mr Bérenger: Can  I move on to the next part? We have been  given kilometres of 
CWA pipes that have been replaced at the cost of CWA, but when the levy was multiplied by 
4,  the  money  that  came  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  consumers  of  diesel  and  l’essence  was 
supposed to fund 100 kilometres. Does the hon. Minister find it normal that to date – that was 
in January 2015, more than a year later - not a cent of that money has been spent to replace 
pipes, and we are told that a contract for 8 kilometres has been awarded? Can I have the date 
on which that contract was awarded? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, the Fund had its objectives and one of them was to spend money 
for  the  water  sector  and  I  have  given  the  amount  that  has  been  spent  with  regard  to  the 
Bagatelle Dam.  I think Rs1.034 billion has already been spent, but then, of course,  I have 
mentioned the number of projects which I have been informed from the CWA with regard to 
projects that are in the pipeline and future projects. So, the other question was for? 

 
Mr Bérenger: The date on which the contract has been awarded. 

13 

Mr Jugnauth: Which contract? 

Mr Bérenger: As far  as  I heard, only  one  contract has been awarded although the 
increase took effect in January 2015, more than a year ago. The only result I heard is that one 
contract for 8 kilometres of pipe has been awarded. May we know the date on which that 
contract has been awarded? 

Mr Jugnauth: The date of the contract awarded was in April 2016 and I am also told 
that with regard to the contracts for works, it can only be awarded after the completion of 
detailed design and that there are several water projects and so on.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 15 September 2015, the hon. Minister 
of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection said that there is reserves of Rs2.5 billion 
and that the STC intends to transfer Rs1.45 billion in the Consolidated Fund for the financial 
year 2015 and 2016. Will the hon. Minister confirm whether this is so?  As per his answer it 
seems that this is not so. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  this  is  a  question  with  regard  to  whether  funds  have  been 
transferred  from  STC.  I  don’t  have  the  information.  The  question  can  be  put  to  the 
substantive Minister and I am sure he will reply. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can I know from the hon. Minister what mechanism 
has been set up at the level of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to monitor 
the allocation of massive funds which are earmarked - this is public funds - with regard to the 
timely implementation of the projects and also on matters of good governance and allocation 
of  contracts?  Is  there  a  Committee  which  has  been  set  up  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance to oversee all these issues? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  again,  if  it  is  with  regard  to  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund,  I  can 
 
assure  the  hon.  Member  that  there  is  a  Committee  which  comprises  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development,  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  the 
Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the 
Accountant General’s Office and, of course, there is a Secretary to service that Committee. 
And that Committee, of course, sees to it that whatever money is being requested to be spent 
for different projects are being monitored properly. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

14 

Mr Jhuboo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the light of the forthcoming Budget and 
being  given  that  the  economy  is  slowing  down  and  investment  is  declining,  will  the  hon. 
Minister consider passing on the future reductions to the public in general in order to boost up 
consumption and the economy in general? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I know that there has been a decrease in the price of Mogas and 
Gasoil on two occasions. In fact, on 14 November 2015, the price came down from Rs45.95 
to Rs41.35 for Mogas and for Gasoil from Rs37.80 to Rs32.75; and in February last, it came 
down to Rs38.85 for Mogas and for Gasoil to Rs29.50. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  gave  us  two 
important figures, that is, the balance as at 31 May 2016 which is Rs4.758 billion and also a 
figure of Rs3.6 billion for projects that have been earmarked by the CWA for 2015 and 2018. 
So,  clearly,  there  is  ample  fund  for  these  projects  that  have  been  earmarked  for  CWA  for 
three years. So, my point is: will the hon. Minister consider the fact - due to the figures that I 
just gave - to bring back the levy to the figure that it used to be, that is, from Rs4 to R1? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  again,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  to  look  at  the  economic 
situation,  first  of  all,  with  regard  to  the  infrastructure  projects  that  this  Government  has.  I 
mean, there are so many projects that we want to finance and we need to get money from 
some quarters. This is not new. I mean, in the past also there has been a levy which has been 
earmarked for contribution with regard to specific projects. Now, we all know what are the 
objectives  of  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  and  I  am  sure  that  all  these  projects  are  priority 
projects for Government and need, in fact, a lot of financing  and we have to see to it. Of 
course, if the time comes when we feel that a decrease in such a levy can be applied, I am 
sure Government will consider that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development confirm 
whether  at  the  time  that  the  new  Government  took  over  in  January  2015,  the  balance 
available in the Fund was about Rs4 billion, and if that is the case, why did Government take 
the decision to increase the levy from R1 to Rs4? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, again, in fact, that has been explained by the former Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development because we have as priority projects, the water sector. 
There are so many replacement of pipes, building of reservoirs and so many other projects 

 

15 

with regard to the water sector. The Bagatelle Dam, itself, if I must say, is a reservoir sans 
fond, and that is not the end of the matter, Madam Speaker, we will have to, in fact, inject 
more money and God knows, how much more money we will have to inject in the future. So, 
we have to be careful because Government cannot just take a decision for now, we have to 
see what is likely to happen in the future and, therefore, even if true it is that the amount that 
was in the Fund stood at Rs4.7 billion yet there are so many projects. In fact, that amount by 
itself is not enough to finance all the projects that this Government is willing to come forward 
with. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister Finance and Economic 
Development  just  confirmed  that  he  is  not  going  to  remove  that  Rs4  tax  on  each  litre  of 
petrol. The figures that he has given show already that there is going to be an excess of over 
Rs1 billion… the water supply project. So, may I know from the hon. Minister Finance and 
Economic Development whether this above Rs1 billion existing has been earmarked for any 
specific project or will that be used also for public utilities, water supply projects? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, it is not correct to say that there is an excess. There is an excess, 
of course, with regard to the amount that has been earmarked to be spent as at now, but more 
money is going to be required for other projects that are in the pipeline. Therefore, I don’t see 
why we should look at it from that angle and we should not forget also that Government has 
given a loan to the Build Mauritius Fund of Rs4.3 billion and that loan has to be refunded. 
Therefore,  only  Rs300  m.  has  been  refunded  so  far.  We  have  also  to  look  at  it  that  the 
Consolidated Fund must be consolidated further. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, last question hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I will put the same question in another way. When the levy, which is, 
in fact, a tax in a so-called no tax budget, but it was a massive tax, it was increased from Rs1 
per litre to Rs4 per litre. The main reason put forward was not Bagatelle Dam or whatever, 
was replacement of pipes and 24 sur 24 and sept sur sept in the near future. Now that we 
know that not a single contract has been awarded; one is being awarded - we had the date 
earlier on - one contract for 8 km under that item. We know how much money is there in the 
reserve and so on and yet we heard the hon. Minister of Trade and Industry - on behalf of 
Government - managing public opinion, preparing public opinion for another increase in the 
price of diesel and l’essence.  

 

16 

Therefore, I agree with the hon. Minister that there has to be an overall examination of 
the situation, but will he agree with me that this would be unacceptable after the figures that 
we have, that now we have another increase in the price of diesel and l’essence, because there 
has been a slight increase on the world market in the price of petroleum products? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I will look at it differently, Madam Speaker. I will say what is 
not acceptable is that we are being late for a number of projects. In fact, I have to be honest, 
CWA  for  all  this  replacement  of  pipes  and  the  investment  that  has  been  earmarked  for 
reservoirs and so on, I believe that we have to try to move forward as quickly as possible 
because that is the priority for Government. In fact, my colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister, 
Minister of the Energy and Public Utilities spoke to me and I am sure that he is seeing to it 
that these projects are materialised as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ 
No. B/535 in regard to the Director General of the University of Technology, Mauritius, will 
now  be  replied  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  time  permitting.  PQ  No.  B/512  has  been 
withdrawn. Hon. Rughoobur! 

REUNION MAUREL - HEALTH AND FITNESS CENTRE PROJECT 

(No. B/506) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Health  and  Fitness 
Centre Project at Reunion Maurel, in Petit Raffray, he will state - 

(a)  

if the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life has sent several reminders to the 
National Development Unit concerning a request for information on the funds 
required for the completion thereof, since January 2016 to date, and  

(b)  

the progress report thereof, indicating the expected completion date thereof. 

The Prime  Minister: Madam Speaker,  I  am informed by the NDU that the Health 
Promotion and Recreational Centre project at Reunion Maurel, Petit Raffray was awarded to 
Best  Construct  Co.  Ltd,  Zonal  Contractor  for  "Construction  and  Upgrading  of  Roads  and 
Drains" on 01 October 2014. 

 The contract value of the project was Rs1.79 m. inclusive of VAT and funds for this 
project  were  to  be  provided  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  and  the  works 
executed under the supervision of the NDU. 

 

17 

 After taking cognizance of this project and the difficulties being encountered for its 
implementation, given that the value of works had reached 65% of the initial contract value 
although works were done up to beam level only, the Permanent Secretary, NDU convened a 
meeting on 20 November 2015 with representatives of the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life.  The  NDU  gave  an  overview  comprising  project  description/details,  findings  which 
included technical aspects and constraints and other observations. 

The Ministry of Health and Quality of Life was informed that it might be advisable to 
stop the project and assess the extent of works executed, given that the contract of the Zonal 
Contractor  had  already  expired  in  March  2015.  Moreover,  the  works  effected  viz  building 
works, did not form part of the Zonal Contract and was not in order. Thus no payment could 
be made to the Contractor. 

 The representative of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life informed that they 
would  seek  a  policy  decision  thereon.  In  the  meantime,  a  site  visit  was  effected  on  11 
December 2015. 

 Further  to  the  site  visit,  a  request  was  made  to  the  NDU  for  the  submission  of 
structural plan, location and site plan and an assessment of works previously carried out. This 
took some time to be prepared in view of the unavailability of information on file at the level 
of NDU and also because of the need for a full survey to be carried out on site.  

Same was submitted to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life on 25 May 2016. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  the  NDU  is  not  in  the 
presence of any reminder from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life as regards funds 
required for the completion of works.  

I am informed that the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life had delegated the Acting 
Regional Health Director, SSRN Hospital to carry out a site visit at the uncompleted Health 
Promotion  and  Recreational  Centre  at  Reunion  Maurel  and  to  submit  proposals  for  an 
alternative use of the building. A decision from that Ministry is awaited. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur:  I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the answer.  May I request 
him to see to it that once the funds are available from the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life, if the project can be handed over to the District Council of Rivière du Rempart to be 
completed as soon as possible?  

 

18 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I will convey that to the person responsible at the NDU.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Fowdar! 

STATE-OWNED COMPANIES - ACCOUNTABILITY 

(No. B/507) Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  directly  or  indirectly  State-owned 
companies,  he  will  state  if  Government  proposes  to  amend  the  legislation  to  allow 
parliamentary  oversight  thereof,  including  through  parliamentary  questions  and  the 
examination of the audit reports thereof by the Public Accounts Committee with a view to 
ensuring the good governance, transparency and control thereof. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, State-owned companies, 
like other companies, are governed by the Companies Act and by their own Memorandum 
and  Articles  of  Association.    Consequently,  they  already  have  their  own  framework  of 
accountability. 

Moreover,  State-owned  enterprises,  including  those  listed  in  the  official  list  of  the 
Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius,  are  subject  to  the  Code  of  Corporate  Governance  which 
provides a framework for improved corporate governance in Mauritius. 

It  is  therefore  considered  that  it  would  not  be  in  the  interest  of  Government-owned 
companies, especially those which are listed on the Stock Exchange, to be brought under the 
oversight  of  any  other  institution,  the  more  so  that  any  leakage  of  commercially  sensitive 
information or information relating to operational matters can cause harm to the company. 

Besides, should any governance issues arise in any State-owned company, the matter 
may  be  referred  for  appropriate  enquiry  to  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance and Institutional Reforms. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  add  that  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  which  has  the  responsibility  for  good  governance 
portfolio  is  already  working  on  a  methodology  to  look  into  the  recommendations  of  the 
Director of Audit and Audit Reports of State-owned enterprises for prompt implementation.  
This, I am informed, is being done with the help of Accounting Officers of all Ministries.  On 
top of that, the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms is 

 

19 

reviewing  all  Boards  of  State-owned  enterprises  in  terms  of  established  Key  Performance 
Indicators’ evaluation and performance for the Board, the Chairperson and the members. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  has  been  elected  on  the  pledge  of  conducting 
business  on  the  principles  of  discipline,  transparency,  accountability  and  exemplary 
governance.  In line with this pledge, a large scale institutional reform is contemplated which 
would  encompass  all  the  sectors  of  public  administration.    This  will  be  done  in  a  phased 
manner and in consultation with all relevant stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, I listened carefully to the answer of the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, he mentioned good governance and transparency.  But when we are talking about 
public funds, wouldn’t he agree that this House has the right to know how public funds are 
being  used  by  being  invested  in  companies,  making  those  companies  answerable  to 
Parliament in case they are dilapidating all funds? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, the time will come when this House will know what has 
been taking place, what has happened and the hon. Member will have to have some patience. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask one question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister?  The Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  made  mention  of  the  fact  that  the  Ministry  of  Good  Governance  is  studying  the 
proposal of having better control over State-owned private companies.  May I ask him if he 
can talk to the Minister of Good Governance to liaise with the Public Accounts Committee so 
that  he  can  receive  the  input  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee,  the  Chairperson  and  the 
other Members, in order to come up with this proposal of having better control over the State-
owned companies? 

The Prime Minister:  Yes. I have just said in my answer that all stakeholders will be 

informed and will give their point of view.  So, I don’t see what else can we do! 

Madam Speaker:  The last question is for hon. Fowdar!   

Mr Fowdar:  Madam Speaker, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the reply.  I fully 
understand that State-owned companies are under the provisions of the Companies Act and 
they  are  not  under  the  supervision  of  Parliament.    I  think  as  the  hon.  Member  has  just 
mentioned, because public funds are involved, I don’t know what sort of mechanism would 
the  Government  come  up  with  so  that  Government  may  still  have  an  oversight  over  those 

 

20 

companies particularly where huge sums of money are involved and massive recruitments are 
being made? 

The  Prime  Minister:    I  have  just  said  in  my  answer  that  the  hon.  Minister  who  is 
responsible for good governance is doing everything that is needed to have a good control 
over  what  takes  place  insofar  as  funds  are  concerned  in  the  companies  owned  by 
Government. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

ICAC -  DIRECTOR GENERAL - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/508) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Independent 
Commission against Corruption, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

the  date  of  appointment  of  Mr  K.  G.,  as  Acting  Director-General  thereof, 
indicating when a substantive Director-General will be appointed therefor, and 

where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed  setting  up  of  a  Financial  Crime 
Commission to operate as an apex body to oversee the Commission and as to 
the proposed amendments that will be brought to the Prevention of Corruption 
Act to give effect thereto. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  Mr  K.  G.  was  appointed  to  act  as  Director-
General  of  the  Independent  Commission  Against  Corruption  with  effect  from  01  January 
2016, pursuant to section 22 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, which also provides that 
such an acting appointment shall not exceed nine months.   

I  can  assure  the  House  that  a  substantive  Director-General  will  be  appointed  in  due 

course. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms that the Financial Crime Commission 
Bill will be introduced into the National Assembly before the end of the year to provide for 
the  creation  of  the  Financial  Crime  Commission  as  an  apex  body  to  combat  white  collar 
crimes, fraud and financial crimes and more importantly to provide the synergy between the 
various law enforcement and intelligence gathering agencies. 

21 

 
The  opportunity  will  also  be  taken  to  review  the  existing  legislation  in  relation  to 
corruption, money laundering, terrorist financing and other related legislation so as to make 
them more responsive to the present and future needs of society. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Madam  Speaker,  we  all  know  that  the  creation  of  a  Financial 
Crime Commission appears in the Government  Programme 2015-2019 and answering to  a 
PNQ  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  which  dated  back  to  24  February  2015,  that  is 
more than a year, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated and I quote - 

“(…)the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
and  the  Attorney  General  are  on  mission  at  present  in  London  for,  inter  alia, 
discussions with the following institutions regarding assistance in the setting-up of the 
Financial Crime Commission – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Serious Fraud Office; 

Foreign and Commonwealth Office; 

Financial Conduct Authority, and 

National Crime Agency.” 

And also, he added – 

“To this end, a new Declaration of Assets Act for MPs and high ranking public 
officers and a Financing of Political Parties Act will be enacted. A new Code of 
Conduct will be introduced for all MPs and public officers.” 

So, my question to the hon. Prime Minister: why is it that after more than a year, we did not 
hear anything in relation to this project although that it has been in February last that the hon. 
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms went to London? 
As I just stated, why is it that now we have to wait for another six months for the setting-up 
of the Agency. 

The Prime Minister: Well, it is a fact that they went to London with regard to the 

necessary…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, don’t interrupt the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

22 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Bhagwan,  I  am  addressing  myself  to  you!  Please,  don’t  interrupt  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Bhagwan,  I  have  asked  you  not  to  interrupt!  That’s  the  last  time  I  am  drawing  your 
attention to this. 

The Prime Minister: He is not Bhagwan! He is bad one … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, what is unacceptable, he is playing with the names of 
hon. Members! Instead of correcting the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, you correct the Member. 
Enfin! 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition, there are certain things that are 
acceptable and there are things which are not acceptable. I have been drawing the attention of 
hon. Bhagwan several times to remain silent and I have been very patient. Several times... 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, when I am on my feet, you remain silent! You know the Standing Orders and 
you know that you have to remain silent! 

(Interruptions) 

This  is  the  last  time  I  am  drawing  your  attention  to  this.  Please,  proceed  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister! 

The Prime Minister: It is a matter of pronunciation! 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Rt. hon. Prime Minister, please, proceed with your reply! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Please, proceed with your reply! 

23 

The Prime Minister: What was the question? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruption, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Can we have some silence in the House while the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is replying to his 
question! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: No, they got me confused! 

The  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Bill  has  already  been  passed.  As  I 
mentioned, in my reply, the other laws are being prepared and if we want to bring good law, 
it takes time. We take all precautions and that is why it takes time. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Referring again to the PNQ of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated – 

“The  Financial  Crime  Commission  will  be  set  up  as  an  umbrella  organisation  to 
oversee  the  operations  of  a  revised  and  enhanced  ICAC  model,  the  FIU  and  Asset 
Recovery Unit(…)” 

Therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this Financial Crime Commission 
will  be  under  the  aegis  of  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms or will it under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office? 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it is hardly 18 months since this Government 
is in power and I consider we have done a lot more than what the previous Government was 
not able to do during 10 years. So, I appeal to hon. Members to have patience. 

That’s your question, it is the answer. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Under  which  aegis  this  new  body  will  be?  Will  it  be  under  the 
PMO  or  under  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms? 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has already replied. 

24 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, next question! 

DRAIN WORKS – IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/509) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime and 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the provision of 
Rs 1.3 billion for the implementation of priority drain works across the island, as announced 
in the last Budget Speech, he will - 

(a) 

give a list of the drain works projects earmarked thereunder, indicating the 
projects which – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

have been completed; 

are in progress, and 

are awaiting implementation, indicating in each case the regions 
concerned therewith, and 

(b) 

amount of funds disbursed therefrom and the amount thereof presently 
available. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the NDU that the sum of 

Rs1.3 billion which was provided in the budget 2015-2016 was meant for – 

(i) 

clearing of outstanding debts amounting to Rs1.040 billion accumulated under 
the previous Government, and  

(ii) 

a sum of Rs300 m. for new projects. 

In  this  respect,  I  am  tabling  the  list  of  drain  projects  constituency-wise  which  the 
NDU has identified for implementation during the current Financial Year.  The drain projects 
comprise both short-term and long-term measures. 

It is to be noted that certain drain projects are being implemented under Works Orders 
following surveys and designs carried out by the NDU staff.  On the other hand, projects of 
greater complexity, have been entrusted to consultants for relevant studies and design prior to 
award of  works contracts. The estimated cost of same are expected to be above Rs600 m. 

 

25 

These comprise major drain projects at, inter alia, Fond du Sac, Camp Carol (Grand’Baie), 
Pereybere, Argy, Clemencia, Lesur, St Remy, as well as in Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, the amount disbursed as at date by the NDU in respect of clearing of 
outstanding  debts  pertaining  to  drains  amounts  to  Rs448.28  m.  The  remaining  sum,  if  not 
utilised by the end of this Financial Year, will be carried forward in the next Budget for the 
clearing  of  further  payments  pertaining  to  drain  projects  prior  to  January  2015  as  well  as 
Consultancy fees for same. 

As  regards  new  projects,  payments  will  be  effected  during  this  Financial  Year  for 

projects already completed. 

It is to be noted that the NDU has issued as at date Works Orders for a total amount of 

Rs90,894,908.39. 

In respect of payment to consultants, same will be met from amount earmarked for 

new projects as and when the Consultants will submit their claims. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in the last Budget, it was never announced that 
Rs1.3 billion would be used for payment of debt in relation to NDU. It was announced that 
Rs1.3 billion would be used for priority drain works across the island and this was announced 
in the last Budget. But, since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated to the House that Rs1 billion 
has been used to repay debt, may we have a list of projects constituency-wise that this Rs1 
billion has been used to repay the debt? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will have a list and will table it. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, with regard to the list of drains that 
he  has  just  indicated  to  the  House,  on  what  criteria  does  the  NDU  decide  upon  the  list? 
Because I see all the drains in the North or in the East of the country, none in the South. Can I 
ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  see  to  it  that  the  NDU  also  takes  care  of  the  priorities 
which have been sent to the NDU with regard to major and urgent drains in the South, for 
example, in Bel Ombre and Chamouny which have been creating a lot of havoc during flood 
periods, please? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Urgent  works  have  been  carried  out  under  the  previous 
Government and they have proved to be useless. So, we want to do serious works that will be 
useful and secure for the people all over the island. 

26 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  not  seen  the  list  tabled  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister,  but  for  Port  Louis  we  are  traumatised  following  the  death  of  the  people  that 
occurred  during  the  flash  floods.    The  former  Government  has  started  a  schedule  of  work 
which has been stopped since January 2015. Rightly or wrongly, I do not know!  But I would 
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to ask the NDU to have a look into those flood-prone areas of 
Port Louis and whatever projects that have been started be carried out, and if new projects 
have to be identified so that there are no more victims in the next flash floods. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  said  that  under  the  previous  Government  many 
contracts, works have not been carried out and we were left with a debt which we have to 
satisfy.  Now, we have to reorganise things and certainly we will do the needful, as I said, for 
the whole island and not only for Port Louis or one or two places.  But, of course, we will 
give  priority  to  places  which  are  more  risky  and  where  floods  do  more  harm  to  the 
inhabitants. 

GRNW - DRUGS DEALINGS - POLICE PATROLS 

(No. B/510) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to drugs, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the measures that are being taken 
to  stop  the  proliferation  thereof  in  Constituency  No.  1,  Grand  River  North  West  and  Port 
Louis West, indicating if consideration will be given for an increase in police patrols in the 
areas where drugs dealings are more common. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  in  the  year  2015,  128  cases  of  dangerous  drugs  have  been  detected  by  Police  in 
Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, whilst from January 2016 
to date, there have been 42 such cases. 

I  am  further  informed  that  mobile  patrols  are  being  maintained  by  personnel  of 
ADSU, ERS and Divisional Support Unit, by day and night.  Special attention is being given 
to increasing the frequency of such patrols at locations deemed to be hotspots. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  its  resolve  to  relentlessly  fight  the  drug  scourge  and  all  its 
ramifications,  the  Police  is  implementing  a  series  of  additional  measures,  throughout  the 
island, as follows - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

27 

daily operations to locate and uproot cannabis plants in collaboration with the 
Police Helicopter Squadron; 

posting of officers at specific locations at airport, seaport and Postal Services 
for the systematic checking of luggages and parcels; 

launching of intelligence-led operations known as “Knock & Roar” aimed at 
checking  and  questioning  of  habitual  criminals  and  notorious  characters 
frequently engaged in unlawful drug activities; 

regular  checking  of  premises  where  huge  amount  of  drugs  was  previously 
seized; 

vehicle  check  points  and  road  block  exercises  are  being  jointly  carried  out 
with ADSU, SMF and SSU personnel by day and night; 

(vi) 

regular talks and programs on the media; 

(vii) 

partnering  with  the  community  and  civic  groups,  professional  associations, 
government agencies and other non-governmental organisations for prevention 
of substance abuse, and  

(viii)  establishment of a platform for informers to share information on drug dealers. 

Mr Armance: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that in order to support the drug 
addiction, we have noted an increase in criminal activities and larceny in the region?  Will 
Government  amend  the  Dangerous  Drug  Act  and  Criminal  Code  Act  so  as  to  strengthen 
penalties related thereof? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, as  I have said in  my answer, the Police have taken so 
many steps and we are trying to do our best to fight this drug scourge because we know that 
this leads to many criminal activities. 

Mr Baloomoody: Madam Speaker, it is a fact that there is a proliferation of drugs in 
Constituency No. 1 and it is also a fact that the Police Stations, be it at Bain des Dames, La 
Tour  Koenig  or  Petite  Rivière,  they  are  undermanned;  they  concentrate  mostly  on  other 
crimes. So, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see to it with the Commissioner of Police that we 
have a sub-office of ADSU in that region? 

The Prime Minister: Well, this is not the only place where they circulated. There are 
many other spots and who will do that?  We need people in the Police Force.  We have to 

 

28 

recruit  more  people,  which  means,  we  have  to  spend  more.    Who  will  pay  for  all  that?  
Consumers! And then you will come and complain that we are fleecing the consumers! 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over!  The Table has been advised that P.Q. No. B/541 in 
regard to the ratification of the Organisation pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des 
Affaires  (OHADA)  Treaty  and  P.Q.  No.  B/560  in  regard  to  the  implementation  of  the 
recommendations of the Judiciary for the setting up of a dedicated Land Tribunal will now be 
replied by the hon. Attorney-General. 

PEREYBERE & LA CUVETTE BEACHES - TUCK SHOPS 

(No. B/514) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
tuck  shops  at  the  Pereybere  and  at  the  La  Cuvette  beaches  respectively,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Beach Authority, information as to the – 

(a)  

(b)  

amount of revenue generated therefrom in each case during the current year 
and the total amount due on claims;  

number  thereof  which  are  presently  unoccupied,  indicating  the  reasons 
therefor, and  

(c)  

procedures followed for the allocation of the vacant spaces thereof. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed that for the current financial year, revenue generated for renting of tuck shops at La 
Cuvette public beach amounts to Rs238,198. With regard to public beach at Pereybere, the 
tuck shops have been unoccupied so far and hence, no revenue has been generated. 

I am also informed that an amount of Rs15,730 (including surcharge) is due for the 

months of May and June 2016 for only one tuck shop at La Cuvette. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that presently all the six tuck 
shops at La Cuvette public beach are occupied.  All the four tuck shops at Pereybere public 
beach  were  vacant  so  far  as  tender  exercises  carried  out  twice  during  the  year  were  not 
conclusive.  However,  following  an  open  tender  exercise  in  April  2016,  the  Authority  has 
been able to allocate the four tuck shops on 18 May 2016 to four different bidders.  The lease 
agreements are in the process of being signed for eventual occupation. 

29 

 
With respect to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the Beach Authority have 
recourse to open tender procedures for the allocation of tuck shops where a major condition is 
that only one tuck shop per bidder per region will be allocated. 

Mr Rughoobur: May I know from the hon. Minister if apart from these tuck shops 
which have already been allocated at La Cuvette public beach, there are other tuck shops that 
are being sublet and if this is in order? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As far as we know, the tuck shops are not sublet.  There are 
crackdowns that are often carried out on different issues, but we are not informed that they 
are sublet. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, as per the procedures, I understand that these tuck 
shops are not allowed to sell alcohol. But I myself have personally been at La Cuvette and I 
have witnessed that alcoholic drinks are being sold at these tuck shops.  May I request the 
hon. Minister to see with the Beach Authority that this is not so? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, as I have said, during crackdowns, I am 
informed that the Police de l’Environnement with the enforcement officers jointly with MRA, 
health officers and the Police, that one lessee was contravened at La Cuvette and prosecutions 
are on-going by the Police. 

GRAND’BAIE DISPENSARY - RENOVATION 

(No. B/515) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the  Minister of Health and Quality of  Life whether, in regard to the Project for the 
Renovation of the Grand Bay Dispensary, he will state – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

if the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport has carried out a 
survey prior to the implementation thereof;  

the estimated cost thereof, and  

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  urgent  implementation  thereof  by  the 
district contractors appointed for the region. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, at present, the Community Health Centre at Grand Bay 

is accommodated in an old building on a plot of land of 952 m2 and dates back to 1955. 

The Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport  carried out a survey of the 
site accomodating the said Grand Bay Community Health Centre on the 09 of July 2015. It 

 

30 

was found that the building was in a very poor  state with major structural damage.  It was 
recommended that the building be pulled down and a new one constructed either on the same 
or on a new one. Renovation was therefore not considered.  

My Ministry will consider the construction of a new CHC on the same site as soon as 

the arrangements are made to provide the same services on alternative sites.  

As regards parts (b) and (c) of the question, the issues do not arise. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur, do you have a question? 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Minister, 
since the site is in a such a deplorable state, have necessary measures been taken to ensure 
that health and safety norms are strictly complied with? 

Mr Gayan: As I just said Madam Speaker the building is in a poor state, this is why 
we are looking for an alternative accomodation to locate the services; to pull this one down 
and to build a new one. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Grand Bay being a highly touristic area, 
it  is  very  strategic  in  our  tourism  industry  and  touristic  activities  practised  there  comprise 
dangerous sports like kite surfing, diving. I would like to ask the hon. Minister if he is not 
contemplating to extend the services of that dispensary into the services of a Mediclini to be 
able to give emergency treatment to tourists and Mauritians who have been in situations like 
near drowning, having stone fish biting and other situations like that. Even if the criteria for 
transforming the dispensary into a Mediclinic is not meant by attendance, I would like to ask 
him if he is not contemplating to transform this into a Mediclinic? 

Madam Speaker: You have made your point! 

Mr Gayan: We can certainly look into that. But I must say that Grand Bay is a very 
built up area and it is not easy to find land to put up that kind of structure but we will look 
into it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

ST ANTOINE SUGAR ESTATE - MARKET FAIR - GOODLANDS 

(No. B/516) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the transfer of the ten acres of 

 

31 

land donated by the owners of the former St Antoine Sugar Estate for the construction of a 
market fair in Goodlands, he will state where matters stand. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the District Council of Rivière du 
Rempart  that  the  Compagnie  Sucrière  de  St  Antoine Ltée  has,  in  fact,  expressed  its 
willingness to vest a portion of land of the extent of 4.22 hectares near the VIP Complex, 
Goodlands in the Council for the construction of a new market fair.  

I am informed that the Council has already started preliminary consultations with the 
different stakeholders namely the Ministry of Health and Quality Life, the Ministry of Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  RDA,  TMRSU,  NTA  with  a  view  to  confirming  the 
suitability of the proposed site. I also understand that a Committee has been set up by the 
Parliamentary  Private  Secretary,  hon.  Ramkaun  and  comprising  elected  Members  of 
Constituency No. 6 since September 2015 to closely monitor this project. The Ministry of 
Public Infrastructure and  Land Transport has also been requested to propose a preliminary 
design of the market.  

 The House may wish to note that the procedures for the transfer of ownership of the 
land to the Council will be initiated once it will be confirmed that the proposed site is suitable 
for the project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Yes,  thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  A  sum  of  Rs80  m.  has  already 
been voted for the project, may I just request the hon. Minister to ensure that once all the 
approvals have been obtained in the weeks to come, the funds are there even in the following 
budget so that we can proceed with the implementation of the project. Thank you. 

Dr. Husnoo: As I have mentioned Madam Speaker, there was some query about the 
distance. I think the market is a bit too far from the inhabited area. We are looking into it. 
Obviously, if it’s appropriate we will have to look for the fund. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Fowdar! 

INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY  

SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 

(No.  B/517)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 

 

32 

Information Communication Technology Skills Development Programme, he will state where 
matters stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

the number of unemployed who have applied therefor and the number thereof 
who have been enrolled; 

the duration of the courses; 

if a stipend is or will be paid to the trainees, and  

(d)   when the first batch of trainees will complete training. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  in  its  endeavour  to  address  the  problem  of 
shortage  of  skilled  manpower  in  the  ICT/BPO  sector,  the  present  Government  allocated  a 
budget of Rs50 m. to my Ministry for the first time, in June 2015 under the heading “Training 
and Capacity Building”.  

It is under this heading of “Training and Capacity Building” that the Information and 
Communication Technology Skills Development Programme is currently being funded. The 
objectives  of  the  Information  and  Communication  Technology  Skills  Development 
Programme are to address the growing demand of manpower in the ICT/BPO sector and to 
increase the employability opportunities of unemployed persons aged 16 and above. 

In  reply  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  2500  unemployed  have 
registered  on  the  Information  and  Communication  Technology  Skills  Development 
Programme database during the period January 2015 to date, out of whom, 903 have been 
selected by different ICT/BPO companies and have been given training and placement. It is 
opportune  to  add  here,  Madam  Speaker,  that  Government  has  already  paid  out  a  sum  of 
Rs36.6 m. representing a refund of 50% of the training and placement for the period January 
2015 to date. I am, however, informed that the whole sum of Rs50 m. will be exhausted by 
the end of the financial year.  

In reply to part (b) of the question, the duration of the training varies from one month 
to three months. However, the training is followed by a job-related placement of up to  an 
overall scheme duration of 12 months in the company inclusive of the course duration. That 
placement may be extended by an additional period of 12 months in a different company.  

In reply to part (c), of the question, trainees holding an SC, HSC or Diploma are paid 
a  stipend  of  up  to  Rs8000  per  month  whereas  degree  holders  are  paid  a  stipend  of  up  to 
Rs15,000 monthly.  

33 

 
Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (d)  of  the  question,  the  House  may  note  that  the 
trainees  were  enrolled  in  monthly  batches  starting  January  2015  and  have  completed  their 
training  and  placement  after  the  subsequent  period  of  12  months.  In  other  words,  the  first 
batch  of  trainees,  which  were  enrolled  in  January  2015,  completed  their  placement  in 
December 2015. 

It is worthwhile to note, that as per the programme, the companies are required to sign 
a commitment to recruit at least 50% of the number of trainees enrolled at the end of their 
placement. 

Mr Fowdar: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has carried out a tracer study to 

see whether the trainees have been recruited in the sectors they have wished to be recruited? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  As  regards  the  Information  and  Communication  Technology 
Development  Scheme,  already  there  is  this  commitment  by  the  employers  who  take  those 
trainees to recruit at least 50%. In addition to that, I have put the question myself to know 
how many of those trainees who have completed their placement have been recruited. Now, 
the  officials  concerned  don’t  have  the  exact  figure  but  I  have  been  told  that  out  of  422 
trainees who have completed their placement, about 300 have been recruited. As for the 122 
remaining,  I  put  the  question  what  has  happened.  But  I  am  told  that  more  often  than  not, 
while being on placement or just thereafter they’ve got other work because the sector has a 
very high turnover. So, they will have got another place to work where they would be earning 
more than what they will in the existing company. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  With  regard  to  the  success  of  the 
programme,  will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  he  envisages  to  seek  more 
funds from the Ministry of Finance for the next batch? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I would like perhaps to … 

(Interruptions) 

I  was  myself  impressed  that  Rs50  m.  had  been  made  available  for  this  training  scheme. 
However, I was a bit puzzled when I was told that there were 2,500 people who had actually 
applied to be on the scheme out of whom only  903 have actually  gone  on placement, and 
those 903 are likely to exhaust the Rs50 m. So, I can appreciate that there is a need for people 
to be employed, but there is also a limit to the amount of money that we can actually obtain. I 

 

34 

don’t  think  that  just  asking  more  is  a  solution,  because  we  have  to  have  the  money  and 
already we all know of the disastrous economic situation we inherited. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Fowdar! 

FINANCIAL SERVICES COMMISSION - SURVEILLANCE SECTION -REVIEW 

(No.  B/518)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Financial  Services  Commission,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to if consideration will be given for a review of the 
staffing and of the functioning of the Surveillance Section thereof. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the FSC has conducted a review of 

its current operational structure including its Surveillance Section. 

Madam Speaker, to reinforce itself as a robust regulator for the nonbanking financial 

services sector in line with technological developments in  

risk-based surveillance and inspections and new financial services offerings, the Board of the 
FSC has already taken the following steps - 

(i) 

on  28  April  2016,  the  Board  of  the  FSC  approved  a  new  organisational 
structure  with  the  establishment  of  four  key  directorates,  that  is,  licensing, 
supervision,  financial  stability  and  legal  and  enforcement  to  address  the 
following objectives - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

enable effective and efficient delivery of the statutory objectives of the 
Financial Services Commission; 

provide  a  fit  for  purpose  structure  to  facilitate  prompt  and  correct 
decision-making in line with international best practices; 

provide for clear reporting lines and accountability at different levels of 
the organisation;  

enable  effective  and  efficient  management 
directorates, divisions and clusters, and  

through 

identified 

prepare  the  organisation  to  deal  with  the  introduction  of  new 
sophisticated service offerings as well as aligned to international best 
practices on risk-based surveillance and inspections. 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

35 

I am informed that an internal resource allocation exercise is currently being 
conducted by the FSC to fit the staffing requirements of a new organisational 
structure  which  will  also  address  competency  mismatch  within  existing 
directorates and their respective clusters; 

the Board of the FSC has appointed an independent external consultant, BCA 
Consulting Ltd., represented by Mr Bijay Kumar Appanah, to assist the FSC 
in conducting a review of salary and terms and conditions of employment in 
light  of  the  new  organisational  structure  that  is  being  put  in  place.  The 
independent  consultant  has  also  been  assigned  the  task  to  assist  the  FSC  in 
defining  key  performance  indicators  by  directorates,  clusters  and  individual 
staff levels to promote a result-based oriented organisation. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Board  will  address  promptly  the 
recommendations  of  the  independent  consultant  which  will  be  submitted  to  the  FSC  in 
August this year.  

I  am  also  informed  that  since  June  2015  with  the  operational  and  structural 
enhancement  which  has  been  made,  the  FSC  has  already  improved  its  surveillance  and 
enforcement activities. In fact, Madam Speaker, 77 enforcement actions were taken in 2015 
as compared to only 49 in 2014 which represents a 57% increase in enforcement actions. Our 
aim, Madam Speaker, is to make the FSC a robust regulator and supervisory body and turn 
Mauritius into a clean and transparent platform for global business activities in this part of the 
world. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Madam  Speaker,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether,  following  the 

recent discovery of the Ponzi schemes, there have been any sanctions within the FSC? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, as the hon. Member is aware, the Chairperson and the CEO of the 
FSC, the previous ones are no longer there, they have been replaced because we believe that 
we needed to have people who were going to come and re-look at what has happened in the 
light of all these events and then bring the changes, and these changes are being brought.  

We are also looking into introducing measures to prevent such Ponzi schemes from 
happening again in Mauritius, but that will also require legislative changes and as the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister has mentioned, this is also something which will be looked at by the Financial 
Crime Commission when it will be set up. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

36 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Minister has made reference to the 
Board. Can he inform the House or table an updated list of the composition of the Board, the 
Chairperson,  Vice-Chairperson  and  all  the  members  and  their  terms  and  conditions  of 
employment? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I think if the hon. Member goes on the Internet and the website of 
the FSC, he will see the composition of the Board which is there. This is what the note says, 
it is available on the website and it will also be available in the Annual Report of the FSC. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, can  I insist on the Minister because I feel the Ponzi 
scheme  was  not  discovered  by  the  Chairman  and  the  Director,  but  the  Surveillance 
Department  is  very  much  responsible  for  that,  whether  there  has  been  sanction  within  the 
Surveillance Department? 

Mr Bhadain: No. Madam Speaker, I am not going to go and explain what happened 
in  the  BAI  scandal  and  how  the  regulator  had  failed  under  the  previous  regime,  but  there 
were reports which were issued by the Surveillance Department and the enforcement team to 
the  Board  and  the  Board  failed  to  take  actions  on  those  reports.    Had  those  reports  been 
looked at and acted upon, this whole scandal would have already exploded prior to 2014. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has mentioned that sanction has been 
taken and the Chief Executive Officer has been sacked. So, may I know, it has been more 
than one year now, when will the Financial Services Commission have a full-fledged Chief 
Executive Officer? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  the  previous  Chief  Executive  was  not  sacked.  Her 
contract came to an end and it was not renewed, there is a difference.  She is a professional 
and she has worked, okay, fair enough! Some decisions were bad, but she is a professional 
after all. Now, having said that, there is a famous saying in English ‘if it is not broken, don’t 
fix it.’ The FSC is working well. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order!  

37 

RIO OLYMPIC GAMES 2016 - ZIKA VIRUS – MAURITIAN DELEGATION 

(No.  B/519)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Zika  virus  which  is  fast 
spreading in Brazil, he will state the precautionary measures being taken by his Ministry in 
relation  to  the  members  of  the  Mauritian  delegation  who  will  be  participating  in  the 
forthcoming Rio Olympic Games. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, the World Health Organisation and the Medical 
and Scientific Department of the International Olympic Committee have both issued a Public 
Health  Advice  regarding  the  Zika  virus  for  all  those  who  will  participate  in  the  2016  Rio 
Olympic Games.  

The  Mauritius  Olympic  Committee,  which  is  responsible  for  the  coordination  and 
participation  of  Mauritius  in  the  Olympic  Games  2016,  my  Ministry  and  the  Ministry  of 
Health  and  Quality  of  Life  are  working  in  close  collaboration  in  order  to  ensure  that  all 
necessary measures are taken to protect members of our delegation from this virus.  

Over  and  above,  mosquito  nets  and  mosquito  repellents  being  provided  by  the 
Mauritius  Olympic  Committee,  an  appropriate  correspondence  regarding  health  advice  has 
been issued to all athletes and officials forming part of the delegation which will proceed to 
Rio. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Minister, since he has referred in a knowledgeable 
way to the delegation that will represent Mauritius, this Zika problem, as at now, how many 
officials and athletes will be travelling to Rio de Janeiro for that event? 

Mr Sawmynaden: At the moment, I can say the number of athletes that are qualified 

is eight, but approximately, it will be around 40 to 50 with more athletes being qualified. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, j’ai bien écouté la réponse du ministre qui veut se 
montrer  rassurant,  ce  qui  est  bien,  mais  a-t-il  pris  connaissance  de  l’avertissement  des 
quelques 150 scientifiques et experts qui ont écrit à l’organisation mondiale de la santé et ils 
insistent que ce virus représente un vrai danger pour la santé publique et demande à ce que 
les jeux olympiques soient déplacés? 

 

38 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  we  are  going  according  to  the  International  Olympic 
Committee.  So,  under  the  World  Health  Organisation  actually  it  is  up  to  them  to  decide 
whether the games will be postponed or not. But at the moment, there is no reason why the 
games will be postponed. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:    Peut-on  savoir  comment  le  ministère  de  la  jeunesse  et  des  sports  et  le 
comité  olympique  procèdent  actuellement  pour  conscientiser  les  membres  de  la  délégation 
mauricienne  qui  seront  à  Rio  par  rapport  au  réel  danger,  encore  une  fois  je  le  dis,  que 
représente ce virus Zika? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  I  have  just  answered  to  that  question.    I  mean  the  Olympic 
Committee in my Ministry is working in close collaboration and together with the Medical 
Sports Unit, we are talking to all the athletes and we are giving them all the precautions and 
measures as well as all the repellents that they need so that they are not affected by the virus. 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Dr. Sorefan ! 

Dr. Sorefan : Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It is a well-known fact that the Zika virus 
affects the fœtus of a pregnant woman.  May we know, in the delegation, how many pregnant 
women are going to this?  

(Interruptions) 

Because we should not blow this case of Zika virus out of proportion.  It affects the fœtus and 
the question does not arise as such for being infected with Zika virus for other persons.  It just 
affects  the  fœtus  and  so  I  think  we  are  blowing  out  of  proportion  of  this  Zika  virus  in 
Mauritius. 

Mr Sawmynaden :  I have taken note of the comments of the hon. Member. 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Dr. Joomaye, you have a question ! 

Dr. Joomaye :  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to ask the hon. Minister if he 
has  checked  with  his  colleague  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  if  the 
appropriate reagents are available to diagnose an infection by Zika virus in the central lab of 
the hospital? 

 

39 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  As  mentioned,  we  are  working  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life.  Definitely, we will take all the necessary measures so 
that we are not infected in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir quels seront les dispositions qui seront prises au retour de la 

délégation à Maurice afin d’éviter que ce virus se propage ici à Maurice? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  This is what I just answered from the question of the hon. Member 
that  we  are  working  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  and 
definitely we will have all the blood testing and all the sample tests done when they arrive. 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn – PQ B/524, B/550, B/551, B/552.  I suspend the sitting for one and half hours. 

At 12.59 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.33 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

HIGH LEVEL FOOTBALL ACADEMY – SETTING UP 

(No. B/520) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  setting  up  of  a  High 
Level Football Academy by his Ministry, he will state where matters stand. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the replies I 
made to PQ B/164 and B/906.  A draft MoU from a famous football Club in Europe has been 
passed  on  to  the  MFA  and  once  we  receive  the  green  light  from  them,  we  shall  be  in  a 
position to sign same and start the Academy shortly. 

Mr  Quirin:    Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  quel  est  ce  famous  club  dont 
l’honorable  ministre  vient  de  nous  informer  et  avec  qui  on  a  un  Memorandum  of 
Understanding? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    I  will  just  ask  the  hon.  Member  to  be  patient.    He  will  get  the 

answer soon. 

Mr Quirin:  Madame la présidente, je ne suis pas en train de plaisanter et ce n’est pas 
la première fois que j’ai une question sur ce dossier.  La première fois, l’honorable ministre 
doit bien s’en souvenir, c’était en mars 2015; une deuxième fois, en novembre de la même 

 

40 

année et là nous sommes en juin 2016, quinze mois après et on a l’impression qu’il n’y a rien 
de sérieux qui est fait.  Si l’honorable ministre considère que c’est un dossier, un sujet fictif, 
c’est  à  lui  de  nous  le  dire  mais  on  ne  peut  pas  revenir,  à  chaque  fois,  en  sollicitant  des 
informations. La dernière fois il ne pouvait pas déposer les copies des correspondances des 
courriers échangés entre les clubs concernés et son ministère ou autre.  Madame la présidente, 
je souhaiterai cette fois ci qu’on ait une réponse claire et nette. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madame la presidente, the idea to set up a football Academy was a 
programme of this Government, I mean when we won the Elections which was not even in 
the Manifesto of his party at that time. So, it is our baby.  We want to do something, but we 
need to do it properly.  Madam Speaker, let me reassure the hon. Member, despite that the 
baby takes nine months, this is an elephant. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, we are not just sitting down and waiting for the Academy to come to 
get football going into Mauritius.  I am glad to announce to this House today that in 2012, 
Mauritius was ranked 201th.  Today Mauritius is ranked 142th.  So, we have gained more than 
60  places  in  the  FIFA  world  ranking.    We  have  opened  all  the  écoles  de  foot.    We  have 
opened the Centre National de Formation.  I have been dealing with several clubs.  I think 
that we have got one of the best MoU.  Now, I am waiting for the green light of the MFA. 
Once we get the green light, we’ll go ahead. Because for all sports in Mauritius, we need to 
deal with the Federation; we have to have the green light of the Federation so that we can go 
ahead. I think now we have reached that turning point and we should materialise soon. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, we are not talking about babies. We are talking 
about  public  funds.  Why  this  opacity,  again,  of  the  name  of  the  club  that  you  are  dealing 
with? What is the reason that you are not giving? As I said, we are talking about public funds. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, who talked of public funds? Who talked about 
money? No one talked about money here! We are just talking about an MoU between a Club 
and the country. If there are financial funds, then… 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, last time I answered the question; because of financial implication, we 
cannot agree to anyone. So, now, let us finalise, then you will see. Be patient! 

41 

 
Mr Mohamed: I pick up where hon. Ameer Meea and hon. Quirin started out. The 
hon. Minister has not answered the question. What is the legal reasoning for him not to be 
transparent about the name of the club? Is it because simply there are no views with regard to 
financial implications or does he not realise that he is accountable to this House for even non-
financial implications? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Let me re-inform the House and the hon. Member that everything 
needs  to  go  through  the  Federation.  Football  is  governed  in  Mauritius  by  the  Mauritius 
Football Association. If I don’t have the green light of the Mauritius Football Association, 
how can I give the name of the club? I think we should have some respect for the Federation, 
and today, we are working in close collaboration. Once they give the green light, we will give 
the name. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

YOUTH CENTRES – CIVIC EDUCATION PROGRAMMES 

(No.  B/521)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the youth, he will state if his 
Ministry  has  arranged  for  Civic  Education  Programmes  to  be  carried  out  in  all  the  Youth 
Centres and, if so, give details thereof and, if not, why not.    

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  hon.  Member  that 
Civic  Education  is  one  of  the  main  components  of  the  wide  range  of  youth  training 
programmes like the National Youth Volunteer Scheme,  Duke of Edinburgh’s International 
Award,  Life Skills Programme, to mention a few, already being carried out by my Ministry 
for the youth across the country. 

The Civic Education Programme comprises – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Training and sensitisation in Human Values; 
Youth Leadership; 
Sensitisation on crime prevention and patriotism; 
Prevention of substance abuse; 
The green initiatives - Environment protection; 
Training in Human Rights, and 
Cross cultural interactive workshops. 

 

42 

For  the  period  of  July  2016  to  May  2016,  a  total  of  4,500  young  have  already  undergone 
training and by the end of 2016 we are expecting to reach a total of 15,000 youth. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  presently 
 
working on the revamping of the Youth Sector and is, as well, finalising the National Youth 
Policy  with  a  view  to  meeting  the  present  day  requirements  of  our  youth  and  preparing  a 
more positive and responsible youth for the future. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir où et quand ont été organisés ces 

cours de civisme ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: In all the youth centres of Mauritius. 

Mr Quirin: Peut-on avoir les dates et lieux quand les cours ont été dispensés ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I cannot give the date now, but it is ongoing. Every weekend, we 

are having several activities and the lieux are the youth centres. 

Mr Quirin: Est-ce que l’honorable ministre peut déposer une liste des dates et des 
lieux, les noms des centres de jeunesse où ces cours ont été dispensés durant ces six derniers 
mois ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I can give the list of the youth centres, now whether I need to give 

attendance of all the youth, I don’t know. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

CSR - CONTRIBUTIONS 

(No.  B/522)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Mauritius Revenue Authority, information as to the amount of contributions thereof remitted 
by companies thereto in respect of the years 2014 and 2015 respectively, indicating the use 
that has been made thereof, including the amount thereof which has been remitted to Non-
Government Organisations, if any.   

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Revenue Authority 
that the amount of unspent CSR funds remitted to MRA was Rs145 m. in 2014 and Rs129 m. 
in 2015. 

43 

 
All  funds  collected  by  the  MRA,  including  those  unspent  CSR monies  remitted  by 
companies are, in accordance with the law, transferred to the Consolidated Fund, from which 
both  recurrent  and  capital  expenditure  of  Government  are  met.  These  include  support  to 
Poverty Alleviation Programmes and NGOs. 

Mr  Uteem:  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  actual  figure  that  has  been 
disbursed from this Fund and remitted to the General Fund? So, from this Fund, what is the 
amount that has been disbursed to NGOs? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  the  amount  goes  to  the  Consolidated  Fund.  So,  there  is  no 
specific  amount  that  is  earmarked  for  NGOs.  The  amount  that  is  being  spent  for  different 
Ministries that will cater for the same objectives as CSR comes from the Consolidated Fund. 

Mr  Uteem:  The  reason  for  this  question,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  we  know  that 
money has been taken out of the Consolidated Fund, especially for the Lovebridge Project. 
So, my question is very specific: in addition to Lovebridge Project, has any fund been taken 
out of the Consolidated Fund and given to any NGO to carry out the CSR activities? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  the  Lovebridge  Project  was  a  specific  project  that  was 
mentioned in the Budget, whereas these funds are funds which are not used by the companies 
for  their  own  CSRs  and  that,  by  law,  have  to  be  remitted  to  the  MRA  and  it  goes  to  the 
Consolidated Fund. 

Mr  Uteem:  Being  given  that  these  funds  are  supposed  to  be  for  CSR  purposes  by 
private companies, and which are not spent, they go to the MRA, would the hon. Minister 
consider  earmarking  those  funds  and  giving  them  to  either  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation or another socially oriented organisation or NGOs so that this money, whose aim 
is to help Social Corporate Responsibility, goes to the NGOs? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, let me remind the hon. Member that, for example, the Ministry 
of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, funds are earmarked from the 
Consolidated Fund to that Ministry for programmes like NGO Trust Fund, around Rs15 m.; 
MACOSS:  Rs100  m.;  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality  and  Child  Development  and  Family 
Welfare, there are special collaborative programmes, there are transfers to NGOs… 

 (Interruptions) 

The Opposition is saying: ‘Ah’. But these are… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Order! 

44 

Mr  Jugnauth:  These  are  objects  which  are,  in  fact,  the  same  as  that  have  been 
defined for CSRs and, therefore, it is not like a Fund which is going to the Consolidated Fund 
that  has  to  be  earmarked  specifically  for  that;  because  the  law  is  like  that,  it  goes  to  the 
Consolidated Fund. 

Mr Bérenger: Not at all!  It is not in the law at all. Not at all! Under the previous 
Government, the funds that went to the MRA because those funds have not been spent on 
CSR Projects, were kept by the MRA for a long time. There is nothing in the law which says 
that all the money unspent on CSR must be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. If yes, tell 
me where? Am I to understand that there are no funds left at the MRA in reference to unspent 
CSR money, that  all have been transferred to the Consolidated Fund and if, yes, how much? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, this is what I have been informed, Madam Speaker. I have given 
it in my answer. I repeat again that the MRA has collected an amount of Rs145 m. for 2014 
and Rs129 m. for 2015 which have gone to the Consolidated Fund completely. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister, clearly - and I don’t blame him, he 
is freshly back in the Ministry and this CSR mess is with us – whether the CSR Committee 
and the CSR guidelines that were abolished by the former Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development in the Finance Bill, last year, are still functioning? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I suppose the Committee is still in place, but I don’t believe that 
they are operating in the same way as before because before they were the ones who would 
assess all the requests that would come to them to see to it that the money that is being spent 
would  be  according  to  the  guidelines  that  have  been  specified.    Again  I  have  to  get  the 
information.  I believe now they are doing some kind of PR exercise maybe to advise those 
companies about the NGOs.  

Mr Bérenger: If you would allow me, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Minister is fresh 
back in the Ministry. It is a very complicated and messy situation, but it is urgent. I am sure 
the hon. Minister must know there are NGOs dealing with vital issues like children welfare, 
handicapped  children.  All  sorts  of  NGOs  are  running  out  of  funds.    It  is  a  total  mess.  
Although,  I  agree  that  he  needs  time  as  it  a  very  complicated  subject,  but  can  I  ask  the 
Minister of Finance whether he will look at that file urgently before Budget even so that these 
NGOs are not let dry where they are. 

45 

 
Mr  Jugnauth:  Yes.  In  fact,  questions  have  been  answered  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister that the matter is being reviewed already. Of course, I am also going to review this 
issue. 

THE VALE - SOCIÉTÉ GAMA - STATE LAND LEASE 

(No.  B/523)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the State land leased to Société GaMa in the Vale, he will state if Government has resumed 
possession of any part thereof and, if so, indicate the – 

(a)  

(b)  

reasons therefor, and  

cost incurred by Government in relation thereto, if any. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, Société GaMa holds an industrial site lease for the period 17 July 2012 to 
16 July 2072 over an extent of 1772.76m2 of Pas Geometriques The Vale for the purpose of 
running a restaurant.  

 
I am informed that the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit had informed my 
Ministry that a strip of tarred land forming part of the land leased to Société GaMa was being 
used by the public as an access road to the restaurant of Société GaMa. It is also being used 
as a roadside parking or drop off area in the absence of adequate space along the same side of 
the road.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  excised  portion  of  land  is  also  being  used  as  access  by  the 

adjoining lessees. 

Société GaMa was on 14 August 2013 notified of my Ministry’s decision to resume 

possession of an extent of 92m2 of land for the creation of an access road.  

Accordingly, action is being taken to vest the excised portion of land in the Ministry 

of Local Government for maintenance by the District Council. 

 
As regards part (b) of the question, no cost has been incurred by Government in terms 
of  compensation  to  Société  GaMa  as  the  Director,  Valuation  and  Real  Estate  Consultancy 
Services has informed that there was no significant increase in value of the excised portion of 
land. With respect to the amendment of the lease held by Société GaMa by the excision of the 
strip  of  92m2,  an  amount  of  Rs1,450.  for  registration  and  stamp  duty  was  borne  by 
Government. 

46 

 
Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the real reason 
for excising this plot of land from Société GaMa - the lease  - was to favour access to the 
campement of his Société and that of his neighbour. 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, there is no question of any favour as I mentioned in my answer, 
but let me inform the hon. Member that he is coming directly to my son’s property. I will 
give him the answer without any hesitation.  Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut is not the 
adjourning neighbour of the Société GaMa.  The land of Société Mohamed consist at its end 
part of an extent of land which borders directly to the main road and thus may be used at any 
time for direct access to the property meaning it does not require the use of a strip of the land 
of  Société  GaMa  to  have  an  access.    The  current  access  of  Société  Mohamed  Umer  Ibne 
Showkut  has  been  the  same  one  since  it  was  acquired  from  the  previous  owners  who 
themselves owned it for years and used it for the same access. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  for  the  guidance  of  the  House,  I  am  going  to  read 
extract  of  a  letter  which  I  am  going  to  table  and  then  I  would  like  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister’s reaction. I quote – 

“As a result of certain constructions effected by Société … 

Madam Speaker:  Can we know the letter emanates from where? 

Mr Uteem: Yes, I say I will table it. 

“As  a  result  of  certain  constructions  effected  by  Société  Mohamed 
Umer Ibne Showkut, the access road to the portion of the lease land to 
the extent of 875 m2 owned and occupied by Société La Belle Anse has 
been  obstructed  as  a  result  of  works  carried  out  by  by  Société 
Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut. I hereby by this present undertake and 
irrevocably  agree  in  the  name  of  the  partnership  Société  Mohamed 
Umer Ibne Showkut to grant a full right of passage and access from the 
coastal road onto the extent of land owned and occupied by Société La 
Belle  Anse  dated  this  17th  day  of  February  2014  signed  by  Mr 
Showkutally Soodhun.” 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  from  this  letter,  it  is  clear  that,  as  a  result  of  illegal  construction  by 
Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut, the access to the road of Société La Belle Anse was 
blocked and that is the reason why Government today has had to take back this lease. 

47 

 
Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I am not the same as the hon. Member killing his own 
hon.  friends  sitting  next  to  him.    There  is  an  official  letter  issued  to  the  Senior  Chief 
Executive by the Société GaMa, which voluntary has given to the Government for the access 
of the… 

As I mentioned, the neighbouring was not Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut, it 
is La Belle Anse.  La Belle Anse, as the hon. Member knows very well is for one of his own 
colleagues, which I do not want to mention. There is nothing to do.  Even La Belle Anse is 
not involved at all.  It has been taken in 2013 and the building was built in 2014.  There is 
nothing of that.  The letter, which the hon. Member has read, I would like to say that the hon. 
Member can produce to the Central CID and make an inquiry about it if it is true what he is 
telling. 

Mr Uteem: I will certainly do that because I am suing the Minister for defamation.   

Mr Soodhun: I invite the hon. Member to do it. 

Mr Uteem: So, I would like to know - since by February 2014, we know that Société 
Mohamed Umer  Ibne Showkut has done an illegal construction on the lease - how did his 
Ministry in 2015 grant a new lease to that Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut which is 
clearly in breach of the terms of existing lease. 

Mr Soodhun: No lease has been granted to Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut.  
The lease has been given in 2011 and not in 2015.  The hon. Member can go and check.  If he 
has any information, I invite him to go to ICAC. 

Mr Uteem: This is incredible. I have a copy of the State of Mauritius Industrial Lease 
between State of Mauritius represented by Mr Pather on one hand Société Mohamed Umer 
Ibne Showkut, and it is dated and signed 26 August 2015.  So there is a new industrial lease 
that  was  granted  last  year  when  Société  Mohamed  Umer  Ibne  Showkut  has  constructed 
illegally on that plot of land. 

Mr Soodhun: It is not true to say that because the SCE, Mr Oozeer, left two days 
after I resumed duty as Minister. When I joined it was in December 2014.  How come he has 
got a letter from Mr Pather? So, any way let me tell the hon. Member that the lease has been 
granted. All these documents have been submitted.   I  am telling the hon. Member that no 
lease has been granted. I take my sole responsibility as the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of 
Housing and Lands, that no lease has been given to Société Mohamed Umer Ibne Showkut in 
2015.  I can challenge anybody.  If he says that he has this document, I invite him to go to the 

 

48 

Central CID and as I have all the documents, I will  give them to the Central CID. He goes to 
the Central CID, I am inviting him to do that. 

Mr  Uteem:  I  will  prove  it  because  it  is  a  public  document  which  incidentally  was 
drafted by a very reputable public notary, Mrs Sawmynaden. I have no problem to table that. 
It was a new lease granted on 26 August 2015. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

STATE BANK OF MAURITIUS – SUBSIDIARY DIRECTOR - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/524)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the appointment of Mr M. M. as Director of a subsidiary of the 
State  Bank  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Financial 
Services  Commission,  information  as  to  if  the  Commission  has  carried  out  an  inquiry  to 
ascertain if he is a fit and proper person to hold the said office and, if so, indicate the outcome 
thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

HAJJ PILGRIMAGE –- PILGRIMS – TRANSPORT CONTRACT 

(No.  B/525)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the transport of pilgrims for the forthcoming Hajj Pilgrimage, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Islamic Cultural Centre, information as to if a bid exercise has been 
carried out for the award of the contract therefor and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, I have been informed by the Islamic Cultural Centre that - 

‘No bid exercise has been carried out for the Year 2016.’ 
In fact, Madam Speaker, the Islamic Cultural Centre does not enter into any contract 
with any airline, but only requests for offers to give price indications to pilgrims willing to 
take best offers received. 

Such  an  exercise  was  carried  out  in  2015,  but  no  response  was  received  from  any 

airline company or General Sales Agents in Mauritius. 

 
Over the last five years, the airfares paid by Mauritian hajjis, inclusive of the airport 

49 

tax in Jeddah, have been as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

2010 – Rs41,300 

2011 – Rs39,870 

(iii) 

2012 – Rs38,750 

(iv) 

2013 – Rs41,390 

(v) 

2014 – Rs40,577 

Hajj pilgrims are not in any way bound to travel by the airline proposed by ICC, and 

may take any route which they consider more advantageous to them. 

Madam Speaker, we contacted Saudi Airlines who said that they were not interested 
in  providing  their  services.  We  then  negotiated  at  the  highest  level  with  Emirates  who  is 
looking at the Mauritian destination in a more strategic way. 

In  March  2015,  I  personally  met  the  President  of  Emirates  Group,  His  Royal 

Highness, Sheik Ahmed bin Saeed Al Makhtoum. 

The most critical issue was to escape the risky US dollar exchange rate compared to 

the Mauritian Rupee. 

Madam Speaker, I would to like point out that, prior to 2015, Emirates was quoting in 
US  Dollars  with  the  exchange  risk  taken  by  the  pilgrims.  The  price  range  for  airfare  was 
amounting from USD1250 up to USD1650. 

The second issue was to resist the forecasted increase in fuel costs. 

After  negotiations,  we  succeeded  in  shifting  the  airfare  price  in  terms  of  Mauritian 

Rupees rather than US dollar terms. 

I am proud to announce that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

in spite of rising airfares and charges, 

in spite of rising US dollar, 

(iii) 

in spite of expected rising fuel costs, 

We managed to bring the hajj airfare for 2015 to Rs35,000 with Emirates. This is by far the 
lowest price of airfares paid over the last five years for Mauritian hajjees. 

50 

 
Further  to  the  visit  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  in  UAE  in  November  last  year, 
where he personally intervened  at high level, Emirates has  agreed to maintain the price  at 
Rs35,000. for the year 2016.  

Madam Speaker, Emirates has also offered to give luggage allowance of two suitcases 
of  23  kilos  each  to  all  pilgrims  on  both  legs.  Furthermore,  Emirates  is  allowing  the 
transportation of 5 litres of Zamzam water for each passenger.  

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister why is it 
that instead of the Board of the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund which according to the 
law is the one who has to organise this Hajj, it was he personally who went and negotiated 
with Airlines for the transport of hajj pilgrims?  

Mr Soodhun: Where is the problem! When his uncle was the Chairman of the ICC, 

what he did?  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please don’t bring in other persons who are not in 

Parliament. 

Mr Soodhun: I am given the responsibility for the hajj affairs, where is the crime? 
We have discussed with the airlines to get the cheapest price than it was five years before. I 
am going to invite the hon. Member, he is also a Muslim like me and an MP. If he can go and 
find out the cheapest price, we are going to agree. Why he can’t do it! 

Mr Uteem: I have done that, Madam Speaker. If a proper tender was carried out, I am 
sure we would get a better price. For example, I checked with the Etihad Airways which is 
the official airline for UA. Etihad via Seychelles is offering Rs31,000 for the hajj ticket.  

Mr  Soodhun:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  give  you  an  example.  In  2012,  ICC  paid  a 
claim of over Rs1 m. to one Airline company with whom they had negotiated a rate and enter 
an agreement. However, pilgrims decided in that particular year to travel by another airline to 
their choice. Secondly, let me tell you exactly what is the situation.  We can have any flight, 
for example Etihad, if we got the Etihad, they have to go to Abu Dhabi and then from Abu 
Dhabi to Saudi Arabia. For example, what is happening for Air France, if tomorrow pilgrims 
opt to travel by the other airlines for instance by Air France, the plane must stop at Paris, a 
flight duration of nearly 12 hours, then from Paris to Jeddah, the flight duration is 5 hours. 
So, there are lots of problems that occur and we cannot thus force the pilgrims to accept that. 
They  can  also  choose.    If  tomorrow  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  Etihad,  he  suggests  the 
pilgrims and if the pilgrims will accept, there is no problem. I invite him to do it. 

 

51 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  Order, please! 

Please order, order!  

No crosstalking!  

Hon. Soodhun, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

No provocation, hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  26  April  2016,  the  Chairman  of  the  ICC  circulated  to  all  Board 

members - I am going to table a copy of this - and I quote – 

“The  VPM’s  office  has  asked  us  to  issue  a  cheque  of  Rs5  m.  in  favour  of 
Emirates Airline as per last year to sure the deal before tomorrow”. 

So the Vice Prime Minister has already given instructions to ICC to pay already a deposit … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! Please!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, please sit down! This is very serious what you are saying, please let the House 
know from which paper or from which document you are quoting! 

Mr Uteem: Yes, Madam Speaker, I am going to table it, but I don’t think that the 
hon. Minister is denying it. It’s a letter from the Chairman of the ICC addressed to all Board 
members. It is an e-mail of 26 April where he says that the Vice-Prime Minister’s office has 
asked to issue a cheque of Rs5 m. in favour of Emirates Airline as per last year to sure the 
deal before tomorrow. So the deal is done, there is no point of trying to find any better deals 
because the Vice-Prime Minister’s office has already decided. 

Mr  Soodhun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  just  mentioned  that  this  is  the  best  price  that  we 

have for five years and even these people … 

(Interruptions) 

 

52 

No, because these people are deaf, they don’t listen. The Emirates Airline has to book two 
flights and if we don’t pay in advance, we are going to miss it because we have got the best 
price. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun, order! 

Order! Order!  

Order, I have said! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order!  Hon. Soodhun, please, don’t use provocative words. Can you, please… 

(Interruptions) 

No. I have asked you all not to use provocative words! Hon. Soodhun, the word that you have 
used is unparliamentary, just withdraw this word. 

Mr Soodhun: I withdraw. 

Madam Speaker: Okay. Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following what was just said about this 
letter that was just referred to by hon. Uteem and the fact that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
does not deny its contents as him having decided instead of the Board, could he please also 
enlighten  the  House  whether  he  is  the  one  who  chaired  the  meeting  of  the  ICC  yesterday 
when four members of the ICC were fired and four new ones were appointed? Is that also 
true? 

Mr Soodhun: He has to come with a substantive question.  I am going to answer to 

that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is misleading the 

House… 

(Interruptions) 

 

53 

Madam Speaker: This is very serious. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: I don’t agree… 

Madam  Speaker:  Please,  sit  down!  Now,  before  you  ask  your  question,  you  have 
said that the hon. Minister is misleading the House.  This is not correct. If you say that he is 
misleading the House, you have to come with a motion. Before you say on what specifically 
he has misled the House, are you prepared to come with a motion to the House? 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, what the hon. Vice-Prime Minister stated is not 

factually true. I will give the example of what he said. He stated… 

Madam Speaker: But then, you are withdrawing the fact, are you withdrawing? 

Mr Ameer Meea: Okay, I withdraw, but I will explain. The hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
stated that for pilgrims if they go through Etihad Airways, they will have to go to Abu Dhabi, 
if they go to Air France they would have to go to Paris. But even with Emirates, they go to 
Dubai and then go to Jeddah. It is the same thing. So, they don’t go directly. They go through 
a transit flight. So,… 

Madam Speaker: What is your question? 

Mr Ameer Meea: So, my question is: will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister consider the 
fact that now we have new players on the market like Turkish Airlines, like Etihad, why is it 
that you have to sign the contract directly with Emirates without an open tender which would 
have been more beneficial to Mauritians? 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I have already answered to this question and the fact 
that the hon. Member must understand when I am telling that because the Emirates Airline, it 
is true to say that they go to Dubai, but it takes  

six and a half hours from Mauritius to go to Saudi Arabia, but whereas France, Air France 
will take about more than 15 hours, even… 

Let me give you the answer! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, you have asked your question. But allow him 

to reply! You cannot constantly interrupt him! 

 

54 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t interrupt him! You will have ample time to ask your question. 

Mr Soodhun: For Turkish Airlines, we can say that if anybody will travel, they are 
free  to  travel,  there  is  no  problem,  if  tomorrow  the  hon.  Member  gets  cheaper  than  the 
Emirates, I am going to welcome it and I am going to support him for that. Ask him to come 
with Turkish Airlines… 

better price than 35,000, then we accept it… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  I  cannot  accept  that  constantly  you  are 
interrupting the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. From a sitting position,  you  are making several 
kinds of remarks. 

(Interruptions) 

But then, that was the question that was asked. 

(Interruptions) 

Next question, hon. Bhagwan! Next question! 

TOURISM AUTHORITY - TOURISM ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS - 

RECRUITMENT 

 (No. B/526) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the Tourism Enforcement Officers, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Tourism Authority, information as to the number thereof recruited - 

(a)  

since  January  2015  to  April  2016,  indicating  the  names,  addresses  and 
conditions of employment thereof, and  

(b)  

in May 2016, indicating - 

(i)  

(ii)  

how the recruitment exercise therefor was carried out, and  

if  the  list  of  the  recruits  will  be  tabled,  together  with  the  names, 
qualifications, addresses and conditions of employment thereof. 

 

55 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Tourism 
Authority that no Tourism Enforcement Officer was recruited during the period January 2015 
to April 2016. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  advised  that  30  Tourism  Enforcement 
Officers, including five Tourism Enforcement Officers who were already on contract, were 
recruited  by  the  Tourism  Authority  after  a  proper  selection  exercise,  on  the  basis  of  an 
approved Scheme of Service.  

The  post  was  advertised  in  January/February  2016  in  four  main  dailies  and  one 
weekly newspaper.  By the closing date of 11 February 2016, 788 applications were received.  
Following a screening exercise, a shortlist of 449 qualified candidates was established.  

Only 400 candidates attended the interviews conducted by a Selection Panel approved 
by  the  Board  of  the  Tourism  Authority.    The  Selection  Panel  established  a  shortlist  of  50 
candidates  in  order  of  merit.    On  10  May  2016,  the  Tourism  Authority  made  an  offer  of 
employment to the first 30 candidates on a one year probationary period. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  terms  and  conditions  of  employment  of  the  Tourism 
Enforcement Officers are governed by the Pay Research Bureau and current legislations in 
force in the Public Service. 

I am tabling the list of the newly recruited Tourism Enforcement Officers and a copy 

of the Scheme of Service for the post. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether there have 
been officers, in an acting position, within the same job? How many? Whether they applied 
for the job and whether there are some who are on the list of those who have been recruited? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Well,  in  addition  to  the  five  Tourism  Enforcement 
Officers who were employed on contract, I think there were three Clerical Officers.  They 
were acting, but they were not found suitable, they were not taken on board. But you will see 
from here.  Firstly, that it is a very open list, secondly, that everybody is highly qualified. I 
have given all the information. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether we can have 

information on the composition of the Selection Committee? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, I have this information. It is headed by the HR 
Manager  of  the  Ministry,  Mrs  Benyett,  and  a  Screening  Committee  and  then  you  have  a 

 

56 

selection panel, Mrs Benyett, Mr Parayag, who is from the Ministry of Local Government, 
Mrs Goolab from the MTPA and Mr Mootoo from my Ministry. 

TOURISM AUTHORITY - RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/527)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  recruitment  of  Messrs  M.  C.,  R.  T.  and  S.  K.  respectively,  on 
contract basis, since January 2015 to date, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the Tourism Authority, information as to the - 

(a)   mode of recruitment followed, and  

(b)  

post occupied, indicating in each case the terms and conditions of employment 
thereof. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Have a good look! Examiner bien, guetté bien!  

Mo pé donne toi li, ki remarque! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, allow him to reply. You have asked your question. 

Don’t make remarks. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I said to have a good look at it! What did I say badly? 

Anyway, keep cool! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  I  will  request  hon.  Members  not  to  make  provocative  remarks, 

otherwise we won’t be able to carry out the debates calmly. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, can I answer, Madam Speaker? 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Thank you. I am answering with a smile. Following a 

number of accidents and some disregard… 

 

57 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, you continue to make remarks. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Will  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  repeat  what  he  said  when  he  said 

circulé. I have heard. He always says he is a gentleman. 

Pas répondre dans so place… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am happy to repeat it. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  please,  sit  down!  Hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister, 

please, proceed with your reply. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you cannot use this word! This word is unparliamentary. To 
whom are you addressing this word ‘criminel’? Can we know? To whom? 

Mr Bérenger: The Member sitting there… 

Madam Speaker: But this is not appropriate, and I would request you to withdraw 

this word. 

 (Interruptions) 

I am requesting you to withdraw this word. Please, sit down! I have to finish with one point 
of order, first. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please, kindly withdraw. There is nothing dishonourable in 
withdrawing a word. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  said  ‘criminel’,  because  he  has  a  case  before  Court.  We  all  know 

about this case. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  No.  Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  this  is  serious.  I  am  asking 

you… 

 

58 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I am not withdrawing! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  But  then,  I  will  have  no  other  alternative!  Hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition, this is very serious. 

No. I will not allow… 

Order! Order! 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition,… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: …if you are not withdrawing I will have,… 

Please, be silent! Allow me to give my ruling!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if you are not withdrawing, I am repeating, I will have 

no other option than to… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I will not withdraw. 

Madam Speaker: If it is so, then I will order you out! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan! Hon. Bhagwan, please leave the House! 

Please, leave the House calmly!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

59 

(Interruptions) 

 

At this stage the MMM Opposition Members left the Chamber. 

Yes, please continue! 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, following…. 

(Interruptions) 

I started, so I will finish, Madam Speaker.  Following a number of accidents and disregard for 
regulations in force… 

the Board… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please order! 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    For  the  record!  I  doubt  whether  there  will  be  any 
supplementary questions.  We never know!  The Board of the Tourism Authority took the 
decision to recruit high calibre and experienced professionals to reinforce the capacity of its 
Monitoring and Compliance Unit. 

Accordingly,  after  a  headhunting  exercise  amongst  former  members  of  the  Police 
Force who were previously attached to the Police du Tourisme and who have considerable 
experience in enforcement duties, the Authority recruited the following persons on one-year 
contract, respectively in March 2016 - 

(i) 

Mr M. C. – Former Police Officer as Assistant Supervisor; 

(ii)  Mr R. T. – Former Inspector of Police as Supervising Officer; and 

(iii)  Mr S. K. – Former Assistant Examiner at the Tourism Authority and Former 

Inspector of Police as Supervising Officer. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their 

contracts. 

Madam Speaker:  Next Question! 

 

60 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam Speaker,  for the sake of the record, may  I  reply to P.Q. No. 

B/528. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:      Hon.  Minister  Gayan,  the  hon.  Member  is  not  here  to  ask  the 
question, so I will not be able to allow you to reply to that question.  The next question is for 
hon. Lepoigneur. 

CERTIFICATE OF CHARACTER - APPLICATIONS 

(No. B/531) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Attorney-General whether, in regard to the Certificate of Character, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions, 
information as to why it is presently taking over five weeks for the issue thereof, indicating if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  processing  on  a  separate  track  of  the  applications 
submitted by students proceeding on overseas studies and who urgently require same for the 
purpose of completing the formalities.  

Mr  Yerrigadoo:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions  (DPP)  that  in  practice,  in  order  to  save  time,  applications  for  Certificate  of 
Character are made directly to the relevant District Head Quarters of the Police.   

As  for  urgent  applications,  they  are  already  processed  on  a  fast  track  basis  and 
applications which are dealt with urgently are those where the applicants have specified in 
their  application  that  they  have  deadlines  to  meet,  such  as  for  instance,  for  visa  purposes, 
applications for university by students, marriage, employment abroad etc., though there is no 
specific separate track procedure for students in particular.   

Thus,  following  receipt  of  the  applications  and  reports  from  the  Police,  urgent 
applications can be processed after the Police have cleared same, of course, within one or two 
days at the level of the Office of the DPP. 

In cases other than urgent applications, the Office of the DPP takes about one week to 

process the applications as each certificate needs to be checked one by one.  

It is also understood from information obtained from the Commissioner Police that at 
the  level  of  the  Police  too,  urgent  applications,  including  applications  from  students 
proceeding overseas, if they are so stated, of course, are processed on a fast track basis so that 
the Certificates of Character are delivered within a week’s time.   

 

61 

I  am  given  to  understand  that  it  is  in  relation  to  those  applicants  who  are  borne  on 
record that the processing of applications may take a few weeks (6 to 8 weeks) given that 
these applications have to be returned to the Division concerned for enquiry/prints to be taken 
to confirm the name borne on record. The length of time taken in such cases also depends on 
the applicant’s response and availability during the course of enquiry.   

I  am  also  given  to  understand  that  difficulties  are  encountered  by  Police  in  the 
verification  of  names  where  there  are  errors  in  spelling.    For  example,  incorrect  National 
Identity Card Numbers, similar names and records are not accessible on the search system.  
Consequently,  the  names  have  to  be  verified  individually  by  the  operator  at  the  Crime 
Records Office of the Police, which may thus in turn result in delay.   

Just for the sake of information, the House may wish to note that there are about 300 to 

350 applications that are received daily at the Crime Records Office. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Lepoigneur! 

Mr Lepoigneur:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As we are talking about Certificate of 
Character, there are some people who have committed minor offences and after five years, 
they still appear on the certificates.  Can the hon. Attorney General look into the matter and 
for new applications, minor offences do not appear on these Certificates? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker, as stated in the Government-Programme, legislation 
will be coming to Parliament.  There are currently lots of consultations going on, because not 
so long ago the Certificate of Character Act was amended, but in is in the stated objective of 
putting matters into practice.  We are also envisaging the possibility even to avoid stigma, 
maybe,  looking  at  Equal  Opportunities  as  being  amended  as  well,  but  legislations  will  be 
forthcoming.  I cannot say exactly when.  We will have to go with the legislative calendar in 
the House. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Could the hon. Attorney General let us 
know  how  many  people  are  really  working  in  that  particular  Department  for  issuing  a 
Certificate of Character? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:   It could be any law officer, for instance, at the DPP’s Office who 
could be signing it, but the issue is that the Crime Records Office which remits is within the 

 

62 

Police Force.  This is where the actual check and system happens.  It is not at the level of the 
DPP’s Office. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Madam  Speaker,  the  problem,  as  the  hon.  Attorney  General  has  just 
indicated to the House, is one of processing, of course, but it is also a problem of substance 
and this is why this Government enunciated in its Government Programme that it will change 
the  law  to  increase  the  employability  of  persons  and  so  on,  and  that  people  with  minor 
offences and crimes, this won’t appear on the Certificate of Character.  In September of last 
year, I asked a question to the hon. Attorney General on the same issue: when will the law be 
amended?  That is nine months ago and the hon. Attorney General said that consultations are 
going on and the law will be coming imminently.  So, can I ask the hon. Attorney General – 
nine months ago, he gave the same answer that he is giving today – when will the law be 
changed in order to bring relief to these applicants of a Certificate of Character? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Madam Speaker, the issue is not only an issue which is of importance 
domestically here in Mauritius.  As the hon. Member would be aware, there are a number of 
our citizens proceed overseas, for example, to work on bateaux des croisières and all sorts of 
such employment.  We need also to harmonise the model of Certificate of Character we have 
so that it is admissible internationally.  Side by side with that, there is also the concept of 
spent  convictions.    Side  by  side  with  that,  there  is  also  the  question  of  stigma.    The  hon. 
Member  maybe  aware  that  in  certain  jurisdictions  like  in  the  UK,  for  instance,  now  even 
some minor offences involving an element of dishonesty, though spent, would still appear on 
the  Certificate  of  Character  with  a  caveat.  That  could  in  turn  lead  to  the  employer 
discriminating against that person who would have already repented and served whatever he 
had to do to society.  So, we are looking at all these things, all the stakeholders involved.  I 
can assure the hon. Member that in line with the Government-Programme, legislation will be 
forthcoming because we are very concerned with the present state of affairs as well. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Lepoigneur! 

MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF BEAU BASSIN/ROSE HILL  

– LABOURERS – RECRUITMENT  

(No. B/532) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Municipal Council of Beau 
Bassin and Rose Hill, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as 

 

63 

to if additional labourers will be recruited thereat, in view of the complaints received from the 
inhabitants of Beau Bassin and Rose Hill in relation to the inability of the Municipal Council 
to realize the landscaping works thereat due to lack of labourers. 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Municipal  Council  of  Beau 
Bassin/Rose Hill has 36 persons of different grades in the Parks and Garden Section.  Out of 
them,  there  are  13  vacancies  which  have  already  been  reported  to  the  Unified  Board  and 
recruitment process is being carried out by the Local Government Service Commission. 

I am further informed that the Council is not in presence of any complaints whatsoever 
from the inhabitants of Beau Bassin and Rose Hill for not being able to manage the green 
spaces within its Municipal area. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Lepoigneur! 

Mr Lepoigneur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to my information, there are 
only 12 workers, six for Rose Hill and six for Beau Bassin for landscaping. During the five 
last  years, we are having lots of new  morcellements and we  are having  lots of complaints 
from inhabitants of my Constituency that these works are not being done properly. Can the 
hon. Minister look into the matter urgently? 

Dr. Husnoo: Sorry, Madam Speaker! I’ll just repeat there are 36 persons in different 
grades in the park and garden section, that’s official. Okay, there are some vacancies now. 
So, if we take 36 minus 13, that makes 23 persons on site. The hon. Member knows what I 
mean. Thank you. 

Mr  Lepoigneur:  Again,  for  Scavenging  Unit,  posts  had  been  advertised  since  last 
year and no recruitment has been effected as to date. Is the hon. Minister aware of that and 
when will these vacancies be filled? 

Dr. Husnoo: As for the scavenging, this, again, as you know, has been reported to the 
LGSC. It is for the LGSC to do the interview and to appoint them. It is beyond the Local 
Government. 

Mr  Lepoigneur:  There  are  also  many  posts  of  Health  Inspectors  which  are  vacant 
since long. Is the hon. Minister aware of the situation? Will these posts be filled to ensure the 
smooth running of the health department? 

Dr. Husnoo: Again, it is not part of the question, if the hon. Member can come with a 

substantive question. 

 
Madam Speaker: I don’t think I can allow this question. The question of the hon. 

64 

Member concerns additional labourers. Next question, hon. Lepoigneur! 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND SPORTS – CENTRES DE FORMATION 

(No. B/533) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Centres de Formation, he 
will state if he proposes to take back the responsibility thereof and of the budget allocated for 
the  collective  sports  to  the  respective  Centres  de  Formation,  that  is,  football,  volleyball, 
handball and basketball. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that one of the main 
objectives of the National Sports Federation is to develop and promote sports at all levels. 
Consequently,  the  responsibility  to  set  up  a  ‘centre  de  formation’  to  coach  young  talented 
athletes devolves upon each National Sports Federation.  

I have been given to understand that, in the year 2000, ‘centre de formation’  in team 
sports were set up by the National Sports Federation in collaboration with the Ministry and a 
‘Comité de  Gestion’ was appointed to manage the centre. This set up had not brought the 
expected outcome. In view of the need to nurture new talents to feed national teams, each 
National Sport Federation put up its own training centre.  

When I took office, an evaluation was made regarding the functioning of the National 
Training  Centres.  Inconsistencies  were  noted  with  regard  to  the  management,  funding, 
detection, recruitment and training. 

My Ministry allocates a yearly budget for the functioning of a National Centre to the 
National  Sport  Federation.  For  the  financial  year  2016,  a  sum  of  Rs700,000  has  been 
allocated  to  football;  Rs300,000  to  basketball,  Rs300,000  to  handball  and  Rs300,000  to 
volleyball. 

Madam Speaker, the question to take over the responsibility by the Ministry does not 
arise as all National Sports Federation for team sports should have their own structures for 
the development and promotion of their respective disciplines.  

Some National Sports Federation also receive logistics and financial assistance from 
their  respective  international  federations  and  sponsors  to  help  in  implementing  the 
programme of different centres.  

65 

 
It is  worth pointing out  that presently there  are three training centres in  basketball, 
football and handball  which are managed by the respective National Sports Federations in 
collaboration with the Ministry. 

Mr Lepoigneur: According to my information, none of these Centres de Formation 
is functioning properly. Before 2004, these Centres de Formation were under the aegis of the 
former Minister, Ravi Yerrigadoo.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, ask the question! 

Mr Lepoigneur: These Centres de Formation have not organised a single tournament 
for young people since 2003. There is no junior tournament under 18 or under 20. Les Jeux 
des Iles 2019 will be held in Mauritius and it is the same national team since 2003, 2007, 
2011 and 2014… 

Madam Speaker: What is your question? 

Mr Lepoigneur: Yes, I am coming. 

Madam  Speaker:  Please,  ask  your  question  hon.  Member.  The  Minister  will  be 

confused otherwise. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lepoigneur: Is the Minister aware that the same national team will represent the 

country in 2019, and they will be around the age of 30 to 35? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  yes,  all  the  Centres  Nationals  de  Formation 
were closed. When I took office, when this Government came in power in 2014; in 2015 the 
Centre National de Formation de Football has been opened, Centre National de Formation 
of Handball has been opened and the Centre National de Formation of Basketball has been 
opened. Only the Centre National de Formation de Volleyball has not been opened yet, but 
still we are in the way of opening it. Now, I can reassure the hon. Member that we are having 
young competition in basketball, in football and in handball. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

SOCIO-CULTURAL ORGANISATIONS  

– EVENING CLASSES – ORIENTAL LANGUAGES 

(No. B/536) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 

 

66 

Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  fees  paid  to  the  persons/teachers  teaching 
oriental  and  ancestral  languages  in  evening  classes  run  by  registered  socio-cultural 
organisations, she will state the names of the said persons/teachers, indicating in each case, 
the amount of money paid thereto since January 2015 to date. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/417,  I  had 
informed the House that the persons teaching oriental language in evening classes are paid 
allowances depending on their qualifications. This range from Rs1,000 to Rs2,000 monthly 
provided they have covered 12 hours of teaching. 

The information pertaining to names of the persons and teachers teaching the different 

languages and the names of the schools is being tabled in the National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that, from January 2015 to April 2016, an amount of 

around Rs31 m. has been spent on the allowances paid to for the teaching. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS - STANDARD II - HINDI BOOKS 

(No. B/537) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to the Hindi books for Standard  II, she will state if 
mistakes contained therein have been reported and, if so, indicate if remedial measures have 
been taken in relation thereto. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, the attention of my Ministry has been 
drawn to certain mistakes in accuracies found in the Hindi books for Standard II which had 
been prepared by a panel of teachers under the aegis of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  soon  as  the  representation  was  received,  the  matter  was 
immediately taken up with the MGI which was requested to appoint an independent panel to 
look  into  the  issue.  The  MGI  accordingly  appointed  an  independent  panel  and  the  panels 
submitted a report on the basis of which a list of errata has been prepared by the MGI for 
distribution  to  schools.  I  am  also  advised  that  the  amendments  are  being  brought  to  the 
textbooks for the Academic Year 2017. 

Moreover, a vetting team has been set up at the MGI to review the textbooks to avoid 
recurrence of the above situation. A quality assurance team is also being set up to ensure that 
a complete verification of textbooks before they are finalised. 

 
Madam  Speaker,  every  effort  will  be  put  in  to  ensure  that  the  teaching  materials 

67 

provided to our pupils are up to the required standards. 

Mr Mohamed: I will follow the question, at page 15 of that Hindi book for Standard 
II, there is reference to ‘ghajar ke khet’. So, basically, they are talking about a field of carrots, 
but the picture does not show ‘ghajar’, but, on the contrary, it shows tomatoes. So, has this 
report  identified  who  has  made  those  blunders  with  regard  to  not  knowing  what  is  the 
difference between a carrot and a tomato? Could those people be identified? What could be 
done in order for those  people to be disqualified from putting our children studying Hindi 
into such complicated situations? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  This  has  already  been  done,  Madam  Speaker.  The 
teachers have been identified. I will obviously not state their names here and they have been 
replaced. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for her answer and the importance I see of 
ensuring  that  our  Oriental  languages  are  protected  and  are  transmitted  down  to  new 
generations. Is this one of the reasons why the number of students going to study Hindi is 
constantly  on  the  decrease?  I  am  not  saying  ever  since  this  new  Government  is  in,  but  is 
constantly on the decrease and even though it is not part of this question, if you would allow 
me, what could be done in order to reverse the trend, to encourage Hindi being taught? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, may I mention that it is absolutely not 
the reason for which there is a decline in the number because this is a problem that has just 
arisen and the decline in number is very often due to parents choosing to ask the students to 
go for the competitive exams of the CPE and to make sure that they don’t lose time doing 
other  things  than  concentrating  on  what  they  consider  to  be  the  main  subjects.  But 
Government  is  doing  everything  that  is  possible  to  ensure  that  the  teaching  of  oriental 
languages be upgraded and necessary support be provided to teachers through the resource 
centres that are being set up and through proper teacher training programmes. 

Madam Speaker: Provided your question is within the parameter of this question. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister - even though it was not - for wishing to 
help and provide us with the answers. Yes, this letter of erratum or even the communication 
has not as yet been communicated to the schools.  The first time, I believe, officially there 
was  the  union  that  informed  the  hon.  Minister  on  28  March  of  this  year  that  there  were 

 

68 

mistakes.  By what time will the students and teachers be made aware of what the mistakes 
are and then maybe we would congratulate them with gajar ka halwa? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Let me inform the hon. Member that the teachers have 
already been informed, that they have been given the information and that the mistakes were, 
in fact, in terms of colour, of printing and in certain cases, the use of singular terms instead of 
plural  terms.    But  these  are  minor  mistakes  and  the  teachers  have  already  been  informed 
about it.  I am sure the teachers will immediately find out as soon as they come across these 
mistakes. 

MINISTRY OF ARTS AND CULTURE  

– DOCUMENTATION UNIT  – DAMAGED DOCUMENTS 

(No.  B/538)    Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the Documentation 
Unit of his Ministry, he will state if books, documents and press cuttings found thereat have 
recently been damaged and, if so, indicate the remedial measures that will be taken in relation 
thereto. 

Mr Baboo:  Madam Speaker, I am informed that recently there has been no damage 
to the Documentation Unit of my Ministry.  However, following heavy rainfall in December 
2014  and  January  2015  respectively,  two  office  spaces  at  the  Renganaden  Seeneevassen 
building, including the Documentation Unit, were overflowed. 

The maintenance company of the building confirmed that this was due to obstruction 

in the drainage system.  This problem has been addressed accordingly. 

Madam Speaker, as regards damaged books and newspapers, copies of most of these 

books and all the newspapers are available at the National Library. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for, obviously, not stating the obvious that 
yes,  they  have  been  damaged,  but  there  are  copies  available  at  National  Art  Gallery. 
According  to  my  information  -  and  could  he  confirm  that  -  back  in  2014,  there  were 
approximately 2,000 books, out of which from Mauritian authors in various languages,  art 
books of masters such as Vincent Van Gogh, magazines, newsletters, journals of art etc. So, 
those  documents  are  no  longer  in  this  Documentation  Unit  and  this,  not  to  the  benefit 
obviously, but au détriment of all the students who come to use the Documentation Unit as 
reference.  So, what has the hon. Minister done ever since January 2015 - I am sure the rain 

 

69 

has not gone on, but has stopped - and what does he plan to do, in order to replenish those 
very important works of art and those literary documents that have been damaged since then? 

Mr  Baboo:  Thank  you,  hon.  Mohamed!    Well,  Madam  Speaker,  some  150  books 
were damaged.  It was not 2,000 books.  I am confirming, it was 150 books and out of these 
150 books, 76 books are available at the National Library.  An order has been placed for the 
remaining books. 

Regarding  press  cuttings,  all  duplicates  are  available  at  the  National  Library. 
According to the National Library Act, it is mandatory to have a deposit of six copies there at 
all times.  

Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister do two things - consider the possibility I am 
just trying to suggest to be constructive – firstly, to have a notice there to inform all those 
students that those are documents that are available at another place, the National Art Gallery, 
and  also  to  consider  the  possibility  of  simply  having  copies  made  and  sent  to  the 
Documentation  Unit  instead  of  having  those  students  and  those  who  want  to  use  those 
documents as reference run around.  Just give them service instead. 

Mr Baboo:  Well, we have got flooding problems.  There is a notice that has already 
been put there where we are informing all the students to move to the National Library, not to 
the Art Gallery. We have already done the necessary. 

MORTGAGE LOANS – DUTY RATE 

(No. B/539) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the rate of duty for 
mortgage loans payable under the Registration Duty Act, he will state if consideration will be 
given for the extension of the ceiling of exemption to two million rupees and that the taxes be 
charged on a pro-rata basis above the two million rupees. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  as  this  is  a  tax  policy  issue,  it  would  not  be 
appropriate at this stage to make any statement on this matter as we are fully engaged in the 
preparation of the 2016/2017 Budget. 

WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY - WASTEWATER CLAIM 

(No. B/540) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

 

70 

wastewater  claim,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Wastewater 
Management Authority, information as to the mode of calculation thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority 
that the wastewater charges for households are based on the volume of water consumed and 
the fees prescribed by regulations, which are as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

First 10 cubic metres  

Rs7.50 per cubic metre; 

11 - 20 cubic metres 

Rs9 per cubic metre; 

(iii) 

21 - 50 cubic metres 

Rs20 per cubic metre; 

(iv) 

51 cubic metres or more  

Rs45 per cubic metre; 

Business premises pay Rs27 per cubic metre, and the minimum fee payable is Rs270. 

As  from  01  January  2016,  about  10,000  households  using  up  to  6  cubic  metres  of 
water  are  exempted  from  payment  of  wastewater  fees.  Those  who  consume  6  to  10  cubic 
metres pay Rs55 monthly. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  aware  that  we  get  a  claim  for  an 

additional 20% on what water we consumed? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  the  fees  claimed  are  as  per  the  regulations  contained  in 
Government  Notices.    Those  are  public  documents.    If  fees  are  being  claimed  which  are 
outside  the  purview  of  the  regulations,  of  course,  a  protest  must  be  lodged  and  remedial 
action taken. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  said  that  the  calculation  for  the 
wastewater  comes  from  the  water  consumed.  But  how  come  we  pay  20%  more  than  the 
amount of water we consume. 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is what I have just replied. 

Mr Mohamed: All previous Governments have worked according to this very same 
formula.  In  spite  of  that  my  question  is  as  follows:  could  he  consider  the  possibility  of 
changing these regulations where it will bring more fairness in the process? Because, clearly, 
as  it  stands  the  regulation  has  nothing  to  do,  therefore,    someone  who  is  paying  for 
wastewater charges has nothing to do with the volume of water that is going to waste, but it is 
a simple equation that is made.   The metre cube of water used, therefore,  equivalent is in 

 

71 

terms  of  wastewater.    Could  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  consider  changing  those 
regulations thereby reducing the financial burden upon families who are having difficulties 
pour  faire  joindre  les  deux  bouts,  simply  because  this  equation  itself  has  to  be  reviewed 
because many years have gone by since it has been reviewed? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The tariff structure was approved as at 13 September 2001, that 

is, the then Minister of Energy.  

Well, please let me… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!  

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Let  me  continue!  The  tariff  for  waste  water,  the  tariff  not  the 
structure, but the tariff for waste water has been reviewed on five occasions after the  first 
2001 waste water tariff. These five occasions were in 2003, 2004, 2008, 2012 and 2016. Of 
course,  it  seems  that  my  answer  does  not  manifest  any  sustained  interest,  so  I  shall  not 
continue. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  would  like  to  reiterate  the  possibility,  I  mean  I  was  very  much 
interested  in  what  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  was  saying  because  I  think  it  is  a  very 
important issue and this is the very same issue that the hon. Deputy Prime Minister when he 
was in the Opposition had raised, that he would see to it that the equations, the regulations 
could  be  changed  in  order  for  it  to  be  fair,  which  I  agree  with.  Therefore,  could  he  not 
consider the possibility whatever be the case, whatever be Governments who have may be 
been in power, that is not being denied, but could we not consider the possibility of coming 
back to what the hon. Deputy Prime Minister and many others have said, of making sure and 
ensuring that the way it is charged for waste water, that there is fairness into it, to alleviate 
the financial burden. Could he not consider, at least, setting up a Committee on that? 

Madam Speaker: We have understood your question. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I  assumed that the hon. Member has read his Order Paper for 
today and therefore is aware that the Utility Regulatory (Amendment) Bill is being passed 
through,  is  being  read  at  First  Reading  today.  Now,  this  is  a  matter  which  surely  will  be 
within the purview of the URA once it is operational.  

72 

 
Dr. Sorefan: In line with hon. Mohamed, all the water that we consume does not go 
down the sewer and the Wastewater Authority charge as per consume. That is why I said, I 
don’t  know  why  they  overcharge  20%,  but  will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  coming  with  a 
Wastewater Abutment Allowance. What I mean by this? People use water to wash their car, 
wash their house, in all religious festivities.  We use water for other purposes, gardening etc. 
Not all the water that we consume in our pipeline goes to the waste. Will the hon. Minister 
consider coming with a Wastewater Abutment Allowance? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I will do no such thing, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn: Nos. B/554, B/556, B/557. Next question hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

ORGANISATION POUR L’HARMONISATION EN AFRIQUE DU DROIT DES 

AFFAIRES TREATY – MAURITIUS RATIFICATION 

(No. B/541) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade  whether,  in 
regard to the Organisation pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires (OHADA) 
Treaty, he will state if Mauritius has ratified same and, if not, why not. 

The Attorney General (Mr R. Yerrigadoo): Madam Speaker, with your permission, 

I shall reply to this question.  

Madam Speaker, Mauritius is not a party to the OHADA Treaty and it is not proposed 
to  ratify  the  said  Treaty  because  it  would  not  be  in  the  best  interest  of  Mauritius  to  ratify 
same.  Our  existing  laws  already  provide  for  an  appropriate  framework  to  les  droits  des 
affaires in Mauritius.  

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the Minister says it is not in the 
advantage of Mauritius.  Is the hon. Minister aware that the Commission on Sale By Levy is 
making recommendations to follow the guidelines of (OHADA) on this and even the AMC 
that will be set up by the Bank of Mauritius, they are saying that they are inspired mainly by 
the  rules  laid  down  by  OHADA.  So,  how  come  that  OHADA  is  good  to  be  taken  as 
recommendation, but is not good for Mauritius. I am surprised that the Minister is going on 
that line.  

Mr Yerrigadoo: I have already answered, Madam Speaker. 

 

73 

LEGACY SOVEREIGN FUND – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/542)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the    Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
proposed  setting  up  of  a  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund,  as  announced  in  the  2015-2016  Budget 
Speech, he will state where matters stand, indicating the amount of funds committed therefor, 
if any. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  the  setting  up  of  the  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund,  as 
announced  in  the  Budget  Speech  2015-2016,  would  require  the  injection  of  a  significant 
amount of funds from the Consolidated Fund. This would inevitably increase the borrowing 
requirements of Government, resulting in a further increase of public sector debt.  

I have carefully looked into the matter and I have decided that it would not be wise, at 
this juncture, to set up the Legacy Sovereign Fund and consequently we have not committed 
any funds for that purpose.  

MAURITIAN DIASPORA SCHEME - EXCISE DUTY EXEMPTION -

BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/543)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Mauritian Diaspora Scheme, he will state the number of members of the Mauritian diaspora 
who have registered thereunder and who have benefitted therefrom as at to date, indicating 
the  quantum  of  income  tax,  custom  duties  and  Value  Added  Tax  exemptions  granted  in 
relation thereto. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Board of Investment that 36 
persons have been registered as members under the Mauritius Diaspora Scheme as at 31 May 
2016. Of these 36 members, 24 are registered as professionals and 12 as self-employed.  

With regard to the quantum of income tax exemption granted, I wish to inform the 
House that the Scheme, which started in October 2015, is in its first year of operation, and 
that the information will only be available by the end of September 2016 when the members 
will have to submit a statement of their income to the Mauritius Revenue Authority. 

I am further informed that eight members have benefited from excise duty exemption 

totalling Rs7.3 m. as concession on motor cars.  

 
Moreover, only five Members have brought in household and personal effects for a 

74 

total CIF value of Rs656,000.  The estimated VAT exemption is Rs98,400. 

Mr  Ramano:  Est-ce  que  je  pourrais  savoir  du  ministre  s’il  compte  éventuellement 
alléger les conditions pour que d’autres mauriciens qui sont à l’étranger puissent bénéficier 
de ces exemptions? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, if there are any proposals, of course, we can consider and see if 

they are likely to be in the interests of those who are abroad.  

Mr Mohamed: Same question on the issue of the Diaspora Scheme. Could the hon. 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development tell us... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Mohamed:  ...  whether,  at  any  stage,  ever  since  the  implementation  of  this 
scheme,  there  has  been  any  database  that  has  been  put  up?  How  many  Members  of  the 
Mauritian Diaspora there are worldwide and who would be those Mauritians whom we could 
attract  to  Mauritius  in  order  to  come  and  be  at  the  service  of  their  country?  So,  does  that 
database exist and, if it does not exist, what has been done in order to be able to try to set up 
such  a  database?  I  would  like  just  to  remind  the  hon.  Minister  that  it  is  the  international 
organisation for migration with its Head Officers in Geneva that has drafted a beautiful book 
which is entitled ‘The Road Map on Attracting Diaspora for Member Countries’. 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, to have a database there must be a mechanism under which we 
are able to identify  the Mauritian Diaspora living abroad. Now, if we, Government or any 
institution has to undertake such an exercise, everyone will understand that we will have to 
commit resources in order to be able to carry out a survey and we can imagine that the survey 
has to be carried out worldwide. So, I believe that this is, maybe, the starting point where 
anybody who is interested in, of course, coming to Mauritius, whether as a professional or 
self-employed, will have to make an application and this is where we can have an initial, if I 
can say, a database. But that will be far from probably what the hon. Member has in mind, I 
mean, having a list of all Mauritians or those who are born of Mauritian parents living in 
other countries. 

NATIONAL OCEAN COUNCIL – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/544)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 

 

75 

Islands whether, in regard to the development of the Ocean Economy as announced in the 
2015-2016 Budget Speech, he will state where matters stand as to the proposed – 

(a)  

(b)  

introduction of a Petroleum Bill in the House and;  

setting up of a;  

(i)  

National Ocean Council, and  

(ii)  

new Faculty of Ocean Studies. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am informed by 
the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  that  Government  has  on  21  August  2015,  agreed  to  the 
elaboration  of  a  regulatory  framework  for  the  exploration  and  exploitation  of  natural 
resources in the Exclusive Economic Zone of Mauritius and the Extended Continental Shelf, 
except  that  part  under  the  joint  jurisdiction  of  and  jointly  managed  by  Mauritius  and 
Seychelles.  

In  this  respect,  the  assistance  of  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  was  sought  by  the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office  for  the  drafting  of  an  offshore  Petroleum  Bill  for  Mauritius.  The 
Commonwealth  Secretariat  has  already  submitted  a  first  draft  of  the  Bill  and  drafting 
instructions have been given to the Attorney General’s Office for the finalisation of the draft 
Petroleum Bill.  

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  that  a  Technical  Committee 
chaired  by  the  Director-General,  Department  of  Continental  Shelf,  Maritime  Zones 
Administration and Exploration is provided technical inputs to the Attorney General’s Office 
for the timely finalisation of the legislation. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (b) (i) of the question, the National Ocean Council 
(NOC) has been administratively set up on 26 June 2015 with the following main objectives - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to co-ordinate technical cooperation and assistance between Government and 
international institutions and foreign experts; 
to set up and drive a Government-private sector working group to assess and 
promote economic activities, capacity building and good governance in all 
sectors of the Ocean Economy, and 
to assess the provision of a modern logistics infrastructure and services for the 
development of the maritime and shipping industry. 

The Council has already set up seven working Groups, namely – 

76 

Training, Employment Generation and capacity building, and 

Business Facilitation in the Ocean Industry; 
Regulatory Institution; 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Development; 
Port and Shipping Development; 

 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)  Marine Research and Seabed Explorations; 
(vi) 
(vii)  Environment Protection, Governance and Sustainable Development. 
Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) (ii) of the question, I am informed that in 2014 
the  University  of  Mauritius  has  established  a  new  Faculty  dedicated  to  build  capacity  and 
undertake research in the field of ocean and ocean-related areas.  

The Faculty of Ocean Studies consists of three Departments, namely - 

Department of Marine and Ocean Science, Fisheries & Mariculture; 
Department of Ocean Engineering and ICT, and 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Department of Marine Trade and Finance. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qui  concerne  la  partie  (i),  est-ce  que  je 
peux  savoir  du  ministre  si  le  pays  est  en  présence  d’une  demande    d’un  pays  ami  pour 
l’exploration des fonds marins dans notre Exclusive Economic Zone? 

Mr Koonjoo: I am afraid, Madam Speaker, I don’t have the information. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  P.Q.  No.  B/547  has  been 

withdrawn. Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

MEDINE SUGAR ESTATE - VRS - PLOT OF LAND 

(No. B/545) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the former employees of 
the Medine Sugar Estate who obtained their Voluntary Retirement Scheme years back and 
who have not been granted a plot of land behind the State Secondary School of Palma as per 
the package agreed upon by the employer prior to their retirement, he will state the reasons 
for the inordinate delay therefor, indicating if - 

(a)  

the Mauritius Sugar Cane Authority has recently held a meeting therewith to 
discuss same, and  

 
(b)  

77 

urgent  remedial  measures  will  be  taken  in  relation  thereto  and,  if  so,  give 
details thereof.  

 
Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  in  2012,  Medine  Sugar  Estate  implemented  the 
Voluntary  Retirement  Scheme  (VRS)  in  respect  of  289  employees.    According  to  that 
scheme, each employee benefitted from a cash compensation as well as a plot of land of an 
extent of seven perches. 

The  employees  have  opted  for  land  on  three  sites,  namely  Chebel,  Bambous  and 

 
Palma. 

 
As I indicated in my reply to P.Q. B/42, I have chaired a Monitoring Committee on 
VRS last year to ensure that all bottlenecks are removed so that all outstanding cases could be 
cleared as soon as possible.  The three sites of Chebel, Bambous and Palma are on the agenda 
of the Monitoring Committee and discussions are ongoing with the relevant stakeholders to 
expedite matters. 

The main constraints that is preventing development on the site at Palma is the request 
 
made by Road Development Authority to Medine Ltd to shift and improve the geometry of 
the Palma Roundabout whilst the TMRSU has asked  

that  the  junction  near  Palma  State  Secondary  School  be  re-designed  to  cater  for  the  safe 
movement of buses. 

 
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the Question, a meeting was held under the 
chairmanship of my colleague, the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport to 
address the  above issue.   I  was present at the meeting together with representatives of the 
MCIA, Medine Ltd, the RDA, the TMRSU and officers of the two Ministries.  With a view to 
look at the  constraints being faced by  the stakeholders, a site visit has been scheduled  for 
Thursday next. 

As regards part (b) of the Question, remedial measures can only be decided after the 

 
site visit and/or other meetings that may be held subsequently. 

Mr Ganoo: May I inform the hon. Minister that this is another sad case where the ex-
employees  of  Sugar  Estate  are  still  waiting  for  their  package,  in  this  case  their  land 
entitlement  of  seven  perches.  But  since  the  problem  is  a  technical  one,  it  is  a  question  of 
agrandir le rondpoint de Palma, I understand costs are involved, of course, the Minister of 
Public  Infrastructure  and  Land Transport is on board.  This is a VRS which dates back to 

 

78 

2012  -  four  years  ago  -  and  ten  ex-employees  have  already  died  among  these  people  who 
mostly reside in Palma, Bassin and Bambous. Can I, therefore, make an appeal to the hon. 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security and to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure 
and Land Transport to see to it that funds are disbursed and that this roundabout, once for all, 
is reconstructed so that the access can be provided to the users of this morcellement which 
will take place, which will be near Palma SSS?  

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, it is true that this problem has been dragging on for a 
long time now.  Since 2012, they have been waiting for their land and that is why I have - 
since  I  have  been  appointed  Minister  of  the  Agro-  Industry  and  Food  Security  -  set  up  a 
Monitoring Committee to look at all the problems to, at least, clear out those bottlenecks so 
that these people are awarded their land title deeds at the earliest.  

With regard to that particular problem, like I said, we have met only some ten days 
back  and  we  are  looking  at  it  personally  so  that  some  solutions  could  be  found  and  the 
infrastructure be put in place and these people be awarded their land title deeds soon. 

Mr Ganoo: I don’t know the total cost implications of changing the roundabout, but 
can I ask the hon. Minister whether it is not possible also, in case Government does not find 
the necessary funds, to have a cost sharing exercise with the Sugar Estate? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, last time, we had a meeting with all the stakeholders 
whereby Medine was present and I must say that they are very willing to share the costs. So, I 
don’t see any problem that would pose once we find the solution which is going to be at the 
satisfaction of all parties concerned. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo!  

UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY SPECIAL SESSION ON DRUGS  - RESOLUTION 

(No. B/546) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  United  Nations 
General Assembly Special Session held on Drugs in New York in April last to review the 
drug control system and to assess and debate the world’s drug control priorities, he will state 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

if the Republic of Mauritius was represented thereat and, if so, by whom;  

why no official of his Ministry attended thereto, and  

 
(c) 

79 

if  any  resolution  was  adopted  thereat  to  promote  the  value  and  urgency  of 
modernizing  drug  policies  and  programmes  and  for  implementing  new 
approaches and reforms in the ‘war on drugs’. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I am very grateful to the hon. Member for having asked 
this  question  as  it  shows  that  he  is  really  in  tune  with  issues  that  dominate  international 
relations.  The  hon.  Member  understands  the  role  of  the  State  in  modern  International 
Diplomacy. Unlike others who keep criticising Ministers who travel overseas on mission, the 
hon. Member knows that Ministers are required to travel whenever issues of direct relevance 
and interests of the country are being debated in international conferences.  

I am also happy that the hon. Member understands that, in international fora, the level 

of representation matters a lot. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  the  UN  General  Assembly  Special  Session  on  drugs 
(UNGASS)  is  concerned,  I  am  informed  that  a  Note  was  received  from  UNODC  (United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime) informing that the UNGASS was to meet in New York 
from 19 to 21 April 2016.   

The Note also made mention that Member States envisaging participation should do 

so at the highest possible level.   

Unfortunately, at the time the meeting was being held in New York, the NATReSA 
Repeal Bill was being debated in the House and I did mention that in my statement at the 
Second Reading.   

I am informed that the UNGASS adopt a resolution A/RES/S-30/1 entitled "our joint 
commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem" by consensus 
on 19 April 2016. I am going to table a copy of that Resolution.  

The House may wish to note that the Resolution is very far-reaching and it reaffirms 

the commitment of Member States to, inter alia - 

(a) 

(b) 

counter the world drug problem in a holistic manner and to actively promote a 
society free from drug abuse; 

enhance national efforts and international cooperation to address the problem 
of availability and accessibility of international  controlled drugs for medical 
and scientific purposes; 

 
(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

80 

design and implement national drugs policies according to their priorities and 
needs, consistent with the principle of common and shared responsibility and 
applicable international law; 

prevent  illicit  cultivation  of  and  eradicate  plants  containing  narcotic  and 
psychotropic substances; 

respect fundamental human rights; 

protect the environment, and 

enhance cooperation and collaboration with specialised agencies dealing with 
drugs and narcotic issues. 

The  Resolution  does  not  make  any  specific  mention  regarding  the  modernising  of 

drug policies or implementation of new approaches and reforms in the war on drugs. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  want  play  politics  with  the  drug  issue,  but 
certainly the hon. Minister should know that, in fact, a special session of the United Nations 
on the drug issue was held in April last after 18 years.  This is what I have been told.  So, the 
reason  given by the hon. Minister does not stand - because the  NATReSA Bill was being 
adopted in the House this is why the Ministry could not send one of its officers to this high-
level meeting especially in view of the fact that all the drug policies were being reviewed. 
The question of programme substitution, prevention mechanism and all the strategies were 
being reviewed and everybody is saying that we have lost the battle on drugs in the world 
today. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes. What is your question! 

Mr Ganoo:  In fact, there was a NGO which was present there from Mauritius. Can I 
ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  Ministry  can  liaise  so  that  the  Minister  can,  besides 
circulating the document which he had just promised, make a statement on what took place at 
this Conference to the House? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, in fact, at the WHA, the World Health Assembly which 
I just attended in Geneva, there was an item on this issue and, if necessary, I will make a 
statement in the House. So, this matter was raised at the WHA. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

81 

 
Mr Mohamed:  The hon. Minister has given us in his reply, Madam Speaker, exactly 
what is available on the Internet as far as the outcome document is concerned.  However, we 
thank him for having summarised it for us in his answer. Could the hon. Minister come and 
explain why is it that not even a single member - we understood the answer which we don’t 
agree  with  that  there  was  the  NATReSA  Bill  and  therefore  could  not  send  anyone  from 
Mauritius”, but how about our diplomatic mission – not even a member from a diplomatic 
mission from Mauritius was present at that meeting and is there any explanation for having 
left our seat? Sorry, we didn’t have a seat because we didn’t even tell them we are coming!  
We were not there! 

Madam Speaker:  Okay. 

Mr Mohamed:  Worse still it was an empty seat. 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, for the information of the House, I must say that there 
are hundreds of meeting taking place every day in the United Nations in New York, and, at a 
special session, the seat of Mauritius always has the nameplate.  So, it is not possible for the 
country  not  to  be  present.    But  we  are  a  small  country;  we  have  lots  of  other  priorities.  I 
cannot say why there was no one at that particular point in time present, but there is a follow-
up that takes place by our mission and all the information is relayed to the Ministry and to the 
Prime Minister’s Office. 

Mr Ganoo:  For the information of the hon. Minister, I have checked and at no point in 
time during this special session was anybody occupying any one of the chairs reserved for the 
Mauritian delegation. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, next time will make sure that somebody is there at the highest level. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

 
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

82 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

(4.11 p.m.) 

DR. A. G. JEETOO HOSPITAL  -  SIX-YEAR OLD CHILD - DEATH 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life ((Mr A. Gayan):  Madam Speaker, with 
your permission, I wish to make a statement on a matter that was raised at Adjournment Time 
last Tuesday on the issue of the death of a six-year old child at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital.   

I  have  to  inform  the  House  that,  from  reports  received  at  my  Ministry,  the  SAMU 
received  a  phone  call  on  the  27  of  May  2016  at  20.47  hours  from  one,  Mr  P.  who  was 
conveying the child to the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Hospital as the child was 
unwell.  He informed that he was using his own means of transport and was coming from 
Bambous, and that he was already on his way to the SSRN Hospital.  He further informed 
that he had reached Petite Rivière and requested for SAMU services.  He was informed by 
the SAMU services that the SAMU vehicle had just left and was busy with another case, and 
since he was already transporting the child, it would be better to attend the closest hospital 
which is the Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital for a first line of treatment to the child. He agreed, and 
accordingly brought the latter to the Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital.   

From reports at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, the late patient L. A. was brought to the 
hospital  at  21.00  hours  and  was  seen  by  the  Casualty  Officer  with  a  history  of  cough, 
shortness of breath, diarrhea and vomiting for the past two days.  It was also found that the 
late patient was pale, dehydrated and in respiratory distress.  

According to the history obtained from the parents, late patient has been operated in 
the  past  at  the  Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care  and  was  followed  for  congenital 
disease  and  was  not  under  medication.  Same  was  confirmed  with  the  Trust  Fund  for 
Specialised Medical Care to the fact that late patient had been successfully operated on 22 
March 2014 for patent ductus arteriosus and was on follow-up treatment.  Patient had last 
been seen on 14 March 2016.   

The late patient had also attended Bambous Area Health Centre on 19 May 2016 for a 

history of sore throat and had been given appropriate treatment.   

83 

 
At 21.15 hours, the late patient was admitted in the Medical Intensive Care Unit with 
a provisional diagnosis of hypovolemic shock.  At 21.30 hours, the late patient was seen by 
the  paediatrician  and  was  shifted  to  the  Surgical  Intensive  Care  Unit  with  a  provisional 
diagnosis  of  pneumonia,  acute  gastroenteritis  and  heart  failure.    The  poor  prognosis  was 
explained  to  the  parents.  Thereafter,  the  late  patient  was  also  seen  by  a  cardiologist  and 
anesthetist at 22.15 hours. A cardiac echography was carried out and treatment was continued 
as  per  paediatrician  instructions.  The  late  patient  was  re-assessed  by  the  specialised 
paediatrician at 22.30 hours, 23.00 hours and 23.30 hours.   

On 28 May 2016, the late patient was reassessed at 02.00 hours and 04.30 hours. At 
05.10 hrs patient collapsed.  Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started and the patient was 
put on artificial respiration. The patient recovered, but at 5.50 hrs she collapsed again and 
cardiopulmonary  resuscitation  was  started  anew,  but  was  unsuccessful.  The  patient  was 
declared dead at 6.25 hrs. The cause of death was attributed to pneumonia, congenital heart 
disease and heart failure. 

Madam Speaker, I know it is very hard for any parent to lose a child at such a tender 
age and we can all understand their pain. On behalf of my Ministry, and I believe in the name 
of  all  our  colleagues  here,  we  can  express  our  deepest  sympathy  to  the  family,  but  I  can 
reassure the House that all necessary treatment was given to the late patient and action was 
taken as appropriate. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The President’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Bill (No. X of 2016) 

The National Assembly Allowances (Amendment) Bill (No. XI of 2016) 

The Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2016) 

The Supplementary Appropriation (2015) (No. 2) Bill (No. XIII of 2016) 

 

MOTION 

STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE  

- BROADCASTING COMMITTEE – SETTING UP  

 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg leave to move the Motion standing in 

84 

my name and which reads as follows - 

“This Assembly resolves that the Report of the Standing Orders Committee in regard 
to the amendments to the Standing Orders and Rules of the National Assembly (1995), 
presently in force, more specifically Standing Order 69, which was laid on the Table 
of  the  National  Assembly  on  Tuesday  31  May  2016  be  approved,  and  that  the 
amendments contained therein come into operation forthwith”. 

Madam Speaker, the House will recall that on 29 March 2016, I presented the Motion 
for the Standing Orders Committee to be empowered to look into the Standing Orders and 
Rules of the National Assembly presently in force, more specifically Standing Order 69 to 
make recommendations for the setting up of a “Broadcasting Committee” for the monitoring 
of the live broadcasting of the proceedings and debates of the House and matters ancillary 
thereto. 

While presenting the motion to the House, I explained that the proposed amendments 
to Standing Order 69 constitute one of the important requirements for the realisation of the 
project for the live broadcasting of the proceedings of the National Assembly.   

As  the  House  is  already  aware,  the  Standing  Orders  Committee  has  completed  its 
assignment and submitted its report which was tabled on 31 May 2016.  The Committee held 
three meetings and, with the assistance of the Solicitor-General and of his Deputy, reviewed 
the draft of the proposed amendments to the Standing Orders which had been circulated to 
hon. Members together with the Notice of Motion. 

The  Standing  Orders  Committee  has  recommended  that  Standing  Order  69  be 
amended by adding a new paragraph providing for a “Broadcasting Committee” as follows - 

(a) 

(b) 

There shall be a Committee to be known as the “Broadcasting Committee” to 
consist  of  a  Chairperson  and  eight  Members  to  be  nominated  by  the 
Committee of Selection at the beginning of every session. 

It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  Committee  to  consider  and  report  on  all  matters 
relating to the Live Broadcasting of the Proceedings of the House and matters 
ancillary  thereto,  including,  recommending  to  the  Speaker,  who  shall 
prescribe same – 

(i) 

the Rules of Coverage, 

 

(c) 

85 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the Guidelines for the Use of Signal and Footage, and 

the Rules and Guidelines to use Parliamentary proceedings from the 
National Assembly on the Internet; 

the  Committee  shall  monitor  compliance  with  those  Rules  and  Guidelines, 
hear any complaint for breach thereof and impose such sanctions as it deems 
appropriate,  including  censure,  restriction  of  access  to  the  press  gallery, 
suspension  or  cancellation  of  licence  to  broadcast  audio  and  video  signal 
and/or  footage  and  recordings  or  to  use  such  audio  or  video  signal  and/or 
footage and recordings on the internet. 

Madam Speaker, the Standing Orders Committee has further recommended that the 
words “Mr Speaker” be deleted and be replaced by the gender-neutral words “the Speaker”, 
wherever they appear in the Standing Orders and Rules of the National Assembly 1995. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise that the proposal of the Standing Orders 
Committee  in  regard  to  the  mode  of  appointment  of  the  Chairperson  and  members  of  the 
Broadcasting Committee is in line with the appointing procedure for the existing Sessional 
Select Committees like the Public Accounts Committee, the Standing Orders Committee and 
the House Committee on which the Members are equally nominated by  the Committee of 
Selection. 

Madam Speaker, as I stated earlier this amendment is but one important step in the 
realisation  of  the  live  telecast  project.  Other  legislative,  administrative  and  technical 
arrangements will have to be completed before the Assembly can go live.  I understand these 
are being attended to by the Office of the Clerk. 

Before  ending,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Standing  Orders  Committee  for  having 

diligently completed the task assigned to it. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Motion to the House. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

Third Reading 

 
On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  (2015-2016)  Bill 

86 

(No. VII of 2016) was read a third time and passed. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.24 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.05 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 

Second Reading 

THE PROTECTION FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(NO. IX OF 2016) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
M.  A.  Perraud):  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Protection  from  Domestic  Violence 
(Amendment) Bill (No. IX of 2016) be read a second time. 

Madame  la  présidente,  Rose,  séquestrée,  sodomisée,  violée  par  son  mari  pendant 

quatre mois… 

Lila, battue, insultée, humiliée, agressée au caustique soda par son compagnon… 

Violette, enceinte, battue par son mari, perd son bébé à l’hôpital… 

Pâquerette, maltraitée et battue par son mari, qui déferle aussi sa colère sur ses trois 

filles… 

Marguerite, agressée à coups de sabre par son mari, en pleine rue, en plein jour… 

Hibiscus, brulée vive par son mari, devant les yeux de son fils… 

Trochetia, étranglée dans son sommeil, ensuite brulée dans un champ par son époux… 

Arome poignardé par sa femme… 

L’oiseau du paradis, rué de coups, séquestré par sa femme, ridiculisé par la police… 

Glaïeul, humilié, griffé, battu par sa femme… 

Madame la  présidente, ces noms sont fictifs mais leurs drames sont bien réels.  Les 
victimes de violence domestique sont-elles des fleurs qui n’ont pas pu s’épanouir mais qui 
ont été violentées, meurtries et sont fanées. 

Malheureusement, nous sommes trop souvent témoins de drames humains, liés à la 
violence  domestique  et  il  est  décourageant,  révoltant  d’entendre  ces  tragédies.  Certaines 

 

87 

victimes trouvent la mort, d'autres victimes vivent dans la terreur, d'autres victimes encore 
sont entièrement détruites, physiquement, mentalement, émotionnellement. Sans compter ces 
enfants,  souvent  témoins  de  scènes  de  violences  atroces,  qui  sont  eux-mêmes  abandonnés, 
déracinés, traumatisés à vie.  La violence familiale sous n'importe quelle forme et à n'importe 
quel niveau est complètement, absolument, totalement, inacceptable! 

La  violence  intrafamiliale  est  un  phénomène  mondial  qui  dépasse  toutes  frontières: 
frontières  physiques,  culturelles,  sociales,  économiques.  Elle  détruit  des  familles,  des 
communautés  entières  et  renforce  d'autres  formes  d'inégalités  et  de  violences  à  travers  les 
sociétés.  Je  l’ai  dit  et  je  redis:  la  violence  domestique  est  aujourd'hui  "le  mal  du  siècle"! 
Faites le tour des continents, des pays, des sociétés, des cultures, ce mal gangrène. Ce n’est 
pas  une  question  d’éducation,  de  richesse,  de  statut  social,  de  drogue,  ou  toute  autre 
explication qu’on pourrait donner pour la violence domestique. Le mal est partout. 

Je suis convaincu que nous sommes tous ensemble dans ce combat, que ce soit les 
Membres des deux côtés de l’hémicycle, - malheureusement je tiens à déplorer l’absence du 
MMM - ceux qui sont en dehors, les stakeholders, les travailleurs sociaux, les victimes, nous 
venons aujourd’hui à travers ce projet de loi ériger un mur contre les bourreaux, qu’ils soient 
hommes ou femmes! 

Mon  constat,  depuis  mon  arrivée  au  ministère  de  l’Egalité  du  Genre,  du 
Développement de l’Enfant et du Bien-être de la Famille, est désolant. Madame la présidente, 
1,626 cas rapportés au Family Support Bureau de mon ministère en 2015, 4,277 cas rapportés 
à la police, toujours pour la même année en 2015. Les ONGs sont unanimes, ces chiffres ne 
sont que le sommet de l'iceberg! Dans une étude publiée en 2013 intitulée « War at home », 
Gender  Links  Mauritius  estime  que  la  réalité  est  15  fois  supérieure;15  fois  supérieure  aux 
statistiques de la police!  La même étude affirme qu'une femme sur quatre a été victime de 
violence. 

Parmi les 1,626 cas de 2015, les plus fréquents restent les agressions physiques, 845 
cas, 357 cas d’agressions verbales, 310 cas de harcèlement, 297 cas de menaces d’agressions 
physiques, toutes ces formes de violence perpétrées par le conjoint ou le partenaire, comme 
vous  le  voyez,  d'autres  formes  de  violence  occupent  des  places  importantes  dans  les 
statistiques. 

Le  gouvernement  est  très  conscient  du  problème  et  en  a  fait  une  préoccupation 
nationale,  comme  clairement  stipulé  dans  le  programme  gouvernemental  2015-2019,  et 

 

88 

soutenu par l’initiative du Premier ministre de mettre sur pied la coalition nationale contre la 
violence domestique. 

Les membres de la Chambre seront d'accord avec moi; il est grand temps de passer à 
la  vitesse  supérieure,  d’apporter  des  changements  majeurs  pour  aborder  cette  question 
urgente.  La loi protégeant la population contre la violence domestique  existe depuis 1997; 
elle a été amendée en 2004, puis 2007, et encore en 2011, mais comme nous le savons tous, 
cela ne suffit pas. Nous devons faire beaucoup plus pour répondre aux cris pour la justice. 
Trop de victimes ont souffert, souffrent et continueront à souffrir si nous ne prenons pas les 
devants pour donner un signal fort contre la violence familiale. 

Nous devons faire beaucoup plus pour en finir avec ces abus horribles et l'impunité 
qui permet à ces violations de droits de l'homme de continuer. Chacun d’entre nous, a un rôle 
urgent et crucial  à jouer aujourd’hui, pour mettre un frein aux crimes terrifiants contre les 
victimes de violence familiale.  

En tant que ministre de l'Egalité du Genre, du Développement de L'enfant et du Bien-
être de la Famille, la violence familiale est devenue une de mes plus grandes préoccupations 
et  priorités  car  elle  ruine  hommes,  femmes  et  enfants.  Les  conséquences  de  la  violence 
domestique  sont  énormes,  pour  la  victime  elle-même:  lésions  physiques,  handicap, 
pathologies  psychiques,  dépression,  état  suicidaire,  et  bien  d’autres,  mais  la  violence 
domestique impacte aussi sur les enfants et  la famille. 

La  famille est la première cellule de base de la société. Si cette cellule de base est 
déstabilisée,  nous  ne  pourrons  pas  avoir  une  société  stable,  un  pays  stable.  Il  est  de  mon 
devoir, non notre devoir, d’accroitre la protection des familles, et le soutien aux victimes, de 
même que leurs chances de réhabilitation et de réinsertion pour les aider à reconstruire leur 
vie.  

Madame  la  présidente, mon  ministère  est  aujourd’hui  en  possession  de  deux  outils 
importants pour adresser le problème de violence domestique. Le premier est le rapport du 
comité consultatif connu comme le Rapport Domingue, rendu public en aout 2015, c’est à 
dire  l’année  dernière  et  le  second,  le  rapport  du  comité  de  la  coalition  nationale  sur  la 
violence domestique, rendu public en avril 2016, cette année-ci. 

Madame  la  présidente, les  mots  sont  importants,  mais  finalement  seulement  les 
actions  comptent  et  je  tiens  à  souligner  que  mon  ministère  a  déjà  mis  au  point  un  plan 

 

89 

stratégique aligné sur le Rapport Domingue et qui rejoint les recommandations du rapport de 
la coalition nationale sur la violence domestique. 

Ces  deux  rapports  sont  unanimes  à  souligner  les  faiblesses  et  les  lacunes  du  cadre 
législatif  existant.  C'est  pourquoi  j'ai  décidé  de  m'embarquer  sur  des  processus  de  réforme 
pour apporter des changements à la Protection From Domestic Violence Act, (la PDVA) pour 
la rendre plus conforme avec des conditions de droits de l'homme et en conformité avec les 
meilleures pratiques internationales combattant la violence familiale. 

Je  tiens  avant  tout  à  attirer  l’attention  de  la  Chambre  que  les  amendements  à  la 
Protection  From  Domestic  Violence  Act  viennent  agrandir  l'éventail  de  protection  des 
victimes. Une victime peut être le conjoint, l’enfant du conjoint ou une autre personne vivant 
sous  le  même  toit.  La  nouvelle  définition  du  terme  « spouse »  prend  d’ailleurs  en 
considération  l’évolution  et  les  nouvelles  relations  de  la  société.  Cette  définition  en  trois 
catégories,  de  l'alinéa  3(b),  vient  adresser  les  faiblesses  de  la  loi  à  protéger  un  plus  grand 
nombre de victimes. Et nous voulons assurer et rassurer les victimes, cette loi vous protègera, 
que  vous  soyez  une  femme  ou  un  homme,  les  yeux  fermés,  sans  distinction  aucune,  de  la 
même manière. 

Nous  savons  qu’il  y  a  une  appréhension  de  ce  côté-là.  D’ailleurs,  lors  de  la 
préparation  des  amendements  au  projet  de  loi,  j’ai  personnellement  rencontré  l’ONG  SOS 
Papas qui se fait la porte-parole des hommes qui sentent leurs droits lésés sur la question de 
violence domestique pour les écouter et les rassurer que c’est une loi qui est gender neutral. 

Madam  Speaker, je  suis  convaincu  que 

la  Chambre,  du 
gouvernement, comme de l'opposition, soutiendront la motion de traiter des cas de violence 
familiale comme un délit grave.   

les  membres  de 

Les  propositions  de  la  Protection  from  Domestic  Violence  (Amendment)  Bill  pour 

accroître la protection des victimes, sont basées sur quatre objectifs principaux - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c)  

augmenter le pouvoir des Enforcement Officers ; 

élargir la définition du terme «violence domestique» ; 

renforcer les mesures pour que les auteurs des actes de violence domestique 
contre le conjoint ou un de ses enfants ou autre personne vivant sous le même 
toit soit érigé en infraction pénale, et 

(d) 

autoriser un policier, à partir du grade d’Assistant Surintendant, à procéder à 

 

90 

l’arrestation d’une personne ayant infligé des blessures physiques, dans un 
cadre de violence domestique. 

Madame la présidente, je propose d’élaborer sur les amendements de la Section 2 de 
la  loi  concernant  la  définition  de  la  violence  domestique.  Les  actes  d’intimidation  et 
d’harcèlement,  ainsi  que  les  menaces,  seront  désormais  considérés  comme  une  forme  de 
violence domestique. La définition de violence domestique comprend donc désormais au total 
huit nouveaux paramètres.  L’acte de donner des coups ou de blesser en font partie. Placer 
son  conjoint  ou  un  de  ses  enfants  sous  la  menace  d’une  blessure  corporelle  y  figure 
également. L’intimidation, le harcèlement, la traque, la maltraitance, les insultes et les actes 
de brutalités seront également condamnés. 

J’attire  l’attention  de  la  Chambre  que  je  compte  apporter  d’autres  amendements  au 

Committee Stage -  les amendements que j’ai fait circuler plus tôt. 

Madame la présidente, contraindre l’autre à un acte sexuel ou un acte de tout autre 
nature, de force ou sous le coup de la menace, est également mentionné. La séquestration, 
faire  du  mal  ou  menacer  de  faire  du  mal  à  l’enfant  du  conjoint,  endommager  ou  menacer 
d’endommager  ses  biens,  le  priver  de  ressources  auxquelles  il  ou  elle  a  droit,  ou  du  loyer 
partagé,  figurent  aussi  dans  cette  nouvelle  définition  étendue.  La  violence  psychologique, 
économique,  verbale,  sexuelle,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’estime  que  les  définitions  sont 
suffisamment élargies à travers ces amendements. 

Une petite note concernant le viol conjugal, il est succinctement compris dans l’alinéa 
3,a,d, même s’il s'insère dans un contexte plus élargie de violence sexuelle, qui insiste sur le 
fait que le conjoint ou le partenaire a le droit de refus. Je suis en faveur de la criminalisation 
du viol conjugal, mais cela va se faire dans un contexte différent car nous procédons à un 
exercice en profondeur sur les offenses sexuelles. Je demanderais à mes collègues des deux 
côtés de la Chambre, que nous procédions par étape, afin de bien cerner le problème. Nous 
franchissons déjà une étape importante avec l’introduction de ces amendements aujourd’hui. 

Madame 

la  présidente, 

j’ai  écouté 

les  propositions  faites  par 

l’opposition.  
L’opposition a attiré notre attention sur le fait que le Code pénal Section 242 stipule que le 
crime de sang est excusable lorsqu’on surprend le conjoint en flagrant délit d’adultère. Mais 
comme  cette  clause  fait  partie  du  Code  pénal,  je  tiens  à  informer  la  Chambre  que  mon 
ministère  travaille  avec  le  State  Law  Office,  pour  que  cette  provision  du  Code  pénal  soit 
amendée subséquemment. 

 

91 

Actuellement,  en  l’absence  d’une  définition  très  élargie  de  violence  domestique, 
particulièrement les violences psychologiques et économiques, causées sur les victimes, les 
coupables ont recours à des omissions dans la loi pour se défendre des infractions commises. 
Les amendements proposés donnent donc droit aux victimes d’avoir recours à l’ordonnance 
de la Cour pour rendre responsable les auteurs des violences domestiques. 

 Autre tournant décisif à travers ces amendements: le rôle des Enforcement Officers. 
Madame la présidente, avoir des textes de loi est une chose, les traduire dans la pratique en 
est  une  autre.  Vu  la  réalité  des  victimes,  il  était  important  de  permettre  aux  Enforcement 
Officers d’intervenir directement, pour venir en aide aux victimes. Donc, ils seront autorisés – 

(i) 

(ii) 

à enquêter et rapporter à la police n'importe quel cas où il y a soupçon qu'une 
personne est, a été ou pourrait être victime de violence familiale; 
pour faire une demande de Protection Order, Occupancy Order ou Tenancy 
Order, au nom de la victime, avec le consentement de la victime, d’une part, et 
sans le consentement de la victime. 

Je  voudrais  préciser  à  la  Chambre  que  dorénavant,  quand  un  Enforcement  Officer 
soupçonne raisonnablement qu'une personne soit ou ait été ou serait susceptible d'être victime 
d'un acte de violence familiale, il aura le devoir d’étudier le cas le plus vite possible et de le 
rapporter au poste de police le plus proche.  Il incombe à la police d'enquêter et de prendre 
des mesures nécessaires avec diligence, basée sur les arguments avancés par le Enforcement 
Officer.  Cet  amendement  vient  répondre  aux  nombreuses  doléances  des  victimes  qui 
rapportent les cas dans les postes de police et ne sont pas prises au sérieux. 

L’intervention  du  Enforcement  Officer  vis-à-vis  du  judiciaire  est  un  amendement 
remarquable proposé, surtout dans le cas où la victime est blessée, la demande d’une décision 
judiciaire pourra se faire sans le consentement de la victime, le but étant d’agir rapidement 
pour assurer la protection des victimes. 

Madame  la  présidente,  les  amendements  vont  encore  plus  loin,  en  habilitant  le 
Enforcement  Officer  à  rechercher  des  « Probation  Reports  of  Compliance »,  devant  les 
magistrats,  dépendant  de  la  gravité  des  cas.  Ce  qui  occasionnerait  l’intervention  d’un 
Probation  Officer  pour  des  enquêtes  plus  approfondies  et  serait  un  sérieux  moyen  de 
dissuasion pour ceux qui ne se plient pas aux Probation Orders. Cette mesure, Madame la 
présidente,  est  très  appréciée  sur  le  terrain.  Souvent  les  Protection  Orders  ne  sont  pas 
respectées, surtout quand les deux protagonistes vivent sous le même toit. 

92 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  le  manque  de  proactivité  des  policiers  qui  reçoivent  les 
victimes de violence domestique a été déploré à de nombreuses reprises. C’est un fait que 
dans  les  situations  graves,  la  première  interface  d’une  victime  et  de  son  bourreau  est  le 
policier. Ce premier contact est d’une importance capitale pour diverses raisons. Il nous a été 
souvent  rapporté  que  l’aide  appropriée  n'est  pas  fournie,  des  victimes  sont  encore  plus 
victimisées  et  les  auteurs  continuent  à  perpétrer  les  actes  de  violence  dans  leurs  zones  de 
confort.  

L’expérience des  années précédentes a mis en lumière les lacunes du système et la 
nécessité  d’adopter  une  approche  concertée  en  matière  de  violence  domestique.  Cette 
expérience montre également la nécessité de rassembler dans une politique consolidée tous 
les éléments de l’action gouvernementale et d’adopter les ajustements qui s’imposent. De ce 
fait,  comme  les  victimes  de  violence  domestique  ont  recours  en  premier  à  la  police,  la 
modification  de  l'alinéa  11A  de  la  loi  permet  à  la  police  d’être  proactive  et  d’assurer  une 
protection immédiate de la victime de violence domestique. Une enquête peut être initiée ; la 
victime peut avoir recours à l’accompagnement médical ou psychologique, et le policier peut 
même procéder à l’arrestation de l’agresseur. 

La  clause  11A  est  ajoutée  à  la  clause  11,  faisant  provision  que  pour  tout  cas  de 
violence domestique rapporté au poste de police, l’officier de police en charge doit faire une 
enquête. Si après enquête, il est établi que la personne est blessée suite à l’acte d’une violence 
domestique, la police peut procéder à l'arrestation de l'auteur de violence. 

Les  amendements  que  nous  proposons  vont  changer  de  manière  drastique  cette 
injustice. Les policiers, à partir du grade d’Assistant Surintendant, seront habilités à arrêter 
une personne en cas d'acte de violence familiale qui est susceptible d'être commis contre la 
victime, quand une blessure physique a été causée, ou lorsqu’il soupçonne que la personne a 
omis  de  se  conformer  à  un  Domestique  Violence  Order.  Ainsi,  il  pourra  l'amener  à  être 
traduite devant un magistrat le plus tôt possible.   

Madame la présidente, je parlais plus tôt de signal fort. Il est important de dissuader 
les  auteurs  des  actes  de  violence  domestique,  pour  qui  avoir  le  recours  à  la  violence  est 
devenu trop facile. Des auteurs devraient être jugés responsables de leurs actes, parce que la 
violence familiale affecte non seulement la victime mais également leurs enfants et la famille 
entière.   Pendant  des  années,  des  décennies,  des  auteurs  impunis  n'ont  fait  que  rajouter  au 
drame.  

93 

 
Les  victimes,  les  familles  -  le  peuple  perd  confiance  en  la  justice. Les  victimes 
continuent à souffrir, les bourreaux continuent à torturer leurs victimes. Est-ce-que c'est cela, 
la justice que nous voulons pour le pays?    

Non.  Que  ce  soit  le  gouvernement,  les  ONGs,  tous  les  stakeholders,  nous  sommes 

tous soudés dans cette bataille. 

Madame  la  présidente,  dans  cet  exercice  d’amendement,  des  dispositions  ont  été 
prises pour des pénalités plus dures en cas de non-conformité à n'importe quel Ordre, sous la 
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act: 

(i)  

(ii)  

(iii)  

au premier délit: une amende de R 25, 000 à R 50,000; 

au  deuxième  délit:  une  amende  de  R  50,000  à  R  100,000,  et  une  peine 
d’emprisonnement ne dépassant pas 2 ans; 

troisième  délit,  et 

au 
d’emprisonnement ne dépassant pas 5 ans. 

toute  culpabilité  subséquente; 

  une  peine 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  avons  voulu  passer  à  une  étape  supérieure  en 
criminalisant l'acte de violence domestique. Oui, la violence domestique est un crime, pas un 
droit dont certaines personnes pensent disposer envers certains membres de leur famille. Il est 
temps de le faire comprendre à la population!  Les amendements prévoient les dispositions 
suivantes pour tout acte de violence domestique - 

(i)  

une amende ne dépassant pas R 50, 000 sur le premier délit, ainsi de suite.  

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  sont  des  réformes  juridiques  que  mon  ministère  propose 
mais nous avons pris les devants, en attendant que l’arsenal légal se renforce et s’actualise 
avec une série de décisions politiques, pour adresser le problème de violence domestique sous 
toutes ses facettes. Les membres de la Chambre seront d'accord avec moi que la législation et 
les décisions politiques devraient aller de pair pour de meilleurs résultats. 

Madame  la  présidente,  comme  mentionné  dans  ma  réponse  au  PNQ  de  novembre 
2015, mon ministère a décidé d’entreprendre une étude sur la prédominance, les causes, les 
conséquences  et 
l'économie 
mauricienne. Comprendre les causes de la violence conjugale est crucial pour déterminer des 
stratégies appropriées pour résoudre le problème. 

la  violence  entre  partenaires 

le  coût  de 

intimes  sur 

Un de mes collègues du gouvernement m’avait adressé une correspondance l’année 
dernière sur le fait que l’adultère et l'alcoolisme seraient deux principaux facteurs causant la 

 

94 

violence domestique. Je comprends son inquiétude sur cette question délicate, mais je suis 
également d'avis qu'une étude approfondie viendra nous éclairer sur les autres grandes causes 
qui méritent notre attention. 

Madame  la  présidente,  plus  que  jamais,  nous  avons  besoin  de  fournir  des  réponses 
efficaces au problème de violence domestique et une approche multisectorielle est essentielle 
pour y arriver à commencer par cette première interface que représente le policier. Le policier 
intervient  quand  une  victime,  à  bout  de  force  et  de  patience,  vient  chercher  secours  à  la 
police. La manière de gérer le cas est crucial. Le policier peut, à cet instant précis, détruire ou 
réparer le couple, et qui dit couple, dit souvent enfants, famille. Il peut réparer cette famille, 
Madame la présidente. 

Le  commissaire  de  police  est  très  conscient  des  doléances  en  ce  qu’il  s’agit  du 
comportement des policiers face aux victimes et il a sollicité l’aide de mon ministère pour 
former  les  policiers.  Nous  avons  voulu  équiper  les  policiers  à  travers  une  formation 
spécialisée pour qu’ils puissent mieux gérer les cas de violence domestique, qu’ils prennent 
conscience de leur rôle, des enjeux de leur position, de l’impact de la violence domestique, 
entre autres. 

De mars à mai 2016, 268 policiers de différentes catégories ont déjà tiré bénéfice du 
programme de formation qui va continuer jusqu’à ce que dans chaque poste de police du pays 
il y ait un policier formé pour gérer les cas de violence domestique. Il faut souligner, Madame 
la  présidente,  que  la  police  a  fait  un  effort  spécial  pour  assurer  la  présence  d'un  élément 
féminin dans chaque poste de police. 

Le  renforcement  des  capacités  dans  les  hôpitaux  est  également  en  cours.  Cette 
initiative vient en fait complémenter un service de fast track, adoptée par le Ministère de la 
santé et de la qualité de la vie pour aider les victimes de violence familiale dans les hôpitaux. 
Je  dois  souligner  que  c’est  sur  les  recommandations  de  la  coalition  nationale  contre  la 
violence  domestique  que  ce  service  de  voie  rapide  est  opérationnel  dans  les  5  hôpitaux 
régionaux. 

Mon  ministère  a  également  demandé  un  financement  à  hauteur  de  5  millions  de 
roupies dans le budget 2016-2017 pour la mise en place d'un centre de commandement pour 
la violence domestique. Le centre de commandement fonctionne grâce à un hotline dans le 
but  fournir  des  soins  immédiats  et  des  conseils  aux  victimes  de  violence  domestique.  Les 
technologies  modernes  seront  utilisées  pour  localiser  les  victimes  et  dépêcher  les 

 

95 

Enforcement Officers de la localité sur les lieux. A la demande de mon ministère, la Haute 
Commission sud-africaine est en liaison avec les autorités concernées en Afrique du Sud pour 
nous donner une formation sur le fonctionnement du Centre de commandement sud-africain, 
qui est un modèle réussi. 

Comme  recommandé  par  le  Rapport  consultatif  et  celui  du  comité  de  la  Coalition 
nationale, mon ministère a déjà demandé au bureau du Premier ministre de déclarer la hotline 
139 comme une ligne d'urgence gratuite, dédiée aux victimes de violence domestique. Cette 
initiative sera d'un grand secours aux victimes de violence conjugale, comme nous pouvons 
tous l’imaginer. 

Dans  le  prochain  budget,  je  demande  aussi  au  ministère  des  Finances  et  du 
Développement  économique  de  soutenir  mon  Ministère  en  faisant  provision  pour  le 
recrutement de coordonnateurs additionnels, et augmenter le nombre d’officiers en charge de 
la  protection  et  du  bien-être  de  la  famille,  pour  mieux  gérer  le  problème  de  violence 
domestique. 

Le personnel supplémentaire viendra renforcer le Family Welfare and Protection Unit 
dans  le  but  de  mettre  en  place  le  guichet  unique  pour  toutes  les  questions  relatives  à  la 
violence domestique et de soutien à tous les membres de la famille, comme recommandé par 
le rapport de la coalition nationale sur la violence domestique. 

La  Coalition  nationale  contre  la  violence  domestique  a  également  fait  appel  à  une 
collaboration  supplémentaire  des  ONGs  pour  fournir  un  hébergement  temporaire  aux 
victimes de violence conjugale et à leurs enfants. Nous travaillons déjà sur les mesures dans 
ce sens, et cela sous-entend les victimes femmes et hommes. 

Je voudrais profiter de l’occasion qui m’est offerte aujourd’hui pour remercier l’ONG 
SOS Femmes qui est une ONG pionnière dans ce domaine et qui fait un travail formidable 
dans  l’encadrement  et  la  réhabilitation  des  victimes  de  violence  domestique.  Je  remercie 
également Chrysalide, Kinouete et Passerelle qui ont répondu favorablement à notre appel et 
qui vont ouvrir leurs portes pour accueillir les victimes de violence domestique. 

Madame  la  présidente,  mon  ministère  a  déjà  entamé  des  discussions  avec  une 
personne-ressource  pour  développer  un  programme  d'autonomisation  des  victimes  de 
violence  domestique.  Une  base  de  données  sur  les  victimes  prêtes  à  participer  à  un  tel 
programme  est  disponible  et  une  fois  que  les  détails  concernant  le  programme  seront 
finalisés, mon ministère envisage de démarrer avec la formation de ces victimes, à partir du 

 

96 

mois d’août, de cette année-ci, 2016. Cet aspect est crucial pour assurer la réhabilitation des 
victimes et leur réintégration dans la société ; ensuite, l’éducation et la sensibilisation en vue 
de prévenir plutôt que de réparer les dégâts de violence causés.   

Madame la présidente, toutes les initiatives de mon ministère fonctionnent comme un 
ensemble  d’éléments  pour  sensibiliser  et  éduquer  la  population.  Madam  Speaker,  we  are 
building the society of the future! Le mur des valeurs et la Charte des valeurs familiales que 
nous avons lancés le mois dernier, pour faire revivre les valeurs, qui sont en pleine érosion.  
Nous  avons  aussi  lancé  l’an  dernier,  un  répertoire  des  services  entourant  le  support  à  la 
famille et un fascicule très pratique pour éduquer la population. 

Les chiffres démontrent que la majorité des victimes sont des femmes. Nous avons 
démarré  une  vaste  campagne  d'autonomisation  des  femmes  et  des  filles,  ciblant  divers 
publics, basés sur le SDG5, le 5ème objectif de Développement Durable des Nations Unies. La 
mentalité est une profonde racine,  qui prendra des décennies  à  changer,  mais nous devons 
accélérer ce processus, pour donner à la femme sa juste valeur dans la société.    

La nouvelle loi sera accompagnée d’une campagne d’information et de sensibilisation 
dans  les  médias  et  les  réseaux  sociaux,  sur  le  terrain,  au  sein  des  Women  Centres,  dans  la 
population en général, avec l’aide de support visuel. Nous sommes conscients que cette loi ne 
sera utile que si elle est vulgarisée parmi les victimes potentielles et nous prendrons toutes les 
dispositions pour qu’elle soit médiatisée. 

Et  bien  sûr,  la  protection ;  la  protection  avec  des  nouveaux  outils  informatiques, 
comme le DOVIS, le Domestic Violence Information System, qui a déjà été mis au point pour 
une  intervention  rapide,  une  meilleure  gestion  des  cas  grâce  à  un  historique  accessible 
instantanément. Ce système permettra aussi d’éviter des double counting.   

Mon ministère va aussi développer un site web dédié à la violence domestique. 

Comme  vous  pouvez  le  constater,  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  faisons  tout  pour 
mettre  toutes  les  chances  de  notre  côté,  pour  réussir  cette  guerre  contre  la  violence 
domestique.  

Madame la présidente, je suis convaincue que les amendements que nous proposons, 
d’une part, et les autres mesures que nous apportons aux politiques et aux services, d’autre 
part,  aideront  à  combattre  ce  mal  du  siècle.  Cette  initiative  du  gouvernement  démontre 
clairement la volonté et la capacité de l'état à renverser la vapeur pour un monde plus juste, 
envers les victimes de violence familiale. 

97 

 
Pour conclure, je voudrais rappeler que la violence domestique est une des violations 
des  droits  de  l’homme  les  plus  dominantes  au  monde,  un  des  pires  crimes  les  moins 
condamnés, et une des plus grandes menaces pour la paix et le développement durable. 

Madame la présidente, les stakeholders sont unanimes, la majorité silencieuse est trop 
fragile,  trop  meurtrie,  trop  brisée,  pour  sortir  du  noir.  Il  est  critique  que  tous  les  acteurs 
concernés  travaillent  ensemble  pour  assurer  l'application  de  la  nouvelle  législation  et  pour 
développer des mécanismes de soutien viables, a tous les niveaux pour mieux protéger les 
victimes  (la  police,  le  judiciaire,  la  santé,  les  ONGs,  le  ministère).  Madame  la  présidente, 
nous  sommes  témoins  d’un  moment  fort  de  notre  histoire,  quand  enfin,  la  violence 
domestique sera reconnue comme un crime, un délit grave. Je prie pour que ce grand pas en 
avant ne fasse plus souffrir aucune autre victime. 

Merci beaucoup 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  and  Tourism  and  External 

Communications (Mr X.L.Duval) rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

(5.37 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  The amendment to the Protection from Domestic Violence 
Act 1997 is indeed timely. Today, Mauritius is facing a plethora of domestic violence cases. I 
have  listened  carefully  to  the  intervention  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development  and  Family  Welfare,    she  has  cited  a  few  cases  of  domestic  violence  and, 
Madam Speaker, all the cases cited by the hon. Minister defy, if I may say, human reasoning.  
Such macabre, Madam Speaker, represents the tip of the iceberg.  We, hon. Members of the 
House, are best posed and have the duty to bring about changes in our law and we do hope 
that the changes which will be brought today in this Assembly will better protect men and 
women from domestic violence and at the same time help to curb cases of domestic violence. 

We cannot deny that the figures for the number of cases reported and the number of 
protection orders issued have constantly soared up year by  year.  However, if my memory 
serves me right, the last amendment brought to the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 
1997 dates back to 2011, almost five  years from now.  This has been  the case despite we 
consider gender violence as a critical area of concern and national priority. 

 
The  Protection  from  Domestic  Violence  Act  1997  has  certainly  been  a  powerful 

98 

weapon in the hands of the enforcement officers - 

(i) 

(ii) 

to assist victims of all sorts of domestic violence, and 

to obtain remedies such as protection orders, occupation orders and tenancy 
orders. 

All  these  remedies,  Madam  Speaker,  available  under  the  Protection  from  Domestic 
Violence Act 1997 are civil in nature.  The only offence created under the Protection from 
Domestic Violence Act 1997 is indeed section 13 - failure to comply with an order of the 
Court.  Therefore, it appears that the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 only caters 
for  the  safety  of  the  victims  of  domestic  violence.    It  did  not  really  provide  for  the 
punishment of the perpetrators. True, we do have the Criminal Code Act 1838 which makes 
provisions for the different kinds of offences including assaults, wounds and blows causing 
death and so on.  

However, the Criminal Code Act 1838 does not create specific offences for domestic 

violence cases. 

We all know how victims of domestic violence cases back off from the Court arena 
when it is time to depone for different reasons, for instance, some women fear for their own 
lives; some do not want family reputation to be tarnished; others prefer to keep silent in the 
best interest of their children.  What I want to emphasise here is that this 2016 amendment to 
the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 rightly incorporates those missing elements 
in the domestic violence legislation. 

One  of  the  objects  of  this  Bill  is  to  provide  that  a  person  committing  an  act  of 
domestic  violence  against  his  spouse  living  under  the  same  roof  will,  henceforth,  be 
considered to commit an offence under the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997. The 
perpetrator will be prosecuted for this offence in addition to the civil remedies provided in 
favour of the victim.   

I  should  also  applaud  the  initiative  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare for having come up with a more refined and all-inclusive 
definition of domestic violence. In 2004, section 2 of the Protection from Domestic Violence 
Act 1997 was amended to include a definition of domestic violence. However, it has been felt 
that the definition was not adequate to cover all the circumstances that crop up in practice in 
such  cases.  This  Bill  adds  acts  such  as  stalking  to  the  existing  definition  of  ‘domestic 

 

99 

violence’. The definition includes the  act of depriving, without any  reasonable excuse, the 
spouse of resources which the spouse is entitled to or requires, or of rent for shared residence.  
This widening definition of ‘domestic violence’ will ensure that genuine cases fall within the 
ambit of the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997. 

Of particular importance is also the clarification brought by this Bill to the definition 
of  ‘spouse’.  We  all  know  that  the  majority  of  known  domestic  violence  cases  concerned 
spouses. However, in practice, a major impediment in the implication of the provisions of the 
Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 has been locus standi.  There are cases before 
the  Courts  which  risk  being  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  the  applicant does  not  qualify  as 
spouse as per the definition provided under the said Act.    

As our law stands, it appears that in order to qualify as spouse, a man and a woman 
who  are  living  or  have  lived  together  as  husband  and  wife  would  equally  need  to  be  the 
parents of a common child. The purpose of this Bill is to bring a significant amendment to the 
definition  of  ‘spouse’  as  it  clarifies  the  position  of  persons  who  have  lived  or  are  living 
together without having a common child.  It is now clear that two persons of opposite sex 
who are living or have lived together as husband and wife would still qualify as spouse even 
if they do not have a common child. It is worth stressing on the fact that the Enforcement 
Officers of the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare do play 
an active and central role in the protection of victims from domestic violence. Their powers 
are  being  stretched  by  this  Bill  with  a  view  to  enable  them  to,  effectively,  discharge  their 
functions and to exercise their powers within the framework of the law. So many times have 
the Enforcement Officers found themselves in the face of cases where their powers have been 
restricted. 

I would like to draw the attention of the House to the new section 8A of the Bill. In 
the current Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997, only the Court was empowered to 
cause a Probation Report to be made to determine Court Order has been complied with or 
not. However, this Bill now extends such power to the Enforcement Officers who can now 
apply to the Court for such a Protection Order. This will ensure that the obtention of an order 
under the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 by the victim is not the end of the 
matter. The Enforcement Officers will now be in a position to ensure appropriate follow-up 
with a view to, ultimately, provide effective protection to the victims of domestic violence. 

100 

 
The new clause 11 of the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 also makes a 
significant  addition  to  the  powers  of  the  Enforcement  Officers  when  it  comes  to  making 
application for orders under the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 on behalf of 
victims of domestic violence. 

This Bill correctly entitles the Enforcement Officers to apply for orders, on behalf of 
victims, where they are unable to consent to same as a result of being injured. The benefits of 
the  amendments  contemplated  by  this  Bill  are  also  far-reaching  as  they  also  increase  the 
duties and the powers of the Police Officers in domestic violence cases. 

In addition to their general powers under the Police Act, the Police Officers will now 
be endowed with further powers under the new clause 11A. With the coming into force of 
these amendments, a Police Officer not below the rank of Assistant Superintendent will be in 
a position to arrest a person who has committed an act of domestic violence on a victim and 
physical injury has ensued. 

We also have to consider that the amendments to section 13 of the Protection from 
Domestic Violence Act 1997 provides for more stringent sentences on the commission of an 
offence under the said  Act. A person, who  fails to comply  with an order issued under the 
Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997, will now on a third or subsequent conviction, 
be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years. 

Furthermore, a person, who does an act of domestic violence, will now be liable on 
conviction to sentences as described under the new clause 13(2) of this Bill. These measures, 
Madam Speaker, are intended to instil in the mind of a Mauritian citizen the seriousness of 
domestic violence offences and the amendments to the Protection from Domestic Violence 
Act 1997 are aimed at bringing a curb on the domestic violence cases. 

These amendments, Madam Speaker, have a laudable purpose. I fully support the Bill. 
I commend and thank the hon. Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family 
Welfare for bringing forward this Bill at a time when we realise it is highly required. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ms Sewocksingh! 

 (5.49 p.m.) 

Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Madame  la 
presidente, comme Madame la ministre, je deplore l’attitude du MMM. C’est dommage de 

 

101 

voir que leurs sièges sont vides, surtout lorsqu’on parle de quelque chose de très important 
pour le pays. 

Madam  Speaker,  hearing  the  words  ‘domestic  violence’  gives  me  goosebumps. 
According  to  Wikipedia:  “Domestic  violence  is  a  pattern  of  behaviour  which  involves 
violence or any other abuse by one person against another in a domestic setting, such as in 
marriage or cohabitation.” 

Madam Speaker, allow to go directly to the subject. Domestic violence can happen at 
any time, any place, to anyone. It occurs in all societies, it knows no age or ethnic boundaries. 
I  am  sure  all  of  us  must  have  known  or  witnessed  someone  who  has  been  a  victim  of 
domestic violence. It comes in many forms, such as physical violence, mental, verbal abuse, 
sexual abuse, marital rape, economic, financial abuse and sometimes even spiritual abuse. 

When  we  talk  about  domestic  violence,  Madam  Speaker,  we  talk  about  the  spouse 
who seeks to assert power or control over her or his partner. Yes, Madam Speaker, I say ‘her 
or his’, but till now, I, personally, have never come across a man who is or has been a victim 
of  domestic  violence.  I  know  there  are  some  cases  where  men  are  victims  of  domestic 
violence, but there are very less compared to women. I have known only cases where women 
have been victims, even figures, Madam Speaker, say that women are more victims than men. 
I  have  known  women  who  have  gone  through  hell  of  abuses,  name  it,  Madam  Speaker, 
physical, mental, sexual. Not later than yesterday, day before yesterday, a case has been filed. 
Last week, we heard the same. 

Madam Speaker, we all know the terms ‘domestic violence’, but let us, for a minute, 
allow  us  for  a  minute  to  be  in  the  place  of  that  person  who  is  being  physically  abused.  I 
would like to give a picture of what I am saying so that we all understand what goes through. 
That is why, Madam Speaker, for a minute I will use the term ‘she’. As I said, I have come 
only across women. That is why for some minutes, I will the word ‘she’ with all due respect 
to all my male counterparts. 

Madam Speaker, when she is in the hands of her partner. The partner who is in full 
control of the situation, the partner for whom she has left everything behind, her parents, her 
family, her relatives, her friends, her house, even gives up her name to take the name of her 
partner, suddenly, sees her world falling apart. She is being beaten so cruelly that she is no 
more a human being, she becomes  an object in  the hands of the partner, Madam Speaker, 
who  is  being  slapped,  kicked,  pushed,  shaken,  thrown,  choked,  burnt.  Sometimes,  Madam 

 

102 

Speaker,  when hands and feet  are not enough to the satisfaction of the  partner, he takes  a 
weapon, an iron rod, a rope, a knife, sometimes even a gun and what not. 

Madam Speaker, just for a second, let us imagine what goes on in the mind of that 
woman  at  that  moment,  who  is  facing  death,  who  sees  death  in  front  of  her.  A  helpless, 
without defence woman who just does not understand how the person for whom she has left 
everything  for,  suddenly,  turns  into  a  monster,  turns  into  a  bourreau,  just  like  Madame  la 
ministre vient de dire. She comes out with wounds, blows, broken bones, burns, and if she is 
less  fortunate,  she  loses  her  life.  And,  if  by  chance,  she  is  spared,  the  next  day,  she  is 
expected to wake up, do her daily cause, go to work, give her best of herself at office, be the 
best wife, best daughter-in-law, best mother, etc. 

Mental and verbal abuse is no less, Madam Speaker. The partner abuses to an extent 
with harsh words, comments, behaviour that it becomes an emotional abuse. The feeling is as 
if  someone  is  using  a  drill,  a  drill  in  the  body,  who  keeps  on  drilling,  drilling,  screwing, 
making holes in the flesh every day, every minute, every hour that she loses her self-esteem. 
She gets anxiety attacks, she faces depression, in other words, she loses her identity, she is no 
more herself. 

 
Madam Speaker, very often, this happens in front of children. It is said that a child 
who  lives  in  a  household  with  violence  often  shows  psychological  problems.  They  can  be 
traumatised throughout their lives. They can face lots of problems in their adulthood.  They 
can have very strange behaviours and sometimes we even see it our society.  Here, Madam 
Speaker, I have a thought for the parents of the victims of domestic violence.   

Madam Speaker, parents’ dream is to see their child happy.  Parents go through a lot 
of sacrifices in their own lives to give a better living to their child.  It is said that parents raise 
their child like a flower -  Madame la ministre has given examples of flowers when she was 
referring to women - but the day they find out that their child is in the hands of an abuser, 
their dream turns into a nightmare.  I have known a mother who, after seeing her daughter 
being physically abused by her spouse, got a stroke.  That unfortunate mother passed away 
with a cancer some  years later.  Though it is said that there is little chance that stress can 
cause cancer, let’s hope that the mother did not die out of sadness. 

Apart  from physical and moral  abuses,  I  earlier  mentioned other types of violence, 
Madam  Speaker.    Sexual  and  economic  violence  and  so  on  do  exist.  I  am  not  going  into 
details to gain time, but we all know that these forms of violence exist and there are other 

 

103 

forms also that do exist. But why so much of violence, Madam Speaker? Why so much of 
violence  in  our  society?  We  are  living  in  a  fast  developing  country.  Our  lifestyles  have 
changed, we are more empowered. Both men and women are working, which may lead to a 
stressful life. We see in many cases domestic violence happens once, twice and then becomes 
repetitive. The violence becomes worst over time. 

It is important to keep in mind that the main cause of domestic violence is abuse of 
power and control. There are other causes of domestic violence such as alcoholism, drugs, 
financial problems and unemployment. There are also rich people who are abused by their 
spouse. There is also lack of confidence, lack of trust and lack of control where anger turns 
into aggressiveness, intervention of relatives and so on. But, Madam Speaker, we still find in 
many  cases  that  the  spouse  does  not  end  the  relationship  and  this  also might  have  several 
reasons, maybe out of love; when you love someone you can give your life to him or to her. 
Very often, we easily forget and forgive out of love. 

Society  is  another  reason  where  a  partner  does  not  leave.  The  society  tags  you. 
Children  can  be  a  reason.  Finance  can  be  another  issue.  The  spouse  can  be  financially 
dependent  on  the  other  one.  Culture  may  encourage  the  spouse  to  stay,  etc.  Domestic 
violence is a highly sensitive matter that should be dealt with a lot of sensitiveness. 

Madam Speaker, we are here today to discuss about the amendments that are in the 
Protection from Domestic Violence (Amendment) Bill which the hon. Minister is bringing 
forward. Though it is the fourth time that this Act is being amended, I have no doubt that we 
are moving a step ahead. This Government is very much concerned about the protection of its 
citizen. In view to provide better protection to victims of domestic violence, proposals to the 
amendment  to  the  Protection  from  Violence  Domestic  Act  of  1997  have  been  made.  This 
Government  strongly  believes  that  it  should  try  to  prevent,  investigate  and  punish  acts  of 
violence against a spouse with sufficient diligence. Madam Speaker, here, I would humbly 
like  to  thank the  hon. Minister  for  the  outstanding  work  that  she  is  doing  to  give  women, 
children and families a better living.  Knowing her determination, her strength, I am sure she 
will go till the end to make things happen. 

Also,  Madam  Speaker,  on  behalf  of  so  many  victims  who  are  suffering  in  silence, 
those  who  are  broken,  those  who  are  sans  voix  out  there,  I  would  like  to  pay  my  sincere 
gratitude to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who is leaving no stone unturned and he is paying a 
lot of attention to this amendment to make the lives of each and every one in our Republic a 

 

104 

safe  and  secure  place  to  live  in.  As  a  Member  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament,  I  have  the 
opportunity  to  share  the  experiences  of  my  country  and  listen  to  some  on  my  African 
colleagues.  Believe  me,  Madam  Speaker,  we  should  say  that  we  are  blessed  to  live  in  a 
peaceful and stable country. There are still countries that do not even have a specific law on 
domestic violence and if they have, they find that the biggest challenge is to implement the 
law. Madam Speaker, here we are talking about amendments and for sure these amendments 
will bring more harmony to our living. 

Madam Speaker, this is the time where we have to do much more to respond to the 
cries  for  justice,  to  respond  to  the  cries  of  women,  children,  families  who  have  suffered 
violence. We have to do much more to end these horrible abuses and the impunity that allows 
this human rights violence to continue. I think we can all agree that the time for excuses is 
long  gone  and  has  passed  and  belongs  to  another  era.  The  silence  on  violence  against  the 
spouse has broken  and  now it is the time for stronger action. When it comes to providing 
services, strong actions to improve the quality and accessibility of services should be taken 
into consideration so that women have prompt access to services regardless of their location, 
race,  age  or  income.  These  include  healthcare  services,  immediate  and  effective  police 
responses,  psychological  support,  counselling,  legal  advice,  protection  orders,  telephone 
hotlines, websites and even social assistance, all these in a conducive environment. 

A victim must have a place to go with the children, which is safe, clean and secure. 
We need more shelters, Madam Speaker, to welcome these victims. They should not feel that 
they  are  a  burden  of  the  society.  Adolescents  in  schools  should  learn  about  health  and 
sexuality  and must be taught that  coercion, violence and discrimination against  gender are 
unacceptable. When it comes to the prosecution of offenders, we know that ending impunity 
means that the law must be enforced. There is also need of reforms in the Police Department 
and Judicial processes which play constraint on the spouse from accessing justice. Courts and 
justice  system  must  be  accessible  and  responsive  to  criminal  and  civil  matters  relating  to 
domestic violence.  

Ending domestic violence is one of the Government’s key priorities, Madam Speaker, 
but we can still bring a lot of reforms, amendments, changes in our Acts. The Minister, the 
Ministry, the Government, NGOs, social workers will do their parts, but this is a matter of 
concern of each and every one.  It is the mind-set that has to be changed once for all. Too 
often,  we  say  it  is  a  private  matter  or  he  or  she  deserves  it.  No  one  deserves  this  sort  of 
treatment, Madam Speaker. There is no reason to express anger through violence. We need to 

 

105 

be  able  to  provide  a  zero-  tolerance  attitude.  We  need  to  set  the  example  in  the  African 
continent. 

Today, Madam Speaker, I have the opportunity to stand up in this august Assembly to 
voice out for those who cannot, those who have been abused daily either physical, mental, 
sexual or in any other forms. Maybe now someone somewhere is being abused or is suffering 
in silence, Madam Speaker. Many of these victims, they live with a wish that they have a 
better  tomorrow.  And  who  would  like  to  die  in  the  hands  of  an  abuser?  Here,  Madam 
Speaker,  I  have  a  special  thought  for  all  those  who  have  lost  their  lives  through  domestic 
violence. May their souls rest in peace! There is no excuse for domestic violence, Madam 
Speaker. We are all equal. We are all human beings. We are all made of blood and flesh. 
There  are  many  ways  where  we  can  avoid  violence.  It  needs  some  understanding, 
commitment, compromise and all blended with some love. 

I would like to end up by referring to a beautiful saying, Madam Speaker. It is said: 
‘Educate a woman, you educate the nation.’ In the same way, I would say, Madam Speaker, 
‘Make  a  woman  suffer,  it’s  the  whole  nation  that  suffers’.  Food  for  thought!  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Selvon! 

 (6.04 p.m.) 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madame  la 
présidente,  j’accueille  favorablement  le  projet  d’amendement  qui  nous  est  proposé 
aujourd’hui par Madame la ministre de l’Égalité du Genre, du Développement de l’Enfant et 
du Bien-Etre de la Famille, pour renforcer la loi contre la violence familiale.  

Je saisis l’occasion pour demander aux membres de cette Chambre d’avoir une pensée 
spéciale  et  de  prier  pour  ces  centaines  de  femmes  et  enfants  qui  ont  été  tués,  blessés  et 
mutilés depuis toujours et continuent de l’être.  

Mais nous devons aussi sympathiser bien qu’ils soient moins nombreux avec les hommes qui 
subissent  le  même  sort.  Le  désespoir  des  victimes  de  violences  familiales  est  immense  et 
conduit souvent à des actes désespérés et à des formes de criminalité des plus affreuses. Ce 
type de criminalité est malheureusement très prévalant à Maurice dans les familles et fait les 
grands titres de la presse chaque semaine. La violence familiale est plus fréquente contre les 
femmes et les enfants mais il y a aussi d’autres victimes de violence familiale. 

106 

 
Maurice n’est pas encore arrivée à une démocratie élargie qui reconnaît officiellement 
tous  les  genres  qui  composent  la  nation  afin  de  mieux  les  protéger  et  leurs  assurer  un 
traitement équitable à tous les niveaux. Dans les grands pays démocratiques, il y a de grandes 
communautés religieuses souvent conservatrices mais contrairement à Maurice elles sont bien 
séparées  de  l’État  et  donc  les  autres  genres  sont  formellement  reconnus  sur  le  plan  légal 
indépendamment des lobbys religieux car la loi c’est pour tout le monde. 

Toutefois, je constate que, dans le présent amendement qu’on nous demande de voter, 
il  y  a  la  notion  de  ‘any  other  person  living  under  the  same  roof’,  dans  la  Section  2  de 
l’amendement  ce  qui  d’une  certaine  manière  peut  inclure  les  couples  composés  de  genres 
autre  que  les  deux  seuls  qui  sont  reconnus  dans  notre  législation.  Je  souhaite  que  dans 
l’application de cette loi la police et le judiciaire interprètent cette expression dans le sens le 
plus large comme dans les grandes démocraties. 

L’appellation du ministère est un ministère de l’égalité des genres, il faut que tous les 
genres soient traités sur un pied d’égalité dans les cas de violence domestique. Concernant 
l’expression  ‘living  under  the  same  roof’,  on  aurait  pu  préciser  plutôt  ‘entertaining’  ou 
‘having entertained an intimate relationship and living or not living under the same roof’ et 
cela afin de renforcer le droit des autorités à intervenir dans le cas des violences familiales 
lorsque  le  conjoint  et/ou  les  enfants  ne  vivent  pas  sous  le  même  toit  pour  une  raison 
quelconque. 

Un autre point que je veux soulever concerne la notion de ‘protection order’. J’aurais 
été  favorable  à  l’inclusion  des  deux  types  –  l’un  ‘protection  order’  normale  et  l’autre  ‘an 
urgent protection order’ pour les cas de violence très sévères qui risquent de basculer vers un 
meurtre, une agression d’une violence inouïe comme cela est trop souvent le cas. Il faudrait 
que  la  police  puisse  obtenir  des  ordres  de  protection  des  victimes  dont  les  vies  sont  très 
menacées dans tel ou tel contexte spécifique. 

Pour conclure, je laisse le soin à Madame la ministre de réfléchir aux points que j’ai 
soulevés  dans  le  souci  de  renforcer  la  portée  de  son  projet  d’amendement  et  de  décider 
d’apporter les changements suggérés. La raison en est que je pense que le gouvernement a 
une  majorité  massive  qui  est  suffisante  pour  lui  permettre  d’opter  pour  une  démocratie 
élargie, plus inclusive des minorités au sein de la nation.  

Merci. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Fowdar ! 

 
(6.08 p.m.) 

107 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. Let me first of all congratulate the hon. Minister for bringing this Bill to the 
House and I have no doubt that the hon. Minister is doing a great job and is leaving no stone 
unturned to improve family life in Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill brings changes to the law and put more weight to severely 
punish those who commit domestic violence. A tough law acts as a deterrent and discourages 
abuses in their acts. Bottom line Madam Speaker, the aim is to protect the victims from the 
abuses and there are a number of ways to do so. Ideally, we should target to avoid domestic 
violence rather than punish abuses of domestic violence as a last resort. The Bill is mostly 
punitive rightly so, but we need to be preventive as well. Madam Speaker, there are different 
stages  in  domestic  violence  before  it  culminates  to  physical  violence  and  in  many  cases 
leading to death. 

Efforts must be made to stop matters at an early stage rather than intervention at the 
late stage of physical violence or death. The main problem is: the victims usually take much 
time before they denounce the abuses and this in the hope that things will settle with their 
spouse,  but,  in  the  meantime,  they  are  severely  abused.  The  law  does  not  provide  Police 
intervention without any complaint on behalf of the victims and the victims are already weak 
and scared to depone against the abuses. 

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  just  like  we  have  neighbourhood  watch  to  track  down 
burglars we must initiate and allow similar forums to track down domestic violence. People 
including  neighbours  must  be  allowed  to  report  any  suspicious  case  of  domestic  violence 
whether  officially  or  anonymously.  This  must  be  acceptable  and  this  must  be  without  any 
cumbersome procedures. We have seen many cases of domestic violence resulting in serious 
physical injury or death where the neighbours and friends were well aware and did not or 
were not allowed to report the cases. I know that people are allowed to do so in the UK and 
elsewhere so why not in Mauritius? So, I would kindly request the hon. Minister to look into 
this possibility of introducing whistle-blowers to minimise cases of domestic violence.  

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is that, it is important to note that domestic violence 
does not always manifest as physical abuse. Emotional, psychological and financial abuse can 
often be just as extreme as physical violence. The tendency in Mauritius is to consider only 
physical violence as domestic violence. Physical violence is only a culmination of the other 

 

108 

types of domestic violence. Many abuses and victims and the public at large are not aware of 
the  other  aspects  of  domestic  violence  and  it  is  important  that  an  awareness  campaign  be 
launched.  I am glad to see all those terms included in the Bill now. Both the potential victims 
and abusers must be made aware of what is domestic violence, this may deter many cases 
right at an early stage.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is important to define the terms found in the Bill such 
as harassment, stalking, intimidation, emotional, psychological and financial abuse by giving 
examples for each one of them. I have chosen stalking behaviours to give a few examples 
which could have been spelt in the Bill. Stalking may be spelt out as repeated phone calls, 
text messages, voice messages, notes, gift, followed by either walking or in a vehicle. This 
will  clarify  matters  for  both  the  victims  and  the  Police.  The  Police  must  be  given  clear 
guidelines  on  where  their  actions  are  needed.  There  should  be  no  ambiguity  and  the 
guidelines must help the Police to take actions promptly. They must not wait for the Court to 
rule out as far as possible before taking action. Arrest and detention must be easy matters for 
them. 

Thirdly, it is not clear whether abuses after a breaking relation such as a divorce are 
punishable  in  the  same  manner  as  for  domestic  violence.  Such  relationship  may  not  be 
covered under the same roof definition. It is known that after a break of relation there is more 
tension  between  the  ex-partners  and  the  tendency  of  abuse  is  more  pronounced.  This  is 
because the dominating partner loses control and is therefore more frustrated. It will be good 
if the hon. Minister, in her summing up, would clarify this matter. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I believe that the Commissioner of Police needs to build up a 
dedicated  team  within  the  Police  Department  to  handle  domestic  violence.  This  team  -  as 
rightly mentioned by the hon. Minister, I was not aware that they are training already and that 
is  a  very  good  thing  -  Madam  Speaker,  must  be  thoroughly  trained  both  in  identifying 
domestic  violence  and  also  in  dealing  with  victims  and  abusers.  Domestic  violence  is  an 
epidemic affecting individuals in every community regardless of age, economic status, sexual 
orientation, religious belongings, cultures and educational standings. Therefore, it is highly 
important to have a dedicated and well-trained team of Police officers to deal with cases of 
domestic violence. 

Madam Speaker, it has also been reported on many occasions that the Police were late 
in  taking  actions  or  in  intervening  in  cases  of  domestic  violence.  This  can  only  add  up  to 

 

109 

make the situation worse. Domestic violence must be given its due importance by the Police 
and must not be considered as less important than other crimes. The Police must take prompt 
actions and must intervene promptly and more importantly, they should not make a joke out 
of it.  

Lastly,  Madam  Speaker,  in  most  cases  we  learn  that  victims  of  domestic  violence 
become victims of some Police officers who find it an opportunity to take advantage of the 
weak  victims.  It  is  also  reported  by  some  victims  that  they  are  verbally  abused  by  some 
Police officers; this discourages the victims to report their cases to the Police and helps to 
aggravate  the  cases  further.  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  therefore  very  important  that  cases  of 
domestic violence are treated diligently and with caution by the Police. I again, congratulate 
the hon. Minister for bringing this Bill to the House and I fully support the Bill. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I will now request the Deputy Speaker to take the Chair. 

At this stage, the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

(6.19 p.m.) 

Mr  G.  Lepoigneur  (Fifth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  M.  le 
président, j’accueille favorablement les amendements que l’honorable Mme. Aurore Perraud, 
ministre de l'Égalité des genres, du Développement de l'enfant et du Bien-être de la famille, 
que je félicite pour le bon travail qu’elle est en train d’accomplir et qu’elle a déjà accompli 
dans son ministère. Mais, permettez-moi, M. le président, d’élaborer un peu sur la violence 
domestique. 

M. le président, les violences faites aux femmes ne sont pas des problèmes individuels 
mais une question de société. Les inégalités entre hommes et femmes en sont le moteur. Les 
politiques  publiques  envisagent  pour  prévenir  et  combattre  la  violence  faite  aux  femmes 
peuvent  se  diviser  en  quatre  catégories :  police  et  justice,  santé,  éducation,  approche 
multisectorielle,  services  sociaux  et  développement  économique.  Le  système  policier  et 
judiciaire peut contribuer à la prévention et la réduction de la violence contre les femmes de 
différents  façons :  en  sanctionnant  les  agresseurs,  en  faisant  entendre  à  la  société  que  la 
violence physique ou sexuelle contre les femmes est un crime, en renforçant leur droit, en 
améliorant l’accès des femmes au système légal, en élargissant la gamme des problèmes de 

 

110 

procédure de preuve lors des poursuites criminelles, réduisant les mauvais traitements dont 
souffrent parfois les victimes de la part des propres institutions qui composent de système 
policier et judiciaire.  

En Amérique latine et dans les Caraïbes, les efforts pour améliorer les lois politiques 
relatives à la violence contre les femmes se sont concentrés sur l’élaboration de la ratification 
des conventions internationales qui fournissent un cadre légal pour appuyer les législations 
nationales et sur la promulgation des nouvelles législations spécifiques conçues pour lutter 
contre  la  violence  contre  les  femmes  et  sous  la  réforme  des  codes  nationaux  et  civils  et 
pénaux.  Ces  réformes  législatives  consistent  en  général  en  des  révisions  du  cadre  légal 
familial et civil pour réduire les discriminations contre les femmes et améliorer leurs droits en 
termes de mariage, divorce, propriété, héritage et garde des enfants et en des révisions de la 
pénale visant à durcir les sanctions dans le cas de violence domestique et enfin, des nouvelles 
législations en termes de procédures criminelles.  

Évidemment, M. le président, on aurait tort de l’oublier, ces réformes législatives ne 
constituent qu’une première étape, il faut ensuite les mettre en œuvre et pour le moment, peu 
a  été  fait  dans  ce  sens.  Les  obstacles  sont  nombreux :  manque  de  coordination  entre  les 
tribunaux dédiés aux affaires familiales et ceux dédiés aux affaires criminelles, réticences de 
la  police  ou  des  juges  à  enquêter  sur  des  cas  de  violence  domestique  ou  à  protéger  des 
femmes en danger, manque de volonté ou incapacité du système judiciaire dans ce second cas 
en général, par manque de ressources ou de méconnaissance de ce question, à appliquer les 
lois.  

Il  faut  ajouter  que  certaines  mesures  légales  pensées  pour  lutter  contre  la  violence 
contre les femmes peuvent s’avérer contre-productives. Ce fut par exemple le cas aux États-
Unis  où  les  lois  établissant  l’arrestation  obligatoire  de  l’agresseur,  dans  le  cas  de  violence 
domestique  il  a  été  établi  que  les  lois  conduises  à  une  augmentation  d’environ  60  %  du 
nombre  des  meurtres  des  femmes  par  leur  compagnon.  Ces  résultats,  en  première  vue, 
s’expliquerait la diminution du nombre de plaintes déposées par les victimes de violences qui 
auraient  suivi  l’approbation  de  ces  lois.  Les  raisons  pour  lesquelles  ces  lois  d’arrestation 
obligatoire  conduiraient  à  une  diminution  du  nombre  de  plaintes  ne  sont  pas  encore  bien 
connues. Il est possible que les agresseurs punissent leur victime encore une fois durement 
après une fois libérée, si c’est le cas il faudrait probablement durcir les procédures judiciaires 
et  pénales.  Il  se  peut  également  qu’il  soit  plus  difficile  pour  les  victimes  de  porter  plainte 
lorsque  cette  plainte  implique  une  peine  plus  dure.  Dans  tous  les  cas,  obligatoirement  une 

 

111 

arrestation  pour  l’agresseur  en  raison  de  ses  liens  intimes  qui  les  unissent  à  l’inverse  des 
mesures légales qui obligent le procureur à maintenir l’accusation même lorsque la victime 
préfère se rétracter, se traduirait par une augmentation du nombre de plaintes.  

Il faudrait donc prêter une attention particulière non seulement à l’effet dissuasif en 
incapacitant  de  produire  une  nouvelle  peine  pour  l’agresseur  mais  aussi  au  manque 
d’incitation  portée  plainte  qu’elle  peut  susciter  parmi  les  victimes.  Une  solution  serait  de 
mettre  en  place  les  politiques  qui  cherchent  à  redonner  du  pouvoir  aux  victimes,  des 
programmes qui leur proposent des services sur mesure en fonction de la personnalité de la 
femme battue ou du contexte familial. En ce lieu de place des politiques de l’inéluctabilité est 
finalement problématique. Dans tous les cas, ce résultat démontre que si besoin s’en fallait 
que  toute  mise  en  place  d’une  nouvelle  politique  publique  devrait  être  accompagné 
systématiquement de son évaluation. 

M. le président, par ailleurs, on cherche à améliorer la reforme du système policière et 
judiciaire  à  la  violence  faite  aux  femmes  en  améliorant  la  formation  des  personnels,  en 
sensibilisant cette problématique et en réorganisant les services de police, par exemple, avec 
la création d’unité spécialisée qui s’occupe exclusivement de ce type de cas et composé de 
femmes policières spécialement formées à cet effet.  

Enfin,  certaines  études  suggèrent  que  la  collaboration  et  l’appui  de  la  communauté 
constitue un élément essentiel de la réponse judiciaire face à la violence contre les femmes. 
D’autres  éléments  revêtent  une  importance  toute  particulière;  d’un  côté  faire  savoir  aux 
femmes qu’elles ont le droit à une vie libre de violence que c’est un droit, et d’un autre côté 
favorisé le soutien de la communauté aux femmes qui ont le courage de saisir la justice.  

M.  le  président,  dans  le  domaine  de  la  santé  également  on  cherche  à  améliorer  la 
réponse  du  secteur  de  la  santé  à  la  violence  faite  aux  femmes  en  termes  de  détection, 
d’orientation, de documentation et de conseils de détection aux victimes. Un autre objectif est 
de garantir l’accès des victimes au service de santé. On peut citer parmi l’initiative visant à 
atteindre ces objectifs, des réformes égales destinées à réguler le système médico-légal, par 
exemple, la multiplication des emplois d’infirmières légistes et spécialisées dans la collecte 
de preuves de préparation des cas légaux et des obligations personnelles de santé vis-à-vis des 
victimes de violences domestiques, des protocoles de santé nationaux, des lois pour réguler la 
médecine légale, on cherche également à renforcer la réforme de l’institution de santé à la 
violence de ce genre en développement l’information statistique hospitalière sur ce type de 

 

112 

violence, en approfondissant les connaissances de son personnel sur les liens contre violence 
et santé, en élaborant des procédures de détection et de dérivation des victimes, en améliorant 
la qualité de l’attention des soins appropriés aux victimes, par exemple, via la création des 
services spécialisés en renforçant la coordination des organisations non-gouvernementales et 
les  différents  acteurs  institutionnels  au  premier  rang  desquels  la  police  et  le  système 
judiciaire.  

M. le président, en éducation on recherche également à améliorer la réforme du secteur 
éducatif  à  cette  problématique.  Cela  passe,  par  exemple,  par  la  sensibilisation  de  son 
personnel à ces questions et à sa formation adéquate. La modification du contenu académique 
de façon à intégrer les problématiques de la violence du genre et des droits de l’homme. La 
mise  en  place  de  programme  de  prévention  de  la  violence  dans  les  écoles,  la  création  des 
services  spécialisés  destinés  à  accueillir,  conseiller  et  orienter,  s’il  le  faut  les  victimes  de 
violence, ou encore le remplacement des manuels scolaires qui véhiculent ces stéréotypes sur 
le genre. 

Une  approche  multisectorielle  est  aussi  importante.  Ce  dernier  type  d’interventions 
englobe les lois de politiques publiques qui cherchent à élargir les droits économiques des 
femmes relatifs aux questions de propriété et d’héritage et de réduire les discriminations dont 
elles sont victimes, les plans nationaux et multisectoriels de lutte contre la violence faite aux 
femmes, l’intégration de la prévention de la violence domestique lors de la conception des 
projets de développement économique et social; programmes de microcrédit ou de rénovation 
de l’habitat, par exemple. Les efforts faits pour entendre, améliorer, coordonner les services 
d’aide aux victimes, par exemple, les refuges, les services d’aide psychologique et légale, les 
lignes  de  téléphones  spécifiques;  le  développement  des  réseaux  locaux  et  nationaux 
d’organisations travaillant pour les droits, la sécurité et le bien-être des femmes en général et 
des victimes de violence en particulier. Les programmes de développement économique qui 
cherchent  à  renforcer  les  pouvoirs  des  décisions  des  femmes –  les  programmes  de 
microcrédit, d’aide aux développements des petits commerces, par exemple. 

Il faut associer à ces différentes interventions des stratégies de communication ou des 
ateliers  organisés  dans  les  communautés  qui  cherchent  à  changer  les  normes  culturels  en 
vigueur et les comportements individuels qui ont contribué à façonner. 

M.  le  président,  la  violence  envers  les  enfants  fait  aussi  partie  de  la  violence 
domestique et qui nous blesse tous. Quoi de plus naturel pour tout enfant d’avoir quelqu’un 

 

113 

qui prend soin de lui et assurer sa sécurité. Selon les recherches, les données relèvent que près 
de deux tiers des voies de fait et des infractions sexuelles sur les enfants et des jeunes étaient 
perpétrées  par  un  membre  de  leur  famille,  plus  de  la  moitié  de  ces  voies  de  fait  et  des 
infractions  dans  la  famille  étaient  commises  par  les  parents.  Les  dommages  peuvent  durer 
toute une vie. Un enfant qui a été victime de mauvais traitement est plus susceptible de vivre 
des relations violentes une fois parvenu à l’âge adulte. Et le cycle de destruction se poursuit. 

Nous devons tous prendre soin des enfants. Aujourd’hui, nous assumons davantage la 
responsabilité  d’intervenir  dans  la  violence  familiale  et  de  prévenir  la  violence  envers  les 
enfants, parce qu’elle doit cesser.  

Le  mauvais  traitement  des  enfants  renvoie  aux  mauvais  traitements  physiques, 
psychologiques, sociaux ou sexuels commis envers un enfant. Il blesse et met en danger la 
survie,  la  sécurité,  l’estime  de  soi,  la  croissance  et  le  développement  de  l’enfant.  Il  peut 
impliquer un seul incident ou une série d’incidents.  

La  violence  physique  est  l’usage  délibéré  de  la  force  contre  l’enfant,  d’une  manière 
telle  que  l’enfant  subit  un  préjudice  corporel  au  risque  de  subir  un.  La  violence  physique 
englobe  des  comportements  tels  que  secouer,  étouffer,  mordre,  donner  des  coups  de  pied, 
brûler,  empoisonner,  tenir  l’enfant  sous  l’eau  ou  tout  autre  usage  dangereux  et  nocif  de la 
punition.  

l’enfant  de  façon  à  causer  ou  à  risquer  de  causer  des 

La  violence  psychologique  renvoie  aux  actes  et  les  omissions  qui  nuisent  à  l’estime 
personnelle  de 
troubles 
comportementaux,  cognitifs,  émotionnels.  Par  exemple,  la  violence  psychologique  peut 
comprendre  des  menaces  verbales  et  le  dénigrement;  forcer  un  enfant  à  isolement  social; 
l’intimidation,  l’exploitation,  le  fait  de  terroriser  un  enfant  ou  d’avoir  couramment  des 
exigences déraisonnables à son endroit. 

La violence sexuelle englobe à la fois le harcèlement sexuel et l’activité sexuelle. Elle 
comprend des relations sexuelles et les tentatives de relations sexuelles ; inviter un enfant à 
toucher  ou  à  être  touché  sexuellement;  l’exhibitionnisme,  l’exploitation  sexuelle,  le 
harcèlement sexuel et le voyeurisme.  

Il y a négligence lorsque les besoins fondamentaux de l’enfant ne sont pas satisfaits. La 
négligence  physique  peut  comprendre  de  ne  pas  assurer  la  nourriture  de  l’enfant,  des 
vêtements, l’abri, la propreté, les soins médicaux et la protection adéquate contre le préjudice. 

 

114 

Il  y  a  négligence  émotionnelle  lorsque  les  besoins  d’amour,  d’acceptation,  de  sécurité  et 
d’estime de soi d’un l’enfant ne sont pas satisfaits.  

Les  enfants  se  trompent  et  mentent  rarement  à  ce  sujet.  La  majorité  des  cas  de 
violence physique comprennent une punition inappropriée, ce qui signifie que les autres cas 
sont  de  nature  plus  grave.    La  forme  la  plus  répandue  de  violence  sexuelle  consiste  à 
toucher ou à caresser les parties génitales de l'enfant, mais dans certains cas, il y a relation 
sexuelle complète ou tentative de relation sexuelle. 

Dans  bon  nombre  de  cas,  les  acteurs  présumés  sont  des  membres  de  la  famille  ou 
d'autres personnes apparentées. La majorité des cas de violence physique impliquent le père 
ou  la  mère,  mais  la  violence  sexuelle  est  habituellement  faite  par  d'autres  personnes 
apparentées ou des personnes non apparentées. 

Les  parents  qui  maltraitent  leurs  enfants  ont  souvent  eux-mêmes  eu  une  enfance 
difficile ou il y avait mauvais traitement des enfants. Ils ont souvent peu de soutien et ne 
savent  pas  comment  jouer  leur  rôle  parental  de  manière  adéquate.  La  famille  fonctionne 
souvent  mal  pour  ce  qui  est  de  la  résolution  de  problèmes,  de  la  communication  et  du 
contrôle du comportement. 

Souvent,  lorsqu'il  y  a  violence  conjugale,  il  y  a  aussi  mauvais  traitement  des 
enfants. L'exposition  à  la  violence  familiale  est  la  forme  la  plus  répandue  de  violence 
psychologique envers les enfants. 

Les études sur la violence familiale révèlent que même dans les cas où les enfants ne 
sont pas directement ciblés par la violence dans le foyer, le fait d'en être témoin peut leur 
faire du tort. Les enfants qui vivent des situations de violence familiale peuvent encourir des 
dommages corporels immédiats et permanents et même être tués. Ils peuvent aussi connaître 
des problèmes émotionnels, comportementaux ainsi que des problèmes de développement à 
court et à long termes, notamment une névrose post-traumatique. 

Dans certains cas de violence physique ou sexuelle, les victimes ont de gros problèmes 
de comportement, des relations perturbées avec leurs camarades, ils souffrent de dépression 
et  d'angoisse,  sont  violents  envers  les  autres,  leur  développement  a  du  retard,  leur 
fréquentation scolaire n'est pas assidue et leur comportement sexuel est inapproprié. 

M. le président, c’est connu le fait d'être témoin de violence familiale est aussi nocif 
que  de  l'avoir  vécue  directement.  Souvent,  les  parents  croient  avoir  protégé  leurs  enfants 
contre  la  violence  conjugale,  mais  les  recherches  montrent  que  les  enfants  voient  ou 

 

115 

entendent  de  nombreux  incidents  de  violence.  Les  enfants  qui  sont  témoins  de  violence 
familiale  souffrent  des  mêmes  conséquences  que  ceux  qui  ont  été  directement  victimes  de 
violence. En d'autres termes, un enfant qui est témoin de violence conjugale vit une forme de 
mauvais traitement des enfants. 

Les effets du mauvais traitement des enfants et de la violence familiale se manifestent 
de bien des façons. Voici quelques-uns des signes de mauvais traitements, surtout lorsqu'ils 
se manifestent ensemble ou qu'ils représentent un changement de comportement - blâme de 
soi,  sentiments  de  culpabilité  et  de  honte,  attitude  très  dépendante,  timidité  extrême, 
cauchemars intenses à répétition, solitude, accès de tristesse prolongés, retrait social, trouble 
d'angoisse de séparation, crainte des dangers,  crainte des personnes qui sont du même sexe 
que  l'agresseur,  appréhension  générale,  anxiété  et  phobies,  retards  dans  le  développement, 
maux  de  tête,  maux  de  ventre,  incontinence  d'urine  nocturne,  troubles  de  l'alimentation, 
automutilations ou brûlures, pensées suicidaires, dissociation mentale, comportement sexuel 
inapproprié;  estime  de  soi  extrêmement  faible,  difficulté  à  faire  confiance  aux  autres, 
difficulté  à  résoudre  des  problèmes,  problèmes  relationnels,  hauts  niveaux  de  colère  et 
d'agression, colères violentes, victime ou auteur de violence dans les fréquentations. 

Il est généralement très difficile pour des enfants qui sont victimes de violence ou de 
négligence  de  signaler  le  problème  à  quelqu'un.  C'est  pourquoi  il  importe  de  connaître  les 
signes de mauvais traitements et de savoir quoi faire à ce sujet. Nous avons tous l'obligation 
de signaler les cas de mauvais traitement des enfants, que ce soit l'enfant qui se confie à nous 
ou que nous ayons des doutes raisonnables à ce sujet. C'est la loi. 

Si un enfant vous dit qu'il est victime de violence - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

croyez-le; 
écoutez-le ouvertement et calmement; 
rassurez l'enfant et donnez-lui du soutien; 
dites à l'enfant tout ce qui s’est passé n’est pas de sa faute.  
écrivez ce que l'enfant vous dit, en utilisant les mêmes mots que l'enfant; 
communiquez à votre service de police local ou un organisme de services à 
l'enfance et à la famille. 

Il y aussi des moyens d'aider les enfants victimes de violence à guérir - 

• 

permettez-leur de briser le silence qui entoure la violence dans leur vie; 

 

• 
• 
• 

116 

renforcez leur capacité à se protéger physiquement et psychologiquement; 
renforcez leur estime de soi; 
offrez  un  milieu  sain  et  agréable  où  ils  pourront  vivre  des  expériences 
positives. 

Si vous êtes un parent, un membre de la famille ou un fournisseur de soins qui maltraite 
un enfant, vous pouvez obtenir de l'aide pour vous-même et pour l'enfant. Il n'est jamais trop 
tard pour faire cesser la violence familiale. Commencez dès aujourd'hui. 

Pour  terminer,  M.  le  président,  je  voterai  avec  l’amendement  de  cette  loi  afin  que 
chaque  mauricien  assume  sa  part  de  responsabilité  en  dénonçant  toute  forme  de  violences 
domestiques dont ils sont témoins afin de réduire les nombres de victimes. 

Je vous remercie, M. le président.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dookun-Luchoomun 

(6.34 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Eduation  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun) :  M.  le  président,  je  voudrais  en 
premier  lieu  féliciter  ma  collègue,  l’honorable  ministre  de  l’égalité  de  genre,  du 
développement de l’enfant et du bien-être de la famille d’être venue de l’avant avec ce projet 
de loi portant sur les amendements à the Protection from Domestic Violence Act. 

M.  le  président  comme  l’a  si  bien  souligné,  ma  collègue,  l’honorable  ministre,  il  est 
malheureux de constater qu’en dépit de l’existence des lois cadres, la violence domestique 
continue  toujours  à  faire  des  victimes  et  cela  plus  de  20  ans  après  Beijing.  Les  chiffres 
officiels, Madame la ministre vient de le dire, 1,626 cas de violence domestique enregistrés 
par  le  Family  Support  Bureau  du  ministère,  plus  de  4,000  cas  par  la  police.  Les  études 
menées par la société civile démontrent qu’une femme sur trois a, au moins une fois, connu 
une  forme  de  violence  domestique,  que  ce  soit  physique,  sexuelle,  économique  ou 
psychologique. Il est certain que plusieurs cas ne sont jamais rapportés et le nombre peut-être 
dépasserait  le  nombre  des  chiffres  officiels  de  cas  de  victimes.  Pourquoi ?  Par  peur  de 
représailles ? Certainement ! Et quels sont les conséquences ? Autant de personnes qui vivent 
dans la peur, dans la souffrance au quotidien, et aussi, combien de personnes perdent la vie ! 

A Maurice, depuis le début de l’année, il y a eu trois cas de femmes battues à mort par 
leurs  partenaires  intimes.  Et  cela  n’est  pas  le  cas  qu’à  Maurice.  A  travers  le  monde,  nous 

 

117 

notons la même chose. En France, en 2015, 134 femmes sont décédées en une année et les 
décès occasionnés par la violence domestique, perpétuée par leurs partenaires intimes. 84,000 
cas de viols répertoriés, 37% de ces cas commis par le conjoint et 17% des cas par d’autres 
membres de la famille.  

Pour l’année 2012, l’ONU chiffre le pourcentage de femmes victimes d’homicide par 
un  partenaire  intime  à  50%.  L’Australie  va  plus  loin  encore,  on  parle  là-bas  carrément  de 
violence domestique comme un silent killer avec 78 cas de mortalité rien qu’en 2015 et une 
personne décédant par semaine, précisément, due à la violence domestique. 

The situation becomes even more alarming, Mr Deputy Speaker, when we consider 
the psychological price that has to be paid by a spouse or any other inmate of the household 
where  domestic  violence  is  rampant.  This  psychological  violence  can  be  seen  even  in 
situations  where  there  is  repeated,  unceasing  upbraiding  and  negative  commenting  on  an 
action carried out by a member of the family. 

Et c’est là, M. le président, que je viens féliciter Madame la ministre pour avoir inclus 
dans ce projet de loi une définition plus élargie pour commencer pour le domestic violence et 
prenant en compte maintenant même l’effet des menaces. C’est très difficile pour une femme 
ou un conjoint d’aller à la police, faire comprendre qu’il/qu’elle a été menacé(e) et expliquer 
qu’elle a été l’impact de cette menace sur lui/elle, sur ses proches, sur ses enfants. Et là, je 
dois souligner, c’est vrai que la violence domestique n’est pas seulement un cas qui affecte 
les femmes, mais, bien sûr, à moindre mesure, même les hommes. N’empêche, la violence ne 
peut être acceptée ! Et bien sûr, tous les différents points avancés par Madame la ministre 
dans le projet de loi, tous les amendements apportés, bien sûr, nous aideront à revoir l’aspect, 
la façon dont on traite les cas de violence domestique. 

Il  est  clair  que  la  violence  domestique  est  un  phénomène  qui  touche  tous  les  pays, 
quel que soit la classe sociale, la  race ou le niveau d’éducation des personnes concernées. 
Mais,  bien  sûr,  M.  le  président,  on  ne  peut  aspirer  à  une  société  où  prime  le  respect  et  la 
sécurité si on laisse perdurer cette situation. Il nous faut, donc, agir car nous avons tous une 
contribution à apporter. Et nos actions doivent se situer, bien sûr, à plusieurs niveaux, mais à 
précisément  deux  niveau.  Il  y  en  a  d’autres,  comme  je  vous  l’ai  dit,  mais  je  m’attarderai 
seulement sur deux. 

En premier lieu, la législation. Madame la ministre a parlé en détails des différents 
aspects des amendements qu’elle apporte. Il  y a aussi des législations dans à peu près 119 

 

118 

pays et 125 pays où ils ont des lois sur le sexual harrassment ; 52 pays où ils ont des lois sur 
le marital rape, etc. Mais, ce que nous avons noté, c’est que très souvent, malgré les lois, 
malgré la législation, la violence domestique continue à perdurer. Et là, je ne parle pas des 
différentes  formes  de  stalking,  de  threatening  et  tous  les  autres  aspects.  Mais,  ce  qui  est 
important,  c’est  qu’on  arrive  à  nous  assurer  que  les  jeunes  dans  un  pays,  les  enfants  sont 
préparés de telle sorte à ce qu’ils puissent faire face et résister à n’importe quelle forme de 
violence,  que  ce  soit  l’intimidation,  le  harcèlement,  le  trac,  le  mauvais  traitement,  les 
menaces, les insultes, les actes de brutalité. Tout cela, on doit prévenir pour empêcher à ce 
que nos enfants soient victimes de ces types de violence. Mais, le plus important, comme je 
l’ai  dit  tout  à  l’heure,  c’est  la  préparation.  Comment  est-ce  qu’on  prépare  nos  jeunes ? 
Comme est-ce qu’on s’assure que la génération qui monte ne soit pas victime de la violence 
et ne soit pas elle-même le perpetrator ? Alors, tout cela, bien sûr, dépendra de l’éducation 
que nous donnons à nos jeunes. Alors, que faisons-nous ? Je profite là d’une petite parenthèse 
pour dire que c’est très important d’apprendre à nos jeunes comment gérer leurs émotions, 
comment  s’exprimer,  comment  démontrer  leur  colère,  leur  joie,  leur  excitation,  parce  que, 
très souvent, si on n’apprend pas à nos jeunes comment gérer les émotions, ils n’arrivent pas 
à savoir qu’elle est la meilleure façon de s’exprimer. 

Au niveau des écoles, nous avons commencé  à travailler de sorte à ce qu’il y ait un 
change in mindset. Il va falloir, bien sûr, qu’il y ait ce qu’on appelle un shift in mentality, an 
attitudinal shift. Comment changer les attitudes?  

We, in Mauritius, are labouring under the fallacious notion of gender inequality. Our 
children need to be properly educated such that the concept of gender equality becomes part 
of the DNA.  

Très souvent, on a tendance à dire aux garçons: ‘On ne frappe pas une fille!’ Mais ce 
qu’il nous faut dire à nos enfants, c’est que la violence n’est pas une solution. Ce n’est pas 
seulement la fille qu’on ne doit pas frapper, on ne doit pas utiliser la violence, peu importe 
dans quelle situation. 

Both men and women have the same rights. They are born equal and mutual respect 
should be the major principle guiding the relation between them. Women have to be treated 
on equal grounds and no crime, injustice or discrimination towards them should be tolerated. 

Et cela, on doit le faire au niveau de l’école. Les enfants en grandissant doivent savoir 
que filles et garçons sont égaux et qu’il n’y pas de discrimination à faire et il faut comprendre 

 

119 

que l’autre est aussi bon dans n’importe quel domaine que ce soit. Et  c’est là que je viens 
ouvrir une parenthèse et dire aux personnes qui pensent que la mixité à l’école n’est pas une 
bonne chose, qu’au contraire, la mixité à l’école apprendra à ces jeunes de respecter l’autre et 
de savoir comment se comporter en présence de l’autre, que ce soit la fille ou le garçon. 

M.  le  président,  avec  votre  permission,  je  voudrais  faire  une  petite  parenthèse  sur 
d’autres actions prises par mon ministère. Je viens de vous parler de la gestion des émotions, 
mais il y a aussi l’introduction de l’enseignement des droits humains au secondaire et cette 
initiative a été très bien accueillie. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the fact is that we are in the process of making our youth 
realise that they need to adopt and use other skills and competencies that will facilitate their 
entry into adulthood. But, as importantly, we have to inculcate the mindset in our youth that 
they should not take any form of domestic violence lying down and keep quiet about it. We 
have to educate them. So, how do we educate them? 

First of all, we have to let the  youth know what are the various forms of domestic 
violence. Very often, some people think it is normal to be insulted, it is normal to be called 
names, it is normal to be bullied and this is the sad story about it. Very many people, maybe a 
man or a woman, let’s put it this way, tend to accept being ill-treated, they think that it is 
normal  and  they  do  not  realise  that  they  are  equal  to  others  and  they  should  have  no 
inferiority complex no matter in what situation. So, this is where we need to make sure that 
educating people starts, not only at home, in school, but should also be done at the level of 
the community, in social centres. 

Therefore, we need to invest in training resource persons who would be in a better position to 
teach our young people and inculcate in them the values that are required for a serene nation. 

 Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, domestic violence is an emotive issue, a very complex one. 
It will be critical that resource persons, as  I have said, maybe at schools or in community 
centres, bring about the proper change in mentality. I was telling you about the increase in 
education  on  domestic  violence  and  abuse  and  to  encourage  people  to  denounce  it  and  to 
disclose violence whether it is at home or elsewhere. 

It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister,  has  talked  about 
spouses and has enlarged the definition of spouses to include former partners because very 
often we had heard cases where after a divorce we find that the former partner is still coming 
and perpetrating violence on the ex-partner. 

120 

 
Now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I think that the more we talk about it, the more we will 
be saying that we all are against forms of violence. So, I won’t take more time of this august 
Assembly and I will end by saying that I congratulate the hon. Minister. I am sure that we 
will have the support of one and all. I’ll invite all Members of the National Assembly to vote 
without any hesitation for this amended Bill. 

Il  y  va  de  l’intérêt  premier  de  notre  pays  et  du  bien-être  de  toutes  les  cellules 

familiales.  

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

(6.46 p.m.) 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): First of all,  I have to thank the 
hon. Minister for bringing this piece of law and right at the beginning, I am telling you that I 
will give full support to this amendment. I think the hon. Minister has said it in her opening 
speech, but I will need to give my contribution to this law. I won’t be long. I will talk on the 
complexity of domestic violence and how it is complex to apply this law. 

As  you  may  know,  in  democracy,  laws  are  made  to  protect  people  contrary  to  an 
authoritarian system where laws are made to repress. Amendment to the existing law on the 
protection from domestic violence is being made tonight surely because victims are not fully 
protected and abusers get away too easily when the actual law is applied.  

Before going further, we have to understand that any form of abuse between intimate 
partners be it physical, sexual, psychological and emotional is domestic violence. With this 
law, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, victims in their hard times will have more support from the 
Enforcement Officers whereby officers will no longer treat those forms of violence as just 
domestic  dispute.  Now,  it  will  be  considered  as  a  crime  when  one  person  attacks  another 
person.  

However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, dealing with domestic violence is such a complex 
issue  as  I  have  told  you.  I  am  sure  that  the  Police,  judges  and  other  people  are  already 
confronted  with  numerous  challenges  while  dealing  with  domestic  violence.  By  trying  to 
understand why victims stay, it is very puzzling to Enforcement Officers and Judges. In most 
cases, victims do not want their relationship to end and that is where it is complex. What they 
want  is  that  the  abuse  and  the  battering  stop.  Therefore,  by  giving  more  powers  to 

 

121 

Enforcement Officers, will this address the issue of protecting victims from violence? One 
has to understand that victims know their abusers better than anyone else. Victims are usually 
trapped by the threats that the abusers use like, for example, if she leaves, he will kill the pet; 
win custody of children or hurt the children. So, how do we address those issues? What I am 
trying to say here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is to highlight the complex nature of domestic 
violence. Making tougher laws is good. It is a very good step by the hon. Minister, but that is 
not enough. We should not just give more power to arrest and then to punish abusers; we also 
need in parallel appropriate setting to protect victims from threats other than battering as a 
result of them reporting their abusers. How are we going to do that? This law is meant to deal 
with  abusers.  Now,  having  dealt  with  the  abusers,  what  need  to  be  done  then  to  prevent 
victims,  mostly  battered  women,  from  feeling  ashamed,  isolated,  embarrassed  and 
threatened? What kind of support we need to give them? Now, the partner is in prison, what 
kind of support will they have to cope with single parenting and low household income? How 
will  they  get  access  to  safety  and  support?  There  is  a  realistic  fear  that  the  abusers  will 
become more violent if the victims attempt to leave. So, as a consequence all those involved 
in dealing with piloting  domestic violence are needed to be fully equipped to address those 
complex issues. 

Rodrigues  is  not  spared  from  this  scourge.  If  you  would  look  at  some  figures.  We 
have  approximately  10,000  families  in  Rodrigues,  a  small  island,  but,  in  2012,  there  have 
been  222  reported  cases  of  domestic  violence.  That  makes  approximately  19  cases  every 
month. So, this is such an important issue to be addressed.  

I have spoken this morning to the Deputy Chief Commissioner who is responsible in 
the areas of Gender, Family Welfare and Child Development and she shares the same view 
with regard to that problem. She has told me that she is working on an Action Plan to fight 
domestic violence in Rodrigues and she welcomes this law. In addition to that, she told me 
that legislation and prosecution is a good idea, but we need to go further than that, as said by 
the hon. Minister, that is, capacity building - to be with the Police and other people.  

She also told me that we need to focus on prevention and awareness so as to sensitise 
the public on domestic violence; to make them more aware so that they can report those cases 
and to increase as well the visibility on domestic violence in the educational curriculum. She 
told  me:  we  need  to  put  the  media  on  board  so  as  they  can  report  most  of  the  cases  of 
domestic  violence.    We  need  to  have  a  very  good  coordination,  research,  monitoring  and 
evaluation as well. 

122 

 
So, having said that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, all I want to do is to raise my concern 
on  the  complexity  in  dealing  with  domestic  violence.  If  the  victims  want  to  end  the 
relationship,  it  is  very  easy  to  apply  this  law,  but  if  the  victims  do  not  want  to  end  their 
relationship  but  just  to  palliate  the  abusers  then  it  becomes  more  difficult.  That  is  what  I 
wanted to raise tonight. I am sure that the hon. Minister is a very able Minister. I think if she 
comes with another law people will start calling her ‘iron lady’.  I am sure the hon. Minister 
is a very able Minister and I think if she comes with another law, people will start calling her 
‘Iron Lady’. I am sure that she will be able because she looks after welfare of family as well. 
I am sure she is not here to destroy family and I am sure she will get the right balance to fine-
tune so as to deal with such problem. 

 I thank you for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Monty! 

(6.55 p.m.) 

Mrs J. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): M. le 
président,  soyez  d’abord  remercié  de  me  permettre  d’intervenir  sur  cette  loi  dont  les 
amendements  sont  attendus  par  toutes  les  victimes  de  violences  de  ce  pays  mais  que 
redoutent certainement ceux chez qui la violence est une seconde nature. Il était temps, M. le 
président,  d’aérer  une  nouvelle  fois  le  Domestic  Violence  Act  de  1997,  car  il  est  un  fait 
indéniable que la violence ait atteint son paroxysme et que notre chère île Maurice couvre en 
son sein de nombreux violeurs de la paix et de l’harmonie familiale.  

Il était donc grand temps, M. le président, que provision soit faite pour des sanctions 
plus sévères qui viendraient stopper ces grands élans de violence qui chez nous ont pris ces 
derniers temps des proportions plus qu’alarmante. M. le président, ces amendements viennent 
démontrer la volonté de la ministre de tutelle traduisant ainsi le souhait de ce gouvernement 
de venir rétablir ce qui a pris de nos jours un pli de barbarie. Se manifestant par des crimes de 
plus en plus atroces, il va  

sans dire que la cible préférée des agresseurs demeure la femme, l’épouse, la concubine.  

M. le président, la violence chez nous a atteint des proportions démesurées, femme 
saucisson, coupée au grinder, violentée, violée, assassinée, balancée dans la nature dans des 
sacs-poubelles,  disposée  dans  des  bouches  d’égout,  étranglée,  ébouillantée,  défigurée  au 
cutter  comme  à  l’acide,  brûlée  vive  et  j’en  passe,  car  les  recettes  de  barbarie  horrifient  et 
horripilent.  L’horreur  est  à  son  comble,  M.  le  président.  Il  était  plus  que  temps  qu’une 

 

123 

ministre  responsable  et  sensible  à  la  cause  humaine  et  plus  précisément  à  la  cause  de  la 
femme, de l’enfant et de la famille vienne rétablir ce qui manquait au bien-être des familles 
mauriciennes où sévit la violence et qu’un gouvernement ayant à cœur le développement sain 
des enfants de l’île Maurice viennent leur permettre, dans une certaine  mesure, de ne plus 
subir  autant  de  violence,  en  durcissant  les  lois  envers  les  transgresseurs  de  la  paix  et  du 
respect d’autrui. 

On me dira peut-être, M. le président, que la violence n’est pas perpétrée contre les 
femmes uniquement et que les cas d’hommes battus existent aussi. Mais vous conviendrez, 
M.  le  président,  que  le  nombre  de  ces  cas  est  nettement  inférieur  et  que  parmi  les  cas 
jusqu’ici rapportés ne figurent aucun cas d’homme battu, tué, balancé au milieu des ordures, 
ou coupé entièrement au grinder ou encore réduit en pièces détachées. Non, M. le président, 
pas encore toutefois … 

(Interruptions) 

Pas encore, pas encore! Attendons-voir! 

(Interruptions) 

Toutefois, ceci ne vient en aucun cas excuser les femmes violentes qui seront aussi passibles 
d’amende ou d’emprisonnement quand et si elle le mérite. 

Venons-en maintenant à l’interprétation du mot ‘violence’ ayant pour racine le mot 
‘viol’  qui  implique  usurpation,  non-respect,  et  qui  comprend  aussi  violer  et  par  extension 
violenter, est prévu dans ces nouveaux amendements le fait d’infliger volontairement coups 
et blessures à toute personne vivant sous le même toit et même de menacer ou de frapper. 
Même la menace sera sanctionnée si bien sûr le cas est rapporté. On ose à peine imaginer, M. 
le président, ce voyage rapide d’une main leste devant trouver où se nicher quand l’agresseur 
pense à ce qu’il attend, l’image des barreaux arrêterait bien des violents invétérés. Cela ferait 
rire les oiseaux ou chanter les abeilles comme dit la chanson et les mains lestes devront en 
prendre le restent; amende, poursuite, prison. 

M. le président, je me garderai de commenter les différentes clauses apportées à ce 
projet de loi, mes honorables collègues ayant longuement commenté sur le sujet. Cependant, 
M.  le  président,  si  la  loi  vient  punir  l’acte  donc,  l’action  même  d’agir  violemment  il  n’en 
demeure pas moins qu’on ne pourrait éradiquer la violence en tant que telle. Les violeurs de 
la société ayant agi tellement de façon criminelle que les choses se sont dégradées. Faut-il 

 

124 

encore que la victime choisisse de se mettre sous l’ombrelle de la loi ? Pour se faire, M. le 
président, je suis convaincue …  

(Interruptions) 

qu’il faut vulgariser les clauses les plus importantes de cette loi, exposer, marteler les  esprits, 
conscientiser. Nul besoin de rappeler ce que le visuel a de particulier, c’est un rappel constant 
qui oblige à voir même si on refuse de regarder et d’en faire sienne. La conscience générale 
j’en suis convaincue sera éveillée en parallèle. Si un rappel de la loi est enclenché de façon 
systématique,  beaucoup  plus  explicite  et  beaucoup  plus  visible,  il  serait  peut-être  bon  de 
suggérer  à  la  Ministre  de  tutelle  la  possibilité  d’exposer  l’essentiel  de  ses  nouveaux 
amendements à la vue du publique en général. À travers des panneaux comme cela a été dans 
le cadre d’un passé pour le ministère du Tourisme afin de préserver l’environnement et sur 
lesquels on disait ‘to jeter to payer’. 

Il pourrait y avoir, à travers le pays, des panneaux de rappel où le message serait clair, 
du type ‘to bater to tasser’, R50,000 ou un an de prison. Deuxièmement ‘to rebater to tasse 
plisse’, R100,000 ou deux ans de prison, troisièmement ‘to rebat encore to tasse nette’ cinq 
ans prison pu toi. Ce serait, à mon avis, M. le président, un message fort de la loi en vigueur 
et un rappel constant des risques à encourir si on cède à ses tendances dominatrices à travers 
toutes  les  formes  de  violence  comme  défini  dans  les  nouvelles  dispositions  du  Domestic 
Violence Act 2016. 

M.  le  président,  cela  aiderait,  j’en  suis  sûre,  les  hommes  violents  à  ne  pas  laisser 
fleurir leurs germes de violence et à leur rappeler qu’il serait mieux de songer à utiliser leur 
main autrement et à dicter à leur bras qui se lève d’habitude abruptement et trop facilement – 
‘ô  bras,  suspends  ton  vol’  car  désormais  ce  mouvement  rapide,  gratuit  et  violent  vers  la 
victime et qui atteint la personne dans sa dignité humaine sera payant. 

M. le président, si les nouvelles dispositions revues vers plus de sévérité pousseraient 
vers une attitude plus responsable, il n’en demeure pas moins qu’elles invitent l’agresseur à 
s’amender  et  appeler  à  naître  un  homme  nouveau,  capable  de  se  libérer  de  son  besoin  de 
blesser l’autre physiquement, verbalement ou alors sexuellement.  

M.  le  président,  cette  loi  se  veut  un  rempart  de  sécurité  comme  une  chance  de 
récupération,  un  filet  de  sauvetage  pour  l’agresseur  ou  l’agressé.  Elle  vise  à  libérer  les 
victimes  de  violence  domestique  des  horreurs  de  leur  quotidien  et  permettent  aux  familles 
vivant  sous  la  violence  de  retrouver  la  paix.  Cependant,  la  question  qui  demeure  est : 

 

125 

l’intensité  visible  de  la  violence  de  nos  jours  sera-t-elle  freinée  avec  les  nouvelles 
dispositions  légales  ou  sera-t-il  nécessaire  d’amender  la  loi  une  cinquième  fois  ou  alors 
carrément criminaliser la violence intra-domestique ou extra-domestique dans le code pénal. 

Sur ces interrogations, M. le président, je mets quelques points de suspension à mon 
intervention  en  remerciant  les  honorables  membres  de  l’assemblée  pour  leur  attention 
paisible, aimable et pacifique et je félicite la ministre de tutelle pour être venue avec cette loi, 
brandir le couperet envers tous les violents de notre société mauricienne.  

M. le président, sur ce, je vous remercie. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

(7.05 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  Bill.  I 
would like to congratulate the hon. Minister and her team for coming forward with the list of 
amendments. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the issue of fight against domestic violence should not be 
narrowed down to an issue of legislation only. I believe, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the 
legal  policies  should  be  accompanied  also  with  social  policies,  and  I  would  like  to 
congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  once  again  because,  in  her  speech,  I  could  read  she  has 
described her intention, her priorities and we can see clearly that the priorities are not only 
the legislation.  In as far back as,  I think, in November 2007, Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir, the 
former Government came forward with - in collaboration with UNDP, the Ministry of Gender 
Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare - a decision to work on a National Action 
Plan  on  domestic  violence.  We  do  not  do  politics  in  such  issues,  but  I  don’t  know  if  the 
National Action Plan was implemented, but what I have read is that there were, at that time, 
five strategic objectives which were defined and I believe that it gives, even today, those five 
strategic  objectives.  I  believe  they  are  tools  that  still  today  can  be  used  to  define  an 
appropriate action plan for the fight against domestic violence and I am going to quote those 
five objectives, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that I consider highly valuable - 

(i) 

(ii) 

improving  legislation  on  domestic  violence  and  strengthening  of  the  justice 
system and agencies response; 
appropriate accessible, timely coordinated multiagency responses and support 
to all victims and children who need it; 

 
(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

126 

sensitise and change attitude to prevent domestic violence from happening in 
the first place; 
promote responsible reporting, advocacy, sensitisation and a forum by media 
specialist  to  encourage  the  comments  at  large  to  discuss  domestic  violence, 
and 
undertake  research  and  studies  on  domestic  violence,  strengthen  capacity 
building and set up an appropriate mechanism for monitoring and evaluation 
of  National  Action  Plan  to  combat  domestic  violence  for  the  promotion  of 
family welfare. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when we look at these strategic objectives that were defined, 
I see the hon. Minister is having these priorities in mind and I think that it is a very good 
beginning.  

The second issue that I wanted to address. First, I want to emphasise on the fact that it 
is important that social policies as well are taken into consideration side-by-side with legal 
issues and I have gone through the Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I have some comments 
on the Bill, on the definition of ‘domestic violence’, itself, and I quote - 

“(…) “domestic violence” includes any of the following acts committed by a person 
against his spouse, a child of his spouse or another person living under the same roof 
– (…).” 

We do not have any definition of that ‘another person’. We might ask ourselves, somebody 
living under the same roof, if a tenant is living under the same roof, sometimes you have a 
tenant in a house, a stranger living under the same roof, do we consider that person to be in a 
domestic  relationship?  In  the  Australian  jurisdiction  domestic  relationship,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  has  been  clearly  defined,  and  I  believe  that  in  this  Bill  as  well,  we  need  to 
clearly define what we mean by ‘another person’.  

My second comment, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, would be on stalking, under section 2, 
paragraph (c), as pointed out by hon.  Fowdar,  I believe that it is important that we define 
‘stalking’. In legislation in South Africa, the House would note that, there as well, stalking is 
an  offence  under  domestic  violence,  the  Act,  but  there  it  is  defined  clearly  as  ‘repeatedly 
following,  pursuing  or  accosting  the  complainant’.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  is  a 
definition from the Act of South Africa. We might not be taking the same definition, but what 

 

127 

is important is that we come with a definition of stalking so that the courts have, I believe, the 
possibility of clearly commenting, judging on the offence of stalking.  

Still,  under  this  definition  of  domestic  violence,  I  see  an  amendment  that  has  been 
circulated  under  paragraph  (h)  where  the  issue  of  depriving  the  spouse  or  other  person  of 
resources; what I wanted to suggest as well, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I believe that depriving 
the  spouse  or  call  the  spouse  or  the  other  person,  the  victim,  there  might  be  an  issue  of 
domestic violence also when you are depriving the victim of property or household effects 
where that victim has an interest. If you are depriving him of property and household effects 
where that victim has an interest, I believe, there as well you have got a case for domestic 
violence and this has be taken into consideration. But we are talking of depriving, we might 
as well be talking of disposal as well, there might be cases where we call it the respondent 
spouse might also be involved with the disposal of property or household effects belonging to 
the victim. I believe these issues will have to be probably taken on board and try to see if it 
can be included in the Act.  

Another  concern  or  rather  a  proposal  that  I  have,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  on 
Section 11 where we are giving more powers to Enforcement Officers, and I see that there 
has  been  actually  an  amendment  to  this  part  where  an  Enforcement  Officer  might  file  an 
application on behalf of the victim, previously in the amendment it was when ‘as a result of 
an injury’. This was in the amendment that was being proposed, but now, this part has been 
deleted ‘as a result of being injured’. I think it is dangerous to leave this open like this, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. I believe that an Enforcement Officer, this bit has to be clarified, ‘the 
Enforcement Officer will act on behalf of the victim’, I believe it might be okay if you put ‘as 
a result of being injured’, but as the case in the legislation in South Africa maybe we will 
have to take other cases as well - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

one, is as a result of being injured; 
second case might be when the victim is a minor; 
third, when the victim is mentally retarded;  
fourth, when the victim is unconscious, and  
fifth, when the person, the court is satisfied is unable to provide the required 
consent.  

I  believe  this  is  another  proposal  that  I  will  be  having  on  this  section  and  a  final 
proposal that I have on this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is when we are giving powers to the 
Assistant Superintendent to arrest, there are two cases where this is possible. Firstly, when 

 

128 

there is physical injury and, secondly, when he has reason to suspect that a person has failed 
to comply with any Domestic Violence Order.   

I believe that where physical injury has ensured, is not enough, I would suggest that we 
move a bit further and I also propose: ‘also in a case where physical injury is likely to be 
ensured’.   In that  case as well, the Assistant Superintendent should be  given the power of 
arrest.  

Again, on the amendments being proposed on this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am 
not  agreeable  in  the  case  of  penalty  that  on  third  conviction  a  person  is  sentenced  to 
imprisonment, that is, somebody who is convicted three times for stalking goes directly to 
prison. I am not agreeable to this. I propose that we have to be flexible. I don’t mean to say 
that we have to be flexible towards the victims, but leave flexible towards the Court; leave 
the Court to decide.  We keep the five years’ imprisonment, but it should be accompanied by 
either  fine  and  five  years’  imprisonment  as  the  case  in  parts  (a)  and  (b).  These  are  my 
comments on the amendments being proposed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Finally, I have to say a few words on the issue of marital rape.  Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  I  think  marriage  is  not  a  licence  for  sex.  I  am  fully  in  favour  of  the  introduction  of 
criminalising  marital  rape,  but  I  think  we  have  to  give  ourselves  time.  I  would  again 
congratulate the hon. Minister.  I am going to read a statement that she made this Sunday in 
‘Weekend’ of 05 June, where she stated – 

“Le problème réside dans le manque de structures. Les abris pour femmes victimes de 
violence sont bondés et il arrive que faute de place, la victime soit obligée de revenir 
vivre  dans  la  maison  où  réside  son  agresseur.  Il  faut  donc  augmenter  le  nombre  de 
shelters pour les femmes et les enfants victimes de violence. Pour le moment, il existe 
20 shelters — 13 gérés par les ONG et 6 par le ministère.” 

I  believe  we  keep  on  talking  about  women  rights,  but  we  forget  that  there  is  the  issue  of 
protection  that  has  to  be  taken  on  board  and  I  believe  that  we  are  not  prepared  yet  for 
criminalising marital rape.  It might be coming gradually, but we have to ensure that we have 
les encadrements et les ressources nécessaires pour pouvoir passer à cette étape-là.  

Once  again,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  and  her  team  for  coming 

forward with these amendments and, of course, I am going to vote for the Bill.  

Thank you very much, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

 

129 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 (7.19 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Thank you very much, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I was looking at the piece of legislation that 
is  being  amended  and  I  have  listened  to  only  a  few  of  the  hon.  Members  who  have 
intervened. I do apologise to the hon. Minister for not having been here when she made her 
address because, I think, it was important for me to be here but, unfortunately, there has been 
some change in the agenda, provoked by our able hon. Rutnah, I believe.  He has managed by 
some  stroke  of  genius  to  shorten  the  proceedings  today.    In  so  doing,  he  has  now,  on  his 
conscience, me not having been able to complete my prayers and rush to his call. So, I will 
live with it - I am joking.   

Anyway, I thank hon. Rutnah for letting me know that I had to come here, and I thank 
you also, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for giving me an opportunity to address this Assembly on 
a very important piece of legislation. 

Very often, when a Minister presenting such a piece of legislation, the first thing that 
comes to her mind, I gather, is, what is the speaker going to say; I mean, is he agreeable or 
not agreeable?  So, let me just answer right away and lay her fears to rest. We are, on this 
side of the House, agreeable with any effort that is made to ensure that we can eradicate to 
the best of our ability, the serious issues of domestic violence. For that and the effort that is 
being put in, let me put it very simply: congratulations!   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will not delve into a long speech. We have heard a lot of 
congratulations coming from that side of the House, joining me as well in the congratulations. 
But allow me to say that when reading this piece of legislation, I was quite disturbed because 
it  made  me  realise  something,  and  maybe  we  should  all,  for  a  minute,  stop  and  start 
questioning the way of living of our country. For once, it has nothing to do with who is in 
Government or who is not in Government. There is a serious situation in Mauritius, that is, 
domestic violence.  

Many Governments have tried, over the years, to come and bring in amendments to try 
to address these issues:  how do  you address it; how do  you ensure that domestic violence 
goes down. And every Minister who is in charge of this particular issue, I gather, one of the 
fears that most probably the Minister has is when she looks at the figures every month. She 
does not want to see it to go up, but she wants to see it go down.  She does not want to see 

 

130 

women  who  are  hurt,  damaged  not  only  physically  but  psychologically  as  well;  children; 
people living as husband-and-wife; concubines.   You don’t want to see  people  get injured 
because of domestic violence. You don’t want to see people get injured because of domestic 
violence.  Those are the concerns of a responsible Minister.  

Unfortunately,  over  the  years,  what  we  have  seen  is  that  all  attempts  –  the  intention 
may be there - have not really worked out to be able to drastically reduce domestic violence. 
So,  what  is  the  solution?  And  when  I  look  at  this  piece  of  legislation,  there  are  certain 
sections of this law that really disturb me, as I have said. Let me get to the first one: Duties 
and powers of Police officers.   

When I read that legislation now, clause 11A (1) says – 

“The  Police  shall  act  with  diligence  in  any  case  where  an  offence  under  this  Act  is 
reported to it.” 

What type of society are we?  This is the question we have to ask ourselves.  What type of 
society have we become, for us, as legislators, to have to put in a piece of legislation that the 
Police have to act diligently?  I am not here in anyway being judgemental or criticising the 
good  intent  of  the  hon.  Minister  in  presenting  this  piece  of  legislation.  But  let  us,  for  a 
minute, pause and wonder not only as legislators, but a lot of us who are here are lawyers. 
People amongst us have also been on the bench and have a lot of experience in delivering 
judgements, have listened to evidence, have heard Police officers cross-examining, enquiring 
officers. Some may be - if I am not mistaken - have worked for the State Law Office. Now, 
imagine what type of society we have become if we are to have to put in a legislation, that 
‘the  Police  have  to  act  diligently  where  an  offence  under  this  Act  is  reported’.      This  is 
elementary.  The Police Act - all laws pertaining to the powers of the Police provide what a 
police can do and cannot do.   

If we have to repeat it here, underline it here, put it in bold, this means somewhere, some 
place, the Police have not been giving satisfaction, as far as the enforcement of this particular 
legislation is concerned. 

(Interruptions) 

True! I am, therefore, wondering whether, true is this having evolved in the right direction. 
No, of course, if we have not evolved because evolution, in fact, means that we are getting 
better. This is what I understand by ‘evolution’. But here, I call it simply a Police Force that 
knows what is in the Standing Orders, knows what are in the Police Act, but does not act 

 

131 

upon it. And the question is: why?  Will a simple piece of legislation, where we underline and 
tell the Police: ‘Water is wet. The sun is hot. And a desert normally is a place where you die 
of thirst.’ Now, if we have to come and teach le b.a.-ba à la police, as far as what acting 
diligently is concerned and to act with responsibilities is concerned, then we have a serious 
problem. I am of the view that it will not be a simple piece of legislation, unfortunately, that 
will change the mentality of those people, who at the Police Force,  are doing what they have 
to do. 

Some of us, here, in this august Assembly, have been lawyers. How many times have 
we not heard, and even Members of Parliament meeting with their constituents, that women 
going to Police stations are as though given the cold shoulder, as though it is not a serious 
and important issue, as though it is the problem of a woman with her husband and there is 
some  sort  of  taboo  in  there  ‘I  will  not  enter  into  the  fray.  I  will  not  descend  among  this 
domestic issue and I will not look into it, so, sort it out.’ The first opportunity that a Police 
Officer - and here I am not generalising, forgive me, Mr Deputy Speaker – unfortunately, the 
English  language  suggests  that  this  is  how  I  should  address  the  issue,  but  a  lot  of  Police 
Officers. I underline it; do their duty correctly more so. But, there are Police Officers and this 
happens  to  be  the  case  that  when  they  receive  women  or  people  who  have  suffered  from 
domestic  violence,  they  do  not  give  this  the  attention  that  it  deserves,  and  then,  all  of  a 
sudden, there is a knee jerk reaction. We realise that we have not done what had to be done, 
then  when  they  have  to  react,  they  overreact.  There  is  not,  unfortunately,  a  proper  middle 
ground which would be a proper responsible way for that Police Force to act in situations like 
this. 

Now, can you imagine a piece of legislation where we have to walk this Policeman 
down, as though we  are walking a baby down  a road? We have to tell the Police Officer: 
‘Where a report is made to the Police station by a victim of a domestic violence?’ Then, you, 
the  Enforcement  Officer  or  another  person, 
the 
circumstances of the offence to be enquired into. What have we discovered here? The moon! 
So, we have to here walk a Police Officer, hold his hand and tell him: “Listen to me, Sir, we 
are to tell you that if ever you do discover that there is an offence that has happened,  you 
have  a  duty  to  enquire  into  it.’  Really!    Is  that  what  we  are  saying?  Legislators  2016!  So 
many  years after Independence, we have to tell our Police Force this. That is problematic! 
Now, we cannot just cast this aside and pretend that there isn’t a serious problem. If the hon. 
Minister has thought it fit to put it in this legislation, this is in admission on her part and that I 

the  officer-in-charge  shall  cause 

 

132 

believe is courageous. She has shown this courage to come and tell us that there is a problem 
of such magnitude that we have to, basically, put in this legislation what should be normally 
the obvious. 

So, then, we come to other situations where I have seen men wondering where is the 
safeguard in this legislation and even the previous legislation concerning domestic violence. 
Where  are  the  safeguards?  We  have  seen  in  certain  specific  Statutes,  for  example,  the 
Prevention  of  Corruption  Act  when  someone  comes  and  makes  a  false  statement  and 
provokes an enquiry and causes prejudice, arrest, inconvenience to someone, there is specific 
provision within that legislation for the one who has made a false declaration to pay a serious 
price for a false complaint. But, imagine in our thirst to bring solutions - and true it is, it has 
to be a priority – to women who are suffering from domestic violence or children, we forget 
that when we talk about the need to do justice, we have to also remember that justice also 
means  helping  the  one  who  is  downtrodden,  helping  the  victim,  but  sometimes,  in  some 
cases, we have come across them, there are also women who give false declarations. It has 
happened!  And  then,  we  cannot,  therefore,  say:  ‘Well,  the  Police  will  then  have  to  act 
diligently in this particular…’ Why not make provisions in this legislation? 

This is what I am saying and this is my humble suggestion that we should also make 
provision  in  this  legislation  for  any  person  who  makes  a  false  declaration.  We  cannot, 
therefore, solely rely on what are the provisions of the Criminal Code as to a false declaration 
and what must be done in situations like that and what the Police must do. But since we are to 
give this a priority - and yes, I commend the hon. Minister for this  - then, what I humbly 
suggest is that a particular clause should be inserted in this legislation that makes provision 
for a man giving a false declaration or a woman giving a false declaration or someone else 
who  is  an  informer  who  gives  a  wrong  declaration  and  creates  havoc  within  a  domestic 
situation. Because we have seen in this country, certain people thrive on having given false 
declarations. We have seen in this country that certain people can only exist if they give a 
false declaration because without this they do not breathe. We have seen that! And, we have 
seen  what  damage  it  can  do  to  people  when  people  act  on  wrong  information  and  what 
happens, who is going to come and wipe the mess. So, this is what my humble suggestion is 
to the hon. Minister and to Government to consider that possibility. 

Now, coming back to the Police Officer who has to act diligently - what happens to 
that  particular  Police  Officer,  therefore,  who  does  not  act  diligently.  Let  us  imagine  the 
scenario.  A  Police  Officer,  here,  we  are  imposing  it  as  a  duty  and  power  upon  the  Police 

 

133 

Officer to act diligently, therefore, to act responsibly. What happens when a Police does not 
comply with that particular clause of the legislation, would that be an offence, according to 
this legislation? No! So, nothing happens to that Police Officer if he does not act diligently. It 
is not an offence defined under this particular legislation and nothing can be done to him. 
Then, if we are to think about something, then we will have to work for disciplinary action, 
then  we  are  going  to  wait  for  him  to  be  suspended,  then  we  are  going  to  wait  for  him  to 
continue  getting  his  pay  while  he  is  suspended,  and  then  –  God  knows  what  is  going  to 
happen! – but, in the meantime, has the victim obtained redress by a Police Officer having 
been sanctioned for not having acted diligently. No! In my humble belief, you cannot provide 
for responsibility, powers and duties and you place it upon the shoulder of that Police Officer 
to act responsibly and diligently, but failure to do so is not an offence. That does not make 
sense! 

Let us look at all legislations where there is a responsibility and a duty placed upon 
the shoulders of certain officers who are not Police Officers. If they fail to carry out his duty, 
it is an offence - company law. Even Company Law talks about the duty of a Director, the 
duty of a Company Secretary, the failure to act properly as a Company Director or a Board 
Member, tantamount to certain offences in certain circumstances. Why is it, in this particular 
case - if we are serious and we want to bring the Police Officer to act responsibly - that we 
give  him  special  treatment  and  say  that  he  is  not  liable  criminally  if  he  does  not  act 
responsibly,  according  to  clause  11A.  Why  are  we  creating  a  special  citizen?    That  is  the 
point I am trying to make.  

So, either we keep the clause that talks about la responsabilité et le devoir de la force 
policière and it is accompanied by an offence if he fails to do so or otherwise you remove it 
purely and simply. Because if he does not today act responsibly and diligently, if it is not an 
offence, why have it there?  It is, therefore, only to show the police.  It is a teaching manual 
for the Police Force how to act because it does not mean more than that.  Even if a woman 
who  has  been  victim,  once  you  take  action  against  the  Police  officer,  he  is  protected  here 
under the law.  Even if an Enforcement Officer does not do his duty properly, he cannot be 
taken to task.  If you want to sue a Police officer civilly, then you are going to have to deal 
with the Public Officers’ Protection Act, an Act within a certain amount of time.  So, if we 
are  to  really  change  the  whole  idea  and  the  vision  of  trying  to  raise  the  awareness,  la 
conscientisation, yes, the hon. Minister is right.  

134 

 
I humbly request that those issues that in the old days may have been good, even in 
the days when I was in Government, Public Officers’ Protection Act was not changed.  Even 
when we are in Government, we did not even do what I think should have been done.  There 
is an opportunity here, in this piece of legislation, to amend the Public Officers’ Protection 
Act, to show that this is high on the agenda of the hon. Minister and Government.  We are not 
going to create a special class of citizen by protecting them even if they fail to act diligently.  
Otherwise, it would be simply cosmetic amendment and nothing more than that. 

I have gone through the statistics, I recall in November last year, the hon. Minister 
gave very alarming figures to the hon. Leader of the Opposition on the number of people who 
were reporting cases to her Ministry and to the six officers  

that she has under her responsibility, over 2,300 in terms of complaints between January and 
October  or  November  of  2015.    Clearly,  the  figures  are  on  the  up,  they  are  increasing.  
Clearly,  without  forgetting  that  there  could  be  duplication  in  terms  of  numbers  and 
complaints,  I  agree  with  the  hon.  Minister  when  she  made  that  reference,  herself,  in  her 
answer.  But it is clear that the total number of cases goes clearly around the figure of 3,000 
on a yearly basis and those who are convicted, an upholding 228 or 300 on average very year.  
Does  it  mean  that  the  2,700  are  false  reports  or  does  it  mean  simply  that  we  do  not  have 
enough  human  resources  to  tackle  those  complaints?    Because  the  longer  a  complaint  on 
matters of domestic violence lasts and not dealt with, the longer it takes to come to some sort 
of inquiry and prosecution, the longer the trauma for the victim.  So, instead of sorting out the 
trauma by legislation, in actual fact what we are doing is protracting the trauma. If we do not 
put enough human resources and staff in order to tackle those cases so that we have, at least, 
50% of cases reported annually, it should have been tackled on an annual basis. Here, we do 
not  even  have  10%  of  cases  reported  annually,  that  are  tackled  with  and  there  is  always 
conviction.  Then, the other possibility is that a huge proportion of those cases that are not 
finally end up in convictions, finally there are reports that are false.  If this is the case, then 
there is another serious issue.   

Let us look at the gender statistics. Under the aegis of the Ministry that is occupied by 
my friend, the hon. Minister, there are statistics about gender.  This is how I see Mauritius as 
a chauvinistic society.  I see our public administration as chauvinistic.  I see it as such.  I see 
the way statistics are kept in Mauritius, it is a tell-tale. When  analysing our statistics, one 
realises that somewhere, some place there is chauvinism therein.  Let us look at the statistics 
kept by Statistics Mauritius  

 

135 

with regard to the number of people who are victims of theft.  You will find it on the statistics 
for crime in Mauritius and offences.  How many people have been driving while being drunk, 
under the influence of alcohol?  You will find it under the Statistics Mauritius.  How many 
people have been slapped, assaulted?  You will it there.  Drugs, you will find it there.  But 
there  is  one  statistics  here  that  I  will  not  find  on  Statistics  Mauritius  Crime  Report,  it  is 
domestic violence.  How important is, therefore, on the agenda of the public administration, 
the issue of domestic violence if it is not in our crime statistics?   

It finds its place only on one website, the website of the Ministry and the Minister 
responsible for that particular Ministry, Gender Equality.  So, what are we saying?  Are we 
saying that this a problem that belongs to a particular Ministry? Are we trying to pretend that 
because we say so, we are saying it is important?  One has to think about it.  Questions that 
have to be  asked: how  much are we  really investing moneywise,  finance-wise, in order to 
address this particular issue of domestic violence?  If public administration and management 
is serious about putting domestic violence high on the agenda, then it should not only be at 
the  level  of  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality  that  you  find  those  figures,  that  you  should 
compile those figures, but it should also be the Police sending it to the Statistics Mauritius 
and it should be compiled in the figures talking about crimes and offences, the problem of 
law  and  order.    But  for  Statistics  Mauritius,  this  is  not  high  on  the  agenda  and  that  is 
worrisome.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, having said all that I have said, we are all for - I say it again - 
efforts that are being made to address this particular issue.  I have only tried to put together 
some of the ideas that have been discussed at our level in order to try to find solutions.  But I 
am also informed - I will let the hon. Minister answer - that there have not been proper or 
enough consultations.  I do not have enough elements on there in order to come and say that 
there have not been enough.  I do not know.  If there has been, I am leaving it open to the 
hon.  Minister  to  come  and  say  there  has  been  and  to  explain.    It  is  important,  I  guess,  to 
address this particular issue for civil society to have the answers. I am not going to condemn 
the hon. Minister in any way since I am not in possession of any element to say otherwise. 

Now, I would also leave this to the hon. Minister to think over it.  I have heard the 
previous  orator  say  it  is  a  good  start.  Very  often,  we  do  realise  that  there  are  certain 
adjustments that must be brought in legislation and we do realise that it is not totally perfect. 
Governments always say: well, it is a good start.  I have been there and I can say it. We also 
say  it  is  a  good  start  and  then,  we  can  change  it  as  we  go  along.    Let  me  just  make 

 

136 

suggestions for the future.  I would like to suggest here and that is what we have done when 
we had working sessions at the level of the Labour Party on this particular agenda of the hon. 
Minister, this piece of legislation that there is a need for all domestic violence cases to be 
dealt with by one proper constituted Family Court, specialist in the field and not to be sent to 
District Courts all over Mauritius, but by a properly constituted Family Court.  If you want an 
example to see whether our judiciary gives importance to domestic violence, I have explained 
comment est-ce que la force policière envoie les statistiques au Statistics Mauritius to show 
that it is not high on their agenda. Do you know about the judiciary dealing with it and how 
high it is on their agenda? If it is high on their agenda, why is it that domestic violence cases 
are  not  taken  at  9.30  in  the  morning.  No  domestic  violence  case  is  heard  at  9.30  in  the 
morning before  any Court in this country, it is only heard at 1 o’clock,  as from 1 o’clock 
onwards,  why?  It  is  because  simply  it  is  not  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  administration  of 
justice. It is because they will come up and tell you we have to deal with other priority cases, 
we have to deal with trial cases, we have to basically hear up evidence, we have to hear civil 
matters and criminal matters when everything is over in the morning then we are going to 
deal with domestic violence cases at one. 

That is not a proper explanation. If we are to give it high on the agenda, we have to 
deal with domestic violence cases as from first thing in the morning and what I suggest is that 
there should be a properly Constituted Family Court that deals  with this and nothing else. 
Then it would be high on the agenda of Government and the administration of justice. Then 
again,  as  far  as  the  administration  of  justice  is  concerned,  they  can  only  do  what  we  give 
them as tools. They can only use tools that us legislators give them and Government has to 
see to it that they are empowered in terms of human resource and finance in order to have 
such specialist teams to deal with this matter.  

Now, there is a fear out there that now it is going to be easy for people to get arrested, 
there is a fear. So, basically what I humbly suggest, what we have seen in the recent past is 
that this fear could not only be a fear and it could be true. Already what is lacking is that the 
police do not take enough responsibility as far as their powers of arrest are concerned. So, 
maybe, what I humbly suggest is also training sessions for Police Officers and the number of 
law officers attached to each district should be on the up because always it is the case that 
they do not like taking responsibility because there is this fear in Mauritius, what will the 
other person think if ever I decided one way or there is someone else who will think badly of 
me if I have decided the other way. 

137 

 
So, that is why they become paralysed and don’t decide at all. Now, the question is, as 
far as the sentencing issues are concerned, the hon. Member speaking before me, said that he 
does not agree that we should leave it to the judiciary to decide as to who should go to prison, 
when they should go to prison. I would tend to agree with what is said, basically is it for us 
legislators to decide when someone should go to prison, the third time, or should it not be for 
the judiciary to decide assessing each case on its own merits and deciding whether, maybe on 
the  first  case  itself,  there  are  such  serious  circumstances  that  warrant  him  going  to  jail 
immediately and fine would not be proper. 

So, who are we therefore to come and impose it upon the judiciary? I think that we 
should give the flexibility,  give the possibility to the judiciary to decide. There is the fear 
very often on the part of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and he said it many times in various 
forums that the magistrates are not acting severely or strictly enough. Maybe he is right or 
maybe he is wrong, I am not here to judge and I do not believe it should be us legislators who 
should come and pass value judgements on what magistrates or judges do. What I think we 
should do is give them the tools, but in no way should we try to put ourselves and take over 
their powers and I  believe that is the importance of separation of powers should be high on 
our agenda.  

Now, those are the few words, the few observations I wanted to make and I thank the 
hon. Minister, in particular, for her attention. I hope that this can add to the debate if ever 
there are other amendments that are going to be contemplated some time down the road.  

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!  

Mr Rutnah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Hurreeram rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Tuesday 14 June 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

 

(7.51 p.m.) 

138 

MATTER RAISED 

FOND DU SAC COMMUNITY PLANTERS – IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie and Poudre D’Or): Thank 
you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Very quickly I won’t take much time of the House. This is a 
request addressed to the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security relating to the issue of 
community planters in Fond Du Sac who are facing problems with the irrigation equipment in 
the sugar cane fields. I have had the opportunity to talk to the hon. Minister and he is aware 
of the difficulty, especially with the irrigation equipment that has to be renewed. So, I would 
humbly suggest and propose that he looks into the matter and try to see how he can solve the 
problem in the earliest possible delay. Thank you. 

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun): Thank you, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I would like to thank the hon. Member for raising these two issues. I 
am informed that the Northern Plaines Irrigation Project, stage one which covers the locality 
such  as  Morcellement  St  André,  Plaine  des  Papayes,  Fond  Du  Sac  and  Triolet  became 
operational  in  1982.  It  is  an  overhead  system  of  irrigation  using  high  pressure  sprinklers 
connected by portable pipes. This system was upgraded in the year 1999. Part of this project 
is connected into a drip and the remaining areas are connected into a mix of solid set and 
centre pivot. Most of the pivots in the Northern Plaines Project have been commissioned in 
2005. The warranty period for those pivots was for a period of seven years and problems like 
severe rusting started after five years only.  

However,  the  defect  liability  was  released  by  the  management  of  the  Irrigation 
Authority in 2013, despite the fact that the rusting problems occurred before the end of the 
warranty period. The Irrigation Authority is today bearing the consequences of that decision. 
Normally,  pivot  should  undergo  rehabilitation  every  six  years.  None  of  the  rehabilitations 
have been effected whilst they were clearly due as from 2011.  

In 2012 and 2013, unused funds for rehabilitation were even returned to the parent 
Ministry  again  showing  how  casually  the  Irrigation  Authority  was  being  managed.  The 
Irrigation Authority has since 2015 awarded tenders for the rehabilitation of 11 pivots, five in 
a  first  tender  and  six  in  a  second  one.  These  works  are  expected  to  be  completed  by 
November this year; the rehabilitation of the remaining pivots is scheduled for next financial 

 

139 

year. As at to date, eight of the 26 pivots are down, six are under repair and two are awaiting 
spare parts.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to the water shortage problems, I am informed 
that following complaints from some planters of Fond Du Sac, a site visit was effected by 
Officers of the Irrigation Authority on 30 May 2016 in the presence of hon. Rughoobur and 
representatives of the planters. There are two pivots namely A6 in box 3 and P1 in box 3 in 
the region Fond Du Sac. Pivot A6 is presently being rehabilitated and is under process, the 
water  supply  was  disrupted  temporarily.  The  pivot  is  expected  to  be  operational  by  next 
week. As regards pivot P1 in box 3 which is already in operation, it will be rehabilitated by 
September 2016 and after completion of the works, the situation is expected to be back to 
normal.  

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

At 7.56 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 14 June 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

FOREIGNERS – VISA & PERMITS – GRANT 

(No.  B/511)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the foreigners, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Passport and Immigration Office, a breakdown of 
the  number  thereof,  by  nationality,  status/occupation,  including  the  students,  who  are 
currently – 

(a) 
(b) 

staying and/or working legally in Mauritius, and 
overstaying their visas in Mauritius, indicating in each case, the  
(i) 
period in consideration of which the visa was granted, and 
(ii)  measures that will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: Admission of foreign nationals into the territory of Mauritius is administered 
in  accordance  with  sections  4  and  5  of  the  Immigration  Act.    The  entry  of  foreigners  is 
controlled through the issue of permits, and visas depending on the purpose of their stay in 
Mauritius. 

140 

 
In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Passport and Immigration 
Office that, as at 02 June this year, there were 62,584 foreign nationals staying and working 
or staying, legally in Mauritius.  This figure does not include the foreign tourists. 

The detailed information asked by the hon. Member is being tabled. 

Visas are granted in accordance with regulation 25 of the Passports Regulations and 

the duration of the visas varies from one day up to a period of six months. 

In regard to part (b)(i) of the question, the information requested is being compiled by 
the  Passport  and  Immigration  Office  and  will  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly as soon as possible. 

In regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, the Border Control System of the Passport 
and Immigration Office generates information on those foreigners who have overstayed in the 
territory and the list of overstayers is updated continually.  A Tracing and Tracking Team has 
been set up at the Passport and Immigration Office to trace out foreigners staying illegally in 
the  country.    The  team  works  in  close  collaboration  with  other  sections  of  the  Police 
Department and other informers to gather information on such foreigners.  The Team carries 
out regular tracking operations when reliable information is obtained. 

Since  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  team  has  carried  out  several  such  operations 
around the island and some 100 foreign nationals were arrested for illegal stay and action has 
been taken for their repatriation. 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD – BOARD OF DIRECTORS – COMPOSITION 

(No. B/512) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Ltd., he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the composition of the Board 
of Directors thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE UNIT – POLICE OFFICERS 

(No. B/513) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the 

 

141 

number thereof attached to the Domestic Violence Unit, indicating in each case the grades 
thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  Police  Family 
Protection Unit (PFPU) is responsible for providing support and assistance to any person who 
is a victim of abuse and domestic violence.  The Unit has its Headquarters in Port Louis and 8 
Sub-Units in the following regions across Mauritius and Rodrigues – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Abercrombie; 

Piton; 

(iii) 

Flacq; 

(iv)  Moka; 

(v) 

Rose Hill; 

(vi)  Vacoas; 

(vii)  Rose Belle, and 

(viii)  Port Mathurin. 

I am further informed that the PFPU is headed by a Woman Superintendent of Police 
and  the  personnel  comprises  two  Women  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Police,  two  Women 
Chief  Inspectors  of  Police,  one  Inspector  of  Police,  two  Women  Police  Sergeants  and  21 
Women Police Constables including two in Rodrigues. 

UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY OF MAURITIUS – DIRECTOR 

GENERAL – INVESTIGATIONS 

(No.  B/535)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Director  General  of  the  University  of 
Technology  of  Mauritius  (UTM),  she  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
UTM,  information  as  to  the  number  of  investigations  initiated  by  the  Independent 
Commission  against  Corruption  against  the  incumbent  thereof,  indicating  the  matters  to 
which the investigations relate. 

Reply (Prime Minister): I am advised that as the Independent Commission against 
Corruption operates strictly in a confidential manner, the University of Technology is not in a 
position to know whether or not the Independent Commission against Corruption has initiated 

 

142 

any investigation against its Director. Moreover, by virtue of section 81 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act (PoCA), no information relating to any investigation being carried out by the 
Independent Commission against Corruption can be divulged. 

STATE LAND - LEASE 

(No.  B/534)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in 
regard  to  the  State  lands  leased  since  November  2015  to  date,  he  will  give  a  list  thereof, 
indicating in each case the – 

(a) extent thereof;  
(b) location thereof;  
(c) duration thereof, and  
(d) terms and conditions thereof, including the amount of money payable. 

Reply:  Since  November  2015  till  date,  337  new  leases  have  been  approved  and 

awarded. 

During this period, 29 existing leases have been renewed. 
As regard parts (a), (b), (c) and (d), I am tabling a copy of the list of the 337 new 

leases and 29 existing leases that have been renewed. 

Amendment  to  existing  leases  or  to  renewed  leases,  although  registered  at  the 

Registrar General’s Office are, of course, not included in the list. 

BELLE ETOILE - ROAD RESURFACING 

(No. B/547) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
Belle Etoile, in Beau Bassin, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central 
Water Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for the complete resurfacing 
of the roads thereat following the completion of the works carried out thereat to change the 
water pipes. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

GRNW & PAILLES ROAD JUNCTION - TRAFFIC LIGHTS 

(No. B/548) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the junction at 
Grand  River  North  West  and  Pailles  Road,  he  will  state  the  number  of  accidents  having 
reportedly  occurred  thereat  since  January  2015  to  date,  indicating  if  he  is  aware  that  the 

 

143 

traffic  lights  found  thereat  are  not  in  good  working  order  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  remedial 
actions will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: I am informed by the Police Department that since January 2015 to date two 
accidents have been reported at the junction at Grand River North West and Pailles Road, one 
with a slight injury and one with no injury.   

I am further informed that the Maintenance Contract for traffic lights provides for the 
contractor to effect daily inspection of all sites and ensure that all traffic signal equipment are 
functional at all time.  Minor faults are detected during the daily routine inspections which 
are attended to within the delay provided for in the contract such as, repairs of green light, 
repair of cables, fitting of resistance, change in push button and so on. 

No major malfunctioning of the traffic lights at the junction has been reported.  A site 
visit effected on 02 June 2016 by officers of the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit of 
my Ministry revealed that the traffic lights are functioning properly. 

I am also informed that a complaint was received in November 2015 regarding the 
phasing  (time  sequence)  programmed  for  the  traffic  lights  at  the  junction.    However,  the 
Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit has advised that reprogramming of the phasing 
will cause severe traffic congestion along the Port Louis – St Jean Road (A1). 

 

POINTE AUX SABLES - KENSINGTON PLACE - ROAD REPAIRS 

(No. B/549) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  Kensington  Place  at  Pointe  aux 
Sables, he will state if he is aware of the bad conditions of the road thereat and, if so, obtain 
from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as to if – 

(a) remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto, and  
(b) consideration will be given for same to be declared public area. 
Reply: I am informed by the Municipal City Council of Port Louis that a development 
permit  was  issued  as  far  back  as  on  16  February  1995  to  “La  Société  de  Promotion”  for 
subdivision of land of the extent of 13 A 34 Perches at Petit Verger, Pointe aux Sables with 
the following conditions – 

• 

• 

the  Council  shall  in  no  way  be  responsible  for  the  provision  of  electricity, 
sewerage and water as well as construction of any road, drain and gutter, and 
request for taking over of roads in the morcellement will not be entertained by 
the Council 

144 

 
I  am  informed  that  following  representations  received  from  the  inhabitants  of  the 
morcellement Kensington place regarding the bad condition of the road thereat, the Municipal 
City  Council  of  Port  Louis  conducted  a  survey  which  has  revealed  that  the  road  requires 
maintenance and complete resurfacing with setting up of curbs on both sides of its sides.  The 
cost of these works is estimated at Rs10 m. and the Council has not earmarked any amount 
for this project under its current budget. 

I  am  further  informed  that  since  the  morcellement  is  managed  by  a  Syndic,  the 
procedure for handing over of all infrastructures should be initiated by the Syndic to enable 
the City Council to proceed with declaring public the roads found in Kensington place.  As at 
date no such action has been taken by the Syndic.  

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE/LUZERNER 

KANTONSSPITAL - MOU 

(No. B/550) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Memorandum of 
Understanding  signed  between  the  Luzerner  Kantonsspital  of  Luzern,  Switzerland,  and  his 
Ministry, he will state the – 

criteria used for the choice of the said hospital;  

(a) 
(b)  names  of  the  officials  from  the  said  hospital  who  were  involved  in  the 

(c) 

negotiations in relation thereto, and  
scope  of  involvement  in  the  decisional  process  as  far  as  strategy,  choice  of 
treatment  and  specific  equipment  for  the  management  of  cancer  patients  are 
concerned.  

(Withdrawn) 

CANCER- RISK FACTORS 

(No. B/551) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  risk  factors  of 
cancer, he will state the strategies developed by his Ministry to create awareness thereof and 
incidentally the prevention thereof.  

(Withdrawn) 

 
 
 

CANCER- MORTALITY RATE 

 

145 

(No. B/552) Dr Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to cancer, he will state the 
latest statistics regarding the – 

incidence thereof and  

(a) 
(b)  mortality rate by the said disease in Mauritius. 
(Withdrawn) 

UTILITY REGULATORY AUTHORITY - OPERATIONAL 

(No. B/553) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Utility Regulatory Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to 
why it is not operational.  

Reply: The hon. Member may refer to my reply to Parliamentary Question B/116 on 05 

April 2016. 

I  had  informed  the  House  that  the  existing  criteria  prescribed  in  Section  10  of  the 
Utility Regulatory Authority Act for the appointment of the Chairperson and Commissioners 
are  highly  restrictive  and  that  I  intended  to  consult  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  the 
amendment of the Act. 

As promised, the Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill is on the Order Paper 

of the House today.  

After  the  enactment  of  this  Bill,  I  intend  to  make  recommendations  to  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister on the composition of the Board.   

CEB - WASTE-TO-ENERGY PREQUALIFICATION EXERCISE 

(No. B/554) Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the recent Waste-to-Energy Prequalification Exercise, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Central Electricity Board, a list of the prequalified companies thereof.  

 

(Withdrawn) 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILLES – SWIMMING POOL - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/555) Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the project for the construction 
of a swimming pool at Rivière des Anguilles and following the acquisition of a plot of land of 
an extent of 8,000m2 therefor in March 2010, he will state where matters stand. 

 

146 

Reply:  I wish to inform the House that a plot of land of the extent of 8006.25m2 or 
1A90  at  Rivière  des  Anguilles  was  vested  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  in  my 
Ministry on 9 March 2010 for the construction of a swimming pool at Rivière des Anguilles. 
The Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping was requested to 
prepare  the  preliminary  design,  drawings,  scope  of  work  and  cost  estimates  to  enable  the 
implementation of the project. However, during consultations and after a survey made by the 
Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping, it was found that additional 
land would be required to accommodate parking facilities at the swimming pool. A request 
was  made  to  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for  that  purpose.  As  the  acquisition  of 
additional land was a lengthy procedure, it was only in September 2014 that the Ministry of 
Housing and Lands vested the required plot of land of 1500m2 in my Ministry.  

As  the  present  focus  is  on  sites  that  would  be  used  during  the  Indian  Ocean  Islands 
Games  2019,  the  construction  of  the  swimming  pool  at  Rivière  des  Anguilles  would  be 
considered at a later stage.  

ROAD DECONGESTION PROGRAMME - PROCUREMENT 

(No.  B/556)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 
to projects implemented under the Road Decongestion Programme, he will state the mode of 
procurement method used therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

HERITAGE CITY PROJECT - CONTRACTORS 

(No.  B/557)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the Heritage City Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain  from  the  Heritage  City  Co.,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
prequalification of contractors exercise therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

GRNW - SRI DEVI KAROUMARI AMMEN KOVIL – SOIL EROSION 

(No.  B/558)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the Sri 

 

147 

Devi  Karoumari  Ammen  Kovil  at  Grand  River  North  West  where  usually  3,000  to  5,000 
pilgrims gather for important pilgrimages and ceremonies, he will state the actions taken, if 
any, by his Ministry having regard to the dangers represented to those pilgrims due to ground 
instability and possibility of landslides thereat for which help has been sought since one year 
and, if not, why not. 

Reply: I am informed that several coordinated joint site visits have been effected by 
the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC) of my Ministry, 
the Landslide Management Unit of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, 
the City Council of Port Louis and the Local Police. I am also informed that the President and 
members of the Kovil as well as the hon. Second Member for Grand River North West were 
present at the site visits. 

The  aim  of  the  site  visits  was  to  investigate  into  a  suspected  case  of  soil  erosion 
causing partial collapse of the floor and make proposal for remedial actions.  A number of 
observations were made during the site visits as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the Kovil has been built on a dangerous slope, within less than 16 metres of the 
Grand River North West bank; 

the  platform  facing  the  river  was  constructed  in  two  different  phases  without 
any proper construction plan as stated by the President of the Kovil; 

(iii) 

the affected part of the platform was constructed during the second phase and 
posed a risk of collapse in case additional loading was allowed upon; 

(iv)  some  horizontal  beams  were  found  to  be  sagged  and  one  supporting  column 

appeared to be slightly inclined;  

(v) 

(vi) 

at  one  location,  some  bricks  appeared  to  have  sunk  due  to  subsidence  of  the 
back filling, and 

the  National  Development  Unit  had  constructed  a  Reinforced  Concrete 
Retaining Wall along part of the width of the land to stabilize the settlement of 
the paved floor area. 

Following these joint site visits, a series of measures have been proposed namely - 

(i) 

access  to  the  affected  part  of  the  platform  which  posed  the  risk  of  collapsing 
should be restricted to devotees. Only the priest and two of his assistants should 

 

148 

be allowed access during the ceremony for the rituals at a small temple located 
in that area; 

(ii) 

access to the portion of ground where the subsidence was noted should also be 
restricted to devotees, and 

(iii) 

the Police should restrict access in the affected areas by placing metal barriers 
during special ceremonies and mass gatherings.  

It is regretful that some cult places are located at zones which are at risk and buildings 
erected  without  the  necessary  clearances.  It  has  often  been  observed  that  over  time,  such 
buildings are subject to the effect of natural calamities or become a danger to the public at 
large due to their location.    

Regarding  the  Sri  Devi  Karoumari  Ammen  Kovil  at  Grand  River  North  West,  my 
Ministry  will  carry  out  another  joint  site  visit  to  determine  what  can  be  implemented  to 
stabilize the problem of soil erosion in the short term pending a more holistic approach to the 
problem in the forthcoming years. 

GRNW - HOUSING PROJECTS 

(No.  B/559)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to 
Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, he will state the - 

(a) housing projects identified, if any, to solve the acute housing problems being faced 

thereat and, if so, indicate in each case, the - 

(i) estimated cost thereof, and  

(ii) expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the National Housing Development Co Ltd (NHDC) that, to 
date,  it  has  implemented  eight  housing  projects  in  Constituency  Number  1,  Grand  River 
North West and Port  Louis West. 1,623 families have been provided with a NHDC social 
housing unit in the region.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  there  is  scarcity  of  suitable  plots  of  State  land  in 
Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West. Hence, applications for a 
housing  unit  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  Constituency  are  being  considered,  subject  to 
eligibility, by the NHDC for housing projects in the nearby localities such as, in Calebasses, 

 

149 

Baie du Tombeau and Gros Cailloux. Moreover, the applicants are also offered the possibility 
to acquire housing units readily available in other localities. 

LAND TRIBUNAL - SETTING UP 

(No.  B/560)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  cases  of  dispossession  of  land  by  sugar  barons,  he  will  state  if 
consideration will be given for the implementation of the recommendations of the Judiciary 
for the setting up of a dedicated Land Tribunal. 

Reply  (Attorney  General):  The  Judiciary  never  recommended  the  setting  up  of  a 
dedicated Land Tribunal.  It is the Truth and Justice Commission which, in Volume 1 of its 
report, at pages 351-352, stated the following -  

“As  regards  the  numerous  cases  of  land  dispossession  and  the  various  obstacles  to 
recovering  same,  the  Commission  wishes  to  recommend  that  a  Land  Research 
Monitoring  Unit  be  set  up  to  cater  for  these  obstacles.    Further  the  Commission 
recommends that a Land Division of the Supreme Court be set up to expedite matters 
in relation to land matters.” 
The  Cabinet  had,  at  its  meeting  of  6  February  2015,  agreed  to  the  setting  up  of  a 
Ministerial  Committee  under  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Tourism and External Communications to reconsider the recommendations contained in the 
Report of the Truth and Justice Commission. 

The  Ministerial  Committee  had  its  first  meeting  on  6  August  2015  and  took 
cognizance of the recommendations of the Truth and Justice Commission.  The Committee 
has also taken note of the report submitted by Mr Mandary on cases of dispossession of land, 
as highlighted in the Truth and Justice Commission Report. 

The  Ministerial  Committee  decided  that  the  report  submitted  by  Mr  Mandary  be 

submitted to the Attorney-General’s Office for advice on the way forward. 

The Attorney-General’s Office received the report of Mr Mandary on 7 August 2015 
and the Solicitor-General designated 2 law officers to study the recommendations and tender 
legal advice. 

The  cases  of  dispossession  of  land  were  studied  individually  and  a  conclusion  was 

reached as to the action to be taken in each case. 

Advice was tendered on 20 January 2016 to the effect that -  

 

150 

“3. We have noted that the facts in a number of cases in the report date back to quite 
some  time.    Although,  there  is  in  principle  no  prescription  period  for  lodging  a 
criminal  prosecution,  there  is  the  risk  of  proceedings  being  stayed  for  abuse  of 
process on the grounds of delay. In any event, the decision to prosecute rests with 
the Director of Public Prosecutions and where it is felt that a criminal offence may 
have  been  committed,  the  matter  may  be  referred  to  the  police  for  enquiry  and 
eventual prosecution by the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions.  As far 
as we are concerned, upon perusing the Report, we have not encountered cases that 
could be the object of criminal prosecutions. 

4.  We have not been requested for advice on civil claims.  Nonetheless, for the sake 
of  completeness,  we  observe  that  the  cases  relate  to  land  disputes  and  the 
prescription time for such matters to be actionable is 30 years. In a number of cases 
in the Report, the 30-year period has been exceeded. In any event, it will be for an 
aggrieved party to exercise his rights in a civil claim and enter a case before the 
appropriate court.” 

In  view  of  the  recommendation  of  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission  that  a  Land 
Division  of  the  Supreme  Court  be  set  up,  the  views  of  the  Judiciary  were  sought  and  the 
former Chief Justice was not in favour of setting up such a Division. 

On  17  September  2015,  the  views  of  the  Judiciary  were  again  sought  and  on  21 
September  2015,  the  Judiciary  replied  indicating  that  it  is  not  presently  contemplating  the 
setting up of a Land Division at the Supreme Court.  However, my Office has been informed 
by the Master and Registrar that the Judiciary would welcome the setting up of a dedicated 
Land  Tribunal  dealing  with  land  disputes  and  which  would  also  deal  with  cases  of 
compulsory acquisition of land by Government in order to avoid the clogging of our Courts. 

It is important to note that many of the cases of alleged dispossession of lands date 
back  to  more  than  100 years  and,  in  most  cases,  legal  challenge  to  the  title  of  the  current 
owners, whether acquired by prescription or other means, is time-barred under the law as it 
currently stands. 

Land  restitution  would,  in  the  circumstances,  entail  various  legal  and  constitutional 
implications  which  would  have  to  be  carefully  looked  into.    It  could  also  entail  major 
financial implications for the State if the approach to be taken in matters of responsibility for 
restitution follows, for example, the South African model. 

 

 

151 

SAVANNE `& BLACK RIVER - RESIDENCE BASSIN - FOOTBALL 

GROUND 

(No.  A/15)    Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  football  ground  at 
Residence Bassin in Constiuency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, he will state if same is 
vested in the Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes and, if so, obtain therefrom, information as 
to if any project for the lighting thereof has been worked out and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Municipal 
Council of Quatre Bornes that the football ground at Residence Bassin in Constituency No.14 
is not its property, but that of the Sugar Industry Labour Welfare Fund. 

As far as part (b) of the question is concerned, I am informed that there is no project 
for  provision  of  lighting  facilities  in  the  football  ground.    However,  only  trimming  and 
mowing works at the football ground are carried out by the Council. 

 

MAHEBOURG - STREET LIGHTING 

(No. A/16) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to 
Mahebourg,  he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  of  the  lack  of  several  street  lanterns  in  the  street 
lighting  system  found  on  the  main  road  thereof  and,  if  so,  will  he,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Road Development Authority, information as to if consideration will 
be given for a review of the said lighting system and installation of additional street lanterns 
thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  As  stated  in  the  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/466  at  the 
Parliamentary Session on 24 May 2016, the Street Lighting System concerns several Public 
Bodies  namely,  the  Road  Development  Authority  (RDA),  the  Local  Authorities  and  the 
Central Electricity Board (CEB). 

As far as the RDA is concerned, it has the responsibility to install street lighting on all 
classified roads, that is, main roads and motorways, at the initial stage of a road construction 
project,  that  is,  at  the  time  of  construction  of  new  roads  falling  under  its  purview.  
Maintenance of the network is catered for under these construction contracts for a period of 
one year only.   

After the construction of the road, the RDA hands over the street lighting network to 
the  Local  Authority  concerned,  which  has  the  responsibility  for  its  maintenance  all 

 

152 

throughout the island, as per existing legislation.  The involvement of the CEB is mainly to 
provide electricity for the street lightings. 

However,  on  07  April  2016,  Government  decided  that  the  responsibility  for  the 
lighting of Motorways be entrusted to the CEB while Local Authorities would be responsible 
for the lighting of other classified and non-classified roads.  A Technical Committee at the 
level  of  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  is  examining  the  legal  and  technical 
implications of the project.  

According to information obtained from the District Council of Grand Port, a survey 
was carried out on 22 April 2016 to identify the deficiencies in the street lighting network at 
Mahebourg and to examine the need and the possibility of extending that network.  During 
the survey, it was observed that - 

there are 97 poles which are spaced at an average interval of 30m; 
96 street lanterns have been provided; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  1 pole is not equipped with street lantern as the switch pole accommodates a 

transformer; 

(iv)  7  decorative  lamps  are  not  functional  along  Cavendish  Bridge.    The  Council 
has several times replaced/ repaired these lamps but they have been repeatedly 
damaged  by  vandals.  Procurement  procedures  have  been  initiated  for  the 
purchase  of  materials  and  spare  parts.    The  works  are  scheduled  to  be 
completed by mid-June 2016, and 
there are several stretches along the main road where no street lighting network 
exists over a total estimated length of 1634m as detailed hereunder - 

(v) 

 
 
 
 

a) From Kong supermarket to Hong Kong Bank 
 
b) Caunhye Plaza to filling Station Total 
c) Shiva Photo Express to Steven Hills   
 
 
d) End of Gavendish Bridge to Bus stop  

 
  
 
 

       260 mts 
        80 mts 
       105 mts 
       124 mts 

e) End of Grand Bel Air to beginning of Morcellement VRS Ville Noire  
 
       255 mts 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e) End of Morcellement Délices to NHDC 

 

 

        810 mts 

 

153 

Total 

 

 

 

 

 

  

        1634 mts 

The cost of providing street lighting thereat (poles, conductors, lamps and processing 
fees)  over  a  cumulative  length  of  1634m  has  been  estimated  by  the  District  Council  at 
Rs1.3m.  However, the CEB is being consulted for the exact costing.  

The project is being envisaged for implementation by the District Council, subject to 

availability of funds in the next budget.  

LE BOUCHON PUBLIC BEACH - AMENITIES 

 

(No. A/17) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  Le 
Bouchon  Public  Beach,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  rehabilitation/ 
upgrading/uplifting thereof, including the provision thereat of – 

(a) adequate parking facilities; 
(b) installation of kiosks and  benches, and  
(c) installation of lighting system and if so, when and if not, why not. 

Reply: Basic amenities are already available at Le Bouchon public beach and include 

toilet facilities, lighting system, benches and a kiosk.  

However,  consideration  will  be  given  to  implement  a  project  to  uplift  the  existing 
amenities and facilities at the public beach during the next financial year. I am informed that 
a  designated  area  for  parking  has  already  been  identified  and  provision  has  already  been 
made  for  the  installation  of  10  additional  solar  lamps.  The  uplifting  works  will  take  into 
consideration the fact that bathing is strictly prohibited at Le Bouchon public beach. 

 

TROIS BOUTIQUES - WATER PIPES - ASBESTOS 

(No. A/18) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
Trois Boutiques  and Cité Trois  Boutiques, in Constituency  No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine 
Magnien, he will state if he has been made aware that the old water pipes contain asbestos, 
thus representing hazards to the inhabitants thereat, and if so, will he, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Central Water Authority, information as to if consideration will be 
given for the urgent replacement thereof and if so, when and if not, why not. 

154 

 
Reply: I am informed by the Central Water Authority that the water supply network at 
Royal  Road,  Trois  Boutiques  and  Cité  Trois  Boutiques  consists  of  500m  and  1500m  of 
asbestos cement pipes respectively. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that  the  pipe  network  in  Cité  Trois 

Boutiques will be renewed during the next financial year at the estimated cost of Rs25 m. 

 

 
 
 

MAHEBOURG HOSPITAL – SERVICES & RENOVATION 

(No. A/19) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mahebourg 
Hospital, he will state – 

(a) the  services  provided  thereat,  indicating  if  consideration  will  be  given  for 

additional specialized services to be provided round the clock thereat, and  

(b) if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  complete  renovation/upgrading  the  of 

building, since it is old and in a derelict state. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, Mahebourg hospital provides the following 

services on a 24 hour basis – 

•  Accident & Emergency Department 
•  Pharmacy services 
•  Laboratory  services  (HB,  FBS,  RBS,  Pregnancy  test,  Urine  for  microscopy 

and stools for microscopy) 

•  One female ward with attached Labour Ward for deliveries  
•  One Male Ward 
•  One Male Ward (for rehabilitation for alcohol abuse – 6 beds) 
•  One Detox and Rehabilitation Centre for drug addicts (Treatment of Opioid 

Addiction) under the case of Harm Reduction Unit. 

Other services provided during the day time (9.00 a.m to 4.00 p.m) are – 

•  Unsorted OPD 
•  Dental Services 
•  Non Communicable Diseases clinic 
•  Dietitian clinic 

 

155 

•  X-Ray services 
•  Physiotherapy 
•  Community Based Rehabilitation Services 
•  Ante Natal Clinic/Family Planning /Cash gift 
•  Well baby clinic/Vaccination 
•  Foot care clinic 

Specialised Clinics 

•  Obstetrics/Gynaecology 
•  Paediatrics 
•  Psychiatry 
•  Dermatology 
•  Ophthalmology 
•  ENT 
•  Occupational Health 
•  Specialist NCD clinic by Diabetologist 

It is not envisaged to provide additional specialised services round the clock thereat 
because of low attendances at the hospital and there is no demand for additional specialised 
services. 

Given the limited resources and that the services provided are adequate there is no 
need  at  this  stage  to  renovate/upgrade  the  hospital.  However,  the  Ministry  for  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  would  be  requested  to  advise  on  the  way  forward  after 
carrying out a comprehensive survey, in consultation with the National Heritage Fund as the 
building is a colonial one. 

 

 

