No. 22 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

MONDAY 08 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 22 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 08 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

BASIC INVALID’S PENSION – ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions  whether, in regard to 
the children with disabilities, she will state  –  

(a) 

the number thereof below the age of 15 who will henceforth benefit from the 
Basic Invalid’s Pension, indicating –  

(i) 

if  the  eligibility  criteria  to  benefit  thereunder  will  be  the  same  as 
presently obtained;  

(ii) 

how the autistic children will be included thereunder, and  

(iii)  

the  sums  provided  in  the  Budget  2016-2017  for  the  implementation 
thereof;  

(b) 

(c) 

the Non-Governmental Organisations that will benefit from the 50% grant-in-
aid increase, and  

how  the  Strategic  Paper  purporting  to  review  the  Special  Education  Needs 
sector will be prepared. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the payment 
of  the  Basic  Invalid’s  Pension  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  section  8  of  the  National 
Pensions Act and is in accordance with the Sixth Schedule of the Act.  As a matter of fact, 
section 8 provides for a person to receive a Basic Invalid’s Pension where the person is likely 
to be so disabled for a period of at least 12 months.  As the law stands presently, eligibility to 
that pension is tied with an age criterion, that is, the person should have reached the age of 15 
and should be under the age of 60. 

It  is  worth  highlighting  that  for  the  purpose,  “disabled”  means  “suffering  from  a 
disablement  of  not  less  than  60%  and  resulting  from  loss  of  mental  or  physical  faculty.” 
Thus, as announced in the Budget Speech, at paragraph 327, henceforth an applicant below 
the age of 15 qualifies for the Basic Invalid’s Pension provided he is medically assessed as 
suffering from a disability of not less than 60% and which disability is likely to last for a 
period of 12 months. 

 

8 

 
In reply to part (a) of the question, I have to inform the House that presently there are 
3,130 children below 15 who are drawing the Carer’s Allowance under the Social Aid Act.  
These  children  would,  without  the  age  criterion,  normally  have  qualified  for  the  Basic 
Invalid’s Pension.  It must, however, be pointed out that payment of Carer’s Allowance under 
the  Social  Aid  Act  is  income-tested,  that  is,  the  aggregate  income  of  the  parents  must  not 
exceed  Rs350,000  annually.    A  beneficiary  under  that  scheme  may  qualify  for  a  benefit 
ranging between Rs2,972 and Rs3,872, depending on whether the beneficiary is also drawing 
either an Incontinence Allowance or is bedridden. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  fact,  that  quite  a  number  of  applications  have  not  been 
favourably determined although the medical assessment revealed more than 60% disability 
over  a  period  of  at  least  12  months,  just  because  the  parents  did  not  satisfy  the  income 
requirement.  With  the  modification  of  the  parameters  of  eligibility  for  Basic  Invalid’s 
Pension, those cases now become candidates for consideration for the benefit. 

 
From  records  available,  it  has  been  found  that  there  are  some  500  such  cases.    I 
personally  consider  that,  as  a  caring  Government,  such  a  discrimination  should  not  be 
allowed.  As a logical conclusion, these cases will now be reviewed while ensuring that the 
necessary administrative procedures are followed. 

 
With this major change that is being operated under the Basic Invalid’s Pension, all 
those children will, henceforth, qualify for the Basic Invalid’s Pension at the present rate of 
Rs5,250 monthly.  The Ministry of Social Security is making immediate arrangements for all 
these cases to be duly processed.  I am assuring the House that I shall ensure that this is done 
within  the  shortest  possible  time  frame,  so  that  no  undue  hardship  is  caused  to  these 
beneficiaries. 

Regarding part (a) (i) of the question, as I have explained, the eligibility criterion has 
been  changed;  more  precisely,  in  terms  of  removal  of  the  restricting  age  factor  and  the 
income-test. 

As for part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that diagnosis of autism is a very 
complex  exercise.  It  involves  a  multi-disciplinary  team  of  medical  specialists,  namely 
Psychiatrist,  Psychologist,  Speech  and  Language  Pathologist,  and  Speech  Therapist.  The 
system currently in place already provides for applicants who suffer from autistic spectrum 
disorder to be entertained by my Ministry. 

 

9 

 
The nature and extent of the pathology are usually certified by either the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life or Specialists from the private sector.  I am further informed that, 
previously, autism was classified under mental retardation, but in the recent past, the medical 
certification is more precise and it indicates that the person is suffering from autism. 

Madam Speaker, it will be good for me to inform the House that, on 21 September, 
last year, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life had diagnosed 51 patients suffering from 
autism, with 37 out of them being between 0 to 10 years, 13 between 10 to 20 years, and 1 
above 20 years.  These cases are examined by the Medical Unit of my Ministry to assess any 
specific needs such as Carer’s Allowance, Incontinence Allowance, severity of disability, and 
whether the persons are bedridden.  A Basic Invalid’s Pension is payable to those who are 
above 15 and who have a 60% degree of disability, and a Carer’s Allowance is payable to 
those below 15 years of age.  Over and above, on a felt-need basis, they are paid Rs450 for 
being  bedridden,  Rs450  for  being  incontinent  and  Rs450  for  being  severely  disabled.  
Besides, bus fare is refunded to the parents accompanying their autistic children to schools 
and Day Care centres.  

With the revision of the Basic Invalid’s Pension Scheme, to cater for children below 
15  years,  children  suffering  from  autistic  disorders  will  be  duly  taken  care  of.    After 
consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  autistic  disorders  have  been 
included in the medical guidelines whereby such disorders carry a more than 60% disability.  
Thus, children with autistic disorders will, henceforth, qualify for the Basic Invalid’s Pension 
and any additional support will be paid out on a felt-need basis as may be recommended by 
the Medical Board. 

With regard to part (a)(iii) of the question, necessary budgetary provisions have been 
made for payment of Basic Invalid’s Pension for children below 15 years, who qualify for 
such a benefit.  In this connection, Rs130 m. have been transferred from the Social Aid vote 
from  where  Carer’s  Allowance  was  being  paid  to  Item  22-103  Basic  Invalid’s  Pension. 
Additionally,  Rs70  m.  have  been  provided  under  that  said  vote  item  bringing  the  total 
provision to Rs200 m., which should, in principle, be sufficient.   

Insofar as part (b) of the question is concerned, Madam Speaker, I have to inform the 
House  that  grants  are  paid  to  NGOs  from  two  sources,  namely,  from  the  Ministry  of 
Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  which  have 
been  provided  with  Rs90  m.  for  2016-2017  and  the  NGO  Trust  Fund  of  the  Ministry  of 

 

10 

Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions which have been provided with 
Rs20.6 m. for 2016-2017, out of which the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
has provided for Rs1 m. to Autisme Maurice as a grant.  The grant payable to the NGO Trust 
Fund is meant primarily for NGOs to meet partly their operational costs and sustain services 
whereas the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific 
Research  supports  financially  the  NGOs  which  are  operating  as  Special  Education  Needs 
Schools.  Details regarding NGOs which benefit from the grant may be laid in the Library of 
the National Assembly if the hon. Leader of the Opposition so wishes. 

Coming to part (c), the last part of the question, I am informed that, in the context of 
the Nine-Year Schooling project, the concerns of children with special needs will be taken on 
board,  especially  since  this  major  programme  is  meant  to  be  both  inclusive  and 
comprehensive; and that means catering for the needs of all children, without any distinction. 

There  will  be  wide  consultations  with  Civil  Society  Organisations  engaged  in  the 
sector, so that the new scheme can draw from the broad experience of these bodies to uphold 
the  Nine-Year  Schooling  project,  especially  the  component  which  promotes  inclusive 
education. 

I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  intends  to  leverage  on  our  bilateral  and 
multilateral linkages to tap some of the best practices currently undertaken in different parts 
of the world. 

However, while we will solicit foreign expertise, we will ensure that the strategy is 
properly  developed  and  is  in  line  with  the  local  conditions  and  considerations  to  make  it 
meaningful. 

In the final reckoning, such a strategy will be directly aligned considerations with the 

Sustainable Development Goal 4 on Education. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  the  details 
provided in her answer.  On the number of children below 15 who will now benefit from the 
Basic  Invalid’s  Pension,  in  his  speech,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development said ‘around 3,130’.  So, is the hon. Minister confirming that there are records 
that show that there are  3,130 children who fall in that category, and that those who fall now, 
will not be losing any benefits enjoyed so far as, unfortunately, is the case for the old age 
pensioners when they reach 60, they lose their Basic Invalid’s Pension? 

 

11 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:    Well,  let  me  first  of  all  thank  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition for having put this PNQ.  We are, today, discussing in an amicable manner the 
welfare of children with disabilities which is the concern not only of the Government, but the 
Opposition too.  Let me assure the House that our Government is very concerned about the 
welfare of children with disabilities and their protection should outweigh any other factor.  
However, the House should appreciate that the Government is doing its level best.  We are 
deploying  all  efforts  to  enhance  the  quality  of  life  of  children  with  disabilities.  We  have 
records regarding actual beneficiaries.  New applications will be considered against the new 
provisions of the scheme as is spelt out in the Budget.  

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has made reference to this 60% 
‘guillotine’,  that  is,  they  must  at  least  be  60%  invalid  to  benefit  from  the  Basic  Invalid’s 
Pension.  Will the hon. Minister agree with me that it is quite arbitrary, why 60% and not 
55% or 50%? It is quite arbitrary!  And I am given to understand that it is always assessed by 
Medical Boards. Can the hon. Minister enlighten us why 60% and not 50% and will she look 
at anomalies, like, for example, if to get Basic Invalid’s Pension, somebody must be invalid 
at least 60% from both ears; if you do not qualify with one ear, you lose the Basic Invalid’s  
Pension completely? So, is this arbitrary criterion of 60% being re-examined? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well, in any scheme which provides for payment of Basic 
Invalid’s Pension, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will agree with me that there should be a 
percentage of disability which qualifies a claimant to benefit from such an invalidity pension.  
In all modesty, I would say that everywhere, all around the world, this is the principle which 
governs the benefit of payment of Basic Invalidity Pension.  Ce 60%  d’incapacité  a toujours 
été là.  Cela existe depuis belle lurette.  So, I think we need to have a range.  We need to have 
checks and balances because the Basic Invalid’s Pension, as we all know, is meant to cater 
for those who are severely handicapped and for those who need financial assistance.  Less 
that 60% will fall under the Social Aids Scheme. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, I am particularly concerned about autistic children, 
children with autism.  As the hon. Minister knows, autism was much neglected by all of us, 
the world over, until recently and we are progressing.  But, the additional problem is that it is 
very difficult to place a figure on autism. There are all sorts of individual cases of autistic 
children and so on.  So, that is why I am particularly concerned about children with autism.   

 

12 

Now,  I  am  surprised  -  I  hope  pleasantly  surprised  -  if  it  is  confirmed,  that  there 
already  exists  a  Board  that  examines  autistic  children  and  that  there  are  already  autistic 
children benefitting from the Disability Pension. Is the hon. Minister sure of that and, if yes, 
can I know how many autistic children benefit from the Basic Invalid’s Pension today? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Autistic  disorders  have  been  included  in  the  Medical 
Guidelines  whereby  such  disorders  carry  a  more  than  60%  disability.  If  I  can  explain,  the 
medical guidelines have now been updated. The ‘Medical Guidelines’ is a document which 
has been prepared by specialists from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. We have, 
most recently, updated the medical guidelines and autistic disorders are indeed mentioned in 
the medical guidelines. For instance, if a claimant makes an application accompanying by a 
medical  certificate,  whether  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  or  a  private 
doctor, he will be assessed by the Medical Board.   If the medical certificate certifies that the 
claimant, be it a child or an adult, is suffering from autistic disorders, the Medical Board will 
not question the disability mentioned therein. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  we,  therefore,  have  the  figure  of  autistic  children  at  present 

benefitting from the Basic Invalid’s Pension? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, hon. Leader of the Opposition, let me check with my 
officers because I, myself, don’t have the figure. So, let’s see if my officers can be of some 
help. 

(Interruptions) 

Unfortunately, we do not presently have the details regarding the number of beneficiaries as 
all these beneficiaries are classified, I understand, under the Basic Invalid’s Pension. 

If I may add, Madam Speaker, in the last PNQ that the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
put to me, I did mention that a survey will be carried out to know about the exact number of 
persons suffering from disabilities. With the survey, I hope we will be getting the percentage 
of children and adults suffering from autistic disorders because this will be one of the reasons 
why the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions will ask for 
a survey to be carried out. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, on autism, again,  I hope and  I am sure that the hon. Minister 
must be aware of the letter recently, 05 July 2016, written to the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development,  on  the  eve  of  Budget  presentation,  on  precisely  Screening  an 
Assessment  of  Autism  in  Mauritius,  where  they  said  that  they  have  a  Board  ‘Autisme 

 

13 

Maurice’, which is very professional, very dedicated; they have a Board. Are they involved, 
in  any  way,  in  assessing  the  autistic  children  who  deserve  this,  who  are  entitled  to  this 
disability allowance? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t think they are involved.  

Mr Bérenger: I think I’ll move on to the next part of my question because I would 
have  thought  that  the  Minister  would  have  discussed  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development the contents of that letter, but, never mind, we will come back on 
that.  

Can  I  move  on  to  the  50%  increase  in  the  grant-in-aid  to  the  NGOs  involved  in 
Special Education Needs? Of course, I wish to have the list if the hon. Minister will place a 
copy because they all or nearly all deserve that increase. Now, Autisme Maurice, I heard the 
Minister said, has benefitted from a grant. Is it a one-off grant or is it an ongoing grant? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: An ongoing grant. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Thank  you,  hon.  Minister!  There  is  another  NGO  that  is  of  urgent 
interest to me, it is the Bureau de l’Éducation Catholique. For nearly two years now, it has 
been  agreed  by  the  previous  Government  and  by  this  Government,  that  Le  Bureau  de 
l’Éducation Catholique would take over the running of 9 schools at present run by ABEIM 
that  involves  254  children.  So,  can  I  know  whether  the  hon.  Minister  has  taken  the 
opportunity - because this is urgent, they are going to close down, they cannot go on anymore 
– to discuss it with both the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education 
and Scientific Research and the Minister of Finance and Economic Development? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: If my memory serves me right, I did say in my last PNQ 
that I have had consultation with my colleague, hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun. I understand 
that it will be so. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been 
good enough to increase by 50% the grant to these NGOs. Can I know whether the grant-in-
aid formula for Special Needs School will also be reviewed upwards? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. Indeed, it will be reviewed. 

Mr Bérenger: Thank you, Madam.  The last part of my question! Thank you for the 
information on how the Special Education Needs Sector will get a strategic paper reviewing 

 

14 

the whole sector. Can I know whether it will be by a Committee, by a Commission and, if 
yes, chaired by whom and the composition thereof? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I have been given to understand that it will be done 

by a Committee. 

Mr Bérenger: Therefore, has the hon. Minister had the opportunity of discussing with 

her colleague, about the Chairperson eventually, and the composition? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, the discussion is ongoing. 

Mr Bérenger: Through the Minister, can I put the fundamental question? I am sure 
she is aware since reading the United Nations Report on disabled people in Mauritius, which 
I  referred  to  recently,  that  the  key  issue  that  will  have  to  be  considered  by  this  Special 
Education Needs Sector Strategic Partner Team, will be that we are stuck now, because for 
years  we  have  been  giving  money,  not  enough,  but  money  to  NGOs,  not  enough  as  the 
United Nations says, but, at the same time, we have been not giving money this time to make 
our schools inclusive, that is, ordinary schools will need to be funded so that they can admit 
handicapped children as well. Now, we are stuck in a way, in a vicious circle because the 
NGOs rightly asked for more money. The more money we give here, the less money we have 
to  put  into  making  our  schools  inclusive.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  she  has 
discussed with her colleague? This is the crucial issue! How are we going to move from the 
present situation where everything is done with NGOs without enough money to a situation 
where all our schools will eventually become inclusive? How are we going to succeed in that 
transition? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  I  have  been  given  to  understand  that  gradually  disabled 
children  are  being  included  in  the  mainstream  education  and  special  Integrated  Units  are 
being created in primary schools, all over the island. 

Mr Bérenger: Reference has been made to special units. Is the hon. Minister aware 
that this is precisely what the United Nations asked us not to do, that is, not to set up special 
units that are being set up, but to adapt the schools, generally without special units to admit 
those kids? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  as  far  as  possible,  children  are  being  canalised 
through the mainstream education, but where we can’t, then the Special Integrated Units are 
being created to provide education for those children. 

 

15 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  My  question  pertains  to  the  last  part, 
special education needs and training. There is a legal requirement for companies to employ, 
at least, 3% of their workforce from children with disabilities. Then, on the other hand, there 
is the Training and Employment of Disabled Board within the Ministry of Social Security, 
National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  the  remit  of  which  is  to  train  persons  with 
disability  to  completely  integrate  the  mainstream  society  and  with  a  view  to  securing 
employment  eventually.  Companies  are  not  charitable  institutions,  the  bottom  line  is 
profitability.  Would  the  hon.  Minister  be  able  to  clarify  us  on  the  following:  how  is  the 
training,  the  TEDPB  reinventing  itself  or  shaking  up  itself  with  a  view  to  providing  the 
appropriate training that is geared to these companies for them to be able to employ them 
because often times those children once they finish their training they don’t get a job, they 
stay at home and they feel depressed? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t want to be nasty, but the UN Convention… 

(Interruptions) 

The UN Convention has been signed in 2007 and ratified in 2010. Mauritius submitted its 
Initial Report in 2012.  Can you tell me what has been done between 2010 to 2014? 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Let me finish! The hon. Member will be saying that I am 
Minister for nearly two years now. Do you know that we don’t even have a proper database? 
The  database  was  not  a  reliable  one.    We  are  setting  up  a  new  database.  The  Hearing 
Committee  was  not  functioning  as  it  should  be.      Members  were  often  absent.    We  are 
revisiting  the  composition  of  the  Hearing  Committee,  the  Committee  of  Employers  and 
creating a new reliable database.  All this, Madam Speaker, can’t be done overnight. The hon. 
Member should be patient. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order!  

16 

Mr Baloomoody: There is one issue which is not clear. Can I ask the hon. Minister 
whether  those  children,  who  are  below  15  and  henceforth  will  get  the  Basic  Invalid’s 
Pension, will still benefit from the Carer’s Allowance? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Of course, they will!   Indeed, this is a landmark measure. 
We are a caring Government.  Sadly, no Government has bothered to address this lingering 
concern.  I, myself, was receiving complaints from parents all over the island. Parents come 
to see us saying that they can’t understand why their disabled children could not benefit from 
the Basic Invalid’s Pension.   The measure, I must admit, was very unfair. So, we have taken 
the decision to remove the age limit discrimination.  As I have said at the beginning of the 
discussion, we mean business, we have at heart the interest and well-being of those disabled 
children.  We are on the right track. Be patient and I do hope that if need be, we will come up 
with additional measures to better protect and promote rights of persons with disabilities. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: To conclude, I would like to, through the Minister, ask Government 
whether  the  time  has  come  to  better  coordinate  action  in  favour  of  handicapped  people, 
people with disabilities, children with disabilities to better coordinate action of Government 
because,    apart  from  her  Ministry,  there  are  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  everything  depends  finally  on  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, also the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Ministry of Education and 
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research of course, and the Ministry of 
Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare. So, there are five Ministries and 
there is an urgent need to coordinate much better how Government performs as a team. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Rightly said, there is an urgent need to coordinate all the 
sectors concerned, Ministries and Departments if we really want to better the system.  We 
will be working on this particular recommendation. I thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
for his suggestion. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

 

 

 

17 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

 (12.05 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): So, let me continue! 

Merci, merci! Thank you. 

In a very polite manner! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I am feeling indeed blessed to be a Member of the Government. I 
have listened with great interest and pleasure to the various speeches of Members from both 
sides of the House. A wide range of subjects have already been covered by my colleagues on 
this side of the House for which I am grateful. I will, therefore, limit myself to the measures 
which touch my Ministry. 

Allow me in all modesty and humility to bring my contribution to this very important 
debate concerning the economy and the welfare of our country. Let me, right from the start, 

 

18 

say  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the  2016-2017  Budget  reflects  fully  the  commitment  of  our 
Government to meet the aspirations of our Mauritian people. 

Vous  serez  d’accord,  Madame  la  présidente,  si  je  vous  dis  que  ce  budget  est  un 
budget dynamique qui fait plaisir à tout le monde. C’est un budget qui vise à lutter contre la 
pauvreté, un budget qui donne un nouveau souffle à notre élan de développement et surtout 
un budget qui est en parfait accord avec notre Vision 2030. The hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development has, indeed, marked a new era of development.  

The Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions is a very 
important  Ministry.  Of  course,  every  Ministry  plays  a  highly  important  role  but  the 
peculiarity of my Ministry is that it deals directly with the public and, most importantly, with 
the vulnerable segment of our population. A Government is judged by the way it treats its 
people especially those in need of help and assistance and our Government is deploying all 
means to alleviate the suffering of those falling under this category. 

The yearly budget of the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions is among the largest. This is because we provide a slew of facilities and benefits 
to the needy. For example, in 2015 and 2016, a sum of Rs13.1 billion was paid out to 179,000 
beneficiaries of Basic Retirement Pension. An amount of around Rs1 billion was disbursed 
for the payment of social aid benefits while Rs1.8 billion was spent on the payment of Invalid 
Basic Pension beneficiaries. 

I wish to point out that a number of departments have experienced progress during the 
last  financial  year  and  we  have  brought  forward  many  positive  changes  to  the  pension 
system. The Budget 2016-2017 works towards further reinforcing the effectiveness of a fair 
pension system. In fact, the budget of my Ministry has been increased from Rs19.8 billion for 
the  financial  year  2015-2016  to  Rs21.2  billion  for  the  financial  year  2016-2017.  I  am 
confident  that  these  financial  resources  will  help  us  further  enhance  the  quality  and 
effectiveness of our services with a view to providing more relief to the population. 

I will now proceed to share with this House those measures which have been taken to 

improve the services provided by my Ministry for the public. 

As I informed the House last year when debating on the 2015/2016 Budget Speech, 
Government had decided to construct a Recreation Centre in Riambel and the required funds 
for the financial year 2015/1016 were provided. Since then, the contract for the construction 
of a Recreation Centre for the Elderly  and Disabled in Riambel, on the basis of a Design, 

 

19 

Build and Turnkey has been awarded on 12 November 2015. The site was handed over to the 
contractor on 03 June 2016 and works started immediately after. According to the contract 
provisions,  construction  works  will  last  for  15  months  and  the  project  will  be  hopefully 
completed in 2017. 

This  project,  once  completed,  will  allow  my  Ministry  to  operate  four  Recreation 
Centres  in  all  and  thus  answer  to  the  needs  of  more  and  more  elderly  persons  who  are 
applying for a stay in a Recreation Centre. A stay in one of the Recreation Centres, with all 
the facilities which are put at the disposal of the elderly persons, is a sure means to provide 
some enjoyable rest and leisure to these persons. 

In line with the Government Programme 2015/2019 which spells out that charitable 
institutions would be required to install CCTV cameras on their premises, my Ministry has 
implemented  a  project  in  February  2016  whereby  all  owners  and  managers  of  charitable 
institutions have been supported financially to arrange for their respective institutions to be 
fitted and equipped with an internal CCTV camera system. This project is meant to enhance 
the protection and security of the inmates, who vulnerable persons either by the age factor or 
because of a disability. 

To  ensure  that  the  system  is  an  effective  means  for  proper  surveillance  and 
monitoring of the strategic areas of the charitable institution, the Ministry of Social Security, 
National Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions has, with the  relevant technical advice, set the 
minimum standard and technical specifications which each institution should respect so that 
the security device serves its intended purpose. 

To date, out of the 27 charitable institutions, 21 have already implemented the CCTV 
camera  project  and  they  have  accordingly  benefited  from  the  100%  grant  payable  by  my 
Ministry for that project. To date, an amount of around Rs736,000 has already been disbursed 
for this project. 

To be fair to Charitable Institutions which have already equipped themselves with a 
CCTV  camera  system  prior  to  year  2014,  that  is,  before  the  project  was  initiated  by  my 
Ministry, measures are being devised to provide for a partial refund of their project cost to 
these institutions. 

Hon. Members would recall that last year, I referred to the measures enunciated in the 
Government Programme 2015/2019, to the effect that special support care will be extended to 
elderly  persons  with  disabilities  and  those  living  alone  as  part  of  a  strategy  to  provide  a 

 

20 

“Service de Proximité” to them. The new scheme allows these elderly persons to benefit from 
the services of a physiotherapist, an occupational therapist, a psychologist or a social worker 
as the case may be. 

The modalities for providing such a service have been worked out and my Ministry 
has started to implement the project to cover, initially, elderly persons aged 90 and above and 
who are in receipt Of Carer’s Allowance permanently. 

The  project  is  being  implemented  as  from  June  2016  with  a  target  group  of  1,500 
beneficiaries. It is being operated more or less as a pilot project and based on the outcome of 
the  pilot  project,  the  scheme  will  gradually  be  extended  for  a  broader  coverage  and  with 
adjustments and improvements where so required. 

In  line  with  our  obligations  under  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of 
Persons with Disabilities, a whole series of actions have been and are being taken to ensure 
that persons with disabilities are not in any manner whatsoever discriminated against. One of 
the most important actions in this respect is, of course, the finalisation of a draft Disability 
Bill. 

By  now,  much  ground  has  been  covered  and  we  have  reached  a  stage  where  the 
Attorney  General’s  Office  has  already  given  its  preliminary  vetting  in  respect  of  the  draft 
Bill. After official consultations have been held with Ministries and departments concerned in 
May and June this year, the Ministry is at present working on the consequential amendments 
which this proposed legal framework calls for. To make sure that all stakeholders are taken 
on board in the development of such an important legal framework, the draft Bill will shortly 
be shared with a broader spectrum of stakeholders.  

Needless for me, Madam Speaker, to reiterate that Government will spare no efforts 
to ensure that the best possible conditions are created to enable persons with disabilities to 
join  the  mainstream  society  and  to  benefit  from  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  rights  and 
privileges. 

I  said  it  in  my  reply  to  a  PNQ  on  12  July  2016,  Government  works  in  close 
partnership  with  other  stakeholders  to  uphold  and  promote  its  policy  aims  and  objectives 
geared  towards  improving  the  quality  of  life  of  our  fellow  countrymen  who  are  most 
vulnerable. The role and contribution of NGOs can never be overemphasised. They are a key 
player.  In  line  with  the  Government  Programme  2015/2019  which  aims  at  “Achieving 
Meaningful  Change”,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 

 

21 

Institutions has come up with a strategy to professionalise the social sector and strengthen the 
capacity of NGOs. 

A  pilot  project  on  Recognition  of  Prior  Learning  in  Social  Work  Practice  was 
successfully completed in June 2016 with a first cohort of 32 NGO representatives who have 
been RPL certified to an equivalent of a National Certificate in Social Work Level 2. In terms 
of  impact,  this  is  not  only  going  to  boost  up  the  self-esteem  and  motivation  of  the  social 
workers but it will also impact positively on the quality of services being provided by NGOs. 

Promoting Social Entrepreneurship also ranks high on this Government agenda. The 
vision of creating a Nation of Entrepreneurship will be incomplete if the social dimension is 
overlooked.  As  a  result,  my  Ministry  is  driving  and  permeating  the  innovative  concept  of 
social entrepreneurship in the NGO sector to enable NGOs to diversify their funding base and 
to  encourage  them  to  come  up  with  activities  for  the  economic  empowerment  of  the 
vulnerable segment of the population.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  know  that  there  have  been  a  few  upsurges  in  the  number  of 
occupants  of  the  Rehabilitation  Youth  Centres  despite  all  efforts  made  to  ward  off  such 
occurrences. With the assistance of an expert, namely Mr William Cullen, a Rehabilitation 
Youth  Centre  Strategic  Plan  has  been  elaborated.  Government  has  approved 
the 
implementation  of  the  recommendations  made  in  that  strategic  plan.  The  main  one  is  the 
conversion  of  the  present  Rehabilitation  Youth Centre  concept  into  a  totally  different  one, 
which advocates the setting up of Small Therapeutic Homes to accommodate some 5 to 8 
girls  at  a  time.  This  approach  focuses  on  the  rehabilitation  aspects  and  emphasises  on  the 
reinstatement of the child in the mainstream society. 

Government has demonstrated its commitment to help these children with a view to 
their reinsertion into their family units. Hence, a provision of Rs3 m. has been made in the 
2016/2017  Budget  to  kick  start  the  Small  Therapeutic  Home  Project.  This  is  indeed  an 
important step which is being taken towards turning round the situation and ensuring real and 
effective rehabilitation of inmates. 

As  I  am  here  talking  about  children  and  juveniles,  it  would  be  relevant  for  me  to 
inform the House that, at the level of Probation and After-Care Service, much effort is being 
deployed to rehabilitate  and guide these adolescents. The staff strength  has been enhanced 
with the recruitment of 10 officers. As a result, the quality of probation work at the level of 

 

22 

social  enquiry,  supervision  of  offenders,  counselling  work  and  preventive  talks  in  the 
community has considerably improved. 

Suicides  and  suicidal  tendencies  have  for  some  time  been  quite  prevalent  in 
Mauritius.  The  Life  Plus  Unit  of  my  Ministry  is  the  working  hand  of  the  Government  in 
dealing with the problem of suicide. 

In September 2015, following the publication of the research ‘Study on  the Causes 
and Consequences of Suicidal Behaviour among Teenagers in Mauritius’, Government has 
set  up  a  Steering  Committee  to  work  on  the  recommendations  of  the  study.  A  National 
Strategy Paper and an Action Plan on Suicide 2016–2020 has been prepared and will soon be 
finalised. 

Madam Speaker, our ageing population does have an impact on our pension system. 
At present, I understand there are six employees to support a pensioner and by 2030, there 
will be three employees to support a pensioner. In order to meet this challenge, the Budget 
2016/2017 
to  make 
recommendations. By taking a pro-active approach, we will ensure that we are fully equipped 
to grapple with the challenges we face in the wake of our ageing population. 

the  setting  up  of  a  high 

is  providing  for 

level  committee 

My Ministry has already established a data-sharing system facilitating the exchange 
of  data  thereby  enabling  my  Ministry  to  reduce  administrative  burden  and  prevent 
overpayment cases. Better control mechanisms for identification of overpayment have been 
implemented through an automated electronic exchange channel with the collaboration of the 
Civil Status Office and the Passport and Immigration Office. This has led to timely detection 
of  deaths,  remarriages  and  departures  of  beneficiaries  from  the  country.  There  were  2,976 
cases of overpayment amounting to around Rs81 m. up to June 2015 compared to 1,688 cases 
amounting  to  around  Rs89  m.  up  to  June  2016.    The  total  amount  recouped  in  2015  was 
around Rs10 m. while in 2016, it was around Rs15 m.. Total refund for new cases for 2015 
was around Rs6 m. and for 2016, it is around Rs8 m. thus showing an increase of around 41% 
in amount recovered, Madam Speaker. 

Apart from the pension perspective, we have to look at the problem in terms of review 
of our existing policies, strategies and facilities as well as other social and health services so 
that  they  become  responsive  to  the  change  in  our  economic  landscape  which  an  ageing 
population carries in its wake. Thus, a National Strategy Paper and Action Plan 2016-2020 on 
ageing has been worked out to chart the main actions required. 

 

23 

This  Budget  2016/2017  goes  further  by  adding  innovation  to  our  social  benefit 
system. We will now benefit from harmonisation of income threshold for eligibility of in-
kind assistance under Social Aid. Assistance in-kind used to be provided to beneficiaries of 
Social Aid with different income ceiling. 

The monthly household income ceiling for eligibility of all kind social assistance is 
now being set to Rs30,000 monthly. We will thus have the same ceiling available for all four 
categories of in-kind assistance. 

its  determination 

This  Government  has  always  shown 

to  eliminate  gender 
discrimination.  The  Budget  2016/2017  has  made  provision  for  the  introduction  of  a 
Widower’s  Contributory  Pension  under  the  National  Pensions  Fund.  At  present,  when  a 
female  spouse  contributing  to  the  National  Pensions  Fund  dies,  the  surviving  spouse 
(widower) is refunded the contributions made by the female spouse as a lump sum. In line 
with the current policy to provide gender neutral services, a Widower’s Contributory Pension 
is being introduced to enable widowers to benefit from pensions under NPF in respect of their 
spouses’ contributions. A very good measure! 

Furthermore, with regard to refund of contributions to non-citizens, it is worth noting 
that the National Pension Act 1976 was amended in January 2012 to provide for the refund of 
contributions to non-citizens at the expiry of their contracts of work. However, the National 
Pensions Act 1976 does not make provision for refund of contributions in circumstances such 
as the death of contributors. Provision is being made in the Budget 2016/2017 to now allow 
refund of contributions to the surviving spouse or the legal representatives of the deceased 
insured non-citizens in case of death. 

For  those  victims  of  accidental  fire,  the  Budget  2016/2017  grants  a  monthly  rental 
allowance of up to Rs5,000 for up to six months.  The victims will thus be assisted financially 
and encouraged to rapidly secure a shelter in the wake of their misfortune. Madam Speaker, 
at this stage,  I will abstain from elaborating on the removal on the age  discrimination and 
disparity  with  respect  to  children  aged  less  than  15  years  as  this  matter  has  already  been 
thrashed out at the level of the PNQ. 

I am pleased with the measures enunciated in the Budget 2016/2017.  It is in line with 
the vision of our Government which is, as you are all aware, to bring meaningful change to 
our country. This Budget lays the foundation for a number of developments and progress and 
I will go as far as saying that we have embarked on an ambitious welfare reform project. 

 

24 

The  measures  have  already  been  announced,  financial  resources  have  already  been 
allocated, now is the time for the real challenge, which is, of course implementation. Now, is 
the time for each Ministry and Department to play its part by delving into the practical stage 
of implementation and therefore this would be the key to real and meaningful change. It is 
only through successful implementation that we will be able to meet our goals. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I wish to, once again, extend my heartful thanks to the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and to all those who have contributed 
towards paving our way to this new era of development. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Aliphon! 

(12.28 a.m.) 

Mr  J.  N.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Riviere):    Merci, 
Madam  Speaker.  Permettez-moi,  avant  tout,  de  féliciter  ma  collègue  l’honorable  Madame 
Jeewa-Daureeawoo pour sa réponse à la PNQ et aussi son discours sur ce budget.  Je crois 
qu’elle a obtenu un dix sur dix.  

Madam Speaker, c’est avec un immense plaisir… 

Taler nous répond twa!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

... que je m’adresse à cette assemblée dans le cadre du budget 2016/2017.   

Malgré l'héritage catastrophique que nous a légué l'ancien gouvernement (et là, je fais 
référence  aux  affaires  BAI,  DBM,  Mauritius  Post,  Route  Verdun,  sans  oublier  les  R  1.4 
milliards de dettes impayées, laissées pour la NDU) et ceci avec, il va sans dire, la complicité 
de  l'opposition  actuelle,  le  gouvernement  Lepep  a  tenu  bon,  et  voilà  deux  ans  qu’il  tient 
fermement la barre. 

Cependant, Madam Speaker, des réalisations, nous en avons concrétisées, et il serait 

bon de le rappeler avant tout à la population et ensuite à l'opposition. 

Contrairement  à  cette  présente  opposition  qui  n'apporte  que  des  critiques  -  et  là,  je 
m’adresse  et  je  me  réfère  aux  propos  de  l’honorable  Reza  Uteem  concernant  le  standing 
ovation à Pravind Jugnauth le jour du budget. Puis-je lui rappeler que le standing ovation est 

 

25 

réservé à ceux qui font du bien dans les bonnes les choses; sinon à qui serait-il destiné? A 
cette opposition stérile ? Ou à leurs vaines critiques ? 

Voyons ! Nous les comprenons. Finalement, n'est-ce pas là leur rôle que de toujours 

contester et de critiquer ? C’est ça l’opposition ! 

Mais  en  tant  que  gouvernement  responsable,  nous  avons  su  manœuvrer  pour  que 
malgré l'héritage catastrophique, chaque Mauricien obtienne un petit plus lors des derniers 
exercices  du  budget.  Oh,  elles  sont  nombreuses  les  mesures  avantageuses  réalisées  par  le 
gouvernement  Lepep !  Je  me  ferai  un  devoir  et  un  plaisir  de  rafraîchir  la  mémoire  de  nos 
amis de l’opposition. 

Le gouvernement Lepep est venu avec des mesures de rééquilibrage, avec la hausse 
des pensions aux personnes âgées, aux orphelins, pour les veuves et nos amis les autrement 
capables avec - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

une compensation salariale de R 600; 

prise en charge par l'Etat des fees des examens de la SC et la HSC ; 

l'eau gratuite pour les familles défavorisées ; 

augmentation de l'aide pour l'obtention des housing loans, 

autant pour l'environnement, autant pour la santé, etc, etc. 

La liste, elle est longue, et nous pouvons en conclure que le gouvernement Lepep a 
amorti  les  inégalités  sociales  et  a  rehaussé  le  pouvoir  d’achat  du  Mauricien.  Souvent, 
l'opposition se veut aveugle et se met en quête de l'impossible ! 

Mais avançons, Madam Speaker! Avançons, et voyons le présent. 

Que  nous  propose  ce  budget  2016-2017,  dans  le  contexte  économique  difficile  que 

connaît le monde ? 

Une certitude, c'est que nous sommes à la croisée des chemins, et il a fallu au ministre 
des Finances d’être dans le bon choix et il a dû prendre des décisions courageuses et tournées 
vers l'avenir. 

Il appartient à tout un chacun de découvrir sans secret ce budget dont l’architecture 
repose sur 10 stratégies clés qui font de ce budget, à mon appréciation, le master stroke of a 
budget ! Mais voilà ! 

 

26 

Laissez-moi partager avec vous les quatre mesures qui me tiennent à cœur. 

Dans le social déjà - 

• 
• 
• 

Baisse du gaz ménager maintenant à R 270 seulement. 
Le seuil d’exemption pour la taxe rehaussée à R 10,000. 
Le plafond pour bénéficier de l’exemption de la taxe immobilière passe de R 2 
millions à R 4 millions. 

En somme, un cocktail de mesures concernant aussi les voitures, les recrutements et 
de  développements.  Je  vous  laisse  le  soin  de  découvrir  le  reste,  et  il  y  en  a  pour  tout  un 
chacun. 

Les PME - 

• 

• 

• 

Suspension de Trade and Licence Fees pour les compagnies payant moins de 
R 5000, pour les trois prochaines années : 75,000 PME sont concernées. 
Pour les entreprises avec un chiffre d'affaires de moins de R 10 millions, elles 
auront un congé fiscal de quatre ans sur les revenus, encore et encore. 
Avez-vous  pris  connaissance  de  l'analyse  des  entreprises  produisant  pour  le 
marché local,  ayant le label  ‘Made in Mauritius’? Les 68 membres de  cette 
association  remercient  le  ministre  pour  ce  budget  qui,  selon  eux,  redonne 
envie d'investir. Quand nous tenons en compte leur poids dans l'économie, ces 
industries emploient directement 55,000 personnes. 

Mon troisième point : La pauvreté 

Etant aussi travailleur social, je ne peux que féliciter le ministre des Finances pour ce 
Plan Marshall tellement complet. Je souhaite à celui qui veut vraiment s'en sortir, de faire le 
pas ; il lui est donné le moyen de mettre un terme à sa pauvreté s’il a la volonté de vouloir le 
faire. 

Comment ne pas saluer cette motivation aux étudiants et à leurs parents, du cash prize 
qui leur sera donné s’ils réussissent leur Forme III, SC et HSC dans le nouveau programme 
éducatif du 9-Year Schooling ? 

Il faudrait maintenant à chaque Mauricien de comprendre l'enjeu économique de l’île 

Maurice, et ce n'est qu'ensemble que nous pourrons relever ce défi pour un avenir certain. 

 

27 

Je souhaite que les Mauricien comprennent et fassent comprendre à l'opposition que, 
contrairement  à  eux,  ils adhèrent  totalement  à  cette  politique  économique,  tout  comme  les 
hommes d'affaires mauriciens soutiennent les propositions du ministre des Finances et qu’ils 
ont su découvrir les secrets de ce budget, tout comme ils se retrouvent dans cette réflexion de 
Salvador Dali – et je cite – 

« Qui  sait  déguster  ne  boit  plus  jamais  pour  le plaisir,  mais  va  à  la  découverte  des 
secrets. » 

Voilà ce que je souhaite à tous pour notre avenir : c’est de se serrer les coudes et aller à la 
découverte des secrets du budget 2016 -2017, et finir par s'en sortir. 

Madam  Speaker,  qu’en  est-il  d’Albion  et  du  Petrol  Hub  qu’on  projette  d’y 
construire ? Je pense que le gouvernement dont je fais partie fera montre de son grand sens 
des  responsabilités  avant  l’octroi  des  différents  permis.  Je  suis  convaincu  que  chaque 
ministère concerné dans ce projet veillera à ce que les procédures pour l’obtention de tout 
permis  seront  scrupuleusement  respectées,  contrairement  à  la  légèreté  avec  laquelle  le 
précédent régime a traité le cas du défunt CT Power. 

Je souhaiterais, en tant que députe et habitant de la région, qu’un Information Desk ou 
des  réunions  d’informations  soit  mis  en  place,  afin  que  les  Forces  Vives  et  les  habitants 
d’Albion  et  des  environs  soient  au  courant  du  projet  et  continuellement  informés  de 
l’évolution  du  projet.  Selon  mon  collègue  ministre  Ashit  Gungah,  c’est  en  place,  cela  va 
venir, et je pense qu’on peut lui faire confiance. 

Apres la mise en lumière des mesures du budget qui me tiennent à cœur, je voudrais 

reprendre quelques critiques de l’opposition : 

Selon l’honorable Bérenger, ce budget n’assure pas la relance économique, un porte-
à-faux,  réflexion  totalement  contraire  à  M.  Tout  le  Monde  et  au  monde  des  affaires 
mauricien. 

Quant  à  l’honorable  Mohamed  qui  qualifie  le  budget  de  mesures  cosmétiques, 
comment  expliquera-t-il  à  nos  amis  de  Rodrigues,  qu’avec  une  augmentation  de  leurs 
finances passant de R 3.3 milliards à R 4.4 milliards, que c'est du cosmétique ? Difficilement 
explicable ! 

M.  Boolell,  lui,  parle  d’un  budget  confettis  et  trompeur.  Quid  de  la  fermeture  du 
Parlement et des séances parlementaires pendant plus de six mois en 2014 pour des séances 

 

28 

de koze kozer ou encore la dette de plus de R 1.4 milliards laissée par eux à la NDU à la veille 
des élections ? N’était-ce pas là trompeur ? 

Enfin, le quatrième et dernier  - malheureusement, il n’est pas là  - dixit l’honorable 
Ramful et son conseil : ‘don’t fool the population again.’  I just wish to give a ticket to his 
say: A Return to Sender qu’Elvis Presley lui aurait chanté s’il était là. And ask him and his 
friends to wear this hat. They easily forget that it’s them that have been thrown away off the 
Parliament by the Mauritians, because they wanted to fool the population with their deuxième 
République and their ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ dream. I just want to ask him or them to wear this hat, 
to keep it, do their mea culpa, and let this caring Government do its job. 

By the way, let me say to our Minister of Finance, ‘Hats off dear Minister for this new 

and good Budget.’ 

Que pourront-t-ils nous proposer de mieux? 

La réponse serait : Rien ! 

Donc, subissons leurs critiques, mais ne nous y attardons pas, Madam Speaker. 

Maintenant,  je  voudrais  m’adresser  à  vous,  Mauriciens,  si  vous  m’entendez.  Vous 
avez fait confiance au gouvernement Lepep en décembre 2014. Gardez confiance. N’ayez pas 
peur  car,  ensemble,  comme  cette  belle  image  de  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  félicitant  son  fils, 
retrouvez-vous en famille, tous ensemble, et avec le gouvernement Lepep nous pousserons 
vers le large pour notre avenir et l’avenir de toute l’île Maurice.  

Je  ne  pourrais  terminer  sans  redire  mon  appréciation,  Madame  la  présidente,  au 
 
premier  budget  du  Gouvernement  Lepep,  présenté  par  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth,  le 
ministre des Finances, à son équipe et à l’ensemble du gouvernement pour son soutien à ce 
budget que je qualifie, une fois encore, de masterstroke budget. 

 

Madame la présidente, je vous remercie. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  this  2016-2017  Budget  of  hon. 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is  marked  by  the 
undeniable  style  and  sincerity  in  action  of  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth.  It  is  clear  that  the  only 
interest of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Madam Speaker, was to 
put the interest of our country and of our citizens first and foremost. Whether you call it un 

 

29 

budget social or a feel-good factor Budget, one thing we cannot deny, this Budget is going to 
create a new era of development. How, Madam Speaker? I will go on to expand upon this. 

But, first of all, Madam Speaker, I want to say this: the 2015-2016 Budget, the last 
Budget presented, was to set the pace for this era of development. But, unfortunately, we all 
know that instead of being a catalyst for change the last Budget was held back from the very 
past from which it had  emerged.  Last  year’s Budget, Madam Speaker,  which was, in fact, 
destiné à la reliance, has instead been swallowed up with expenses having to mop up the 
mismanagement of the previous Government. We must not forget that. We have had so many 
criticisms about the 2015-2016 Budget and the present Budget but we must look what it was 
set out to do and what has happened in its wake.  

It is true that hon. Pravind Jugnauth stated at paragraph 15 of his Budget Speech that 
the  challenges  of  tomorrow  cannot  be  met  with  our  mindset  policies  actions  and  actions 
locked in the paradigm of the past. But yet, in order to understand and take stock of what has 
happened,  we  have  to  walk  back  in  that  immediate  past.  Let  us,  for  instance,  look  at  the 
NDU. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister will indeed give to the figures of how many millions we 
are having to pay in terms of debts of the previous Government. R 1.4 milliards! These were 
the previous Government’s largess we are having to be pay back. Another example, Madam 
Speaker, is the Terre-Rouge/Verdun saga, the Bagatelle Dam saga where millions have been 
spent. The Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, has talked about it and I am sure will 
address it upon head in his speech. So much has had to be spent to set right the errors.  

We must not forget also the MBC, the Air Mauritius, the Amul saga, the D. Y. Patil 
saga. The hon. Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions has, 
in answer to a Private Notice Question, stated about the lack of database and having had to 
spend time and energy for the last two years setting up this database. All this takes its toll and 
that is why the previous Budget could not do what it exactly sets out to do, Madam Speaker. 

The NDU! Indeed, as I said, the R 1.4 milliards  which we have to pay back every 
year. We are told that PPSs do nothing. Take note those who write about us up there! You tell 
us that we do nothing, we have no bilan! Why? It is because we are mopping up the mess of 
the previous Government, we are paying back debts! We have to repair what has been set 
wrong. For instance, we talk about canals being made, terrains being made, terrains of foot, 
PNQs, Parliamentary Questions have been addressed in this House about what the NDU has 
not done, about the terrain of foot in Tranquebar. Yesterday, we finally had the cutting of 

 

30 

ribbon of that terrain. But, why it took so long? Because the field was not right and it had to 
be set right, millions of money from this present Budget had to be spent to set it right! 

That is why!  

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus: Madam Speaker, I can go on and on about such examples. 
But,  surely,  this  2016-2017  Budget  is  setting  the  pace  for  us  to  achieve  our  objective  of 
ensuring a sustainable growth. Through this Budget, the Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development has been able to strike out the right balance between the social and economic 
policies, thus creating the right environment to ensure that the whole country not only takes 
part, but takes responsibility in achieving this new era of development. The hon. Minister is a 
responsible  Minister  who  has  come  here  not  to  ask  his  people  to  ‘touss  sali’  or  to  do 
‘macarena’, but to assume his responsibility. It is placing responsibility on each and every 
citizen of this country. 

For example, look at the measures taken for the suspension regarding the payment of 
trade fees of Rs5,000 or less by medium and small enterprises where a definite timeframe of 
three years has been set. Clearly, Madam Speaker, this shows the responsibility of the hon. 
Minister  who  gives  a  clear  indication  to  responsible  organisations  that  they  will  have  to 
achieve their set objectives to become sustainable within that timeframe. We are helping you 
to help yourself.  But become responsible and become independent! This is the message. This 
Budget is not merely taking taxpayers’ money and thrusting it away irresponsibly, as I have 
just said.   

Another example of the responsible Minister’s responsible action is the tax holiday 
given to businesses. For instance, new businesses in priority sectors are being given an 8-year 
tax holiday and the existing ones will beneficiate a 4-year tax holiday. These will also include 
corporate societies and individuals. Once again, showing that the Minister is giving a chance 
to everybody to ensure that this era of development really happens and it becomes a reality. 

Even as regards the alleviation of poverty, targets have been set. The hon. Minister 
has shown his very keen interest to ensure that we have a benefit threshold that every family 

 

31 

is being cared for. For instance, a family of two adults and three children will have a benefit 
threshold of Rs9,520, touching some 6,400 families, Madam Speaker, and, this will be for a 
transition  period  of  two  years.  Once  again,  we  see  the  action  of  the  responsible  Minister 
setting specific timeframes in order to ensure that the implementation of his measures gives 
the resultat escompté.  

Through  the  various  budgetary  measures,  it  is  clear  that  the  thread  along  the 
philosophy of this Budget is to ensure social stability so as to create the proper environment 
that  will  foster  the  desired  economic  development.  And,  I  will  say  that  there  are  so  many 
measures in the Budget to achieve this, that some - not so many now on the other side of the 
House  –  fail  to  see  the  wood  for  the  trees.  And  here,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to 
emphasise on the consistency of hon.  Pravind Jugnauth in his approach through the various 
Budgets he has moved in this very House. 

It is not only me saying what I have just said. When we look at what KPMG has said, 
Madam  Speaker,  on  this  Budget  breaking  the  myth  of  high  expectations  and  staying  on  a 
stable socio-economic course amidst external uncertainties, what it has to say is this –  

“It is commendable that the 2016-2017 Budget  has maintained the core philosophy 
Mauritius is known for, which is to maintain a pro-business and social welfare agenda 
with measures projecting an outlook where GDP growth rate will be 4.1% in 2017 
from 3.4% in 2015/16, and targeting a statutory debt of 50% in 2018, down from the 
current 65%.” 

Is  this  not  an  achievement?  Is  this  not  a  milestone  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  set  and  is 
realistically achieving? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to elaborate on one particular measure announced in the 
Budget Speech regarding the agricultural business. The creation of an Agri-Business park at 
Highlands - proposed creation over an area of 100 acres is a major landmark in our endeavour 
to modernise our agricultural sector and give facilities to MSMEs and cooperative societies to 
develop.  

Yes, indeed, MSMEs because this Government has created the MSM enterprises, that 
is, the Micro Enterprises are added to the Medium and Small Enterprises, so, therefore, the 
creation of MSM Enterprises. 

Madam Speaker, it is obvious that such a measure in the agricultural sector can only 
come  from  someone  who  has  been  the  architect  of  the  sugar  sector  reform  and  it  is  well-

 

32 

known success. We are sure that this project, Madam Speaker, will lead to the creation of 
other Agri-parks in various parts of the island and it will act as a catalyst to our desire to 
become self-sufficient in vegetable production.  This is very important. This is the national 
flow flowing from the SME and MSME Development Certificate Scheme which ensures the 
financing  of  Agricultural  Business  Parks  (Agri-parks)  by  now  providing  land  for 
development.  We are giving you the finance.  We are giving you the land and we are telling 
you, as the hon. Minister has said: ‘Be responsible!’ 

Our policy to move forward by production or by vegetables will be facilitated surely 
by  the  Agri-parks  and  it  is  going  to  create  the  optimal  environment  needed  for  such 
production.    Here,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  urge  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and 
Food  Security  to  consider  moving  beyond  simple  food  production  and  offer  services  of 
integrated  packaging  plants  within  these  Agri-parks  so  as  to  bring  added  value  to  the  end 
product and resulting increase income for the producers. So that the product, instead of being 
just  vegetable  produce,  will  be  placed  in  packets  and  will  reach  high  levels  such  as 
supermarkets directly, thus increasing their income. 

Madam Speaker, up to now, I have talked about the very caring side of this budget.  
Now,  I  would  also  like  to  move  to  the  daring  aspects  thereof.    By  the  daring,  I  mean  the 
institutional reform proposals made by in this Budget.  This measure is aimed at increasing 
public  sector  efficiency.    There  have  been  mergers.      I  will  not  go  into  all  of  it,  but  just 
highlight a few because everyone is familiar with the budgetary measures. For instance, the 
merger  proposed  between  the  SMEDA,  the  Enterprise  Mauritius  and  the  National  Women 
Entrepreneurship Council.  We have the SPDC, Business Parks of Mauritius Ltd (BPML), the 
SLDC,  the  Belle  Mare  Tourist  Village  Merger,  Le  Val  Development  Ltd  and  Pailles,  the 
ICTA, the IBA, the MHC, the NHDC and all others. 

Moreover, there are measures to bring about the restructuring within the public sector 
and certain parastatal bodies. Some 13 to 14 of them will all, Madam Speaker, send the right 
message to investors that the Government understands the need for business to have visibility 
for the conduct of businesses.  In addition, they will promote good governance, accountability 
and insight, a culture of rigour in terms of Government spending which will further enhance 
the reputation of our country. 

These are not merely observations coming from me, personally and, once more, I turn 

to what KPMG had to say. Indeed, it says - 

33 

 

“This measure (…)” 

Public sector efficiency reform, they call it.  

“(…) is very much welcome with a lot of appreciation and indeed leads to the 
revamping  and  restructuring  and  this  will  increase  visibility,  accountability 
and, of course, efficiency of the Government”. 

Madam Speaker, I will now move to another major pillar of our economy, namely: the 
Residential and Real Estate and Construction economy, which during the last five years has 
gone through a contraction with the figure of 8.5% in 2004.  The sector, Madam Speaker, is 
the  third  largest  sector  of  the  country,  employing  some  46,300  people  at  the  same  stroke, 
absorbing a large percentage of the working population with minimum level of education.   

With  these  facts,  Madam  Speaker,  daring  decisions  had  to  be  taken  by  the  hon. 
Minister  in  order  to  kick  off  la  relance  in  the  sector.    When  going  through  the  decisions 
announced by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development in this sector, this sector 
is expected to achieve a positive growth rate of 1.6% in 2016.   

Moreover, the same experts who have commented on this Budget positively project a 
boost in the construction of real estate sector, which will generate a positive spill over in the 
economy in terms of job creation, demand on construction materials and linkages with other 
sectors  of 
  Besides, 
macroeconomic benefits, there will be opportunities and benefits for micro small and medium 
entrepreneurs  to  service  these  residential  developments.    Of  course,  we  cannot  forget  our 
MSMEs.  

including  manufacturing  and 

the  economy, 

transportation. 

First-time buyers and middle-income earners will find it easier to acquire building, be 
it a house or an apartment. Madam Speaker, these are bold measures, very bold measures; 
measures taken to ensure and secure this era in time.  Indeed, these measures are not locked 
in the paradigm of yesteryear, but these measures are very avant-gardistes, are very modern 
and  have  moved  on  with  the  time  because  it  has  to  answer  the  challenges  of  today  and 
tomorrow. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, much has been said by those on the other side - not 
many  left  now  -  and  in  the  press  about  certain  changes  and  reviews  of  the  Government’s 
decision.  Of course, we have read in the press and we have heard it on the lips of the few 
others there that this is incoherence, this is backtracking, but, Madam Speaker, I call it bold. I 
call it responsible.  Why bold, Madam Speaker? Because this Government has had the guts to 

 

34 

dream for this country!  This Government has had the guts to dream and wants something 
much better for this nation, but this Government also adapts to changing conditions.  This 
Government is a responsible Government.  Yes, responsible, Madam Speaker, because this 
Government will not spend taxpayers’ money when it has decided to take a path that there are 
indicators against its project under consideration.  Yes, it dares to free certain decisions.  Yes, 
it dares because it does not have hidden agenda.   

This Government has not tied its hands to anybody except to its nation.  If it is linked 
to anybody, if it bows down to anybody, it is le peuple, so it dares to say stop and freeze.  If 
only our predecessors had dared to do that, we would not have had the Bagatelle Dam, we 
would  not  have  had  Betamax,  we  would  not  have  had  Terre  Rouge/Verdun  and  so  many 
more. 

L’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  a  été  fidèle  à  lui-même,  à  ses  principes  et  à  ses 
convictions.  We read this through every line of this Budget.  We read this and we will see the 
legacy that hon. Pravind Jugnauth will leave with this new era of development just like Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth has left a legacy of economic development.  This is the true heritage des 
Jugnauth,  the  heritage  of  a  new  era,  of  a  nation  worldwide  development,  national 
development, national prosperity. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.37 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Before passing on to the next orator,  I have used my discretion to 
allow the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security to make a statement out of turn 
at  this  stage.  Inasmuch  as  it  relates  to  the  prevalence  of  the  foot-and-mouth  disease  in 
Rodrigues and Mauritius, an issue which is of national importance. Hon. Seeruttun! 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - OUTBREAK 

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun):  Madam 

Speaker, thank you for allowing me to make the following statement out of turn.  

 

35 

I  wish  to  make  a  statement  on  the  prevalence  of  the  foot-and-mouth  disease  in 
Rodrigues and Mauritius and the measures taken by my Ministry to control the spread of the 
disease. 

On 19 July 2016, the Division of the Veterinary Services of my Ministry was notified 
by the Veterinary Officer of Rodrigues of an increasing number of sick cattle in the region of 
Terre Rouge and Roseaux in Rodrigues. 32 animals were showing mouth lesions and frothing 
and two deaths were reported. A viral infection was tentatively diagnosed. 

On  21  July,  a  first  set  of  blood  samples  were  received  at  the  Animal  Health 
Laboratory at Réduit and tests carried out on 21, 22, and 23 July revealed negative results for 
6 different viral infections. 

In view of the increase in number of reported cases which had reached 70, technical 
and  financial  assistance  was  sought  from  the  Unité  de  Surveillance  of  the  Indian  Ocean 
Commission  (IOC)  on  27  July  to  investigate  the  causes  of  the  infection.    Accordingly  the 
Veterinary  Epidemiologist  of  the  IOC  and  two  veterinary  officers  of  the  Division  of  the 
Veterinary Services (DVS) proceeded to Rodrigues on 30 July. On 31 July, they reported that 
31 farms were found to be infected and clinical evidence was detected in 92 cases. 

In the meantime, on 29 July 2016, the DVS informed the Commission of Agriculture 
in  Rodrigues  that,  in  view  of  the  continuous  increase  in  the  number  of  infected  cattle,  a 
restriction should be imposed on the exportation of cattle to Mauritius and the embarkation of 
the consignment of cattle aboard the vessel MV ANNA expected to depart for Mauritius on 
30 July 2016 should not be authorised. The Commission replied that the request for the ban 
on the export of the animals would be considered by the authorities in Rodrigues. 

On  01  August  2016,  despite  the  request  made  by  the  DVS  not  to  ship  any 
consignment  of  animals  in  Mauritius,  the  MV  ANNA  berthed  in  Port  Louis  with  13 
containers of animals comprising 91 heads of cattle, 69 sheep and 75 goats.  

A decision was immediately taken by my Ministry to transport all the containers to 

the Richelieu Quarantine Station to minimize the risks of contamination. 

Madam Speaker, on the 01 August, the Veterinary Services of my Ministry became 
aware that another consignment of animals comprising 82 heads of cattle, 101 sheep and 140 
goats had been imported from Rodrigues on 15 July 2016. These animals had been imported 
on behalf of 19 breeders located in different places in Mauritius. 

 

36 

Meanwhile analysis of a set of blood samples received on 31 July from Rodrigues was 
carried out on the 01 August at the Animal Health Laboratory at Réduit and showed positive 
results have been obtained for the foot-and-mouth disease.  

Several teams comprising Veterinary Officers and Extension Officers of FAREI have 
been constituted and have been effecting visits to the different breeding places in Mauritius to 
enquire about the health of the animals and to advise the breeders concerned not to effect any 
transfer of the animals from one place to another around the island. 

One  particular  farm  in  Vallée  des  Prêtres  containing  80  animals  including  animals 
imported from Rodrigues on 15 July was visited on 02 August and suspected clinical cases of 
FMD were detected. 

No detection of the disease has so far been made on the other farms visited. 

A Crisis Committee comprising representatives of my Ministry, FAREI, the Ministry 
of  Environment,  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government,  the  Police  Department  as  well  as  the 
Chamber of Agriculture and the Mauritius Meat Producers Association has been set up for a 
better monitoring of the situation. 

Madam Speaker, a meeting was held at my Ministry on Friday 05 August with the 
Veterinary Epidemiologist of the IOC who had proceeded to Rodrigues and senior officials of 
my Ministry. 

The following options have been proposed - 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

The culling of all animals imported from Rodrigues on 15 July and 01 August 
as well as any other animals which have been infected by the disease. 

The culling of all animals as per the above option plus the vaccination of all 
other animals found in a radius of three kilometres within the localities where 
the infected animals are being kept. 

The  vaccination  of  all  the  herds  in  Mauritius  including  cattle,  sheep,  goats, 
pigs and deer. 

The Crisis Committee met on Friday afternoon and recommended the following measures - 

(1) 

The  immediate  culling  of  all  animals  found  at  Richelieu  Quarantine  Station 
and  on  the  farm  at  Vallée  des  Prêtres  given  that  many  of  the  animals  have 
shown symptoms of the disease. 

 

(2) 

(3) 

37 

The import of vaccines for the vaccination of animals found in the immediate 
surroundings of farms where imported animals from Rodrigues are being kept. 

The authorisation of the Commissioner of Police to be sought for the culling 
of animals by gunshot. 

I was briefed of these recommendations on Friday evening and I immediately consulted the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the approval to proceed with the proposed measures. The Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister has given his consent and the Commissioner of Police has been requested in 
writing  to  provide  the  necessary  assistance.  Two  officers  from  the  Police  Department 
attended  an  urgent  meeting  with  my  senior  officers  in  my  presence  on  the  same  night  to 
decide  on  the  modalities  for  the  culling  exercise  during  the  weekend.  As  at  yesterday,  54 
heads of cattle, 144 sheep and goats have been culled at Richelieu, and 60 sheep and goats at 
Vallée des Prêtres. The culling exercise is being pursued today. 

Moreover, an order of 10,000 doses of vaccines was placed on Friday night with a 

laboratory in Botswana. The consignment is expected to reach Mauritius by DHL. 

Additionally, a strict control is also being exercised at the airport to ensure that no raw 

meat is carried by passengers coming from Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to Rodrigues the situation has been worsening and the 

Rodrigues Regional Assembly has declared the whole of the island as quarantine zone. 

Measures are also envisaged to cull all the animals in the reported infected farms. My 

Ministry will extend all the assistance to Rodrigues for a better control of the situation. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is seeking the collaboration of all stakeholders and the 
population at large, both in Mauritius and Rodrigues, for the effective implementation of the 
preventive measures to prevent the spread of the disease. 

My Ministry is closely monitoring the situation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Koonjoo! 

(2.43 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 
Outer  Islands  (Mr  P.  Koonjoo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like,  at  the  very  outset,  to 
congratulate  all  the  orators  who  have  taken  part  in  the  debate  before  me  and  a  special 

 

38 

congratulation  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  the 
presentation of this Budget. I will also concur with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who has rated 
it as excellent. It is quite abnormal that the hon. Leader of the Opposition is absent. Even he 
has passed a very positive comment, he said: “c’est un budget intéressant”. Je me rappelle 
bien, pour la première fois quand le ministre des Finances d’aujourd’hui était ministre des 
Finances et il avait présenté un budget, à ce moment-là, l’honorable Paul Bérenger disait - 

‘Coup d’essai coup de maître’ 

C’était les commentaires du Premier ministre d’alors.  But you can never rely on the tongue 
of hon. Bérenger because at times it is good, at times it is bad. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, this time it’s good. Autrefois, c’était ‘petit crétin’, n’est-ce pas? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, no comment! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: You can’t make any comment on him! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow him to proceed! 

Allow him to make his speech, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: Ouvert to zoreil bien!  Madam speaker, this budget depicts the vision of 
a man with a heart who has shown empathy to the plight of the most vulnerable segment of 
the population, a man who has lent his ears to the concerns of the middle class and a man 
who has been responsive to the expectations of one and all, be it the business community, the 
small entrepreneurs and even the old people. 

This budget paves the way for a new era of development in line with the Government 
Programme  2015-2019  and  the  Economic  Mission  Statement  of  the  Prime  Minister.    The 
measures  contained  therein  are  bold,  realistic  and  achievable  despite  the  uncertainties  and 
turbulences of the global economy exacerbated recently by the Brexit.  This Government has 

 

39 

not  yet  lost  sight  of  its  commitment  to  transform  Mauritius  into  a  truly  forward-looking, 
environmentally sustainable, economically vibrant and innovative nation. 

Madam speaker, there can be no other stronger evidence than the positive response 
from  the  different  segments  of  the  population  be  they  trade  unions,  civil  society  or  the 
business community to show that the budget has been widely accepted by the majority of the 
population, and especially those in the extreme poverty trap. Madam Speaker, to be poor is 
not a curse, it is not a sin.  Nobody is born poor, nobody is born rich. Some achieve richness, 
but some have got richness trusted upon them. This also is true. 

This  budget,  Madam  Speaker,  has  created  the  necessary  feel-good  factor  in  this 
country. I personally bear witness that it has touched immediate and short-term needs of one 
and all. 

To those eternal pessimists who keep on shouting that this Government is lethargic in 
action,  I  would  like  to  remind  them  that  we  have  already  started  to  reverse  the  surging 
unemployment trend from 8.7% to 7.6% during the first quarter of 2016.  This is a very good 
sign, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  speaker,  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  we  had  pledged  to 
achieve meaningful change with a focus on the vulnerable segment of the population.  This 
Budget has clearly transmitted this strategic in touch into concrete outcome through a number 
of key measures.  

For example, I will take a few of them - 

(i) 

through  the  payment  of  a  monthly  subsistence  allowance  ranging  from 
Rs2,720  up  to  Rs9,520  to  poor  families  in  Social  Register.  ‘Poor  families’ 
there  was  a  time  we  never  heard  the  words  ‘extreme  poverty’.  We  heard 
‘extreme  poverty’  only  after  the  ex-Prime  Minister  was  in  power,  after  a 
decade of rule people were fed up of him and that was why one man alone - I 
repeat, Madam Speaker, one man alone - stood up and the whole country was 
behind him indistinctively of the religion, colour, be it a Hindu, a Muslim, a 
Christian or a Chinese or even the White people. Everybody was behind Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth and the victory of that time was because of him. History 
will bear evidence that one man just stood up to fight corruption, to fight the 
mess  the  ex-government  had  created,  he  was  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  and 
everybody  believed  in  him,  the  youngsters,  the  old  people,  men,  women, 

 

40 

everybody  believed  in  him  and  it  was  a  landslide  victory.  Thank  God  the 
campaign did not go for two weeks more or otherwise it would have been a 
clean sweep 60-0. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

 Madam,  through  the  increase  of  the  Crèche  Voucher  Scheme  for  poor 
families from Rs1,500 to Rs2,000 per child;  

through the extension of the basic invalidity pension to some 3,130 children 
below  15  years  of  age.  My  colleague,  Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo  answered  a 
Private Notice Question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and it is clear 
that the measures for the children in this Budget are extraordinary.  

Never I think that anybody has seen a Budget where so much is done for the people who are 
extremely poor. I wonder if people know - I don’t know anybody in this House, I can’t say 
anybody – they may know, but can they feel the poverty? Have they ever seen how people 
live in poor huts, in misery terms, how they manage to eat? No! You have not seen that! You 
have heard, you know it, but you have not felt it. Have you ever feel the pang of hunger? No, 
you don’t… 

(Interruptions) 

Nobody because the Labour Party is Labour Party in name only, Madam Speaker. Have you 
found any Member whose father was a labourer in the Labour Party? 

You are from the Labour Party? I don’t know… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

Mr Koonjoo: pe gagne dimal?  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

 

41 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Though  the  drastic  reduction  in  the  retail  price  of  cooking  gas  from 
Rs330  to  Rs270  per  12  kg  cylinder.  You  just  ask  anybody  outside.  Go  out  there  and  ask 
anybody especially the poor people… 

You are not poor man! You come with a big satchel in the Parliament…  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister… 

Mr Koonjoo: … just like your friend… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  please!  Please,  address  yourself  to  the  Chair  and 
you can’t engage yourself in a conversation with the Opposition! You address yourself to the 
Chair. Whatever they may say, they will have the opportunity also to reply when they take 
the floor.  

There is no insult!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Look, you will have the opportunity to reply back… 

(Interruptions) 

…but you won’t be able to reply now. From a sitting position you are not allowed… 

(Interruptions) 

You should not tell me what I should do! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, you should not because this is confrontation to the Chair! You should not 
tell me what I should do! 

(Interruptions) 

Okay? You should not! And I will not… 

(Interruptions) 

If you continue then I will have to order you out! 

(Interruptions) 

 

This is a first warning I am giving you! 

42 

(Interruptions) 

And you should not confront the Chair.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: Thank you, Madam. These key measures will have a direct bearing in 
the lives of thousands of families, Madam Speaker. They will add up to the Marshall Plan 
which contains a number of concrete measures to tackle the root of cause of poverty. 

Madam Speaker, I now come to the budgetary measures relating to my Ministry. Here 

I would like to, first of all, list down the major achievements… 

(Interruptions) 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

the National Ocean Council was set up administratively on 26 June 2015. Here, I 
wish to inform the House that the Commonwealth Secretariat on 08 April 2016 
has  submitted  a  preliminary  advice  report  for  the  Development  of  the  National 
Ocean Policy for the Republic of Mauritius and Related Matters. My Ministry is 
currently analysing the proposals contained therein; 

the construction of Blue Bay Marine Park - lying idle for so many years - Centre 
has been completed and was officially inaugurated on 29 June 2016; 

1.5  m.  fish  fingerlings  were  released  at  selected  sites  in  the  lagoon  around 
Mauritius  for  the  replenishment  of  the  fish  stock  because,  unfortunately,  our 
lagoon has been depleted of fish; 

(Interruptions) 

33 fish business operators are registered with the competent authority seafood for 
export of fishery products; 

828  candidates  have  been  trained  at  the  Mauritius  Maritime  Training  Academy 
this year; 

secondary  school  sensitization  campaign  on  career  opportunities  in  maritime 
sector,  presentations  have  been  conducted  in  145  schools  and  attended  by 
approximately 6500 students of Form V and Form VI; 

 

(vii) 

43 

fees for the Mauritius Maritime Training Academy candidates have been reduced 
from  Rs11,000  per  candidate  to  Rs2,000  while  medical  fees  down  from  about 
Rs10,000 to Rs2,000 just to allow people from the poor section to get trained at the 
Academy and join the ship or the cruise vessels; 

(viii) 

the  Mauritius  Shipping  Corporation  Ltd  which  prior  to  the  advent  of  this 
Government  has  registered  five  years  of  consecutive  massive  losses  totaling  to 
Rs260  m.  has  been  successfully  restructured  into  a  profitable  and  dynamic 
company  completely  free  of  Government  finance  to  meet  its  operational  and 
marine maintenance equipment; 

(ix) 

(x) 

through the involvement and efforts of the Mauritius Shipping Company Ltd which 
has managed to attract Bomin Ltd. the fourth largest bunker trading company in the 
world to commence bunker trade in Mauritius thus, paving the way for Mauritius 
to become a shipping hub in the region, and 

I would like to express my deepest appreciation to the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  on  the  exemption  from  payment  of  income  tax  to 
seafarers. This measure, Madam Speaker, would encourage Mauritian seafarers to 
henceforth  take  up  work  on  local  Mauritian  vessels.  This  is  a  landmark  in  the 
history of fiscality in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, I now turn towards the fisheries sector.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  fishing  sector  is  being  called  upon  to  play  a  vital  role  in  the 
development  of  strategy.  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  a  new  Fisheries  Bill  is  being 
finalised and will be presented in the House by the end of this year. Madam Speaker, in line 
with  Government’s  objectives  of  diversifying  its  economic  base,  my  Ministry  proposes  to 
take the fisheries sector, principally an industrial fishing sector, so that it becomes a major 
segment of the economic development in the near future. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget highlights that 35 hectares of reclaimed land earmarked 
for petroleum storage, logistics and fishing activities at Port Louis. Moreover, the Mauritius 
Port  Authority  will  construct  break  waves  at  Fort  Williams  to  provide  shelter  for 
approximately 120 fishing vessels. No doubt, the investment by the Mauritius Port Authority 
will increase fishing vessels traffic in Mauritius and will also enable the country to capture a 
higher fish tonnage. The extension of the port will provide space for the new operators to 
establish and enable existing operators to extend the activities. 

 

44 

Madam Speaker, with a view to harnessing the full potential of our marine resources 
and in line with the objectives of my Ministry to develop a national fleet, actions have been 
initiated with potential promoters to invest in this sector. Afritex is one company, which has 
already  set  up  a  structure  in  Mauritius  and is  operating  five  fishing  boats  under  Mauritian 
flags. It is exporting its chilled fish to US market. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  the  introduction  of  a  new  incentive  scheme,  with  the  tax 
holiday  of  eight  years  to  attract  industrial  fishing  companies  to  operate  in  Mauritius  and 
contribute to the development of the seafood hub, this sector will develop further. At present, 
the  EU  and  the  US  are  the  main  export  markets  for  our  fish  and  fish  products.  Out  of 
diversification strategy, we are exploring the possibility to export to the emerging sectors like 
China and Russia. I will just give you the example. Following negotiations with the Chinese 
authorities, we are now exporting fish and fish products, including fishmeal and fish oil to 
China.  Actions  have  already  been  initiated  with  Russian  authorities  for  the  export  of  our 
seafood  to  Russia.  Concomitantly,  promoting  aquaculture  production  and  meeting  the 
requirements  of  the  international  markets  for  aquaculture  products  would,  therefore, 
spearhead diversification in the fisheries sector, and help increase in growth. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  is  aiming  to  increase  the  industrial  aquaculture  fish 
production for internal consumption, exports and job creation, and explore links with small-
scale operators. Fish farming sites have been earmarked and specific regulations have been 
prescribed.  The  farming  sites  include  20,  as  mentioned  in  the  Budget,  for  industrial 
aquaculture. I wish to inform the House that two major projects have been approved for the 
culture  of  Cobia  in  the  sea  concessions  on  the  west  coast  and  marine  shrimps  at  Albion 
Fisheries Research Centre (AFRC). Moreover, Government will set up common facilities on 
land for aquaculture and fish processing. During the financial year 2015/2016, five local and 
foreign companies have received approval for implementing major aquaculture projects. 

As regards the semi-industrial sector, my Ministry is pleased to note that the Budget 
has  made  provision  to  revitalise  this  important  segment.  In  an  effort  to  increase  the 
production of bank fisheries, outer reefs and bank fishing, over the above the tax holiday of 
eight years. The Budget also provides for a grant of 50% up to a cap of Rs4 m. to cooperative 
societies to enable them acquire semi-industrial vessels, because we are going to fish outside 
the lagoon. With an EEZ of 2.3 million square kilometres, Madam Speaker, I think it is time 
now for us to forget the lagoon, go and explore the outside lagoon, the sea. This measure will 
give a new impetus to our cooperative societies to venture in promoting this sector.  I would 

 

45 

appeal to the fishermen community, especially the young fishermen, to join us. There are lots 
of opportunities in this sector. I appeal to them to come and to train themselves.  This will 
lead them to fortune. Thank you! 

With  a  view  to  alleviating  the  difficulties  of  our  fishermen  communities,  measures 

taken during financial year 2015/2016 include – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

free wire ropes have been given to all fishermen using basket traps; 

all fishermen have been provided with a lifejacket; 

ten  fishermen  benefitted  funds  to  the  tune  of  Rs200,000  grant,  each  for  the 
purchase of a canot, and actions have been initiated for the release of the funds 
to acquire 10 additional canots; 

training is being provided to 25 skippers now for fishing boats of less than 24 
metres in length, and 

133  fishmongers  have  been  trained  at  the  Fish  Handling  Preservation  and 
Marketing at FITEC. 

Madam  Speaker,  to  enhance  production  of  fish  from  activities  in  the  lagoons,  my 
Ministry  is  implementing  a  closure  of  the  fishing  of  octopus,  now  in  vigour  at  a  national 
level,  from  15  August,  this  month,  to  15  October  this  year.  In  this  context,  a  National 
Sensitisation  Campaign  was  conducted  among  the  fishermen  community  and  the  public  at 
large. I personally attended the meetings held with the fishermen around the island to ensure 
effective communication and success of the project. We had a pilot project last year in the 
South, and we found that it brought a big success in the South. We want to imitate for the 
whole country this year.  Unfortunately, we are after l’île Rodrigues. They have done it in 
Rodrigues and the output has been increased from one to five times. 

With artisanal fishing reaching its limit, there is need to further reorient the fisheries 
sector  towards  higher  value-added  activities.  As a  result,  fishermen  are  encouraged  to  fish 
around  the  Fish  Aggregating  Devices,  called  FADs,  and  further  offshore,  and  engaged  in 
farming in the lagoons. 

As regards aquaculture, to accompany fishermen communities to engage in fish cage 
farming,  fingerlings  have  been  provided  free  of  cost  to  existing  cage  owners.  Technical 
advice will also be provided to potential operators. Cage materials, including nets and cage 

 

46 

structures, have been acquired for the setting up of ten cages at selected sites, and these will 
be handed over to ten fishermen associations shortly. 

For financial year 2016/2017, with a view to promoting small-scale aquaculture, the 
Budget has made provision of Rs12.5 m. for the purchase of ten floating cage structures to 
allocate to fishermen cooperatives.  This measure will help the uplift of the socio-economic 
status of the fishermen and I am sure they won’t miss this opportunity. 

As  regards  the  offshore  fisheries,  my  Ministry  will  continue  to  impart  training  to 
fishermen  fishing  around  FAD  or  using  long  lines  to  fish  tuna  and  related  species.    My 
Ministry will ensure that all the FADs will be kept active.  The measure earmarked in this 
Budget relating to the purchase of a multi-purpose vessel, will allow us to carry our research, 
surveys  and  training  of  fishermen  and  skippers.    This  will,  no  doubt,  be  instrumental  in 
achieving our objectives. 

Madam Speaker, let me turn now to the shipping sector.  Madam Speaker, Maritime 
Safety and Security will remain high on the agenda of my Ministry.  The MV Benita which 
ran aground at Le Bouchon in the South of the island had been making headlines for weeks.  
The response has been quick and any major risk of oil spill was contained.  MV Benita was 
freed from the rocks within 34 days despite the prevailing adverse weather conditions at Le 
Bouchon and without using any explosive.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  context,  my  Ministry  is  in  the  process  of  upgrading  our 
legislation to include the requirements therein by drafting a Marine Pollution Bill, which had 
never been done in the  past.  Moreover, we have drafted a Marine Pollution  Liability  and 
Compensation  Bill  to  cover  requirements  under  CLC,  International  Convention  on  Civil 
Liability  for  Oil  Pollution  Damage  and  an  International  Convention  of  Civil  Liability  for 
Bunker Oil Pollution Damage.   

Madam Speaker, currently we have some 30,000 vessels that ply close to Mauritius, 
but  only  around  3,000  (one-tenth)  vessels  called  and  are  registered  at  Port  Louis  yearly.  
Nearly 30,000 and only 3,000 calling in our Port! This is a big opportunity, Madam Speaker.  
One  can  guess  the  potential  to  grow  the  maritime  sector.    Such  a  scenario  will  create 
opportunities  for  growth  but,  on  the  other  hand,  shortage  of  skills  acts  as  a  constraint  as 
demand outstrips supply.  In our endeavour to address this human resource constraint, this 
Budget has made provision to increase the intake of the MMTA by 50%, that is, to 1,200 
training annually.  

 

47 

Madam Speaker, considering the big demand for recruitment in the shipping sector, 
we are also opening up Marine Training Market to the private sector. And I believe that, it is 
always with the concurrence of private and public sector that we can do a lot of things. As in 
the past, we have done the first economic miracle because there was a lovely togetherness 
between private and public sector, and that was due especially to our Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

I wish to inform the House that approval for the setting up of a Maritime Training 
Institution has been granted to a private company. Moreover, to raise the awareness of vast 
employment  opportunities  in  the  sector,  my  Ministry  has  carried  out  a  very  fruitful 
sensitisation campaign with college students. We propose to continue with the sensitisation 
campaign  on  a  yearly  basis.  It  is  hoped  that  our  future  generation  will  choose  this  very 
promising avenue as a career path. 

Moreover,  to  facilitate  employment  in  the  cruise  sector,  my  Ministry  has  partnered 
with  the  local  recruiting  agents  to  facilitate  and  enhance  the  recruitment  and  placement  of 
Mauritian seafarers on-board ships, particularly on cruise vessels. 

 
Let me now turn to outer islands, Agalega.  Madam Speaker, let me say a few words 
about  Agalega.    It  is  comforting  to  note  that  the  major  infrastructural  projects  are  well 
underway following a signing of a MoU with the Government of India.  A grant of Rs750 m. 
had been provided for the projects such as airstrip and jetty. And nothing has been done for 
ten years! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Currently,  a field survey  and other investigations are underway  and 
same are expected to be completed by the first week of December 2016 and the work will 
start on July 2017. With a view to enhancing the living conditions of Agaleans, the Budget 
has  made  provision  to  the  tune  of  Rs4  m.  for  the  acquisition  of  two  generators  to  secure 
continuous electricity supply for the population. It has also earmarked a sum of Rs6.5 m. for 
a cold room to store food items and fish catch which is, eventually, to be sent to Mauritius.  

(Interruptions) 

The above measures will definitely enhance the social economic development of Agalega.  

Regarding the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd, Madam Speaker, I would like to 
inform the House that the restructuring exercise has borne its fruits as the MSCL has made a 

 

48 

profit of around Rs52 m. as at 30 June 2015 and compared to the loss of some Rs63 m. for 
the previous audited financial year. The accumulated losses of the MSCL as shown by the 
audited accounts for the five years up to 2014 stood at Rs260 m.. Moreover, the chartering of 
the MV Anna as a transitional backup measure pending the acquisition of a new cargo vessel 
was  further  extended  to  January  2018  in  order  to  avoid  any  disruption  in  the  provision  of 
goods to the Rodrigues. 

Mauritius  Oceanography  Institute!  You  will  agree  that  research  and  development, 
Madam Speaker, is the backbone of a globally competitive and innovation driven economy. 
Research and development will be crucial for the development of the ocean economy as the 
next phase of our socio-economic development will be driven by technology and innovation. 
With  the  commissioning  of  the  Mauritius  Oceanography  Institute  (MOI)    New  Research 
Centre at Albion, we are looking forward to the MOI playing a vital role in the process of 
applied research in the ocean sector. 

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to announce and inform the House that the Government 
will sign a MoU with the National Institute of Oceanography Goa towards the setting up of a 
World-Class Research Institute of Oceanography in Mauritius. The measure will enable MOI 
to undertake advanced research in the field of oceanography. 

Madam Speaker, emerging economic subsectors are becoming a reality in Mauritius. 
In  December  2015,  the  first  deed  of  concession  on  the  Deep  Ocean  Water  Application 
(DOWA) Project was signed between the Government of Mauritius and Urban Cooling Ltd.  
As regards the marine renewable energy, following the signing of a collaboration agreement 
between  the  Mauritius  Research  Council  (MRC)  and  the  Carnegie  Wave  Energy  Ltd. 
(Australia) in June last year, the deployment of a wave monitoring device for the Carnegie 
Wave Energy Project took place in June 2016. 

Moreover,  I  wish  to  inform  that  two  studies  are  being  concluded  with  regard  to 

the production of electricity through ocean waves and offshore wind. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  a  concluding  note,  I  would  like  to  state  that  in  the  face  of  a 
sluggish global economic environment, this Budget has paved the way to achieve a sustained, 
strong,  inclusive  and  balanced  growth.  I  must  congratulate  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development;  I  know  him  only  since  1995  after  the  big  defeat  in  the  election. 
After general elections, he stood as a candidate for the municipal elections, and I remember, 

 

49 

myself and my friend hon. Showkutally Soodhun, we campaigned door-to-door for him and 
he was elected alone, I believe, in Vacoas/Phoenix. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, 1996.  From that day, I know hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth. Now, I believe that he is 
grown up in all senses, every way, mentally - I know he has passed some difficult times, but 
those different times have made him become strong and, today, after this Budget, anybody 
you  will  ask  on  the  way,  in  any  place  in  Mauritius,  ask  them,  men,  women,  children, 
especially extremely poor people, they will tell you that they are happy with the Budget and 
that hon. Pravind Jugnauth now can step in the shoes of his father; he  is the future Prime 
Minister. You mark my words!  The other day, when he presented the Budget, I went and met 
him, I don’t know who saw me and I told him the same phrase: ‘Now, you are ready.’ 

I’ll tell you what I told him in his ears. 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: There is no secret. I told him: ‘Now, you are ready. One step is ahead, 
it’s  too  much.  In  another  one  or  two  steps,  only  one  step  more.’  Maybe  the  problem  of 
extreme poverty, we can expunge it out from Mauritius and I believe that Mauritius will be 
the only country where the world will look upon as a determined nation, a determined Prime 
Minister; with this team, together with him, they can do miracles in this country. We don’t 
have resources, but we have got determination, we have got conviction and I believe that with 
this Budget… 

(Interruptions) 

…the Prime Minister to be, in waiting, I say waiting… 

(Interruptions) 

I believe that we will show the example to the whole world and I tell the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development that myself, my Ministry, all the Ministries, all the MPs 
and  PPSs  in  this  Government,  we  are  with  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth:  “Go  ahead,  make  it 
happen, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, we are together. Congratulations for this Budget!” 

Thank you. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Léopold! 

50 

(3.22 p.m.) 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): Madam Speaker, I welcome the 
Budget of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development presented to the nation 
of the Republic of Mauritius on 29 July. 

The people of Rodrigues also welcome this Budget formidably. The Rodriguan people 
welcome those good announcements on measures to ease household expenses, among others. 
Bearing  in  mind  that  in  Rodrigues,  the  cost  of  commodities  are  higher  than  in  mainland 
Mauritius, but many efforts are being made in subsidising basic food items. 

Before going further, Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the House once more 
that Rodrigues Island, which is a territorial continuity of the Republic of Mauritius, accedes 
to its autonomous status in the year 2001, status granted to us by the present Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister together with hon. Paul Bérenger in an alliance of MSM/MMM. 

But there are fears and suspicion that call for devolution and internal self-government 
or  nothing  but  a  thin  cover  for  eventual  secession  and  independence.  That  is  totally 
groundless! The near totality of Rodriguans want to remain in a country called the Republic 
of  Mauritius.  What  the  people  want  is  real  Executive  and  Legislative  Authority  for  its 
development. Of course, there are secessionists, but they are of tiny minority and the OPR 
Party had kicked them out during the last general elections. They had not only lost general 
elections, but also had not been able to secure a seat in the National Parliament. 

Having said all that, Madam Speaker, despite our autonomous status, it is true that we 
have  our  own  budgetary  exercise,  money  granted  by  the  Central  Government.  With  that 
money, the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has the task of setting priorities and executes the 
implementation  of  projects.  But  the  State  has  its  regional  economic  strategy  for  the 
sustainable  development  of  its  entire  outer  island  and  that  includes  Rodrigues  Island, 
Agalega, St. Brandon, Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin. 

What  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  done  in  this 
Budget, it’s just doing just that, that is, une politique des îles, those outer islands which form 
part  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius.  I  do  not  think  that  this  is  too  much  to  ask  in  view  of 
developing  sustainable  economic  development  of  those  outer  islands.  Of  course,  priority 
differs from island to island. 

 

51 

Madam Speaker, Rodrigues had, in the past, been neglected. Well, I would rather say 
that in the past it had been underfunded by the State despite the fact that we contribute our 
fair bit to the economy of the Republic of Mauritius.  

I  am  so  thankful  –  and  the  people  of  Rodrigues  as  well  -  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development for having been so considerate in making provision to 
provide Rodrigues with the necessary tools for its sustainable economic development. Both 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Minister of Finance  and Economic Development 
have been to Rodrigues prior to the presentation of the Budget and had consulted the local 
people and listened to their aspiration, and to see with their own eyes that the money granted 
to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly is judiciously used for the economic development and 
well-being of the people of Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, my generation and the generation that is following me is that of the 
21st  century  generation  and  we  represent  the  future  of  Rodrigues  Island  and  that  future  is 
happening  now.  Therefore,  to  keep  pace  with  our  time,  we  urgently  need  adequate 
infrastructure, high speed internet connection, bigger airport and modern harbour. The hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, I am sure, will agree with me that adequate 
resources  are  needed  so  as  to  narrow  the  gap  of  inequality  which  exists  between  the  two 
islands. 

It is  good to be noted that since 2012,  good  governance and judicious  use of State 
money are prevailing in the administration of Rodrigues Island. New schools are being built, 
there are new road access, upgrading of hospitals and improvement of health care system. 
Those developments happened because of the trust of the Central Government to Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly.  

Actually,  Rodrigues  lacks  some  physical  structure  and  facility  to  enhance  its 
economic growth. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is well aware of 
that. 

This  present  Budget  is  a  translation  of  the  firm  commitment  of  the  Central 
Government  in  responding  to  the  aspiration  of  the  people  of  Rodrigues  by  setting  their 
priorities right.  

With  this  Budget  we  are  going  to  have  a  new  run  way  with  new  terminals,  better 
internet connection via satellite pending the laying of the undersea fibre optic cable and all 
the  necessary  measures  are  taken  for  the  realisation  of  this  project  which  is  long  awaiting 

 

52 

principally by the young people of Rodrigues. A new and bigger harbour will come into light 
with the provision made in this Budget. 

So why does Rodrigues need all that? Is it just to make Rodrigues fashionable and 
trendy? No, Madam Speaker, it’s all about connectivity (connecting to the globalized world). 
Years  ago,  my  parents  were  entrepreneurs  too,  but  they  did  it  for  subsistence  and  self-
sufficiency.  

Things have changed now. We need to transform our local products and add value to 
them,  selling  them  to  the  global  competitive  market.  Twenty  years  ago,  who  would  have 
thought that we will have unemployed  graduates in Rodrigues? Now,how are we  going to 
tackle the problem of unemployment of graduates in particular? Why do we need to solve the 
problem of connectivity once and for all in Rodrigues? 

Madam  Speaker,  our  economy  is  based  on  mainly  agriculture,  fishing  and  tourism. 
They are all linked to the SME. Therefore, connecting to the underwater sea fibre optic cable, 
having a bigger airport in Rodrigues and having a modern harbour are very important to keep 
us update with the 21st century type of development. They are important because they are the 
instruments in enhancing growth, hence improving the quality of life of all Rodriguan people 
and reducing poverty. 

Those  measures  announced  in  this  Budget  will  certainly  transform  the  Rodrigues 

society by - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

moving people out of poverty; 
creating new jobs; 
enhance human development; 
improvement of health and education and, on top of that, 
a  sum  of  Rs1.1  billion  has  been  earmarked  and  distributed  in  various 
Ministries  so  as  to  help  Rodrigues  and  accompany  Rodrigues  in  its 
development. 

Concerning the health services nationally, lots of money have been put in the health 
service which is a very good thing. But, Madam Speaker, when you, anyone or I are feeling 
sick and go to the hospital that is too late. When you feel sick and go to the hospital it is too 
late already. So, that is why we need to focus on the primary healthcare service. We have a 
lot of trained doctors in Mauritius. I think we have to lay emphasis on the concept of family 

 

53 

doctor. We need to introduce the concept of family doctor in the Republic of Mauritius so as 
to prevent people from getting sick and prevent pressure on hospitals. 

Amongst  the  many  reasons,  we  can  use  most  of  the  trained  doctors  we  have  in 
Mauritius as family doctors and they can prevent drugs addiction in Mauritius. That is very 
prevailing in Mauritius now with synthetic drugs. I think one of the solutions with which we 
will be able to tackle it is by the introduction of family doctors. Amongst that they will be 
able  to  stay  in  communities  and  even  doctors,  family  doctors,  can  play  a  vital  role  in  the 
prevention of poverty not only diseases but the prevention of poverty and social problems as 
well. 

Concerning taxes on tobacco and alcohol, I think that is a very good initiative by the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development but how about those people who are very 
poor but are addicted to cigarettes? So, I don’t think they will stop buying cigarettes, by any 
means  maybe  by  thieving  they  will  try  to  go  and  get  the  cigarettes.  So,  we  will  need  to 
prevent social problems. We will need to tackle the problem of addiction by opening more 
secession tobacco clinics so as to allow those people to get out of this addiction and to have a 
very good society. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, Rodrigues has chosen to engage itself in sustainable 
development by respecting the environment and its biodiversity and the fight against climate 
change. Though we are not a big polluter but, when it comes to climate change as a small 
island we are the most which is getting affected. Now, with climate change, with prolonged 
winter, we are seeing that there is a new occurrence of new viruses which is not only a threat 
to  animals  but  a  threat  to  humans  as  well.  As  you  may  know,  there  is  an  outbreak  in 
Rodrigues. I associate that to climate change as well because those viruses are endemic and 
they can stay in the soil maybe because of change of temperature or prolonged winter. That is 
what is happening in Rodrigues. Now it is hitting animals but, as you might have heard in the 
world there is the outbreak of Ebola and other viruses which if we don’t take great care of 
even  humankind  can  perish.  So,  Madam  Speaker,  I  make  an  appeal  to  the  national 
Government to give us a helping hand, the usual helping hand, so as to combat the outbreak 
which is occurring in Rodrigues because, even if the virus is not transmissible from animals 
to  humans,  we  are  suffering  from  great  economic  loss.  We  have  a  population  of 
approximately 10,000 animals in Rodrigues. We are killing 4,500 now so as to prevent the 
spread of that virus. So, that will bear on the farmers. On our part, in the Rodrigues Regional 
Assembly we are making lots of efforts so as to help those farmers in this difficult time. 

 

54 

On these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bholah! 

(3.36 p.m.) 

The Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives (Mr S. Bholah): Madam 
Speaker, allow me first and foremost to commend the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development for the pragmatic approach he has adopted in the formulation of the 2016-2017 
Budget.   

This Budget marks a turning point in how it has been presented. It stands out as being 
studiously articulated around 10 key strategies,  each  accompanied by  a  forceful and  wide-
ranging  set  of  measures  that  are  aimed  at  meeting  the  expectations  of  the  Mauritian 
population.   

In  the  face  of  a  sluggish  economic  context  as  accentuated  by  Brexit  and  Eurozone 
concerns, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has judiciously sought to 
strike  a  balance  between  promoting  economic  growth  and  social  responsibility,  while 
maintaining fiscal discipline. 

With this Budget, the Government has hit the bull’s eye as it has the merit of being a 
concrete response to the population’s economic and social emergencies. Priorities have been 
well identified and practical solutions have been brought forward to act upon them. Crafted to 
give a new impulse to the economy, Budget 2016-2017 paves the way for the adoption of a 
new  economic  cycle  focused  on  innovation,  boosting  exports  and  private  investments.  It 
clearly enunciates a new spirit geared towards public sector reform, notably with enhanced 
business  facilitation  and  acceleration  of  public  investment  in  the  digital  field,  a  new 
orientation which is ambitious but sorely needed.   

The high point of the 2016-2017 Budget, Madam Speaker, is undoubtedly its social 
penchant, with a bold and distinct inclination to cater for our fellow citizens who are at the 
lower  rung  of  the  social  ladder.  This  Government  has  pledged  to  fight  poverty  and  to 
empower those families so that they can move up the ladder.  

This commitment underpins the core philosophy of this Government and some strong 
social  measures  taken  in  this  Budget  eminently  translate  this  vision.  The  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  has  taken  an  unprecedented  decision  –  that  of  eradicating  absolute  poverty  in 
Mauritius by introducing a new scheme under which every adult on the Social Register will 

 

55 

be  entitled  to  a  monthly  subsistence  allowance  based  on  a  minimum  threshold  of  Rs2,720 
with a maximum threshold of Rs9,520 for a family of two adults and three children along 
with a designed programme to get out these people of the poverty trap.  

Madam Speaker, this is higher than our current threshold of Rs6,200 and 40 per cent 
higher  than  that  advocated  by  the  World  Bank.  Isn’t  that  an  unambiguous  proof  of  this 
Government’s sincere commitment when it comes to providing a decent quality of life to our 
most unfortunate citizens?  

As stated by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and I quote - 

“The  challenges  of  tomorrow  cannot  be  met  with  our  mindset,  policies  and 
actions locked in the paradigm of yesterday”.  

The harmonious blend concocted to meet economic as well as social imperatives indeed sets 
Mauritius  on  a  new  course  of  its  development  path.  And  above  all,  this  budget,  with  its 
diversified nature, has, on top of having an invigorating effect, has created a feel-good factor 
among various strata of our society, that is, the business community as a whole, youngsters, 
households and the underprivileged, amongst others.        

For  more  than  half  a  century  now,  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  and  its 
predecessor, Gross National Product (GNP), have been reasonably accurate metrics used to 
measure  a  country’s  economic  performance  and  its  ability  to  produce  wealth  for  its 
citizens. It naturally takes center-stage in the present context, as members of the House are 
keen to debate about the 2016-2017 Budget. There have been and there will be traditionally 
numerous speculations and comments about the GDP forecast made by the hon. Minister of 
Finance in his Budget Speech. This is part of the game, given that GDP has always been a 
powerful benchmark to guide economic development. 

Madam Speaker, I have listened carefully to many interventions in this House and I 
will refer to the intervention of hon. Reza Uteem. In his opening speech, which was - I must 
admit – delivered in a very nice tone.  He criticised in a very constructive manner, I must say, 
most  parts  of  the  debate  and  I  understand  him  being  a  Member  of  the  front  bench  of  the 
Opposition. I will state an extract of his speech where he says – 

“However  much  I  would  like  to  believe  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  Madam  Speaker,  no  one,  no  economist,  no  report 
from local bank, not even the Bank of Mauritius is expecting GDP growth to 
exceed 4.0 per cent.” 

 

And he goes on to say – 

56 

“And, with the full effect of Brexit yet to be felt, with a downward revision of 
global growth by the International Monetary Fund, I am afraid that the 4.1 per 
cent growth is likely to be a mirage.” 

This is what he said.  Well, the 4.1 per cent which the hon. Minister of Finance has stated in 
his budget is taking into consideration the various points he has enunciated.  Neither the IMF 
nor the Bank of Mauritius had these information beforehand before predicting this.  At the 
same time, I have in a previous intervention in this very House stated that figures are figures 
and I had already stated that any fruits coming from a good economic performance are not 
necessarily cascaded to the downtrodden people.  I have given many examples of countries 
that are cited in the BRICKS economies and I must go and state today how the GDP came 
forward.  It was back in 1934 when an Economist called Simon Kuznets delivered a report to 
the US Congress and at a time when the US economy was promising,  there was no available 
data, so he came with a report and he stated about national income.  There the question of 
national income and later GDP came into concept.  It was at a moment of crisis as I said.  But 
in this report, there was a warning which most nations and economists tend to ignore today.  
It is stated that - 

“The  welfare  of  a  nation  can,  therefore,  scarcely  be  inferred  from  a 
measurement of national income”.   

He further stated that - 

“GDP  is  a  tool  to  help  us  measure  economic  performance,  but  it  is  not  a 
measurement of our well-being.” 

This is what he said.  We have simply ignored Kuznets warning. We live in a world where 
GDP is a benchmark of success in a global economy.  Politicians boast themselves with GDP 
going up.  Unfortunately, the world is marching to the drumbeat of GDP. 

Now,  we  have  to  turn  to  a  measurement  revolution  and  it  is  here  that  this  social 
progress  index  comes  into  play.  The  social  progress  index  is  a  measurement  of  a  society 
completely separate from Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  It is based on three dimensions – 

(i) 

Basic human needs for survival. Here, any nation must take into account if it 
can provide nutrition and basic medicines to its population, water, sanitation, 
shelter and personal safety; 

 

(ii) 

57 

Access to building blocks to improve their lives.  The elements which are 
incorporated here are education, information, health and sustainable 
environment, and 

(iii)  Does everyone have a chance to pursue his goals and dreams?  

Again, this encompasses human rights, freedom of choice, inclusion and access to advanced 
education. I believe that if it takes into account all these dimensions then we can say that the 
fruits of a good economic performance are being enjoyed by all the people. 

However, despite GDP’s success as the key indicator for any society, more and more 
modern policymakers  across the world are questioning this metric’s exclusionary  focus on 
economic  factors  at  the  expense  of  other  social  elements.  Let  us  take  the  case  of  oil-rich 
States in the Middle East – they may have the highest levels of GDP per person, yet they lag 
behind  in  terms  of  civil  rights,  education  and  a  host  of  other  quantifiable  and  desirable 
measures. 

I believe that including the consideration of social factors when assessing a nation’s 
performance  is  more  reflective  of  reality.  A  country’s  destiny  depends  on  its  degree  of 
economic  growth  as  well  as  the  well-being  of  its  population  and  of  its  potential  for 
sustainable development. In this perspective, this budget reassures us as - with, for example, a 
well-rounded Marshall Plan against poverty, we observe that we are in line with this more 
holistic approach about a country’s overall situation.  

Economic growth has lifted many Mauritians out of poverty and improved the lives of 
many more over the last decades, particularly following the Economic Miracle accomplished 
by the present Leader of the House during his prime-ministership in the 80s-90s. Yet, with 
numerous  new  challenges  shaking  our  society,  it  is  increasingly  evident  that  a  model  of 
development based solely on economic progress is incomplete.  

Economic growth alone is not enough. A society which fails to address basic human 
needs, equip citizens to improve their quality of life, and provide opportunity for its citizens 
is  not  succeeding.  We  must  widen  our  understanding  of  the  success  of  societies  beyond 
economic  outcomes.  Inclusive  growth,  which  is  on  top  of  the  agenda  of  this  Government, 
indeed requires achieving both economic and social progress. That is indeed why almost 50% 
of  the  Rs117.4  billion  earmarked  as  expenditure  for  the  fiscal  year  2016/2017  will  be 
allocated  to  such  items  as  social  protection,  education  and  health,  which  are  critical  to  a 
nation’s well-being.  

 

58 

I will thus today urge all MPs as well as external analysts to think out of the box while 
debating about the 2016/2017 Budget and to go beyond the sole consideration of GDP. Let us 
call a spade a spade – Gross Domestic Product has too often been inappropriately used as a 
measure of national well-being, something for which it was, in fact, never designed. 

I would like to draw the attention of the House about the Social Progress Index (SPI), 
which claims to have created a new way of assessing our society beyond GDP. I find it quite 
revealing  that  this  new  measurement  index  to  help  quantify  social  progress,  separate  from 
economic  indicators,  has  been  developed  by  the  business  community  itself.  This  should 
reassure the sceptics. 

I acquainted myself with the 2016 Social Progress Index which includes 133 countries 
covering 94 per cent of the world’s population. Finland is this year’s top performing country, 
followed by Canada, Denmark, Australia and Switzerland in order. The US ranks 19th and has 
lost grades compared to last year’s index. Mauritius ranks 40th and is located in the Upper 
Middle  Social  Progress  category,  a  diverse  group  achieving  a  good  performance  overall, 
ranking in the top half of countries globally, but with several areas of improvement which 
have  been  thoroughly  addressed  in  the  2016/2017  Budget:  access  to  ICT  and  advanced 
education, health and wellness and inclusion, amongst others. 

It is laudable that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has come 
up with a Budget that will trigger growth that benefits all segments of society, rather than 
growth at all costs.  While debating on the Budget, we should assess our country’s success in 
turning  the  projected  economic  progress  into  improved  social  outcomes  for  our  fellow 
citizens. Instead of making a fixation on GDP solely, we should truly care about economic 
growth that goes hand in hand with the imperatives of meeting basic needs, improving the 
foundations  for  wellbeing  and  creating  opportunities  for  our  people.  Indeed,  it  is  by 
understanding the relationship between economic development and social progress that we 
will be able to build a successful, united Mauritian community. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  my  field  of  predilection,  that  is,  SMEs.  I  am 
particularly  thankful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  the 
Budget team as the recommendations of my Ministry as well as of entrepreneurs in general 
have not fallen on deaf ears.   

MSMEs have gone through rough seas for the past few years, particularly with ever-
growing competitive environment generated by globalisation. With the 2016/2017 Budget, I 

 

59 

am confident that they will indeed breathe a sigh of relief. They are placed at the very front of 
the stage since the dynamism of local entrepreneurship and its capacity to generate wealth are 
clearly  recognized.  SME  parks,  matching  grants  and  improved  access  to  capital  will 
definitely give a boost to the sector of micro, small and medium businesses.  

At this stage, I wish to point out some of the key measures benefiting the SME sector 
translated into figures: three  years suspension on trade fees for licenses up to Rs5,000 and 
below; eight years tax holiday for start-ups registered with SMEDA; four years tax holiday 
for  enterprises  registered  with  SMEDA  having  less  than  Rs10  m.  of  turnover  effective  as 
from 01 July 2016; three years extension for the SME Financing Scheme, with an interest rate 
to  be  brought  down  from  7.4%  to  6%;  Rs50  m.  grant  under  the  National  SME  Incubator 
Scheme;  Rs100  m.  line  of  credit  for  factoring  services;  Rs500  m.  into  an  SME  Venture 
Capital Fund and a 40% reduction in  air freight  costs to Europe in the textile and apparel 
sector  over  a  two-year  period.  Those  figures  are  eloquent  and  their  potential  beneficial 
impacts are obvious!  

Moreover,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  our  entrepreneurs,  the  Leasing  Equipment 
Modernisation  Scheme  (LEMS)  is  being  reintroduced  to  facilitate  the  financing  of  new 
equipment and state-of-the-art technology for manufacturing enterprises that lack the credit 
or the required collateral to access traditional forms of financing. The Budget equally poses 
ground works for a transition to the next phase of economic prosperity with the advent of the 
digital  revolution.  A  critical  measure  is  indeed  the  VAT  exemption  on  3D  printers,  from 
which  all  SMEs  will  benefit.  The  idea  is  to  provide  all  companies  with  the  possibility  of 
having  access  to  modern  and  high-precision  production  techniques,  thus  facilitating  the 
adaptation of their products to a highly competitive market.  

During  my  consultations  with  entrepreneurs,  Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  of  market 
access has often cropped up and I have always urged them to turn to export. Most of the time, 
they would legitimately bring forward all the barriers and hassles they are confronted with, 
engaged  in  complex  export  procedures.  In  this  perspective,  the  setting  up  of  a  national  e-
commerce platform by MEXA, together with Government, will be a gateway to the rest of 
the world as it will connect consumers from all over the world to the export-ready products of 
our SMEs.  

The  projected  outcome  of  such  measures  is  recognizable.  Such  a  strategy  which 
consists in facilitating access to technology for SMEs is about fostering a wave of modern 

 

60 

entrepreneurs. Our  economy is ripe for change and is entering a new cycle and for this to 
happen successfully, we indeed need a class of entrepreneurs that is equal to the challenge, 
and who are well equipped to succeed in the most sophisticated of markets.  

The 2016/2017 Budget also makes provision for a series of measures geared towards 
an  appropriate  matching of  skills.  The  skills  mismatch  is  a  sad  reality  that  significantly 
affects  our  SMEs,  particularly  in  technical  sectors  like  woodwork  or  handicraft.  Via  this 
Budget,  Government  is  putting  emphasis  on  training  as  a  prerequisite  to  address  the  skills 
mismatch.  Some  4,000  persons  will  be  enlisted  under  the  National  Skills  Development 
Programme for training in technical skills that are in high demand. And so as not to do things 
by halves, the Budget also makes provision for the reinforcement of the corresponding legal 
framework for the Technical and Vocational Education and Training and the setting up of a 
Skills Development Authority as an independent regulator. 

Madam  Speaker,  well  aware  of  the  constraints  that  some  regulations  represent  for 
small businesses and entrepreneurs, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
has rightly laid emphasis on the possibility of removing unnecessary burdens at this level. 
Less  administrative  overheads  will  definitely  help  small  businesses  to  focus  on  growing 
rather  than  on  tickling  regulatory  boxes.  Last  year,  Government  removed  and  simplified 
around 70 permits or clearances.  We also set up MyBiz, the SME One Stop Shop, to act as a 
single window for all licenses, permits and other clearances required by entrepreneurs. This 
year,  we  are  going  further  by,  for  example,  suspending  trade  fees  for  licences,  as  already 
mentioned, except for those engaged in activities such as gambling, and sales of liquor and 
cigarette.  This  measure,  Madam  Speaker,  will  benefit  new  businesses  and  some  75,000 
existing businesses. 

Since  I have been serving  as Minister  responsible for the SME sector,  I have been 
concerned by the high rate of mortality among start-ups. Indeed, seven out of ten start-ups 
generally die prematurely for a variety of reasons ranging from lack of entrepreneurial know-
how  to  problems  accessing  markets.  It  is  in  this  context  that  a  Business  Incubator  was 
launched  few  weeks  before  the  Budget  in  Mahebourg.  This  new  infrastructure  provides 
mentoring  services  to  support  young  and  innovative  entrepreneurs  and  to  help  them  find 
solutions  to  their  problems.  I  hereby  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development for supporting my Ministry in this mission through the 
National SME Incubator Scheme. The Rs50 m. grant under this scheme will be a thrust with 

 

61 

regard  to  our  commitment  to  increase  the  lifespan  of  those  start-ups  which  will  shape  the 
future entrepreneurial landscape of our country.  

Madam Speaker, as stated before, the sectors in which our MSMEs are operating are 
already experiencing unprecedented challenges as a result of trade liberalisation in line with 
the globalisation process, the World Trade Organisation regulations and the dismantling of 
safety nets like the Multi-Fibre Agreement or the Sugar Protocol.  This situation is further 
aggravated by  very  tough competition from imported and imitated products from low cost 
countries, in particular China.  Despite this difficult context, the Government has, once again, 
and rightly so, propelled this sector to the forefront of the economic landscape. 

In  a  climate  of  global  uncertainty,  Mauritius  has  no  choice  but  to  continue  to 
transform its economy to maintain the rapid pace of growth from the previous decade and 
take it to the next level. As we move towards becoming a high-income economy, the SME 
sector is being be called upon to become the main source of growth, output and employment. 
To pursue such challenging targets successfully, it is obvious that we need the most adapted, 
dynamic and proficient resources. 

The  mission  of  the  Business  and  Enterprise  Division  of  my  Ministry  is  to  act  as  a 
facilitator and catalyst in the promotion, development and growth of a globally competitive 
and  innovative  SME  sector  through  the  creation  of  the  appropriate  legal,  institutional, 
operational and financial framework. My ministry has been, up to recently, endowed with a 
single entity, the SMEDA, to materialise and implement all actions to be taken within this 
framework.  As  per  the  SMEDA  Act,  this  institution  is  supposed,  inter  alia,  to  provide  a 
service  delivery  network  which  increases  the  contribution  of  MSMEs  in  the  national 
economy and enhances the contribution of MSMEs in the national economy and  enhances 
economic growth; devise and implement development support programmes and schemes for 
SMEs; facilitate, assist and provide the necessary support to SMEs to gain market access and 
business opportunities, and to compete successfully in the national and international markets. 

I  must  say  that  great  was  my  disappointment  when  I  realised,  simply  after  a  few 
weeks in office, that SMEDA is, in fact, an ailing organisation mired in a deep state of apathy 
and paralysed by its own bulkiness. Years and  years  of mismanagement, malpractices and 
absence  of  strategic  direction  have  borne  this  consequential  legacy,  which  is  in  sharp 
dissonance with the ambition of this Government to make the SME sector become the engine 
of our economic growth. 

 

62 

It is a fact that the success of the activities provided by SMEDA to our SMEs is very 
much  mitigated,  and  most  importantly,  it  does  not  inspire  trust  and  confidence  among  its 
main public, that is, our entrepreneurs. 

One  of  the  highlights  of  the  2016-2017  Budget  is  the  determination  of  the 
Government  to  embark  on  a  series  of  timely  reforms  aimed  at  restructuring  public  service 
institutions,  including  SMEDA,  in  a  bid  to  increase  efficiency.  The  sector  will  definitely 
benefit  from  the  merger  between  SMEDA,  Enterprise  Mauritius  and  the  National  Women 
Entrepreneur Council – those three institutions having either overlapping or complementary 
functions when it comes to enterprise development. On top of leading to a rehabilitation of 
SMEDA in its current form, the new institution that will emerge from this exercise ought to 
transcend the efficiency problems arising from the duplication of roles and the fragmentation 
of operations, as it has been the case to date. 

A word of caution, however. I wish to draw the attention of the House and of all the 
stakeholders involved, without exception, that we have no choice but to get it right from the 
very beginning when it comes to the merger process. One of the fundamental reasons behind 
the inefficiency of SMEDA is that it is a bulky organisation with more than 100 employees, 
three-quarter of which is composed of redundant administrative positions. This is mainly due 
to the result of the merger in 2005 of the then Small and Medium Industries Development 
Organisation  (SMIDO)  and  the  National  Handicraft  Promotion  Agency  (NHPA)  into  the 
Small  Enterprises  and  Handicraft  Development  Authority  (SEHDA),  which  was  later 
renamed as SMEDA. 

Prior to the merger, SMIDO had 45 employees and NHPA had 67; SEHDA was set 
up with all these employees without any attempt to create a common working culture and to 
propose  a  conducive  structure  for  the  organisation  to  deliver  according  to  its  redefined 
mandate, as provided in the Act. A reduction of 48 employees was proposed following the 
merger, but had not been acted upon. A new Act was proposed in 2009 to set up the SMEDA, 
and once again, the relevant authorities failed to address those severe institutional capacity 
weaknesses. The consequences of such a ‘laisser-aller’ were inevitable, but it is a pity that it 
is  the  community  of  entrepreneurs  who  has  been  the  most  acutely  affected  by  the 
irresponsibility of successive previous regimes. 

A  Government  that  aims  at  bringing  sustainable  change  and  propelling  SMEs  as  a 
major driver of the economic development of our country does not have the right to repeat the 

 

63 

same mistakes made by  previous governments.  Indeed, the greatest loss that most mergers 
suffer is not due to a poor match, but rather to poor post-merger implementation. 

As far as I am concerned, I am determined to take all adequate measures to ensure 
that the SMEDA-EM-NWEC merger is carried out ‘dans les règles de l’art’ for it to function 
in  the  context  of  an  optimum  structure,  with  the  required  skills  and  with  a  performance-
oriented approach. 

A merger has to be viewed as an exercise of value creation. The fundamental premise 
of this merger is that the merging entities, that is, SMEDA, Enterprise Mauritius and NWEC, 
will undeniably be more valuable together than they are separately. 

The  overarching  objective  of  this  major  reform,  Madam  Speaker,  should  be  to  re-
integrate  and  strengthen  that  forthcoming  institution’s  capacity  to  formulate  and  develop 
enterprise policy. I am conscious that we will need to clearly define the specific value that 
will have to be created for entrepreneurs from this merger. I am among those who strongly 
believe  that  the  relationship  between  citizens  and  the  State  is  the  key  feature  in  any 
democratic society. Since now, the relationship between SMEDA and entrepreneurs has been 
fractious  and  marked  by  dissatisfaction.  The  merger  will  provide  us  with  a  golden 
opportunity to recraft this relationship, in particular by ensuring that it is designed to deliver 
encompassing,  quality  services  to  entrepreneurs,  and  to  contribute  effectively  to  the 
accomplishment of the economic agenda of the Government. 

The institution that will be born from this merger will have no choice but to be the 
preferred  point  of  contact  of  entrepreneurs  of  all  horizons  when  it  comes  to  support  and 
advice in the fields of enterprise development, access to markets and business opportunities. 
This is a must, and I will be intransigent about this aspect. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  another  note,  my  Ministry  is  fully  engaged  in  informing  and 
training  our  entrepreneurs  through  different  workshops  on  how  to  develop  the  export-
readiness of their products and services, notably due to the restricted size of the local market. 
This  was,  however,  without  counting  the  shock  waves  sent  to  the  whole  world  from  the 
decision of 17.4 million voters in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union (against 
16.1 million voters opting to remain). Mauritius is no exception. Many think that Brexit has 
caught us on the wrong foot with regard to our export-oriented policy. 

The  Government  as  well  as  the  business  community  have  indeed  expressed  their 
concern  about  the  potential  impact  of  Brexit  on  our  country’s  economy  and  on  our 

 

64 

enterprises. The EU has been the main destination for our top exports for the last five years, 
with the UK, which represents 12% of our total exports, topping the list. Our main exports to 
UK in 2015 have been textile and garments, about Rs4.9 billion; fish, Rs2.1 billion, and sugar 
Rs1.1 billion. Stakeholders affirm that our export proceeds from the UK will be affected by 
10% due to exchange risk only. A recent study of the Mauritius Exports Association (MEXA) 
states  that  our  textile  sector  will  be  particularly  affected,  with  significant  losses  to  be 
expected and about 2,500 jobs in jeopardy. 

It  is  quite  clear  that  the  negative  impact  of  Brexit  on  the  Mauritian  economy  is 
inevitable.  Does  this  mean  that  we  should  resign  ourselves  to  simply  accept  this  state  of 
affairs and endure the turmoil patiently without seeking for new avenues? This, in fact, is the 
worst-case scenario that we could inflict ourselves and the most counter-productive attitude 
that we could adopt. 

According to Article 50 of the Treaty of European Union, the withdrawal of the UK 
will be effective after a transitional period of two years following UK notification. Without 
saying that we should thus sit back and relax as we will continue to trade on a duty free and 
quota free basis with the UK as per the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement during that 
period; there is no need, however, for us to give way to panic. This transitional period is a 
breathing  space  that  ought  to  be  wisely  used  and  maximized  upon,  notably  by  adopting  a 
strategic and proactive attitude. This is, in fact, the opportune moment for us to think big by 
finding  ways  to  improve  our  productivity,  diversify  our  markets,  sharpen  our  economic 
diplomacy strategy and explore promising sectors. 

In his answer to the Private Notice Question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition on 
28 June, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stressed on our need to continue diversifying our export 
and  export  markets,  our  aim  being  to  move  from  being  a  Euro-centric  exporter  to  a  more 
diversified export and tourism-based economy.  

Already,  with  increasingly  diversified  trade  and  investment  ties  with  the  United 
States, China, India as well as various African, Middle Eastern, and other Asian countries, 
our country is slowly but surely paving the way for it to be less economically dependent on 
its historical partners in Europe. This policy has already started to bear fruit as latest figures 
show that over the last five years, whilst Europe remained our main export market, its overall 
market  share  has  significantly  decreased  from  72%  to  55%  as  a  percentage  of  the  total 
domestic exports. 

 

65 

To  build  on  this  positive  trend,  economic  diplomacy,  which  occupies  a  prominent 
place  in  this  new  era,  will  be  crucial.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has extensively catered for this aspect. Since there is an urgent need to expand 
our economic space, the Budget makes provision for seven more economic counselors who 
will  be  posted  around  the  world  to  promote  our  country  and  explore  new  markets  for  our 
products and services.  

Madam Speaker, the USA is one of those new markets. According to the  IMF, the 
USA is among the countries to be least affected by Brexit – its economy is expected to grow 
by 2.2% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017. This is good news for Mauritius, particularly with regard 
to AGOA, which has been renewed to 30 September 2025, we have nine years more to go, 
and  which  provides  us  with  the  opportunity  to  benefit  from  an  average  of  17.5  per  cent 
customs  duty  advantage  relative  to  non-African  suppliers.  We  need  to  free  ourselves  from 
euro-centrism  when  it  comes  to  exports?  AGOA,  without  being  the  panacea,  is  a  valuable 
option. Our exporters, who have traditionally been euro centric, therefore, have to make the 
efforts  required  to  familiarize  themselves  with  the  pipeline  structure  and  behaviour  of  the 
U.S. clothing market. According to information that I have, the imports of U.S. from AGOA 
represents only 2 per cent of its total imports and from this 2 per cent the main chunk comes 
from South Africa in terms of vehicles which land into the USA duty free and quota free. 
This only shows the big potential lying ahead and, unfortunately, we have just been relying 
on the U.S. clothing market where AGOA has so many, some 5,000 to 6,000 items on which 
we can capitalize. 

Moreover,  so  as  to  fully  take  advantage  of  AGOA,  we  need  to  shake  up  the 
misinterpretation as to the fact that AGOA is basically concerned with textiles and apparel – 
there are, in fact, 7,000 products eligible under this agreement, with newly-added products 
comprising,  inter  alia,  previously  excluded  items  such  as  footwear,  luggage,  handbags, 
watches, etc., i.e. things that can be produced in Mauritius.  

Now,  given  the  size  of  the  island  and  the  constraints  on  resources,  it  might  not  be 
feasible  or  it  would  be  naive  for  Mauritius  to  consider  too  large  an  array  of  products  for 
export under AGOA. Our entrepreneurs should instead focus on those goods where they can 
create a niche. Some of the main products that Mauritius could focus on are jewellery and 
watches,  given  that  our  entrepreneurs  already  have  some  expertise  in  the  manufacture  of 
these. 

 

66 

The potential of Africa as a reliable partner should not be overlooked. The 2016-2017 
Budget precisely advocates to continue to build on our Africa strategy where we have made 
concrete progress in the past year, with the signing of agreements with Senegal, Madagascar 
and Ghana for the establishment and management of Special Economic Zones. 

Madam Speaker, we are members of SADC and COMESA, which, according to me, 
are a breeding ground for our SMEs. Figures from 2010 to 2015 show that there has been a 
notable  increase  in  domestic  exports  to  the  SADC  and  COMESA  Member  States,  moving 
from  12%  to  18%.  South  Africa  stays  the  main  regional  export  market  followed  by 
Madagascar, Kenya and Seychelles. South Africa and Madagascar together make up for 84% 
of total domestic exports to the region and this fact pinpoints the untapped potential in the 
SADC/COMESA region. For example, our paint industry has an important role to play in the 
coming years for the development of Mauritian exports, particularly in the countries of the 
SADC, COMESA and the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC). 

In addition, the conclusion of the Continental Free Trade Area negotiations in 2017 
will bolster intra-regional trade through the creation of a wider market, increased investment 
flows,  enhanced  competitiveness  and  development  of  cross-regional  infrastructure.  The 
CFTA  comprises  the  three  largest  regional  economic  communities  (RECs)  in  Africa:  the 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the East African Community 
(EAC),  and  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  and  will  cover  some 
6,000 products. It is expected to create an enabling environment for regional trade through 
the creation of a single economic space bigger than any of the individual three RECs. It is, 
therefore, imperative that local entrepreneurs take advantage of the enlarged market within 
the entire region. 

The  potential  of  these  sizeable  markets  (the  USA,  SADC,  COMESA,  CFTA) 
undeniably augurs well for Mauritian exporters. And icing on the cake: as per the 2016-2017 
Budget,  Mauritius  will  finalise  the  Comprehensive  Economic  Cooperation  and  Partnership 
Agreement  (CECPA)  and  Preferential  Trade  Agreement  (PTA)  with  India,  adding  to  the 
existing PTA with Pakistan, thus, ensuring a confident entrance for local exporters in Asia.  

On top of diversifying our markets, new sectors are beginning to surface. Indeed, a 
number  of  new  products  such  as  Animal  Feed,  Printed  Materials  and  Medical/Surgical 
Instruments were ranked among our top 10 exports in the year 2015. New markets and new 

 

67 

export  sectors,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  future  does  not  look  that  grim,  provided  that  all 
parties pitch in to make things happen. 

After all, we should not be under any illusions.  We all know that there has never been 
a level playing field for Small Island Developing States  (SIDS) like Mauritius in the process 
of globalization and being aware of our vulnerability to external shocks, we have always been 
used to take up such challenges and to confront change. Mauritius is a resilient country and 
we know that together, we have the capacity to develop adequate mechanisms to adapt to this 
new economic configuration. This Budget is helping us to build on this resilience by finding 
ways to improve our productivity, diversify our markets, sharpen our economic diplomacy 
strategy and explore promising sectors. 

Madam Speaker, I will now turn to the cooperative sector. The cooperative sector or 
the cooperative movement is over a century old. In fact, the first cooperative society was set 
up  in  1913  and,  evidently,  it  was  in  the  sugar  cane  sector.  So,  today,  the  cooperative 
movement is 103 years old, we can say. There have been other cooperative societies in the 
sugar cane sector itself, in the tea sector, in the agricultural sector, in the production of fruits, 
vegetables, in fishing, in transport and also Cooperative Credit Unions. 

However, this sector has not known much progress and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
always reminds me that if this sector, the cooperative movement, would have been taken care 
of in the right way, it would have been a powerhouse in the economy of Mauritius and I agree 
fully with him. 

We  have  done  much  to  reactivate  the  activities  for  the  cooperative  sector  and  this 
sector has not attracted our youth for various reasons. The cooperative stores, the retail shops, 
have  almost  disappeared  in  Mauritius  and  there  used  to  be,  if  not,  maybe  hundreds  of 
cooperative retail shops in each village and in each town as well. Added to this, there has 
been  the  advent  of  the  failure  of  the  Mauritius  Cooperative  Credit  Bank  (MCCB)  and, 
thereafter, the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank (MPCB). Et comme dit l’adage ‘jamais 
deux sans trois’, there has been the case of the Vacoas Multipurpose Cooperative Society last 
year, qui va rester quand même dans les annales du mouvement coopératif après la MCCB et 
la MPCB. 

Now, coming to MPCB, the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank, this was set up in 
2001.  Of  course,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  was  Prime  Minister  at  that  time,  hon.  Paul 
Bérenger  was  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  was  the  Minister  of 

 

68 

Agriculture. I was on the Board of the Sugar Investment Trust (SIT) as Chairperson. When 
this bank was being set up to give a new boost to the cooperative movement as far as the 
financial  institution  is  concerned,  the  SIT  approached  hon.  Bérenger  and  offered  to 
participate in the shareholding of the MPCB to the tune of 10%. Hon. Bérenger was quite 
surprised and, of course, he said that he never thought of such a help in putting up a financial 
institution  for  the  cooperative  movement  and  he  welcomed  the  idea  so  much  so  that  he 
offered the then Chief Executive of the Sugar Investment Trust to be the first Chairperson of 
the MPCB.  

So, the MPCB was set up in 2001 and the rest is history; we all know what happened. 
But  what  is  sad,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  today  when  I  am  in  the  process  of  reviving  the 
cooperative movement, the cooperative movement does not have a financial institution today. 
The Vacoas Multipurpose Cooperative Society could have been at the centre point in terms of 
financial resources, a bank proper for the cooperative movement. This has also failed. 

(Interruptions) 

Which is more sad, Madam Speaker, is that all the depositors of the Post Office Savings Bank 
(POSB) who have been merged with the MPCB, have also been deprived of a bank as such. 
Needless for me to comment on SIT!  My colleague, the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and 
Food Security is here. Back in 2001, every effort was made, starting from the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, with hon. Bérenger as Minister of Finance and hon. Pravind Jugnauth as Minister of 
Agriculture  to,  again,  give  a  boost  to  SIT.  We  acquired  some  7,000  acres  of  land  at 
Rs125,000 per arpent and this group is to become one of the main institutions for planters, 
for  the  workers  of  the  sugar  industry.  Today,  we  do  not  recognise  this  SIT.  As  former 
Chairperson of SIT, I am very sad today. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You can ask this question when you intervene! 

Mr  Bholah:  However,  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry,  we  are  doing  our  level  best  to 
reignite the flame in the heart of co-operators. In this vein, I can list a number of actions that I 
have already taken. For example, we came up lately with a book which we named ‘Top 100 
Cooperatives’  which  was  well  acclaimed  and  which  gives  a  lot  of  visibility  to  the  whole 
nation as to what the different cooperative societies are doing in this country. We have also 
launched a Directory of cooperatives which depicts all the services and the addresses of the 
different cooperative societies.  

 

69 

We  have  set  up  a  Tertiary  Cooperative  Society  called  the  Mauritius  Cooperative 
Alliance. The structure of the cooperative movement is such that at the base level, we have 
primary  cooperative  societies  and  then  cooperative  societies  of  the  same  segment  of 
economic activities are grouped into federations. This is the second layer. Now, to complete 
the third layer which looks after the interests of the whole cooperative movement, we have 
created and set up the Tertiary Cooperative Society, the Mauritius Cooperative Alliance. 

Year after year, we are launching the Mauritius Excellence Award for cooperative so 
as to reward the best performing cooperative society. We have also set up the Law Advisory 
Committee, which is in law, but which has never been set up by any Government previously. 
We have also organised a lot of markets so that many cooperative societies can exhibit and 
sell their products in the different cooperative sectors in the different cooperative societies. 

We are in the process of reviewing the law. The present law dates as far back as 2005 
which was brought forward by the then Minister of Cooperatives, hon. Koonjoo.  This also is 
being looked into. We are in the process of computerising the Ministry and I am happy that 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development has provided for funds in this respect. 
Again, in order to train and sensitise people in the cooperative movement, we are putting up a 
National  Cooperative  College  at  Bois  Marchand.    Again,  I  am  very  thankful  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development for giving us the appropriate funds. 

Madam  Speaker,  more  will  be  done  in  this  cooperative  sector.  At  the  level  of  my 
Ministry, I am doing my utmost to again build up the image of the cooperative movement in 
Mauritius.  I  am  happy  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been  encouraging  me  since  I 
assumed duty in this Ministry and we believe that with the help of one and all, we will be 
able to again project a good image for the cooperative movement in Mauritius. 

With this, I thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.30 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.05 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Gobin! 

Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac):  Thank you, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  for  allowing  me  the  opportunity  of  saying  a  few  words  on  the 
Budget Speech 2016/2017.  

 

70 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  very  first  words  obviously  go  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development.  I  want  to  tell  him,  although  in  his  absence,  that  il 
incarne le feelgood factor. I think the hon. Minister Pravind Jugnauth, indeed, symbolises the 
feelgood factor. I will give two examples.  The fine morning when he was sworn in as a new 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development in Réduit, we all, as elected Members in our 
respective Constituencies, received messages showing that feelgood factor which was felt on 
that very day.  And, on the day of the reading of this Budget Speech, Friday 29th, the same 
feelgood factor was felt in the country at large. I want to underline that as opening remarks. 

I  want,  secondly,  to  say  something  about  the  Budget  Speech  itself.  Well,  indeed  I 
want  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  for  the  hard  work  he  has  personally  put  in  in  the 
drafting of the Budget Speech, but I want to underline the degree of care that has been taken 
in writing Budget Speech and in designing it. I mean to say that each measure links perfectly 
well with the next one, so that then there is… 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly, thank you! There is a harmonisation and everything is synchronised where 
everything falls into place. This shows the degree of care that has been taken in writing the 
Budget Speech. One can see that, when reading, not only the  Budget Speech, but also the 
annex and the accompanying documents. So, it shows that this has been thought all through 
where everything ties up neatly to form an elaborate set of measures to bring change. 

Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we can, in Government, change things for the better 
and this is what this Budget is all about. I now wish to come to some salient features of the 
Budget.  The Budget is indeed about ushering in a new era of development, and this new era 
is  centred  around  10  strategies  as  has  been  stated  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development. I will not comment upon all the 10 since I have only a few minutes. 
I will concentrate and single out 3 out of the 10 strategies. 

The first is about fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
it  is  not  a  coincidence  that  this  strategy  ranks  first  on  the  list  of  the  10  strategies.  It  is  a 
measure  of  importance  which  is  afforded  by  Government  to  modern  entrepreneurs.  Now, 
under  this  heading  of  fostering  a  wave  of  modern  entrepreneurs,  I  wish  to  highlight  the 
following – 

First,  it  is  about  the  fiscal  incentives  given  to  SMEs.  Here,  I  will  quote  from  the 

Budget Speech on the fiscal incentives, at page 5 of the Budget Speech – 

 

71 

“The  8-year  tax  holiday  in  respect  of  business  income  is  being  extended  to 
new  enterprises  set  up  by  individuals  or  co-operatives  societies  qualifying 
under the scheme and registered with SMEDA.” 
We  have  had  lots  of  representations  from  our  constituents  regarding  existing 

enterprises. What about the existing ones?  The Budget caters for that and provides that – 

 “Existing enterprises registered with SMEDA with a turnover of less Rs10 m. 
and engaged in qualifying activities under the same scheme will be given a 4-
year tax holiday in respect of their business income.  The tax holiday will start 
as from the year of assessment 2016/2017.” 

I want to highlight that as one of the strong measures that has been taken under this strategy 
of fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs. 

The second point I want to highlight under this very same strategy concerns the agri-
business. There are a number of salutary measures, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, which I think, 
we have been waiting for very long time. The Budget caters for unutilised and abandoned 
cane lands of small planters - I wish to underline that which is included at page 10 of the 
Budget where it is announced that - 

“(…)  Mauritius  Cane  Industry  Authority  will  set  up  an  Agricultural  Land 
Management System to bring unutilised abandoned lands of small planters and 
the productive use.” 

We  have  seen  for  the  past  years,  a  number  of  lands  being  abandoned  and  this  is  being 
detrimental to our economy. This is being tackled now. 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

The grant facility for sheltered farming is being increased from Rs250,000 to 
Rs400,000; 
The provision of Rs20 m. for the setting up of an exclusive Bio-
Farming/Organic zone with modern infrastructural facilities; 
The Bio-Technology Institute; 
The tea nursery at La Brasserie; 
The reopening of ex-Dubreuil tea factory;  
Rs10 m. earmarked to boost dairy production; 
Additional Rs10 m. to enable milk processors to provide small cow keepers 
with essential support such as artificial insemination; 

 

72 

• 

• 

Rs7 m. to support bee-keepers through the creation of bee-keeping zones in 
different regions, and 
the subsidy on freight for the export of horticultural products. 

These measures go a long way to show how we have the Agribusiness sector at heart. 

The third issue, under the strategy of fostering a new wave of modern entrepreneurs 
c’est  un  savant  mélange  de  deux  secteurs.  Le  secteur  coopératif  et  le  secteur  de  la  pêche 
where  this  budget  achieves,  if  I  can  say  so,  d’une  pierre  deux  coups,  where  measures 
announced will boost, not only the cooperative sector, but also the fishing sector. 

I  am  here  referring  to  the  grant  of  50%  up  to  a  cap  of  Rs4  m.  to  be  given  to 

cooperative societies to enable them to acquire semi-industrial vessels. 

The new incentive scheme with a tax holiday of 8 years will be introduced to attract 
industrial fishing companies to operate from Mauritius and contribute to the development of 
our seafood hub. 

And finally, to promote small-scale aquaculture, a provision of Rs12.5 m. has been 

made for the purchase of 10 floating cage structures to allocate to Fishermen Cooperatives. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wanted to highlight these measures under the first strategy 

of fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs. 

The second strategy I have singled out for purposes of my speech tonight concerns 
business  facilitation  coupled  with  the  Public  Sector  Reform  Programme.  Our  country,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  has,  indeed,  seen  complex,  onerous  and  lengthy  procedures  when  it 
comes  to  licensing  and  this  has  discouraged  a  lot  of  our  entrepreneurs  into  engaging  in 
businesses. I salute the measures announced in the budget to streamline procedures, both at 
the level of Local Government as well as at national level. 

I wish also here to highlight this very innovative new regime called the Regulatory 
Sandbox Licence which, I think, deserves to be mentioned. This will prove to be an effective 
mechanism to speed up investments in grey areas, then, the BOI can step in and grant the 
Regulatory Sandbox Licence. 

Now,  streamlining  processors,  I  have  said,  will  facilitate  growth,  but  it  will  not 
happen if there is no effective public sector reform. Here, I want to highlight the provision 
made in the budget for the public sector reform and we can also see the clear intention of the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  to  steer  the  reform  programme 

 

73 

personally. He has announced and has made it clear that he will spearhead the public sector 
programme personally. Hence, the transfer of the Public Sector Efficiency Bureau, under the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for,  precisely,  steering  the  public  sector 
reform. 

Now, the third strategy, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, undoubtedly concerns the strategy to 
deal with the root causes of poverty. Here, I want to highlight that it is not the intention of 
Government merely to give allowances. We have all heard of the saying that if you give a 
fish to somebody he will eat for a day, but if you teach him how to fish, he will eat for life. It 
is  not  again  about  dishing  out  allowances,  but  it  is  about  dealing  with  the  root  causes  of 
poverty,  it  is  about  empowerment.  I  will  highlight  just  three  measures  to  show  how  the 
measures concern empowerment - 

The allowances to be paid for improving educational achievements; 

(i) 
(ii)  We  are  giving  a  second  chance  to  students  from  poor  families  to  resit  for 

SC/HSC and Government will bear the exam fees; 
The  pilot  project  in  5  ZEP  schools  to  combine  academic  teaching        
with community engagement.  

(iii) 
 

All this go a long way to show the commitment of Government to empower the vulnerable 
citizens of our country. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will now come to the second part of my intervention 
which is more linked with my constituency. It is my duty as elected Member of Constituency 
No. 13 to thank the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for a few specific 
measures pertaining to the southern part of our country. 

These measures have, indeed, boosted the moral of the inhabitants in the South. I am 

here referring to - and there are quite a number of them - 

• 

• 

Rs20 m. provided for the setting up of an exclusive Bio-Farming/Organic zone 
with comprehensive modern infrastructural facilities at Britannia; 
The construction of a new Police Station at Camp Diable. 

Pour la petite histoire, the Police Station of Camp Diable was opened in 1983 when 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth was Prime Minister. The Commissioner of Police had found a house to 
rent  temporarily,  but  the  Police  Station  is  still  in  rented  premises.  The  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  walked  the  talk.  It  is  not  only  effet  d’annonce.  I 

 

74 

have checked in the Public Sector Investment Programme, funds have been earmarked for the 
construction of 6 Police Stations and one of them is Camp Diable. 

We  will  see  the  transfer  of  Souillac  District  Court  to  a  more  convenient  location, 
namely in the building  of the SIFB which is empty right now.  It  will be in a much better 
environment. 

There is provision in this budget for the technical design of a new swimming pool in 
Rivière des Anguilles. Many of my colleagues here have asked me which formula we have 
used to get that. My colleague, hon. Jahangeer and myself, have persuaded the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, he has heard us and he has made provision for the 
technical design of a new swimming pool at Rivière des Anguilles. 

(Interruptions) 

Ce  n’est  pas  fini,  il  y  a  encore.  There  is  the  upgrading  of  Mont  Blanc  Water 

Treatment Plant and the construction of Rivière du Poste Water Treatment Plant. 

There is still more! The construction of 47 housing units, 18 serviced plots at Souillac 
and  50  more  housing  units,  at  Souillac  still  and I  have  checked  the  item  under  the  Public 
Sector Investment Programme, they are under item E503 and E507 of the PSIP respectively. 

Ce n’est pas fini. The budget earmarks the Rivière des Anguilles Dam and I quote – 

“A main project in the pipeline.” 

Therefore, Government has not forgotten about it. It is a big project, so it takes time. 

There  are  still  more.  Extension  of  the  State  Secondary  School  at  Saint  Aubin  and  finally, 
although  this  concerns  more  Constituency  No.  14,  but  it  will  still  be  beneficial  to  all  the 
inhabitants in the southern part of Mauritius and it is the construction - finally we can see that 
- of the recreation centre for senior citizens at Riambel.  

(Interruptions) 

And, interestingly, the  works have started in June. So, our senior citizens will not need to 
travel to Pointe aux Piments or Belle Mare. When they reach there they are sometimes so sick 
that they do not enjoy their stay. 

(Interruptions) 

 

75 

For all these measures, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the inhabitants of the southern part of 
Mauritius and, more particularly, my Constituency No.13, they join me and my good friend 
hon. Jahangeer to say to the Minister of Finance and Economic Development - thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

I am attracting the jealousy of my hon. colleagues. 

(Interruptions) 

The third and last part of my intervention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is my duty to 
give my personal suggestions on other issues and I think the first one is about the African 
strategy. I have heard the hon. Minister Bholah talk about the Africa strategy and I totally 
agree with what he has stated. We need to keep our efforts ongoing and we need to keep the 
lead  that  we  have.  I  am  appealing  to  Government  and  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development in particular. We need to boost on our Africa strategy more and we 
need to bring change even on that issue as well. My  dream is that Mauritius becomes the 
investment  platform  for  each  and  every  single  investment  going  into  Africa.  Ça  doit  être 
comme  une  seconde  nature.  It  should  be  comme  un  réflexe.  Any  investor  thinking  of  an 
investment in Africa should think Mauritius! It should come to mind. We need, therefore, a 
top-of-the mind campaign in terms of our Africa strategy.  

When I read that the World Economic Forum had its Conference in May this year it 
was in Rwanda I had a pinch in my heart and I said: why not Mauritius? It is a very good 
thing that we are going to have the CPA Africa group in a few days’ time, but why not more? 
When I read about the four nations’ tour of Shri Narendra Modi last month visiting South 
Africa, I think Tanzania, Kenya and Mozambique, the first reaction I had was why did not he 
stop over here on the way to or back home? It should become, as I said, a natural réflexe that 
any  investment  should  be  structured,  should  be  headquartered  in  this  safe  and  beautiful 
country which is Mauritius. 

(Interruptions) 

Stepping stone, indeed, Rt. hon. Prime Minister! And, at the upcoming Heads of States and 
Governments Meeting of the SADC I am appealing to you to attend and make a very bold 
statement in that regard. I think it is going to be towards end of this month, but I don’t have 
the confirmation as to the date. 

 

76 

Again, I give another example when Shri Pranab Mukherjee, President of India, went 
for a three nations’ tour, he visited Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire and Namibia. I said to myself: why 
not a stop over here first? We should give incentives for these businesses because, indeed, 
these State visits are about stimulating businesses. Should not these investments be structured 
here  for  the  safety,  stability  of  this  country  and  for  the  elaborate  financial  services  centre 
which we are already? So, my suggestion is: we should intensify on our efforts on our Africa 
strategy. 

The  second  suggestion  I  want  to  make  concerns  the  reform  in  the  banking  sector 
which  has  been  announced  in  the  Annex  to the Budget  Speech.  The  Annex  to the  Budget 
Speech mentions that the Bank of Mauritius Act will be amended for a number of reasons to 
– 

“grant central authority over bank holding companies and allow the Bank of Mauritius 
(BoM) to monitor intra group transactions and those between the group entities and 
related parties;” 

It is also announced that the Bank of Mauritius would – 

“issue  Rules  without  the  approval  of  the  Minister  as  is  the  case  for  the  Financial 
Services Commission;” 

I pause here to wonder whether we are going in the right direction! 

It is stated in the Annex that –  

“The Banking Act will be amended:  

(i) 

to remove "investment banking business" from the definition of "bank" 
so  that  only  the  Financial  Services  Commission  (FSC)  regulates  this 
business.  Consequential  amendments  will  also  be  made  to  the 
Financial Services Act accordingly;” 

And here,  I  pause to  remark that if this measure will be implemented  I am not  convinced 
whether the  FSC, actually as it is, is sufficiently equipped in terms of human resources to 
monitor investment banking. I am suggesting that we look carefully at that measure. If need 
be, there should be some capacity building first and then implementation of this issue. 

The Banking Act, furthermore, it is stated, will be amended and I quote – 

 

77 

“to  remove  the  supervision  of  credit  unions  from  the  purview  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius;” 

I am looking at hon. Minister Bholah to say that we have seen, I think in the past, enough 
fishy business, enough funny business from credit unions and I do not understand why we are 
going to remove the supervision of credit unions from the purview of the Bank of Mauritius. 
If this measure is implemented, the question then is: who will supervise the credit unions? If 
the answer is the FSC then the question is: can the FSC supervise the credit unions? Credit 
unions advance loans, in fact, to their members and not to any other member of the public. 
Are they equipped to monitor? In effect, credit unions give loans to their members. They are 
concerned with issues same as with commercial banks, but perhaps on a smaller scale. I am 
not even sure that it is on a smaller scale because credit unions these days have become so big 
that they are granting loans in millions. 

So,  I  am  appealing  that  we  have  a  careful  look  at  this  measure  and  if  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  is  too  busy  to  supervise  the  commercial  banks  that  it  does  not  have  time  to 
supervise  the  credit  unions,  then  we  will  create  a  separate  department  within  that  Bank 
staffed  with  persons  experienced  in  the  business  to  supervise  because  the  Registrar  of 
Cooperatives  cannot  do  that.  Probably,  we  will  have  to  see  this  through,  ventilate  for  full 
debate before it is implemented. 

Now, as a member of the Bar, I cannot end without mentioning what I have seen in 
the  Annex  concerning  the  licensing  of  international  law  firms.  It  is  announced  that 
international law firms will be licensed by the Financial Services Commission. Well, I would 
have  preferred  my  learned  friend  the  hon.  Attorney-  General  to  be  the  licensing  and 
supervising  authority  rather  than  the  FSC.  I  hope  it  will  be  ventilated  and  there  will  be 
thorough debate on that issue before any implementation. 

I have said enough, I think I will stop. But, before, I wish to say something - I think 
we all agree that it will be on the implementation that we are going to be judged. I have no 
doubt here that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will indeed steer 
this new era of development with success and we all, I know, all my friends here are joining 
me to assure the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and the Government 
generally of our total collaboration and unflinching support. 

Before resuming my seat, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to say good luck to all our 

athletes who are actually in Rio. 

 

I thank you all. 

78 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Toussaint! 

(5.29 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Toussaint  (Second  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Thank  you,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. Veni, lecti, vici ; il est venu, il a lu, et il a conquis. Il a conquis les cœurs 
des Mauriciens en général. Il a même conquit le cœur du Leader de l’opposition qui a trouvé 
le budget ‘intéressant.’ Un travail de titan abattu dans un temps limité qui lui était imparti, et, 
au final, un budget 2016/2017, qui marque un changement profond dans la façon de réfléchir, 
de procéder et d’implémenter. Bravo à notre ministre des Finances, mon leader, l’honorable 
Pravind Jugnauth! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, permettez-moi aussi de féliciter chaleureusement the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, qui a assumé le poste de ministre des Finances et du 
Développement  économique,  malgré  une  charge  de  travail  déjà  énorme,  et  qui,  avec  son 
maestria légendaire, a nommé le leader du MSM, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, comme le 
grand argentier, avec une réalité et avec un monde en pleine transition. 

L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth nous a fait comprendre que l’état des choses au niveau 
mondial est très difficile, que ce soit sur le plan économique, financier, social et géopolitique. 
Face à cette nouvelle ère, nous devons apporter de nouvelles réponses et différentes manières 
de  procéder.  Je  pense  que  c’est  bien  cela  qu’on  appelle  une  rupture,  et  il  y  en  a  qui  ne 
voyaient aucune rupture. Eh bien, je crois qu’ils n’ont rien compris ! 

M. le président, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, lors de la présentation de son budget, 
nous a montré et nous a prouvé qu’il a privilégié l’aspect humain au lieu de la dictature du 
chiffre. Il a eu à cœur l’intérêt général de la population. Il démontre qu’avec tout le travail 
qu’il  a  effectué,  la  volonté  politique  et  un  pays  uni  doivent  suffire  à  faire  disparaître  le 
quotidien précaire des plus pauvres. 

Ce budget démontre que nous sommes là pour la réussite ; la réussite de tous. Nous ne 
divisons pas ; nous rassemblons. Contrairement à d’autres, nous ne jouons pas avec l’avenir 
du peuple, nous ne politisons pas le malheur du peuple. Living in today’s world requires a lot 
more imagination, and those who lack imagination, they repress it on others. 

Je parlerai de quelques points par rapport au budget, parce que quand même il y a pas 
mal de choses qui ont déjà été dites. En tout premier lieu, M. le président, permettez-moi de 

 

79 

parler  des  mesures  qui  visent  à  mettre  fin  à  la  pauvreté  extrême.  C’est  avec  beaucoup 
d’émotion qu’en préparant mon discours j’étais revenu un petit peu en arrière, c’est-à-dire en 
2013.  Je  vois  l’honorable  Nando  Bodha  qui  arrive  et  il  va  se  rappeler  certainement  des 
différentes activités que le MSM avait faites durant cette année-là, l’année de ses 30 ans. Une 
des activités qui m’a le plus marqué, c’était bien sûr une petite tournée à travers l’île, surtout 
dans  les  poches  de  pauvreté.  C’était  en  2013.  C’était  accablant,  désolant,  inacceptable, 
aberrant,  de  voir  que  nos  concitoyens  vivaient  -  et  certains  encore  continuent  -  dans  des 
conditions vraiment, vraiment difficiles. Un exemple : on avait vu - ce n’était pas une maison, 
ce n’était pas une hutte, ce n’était pas une cabane. C’était tout simplement quatre poteaux de 
bois avec un peu de tôles pourries en haut et quelques tôles tout autour. C’était une maison 
pour cinq personnes. Je ne sais pas si, entre-temps, ils ont pu trouver quelque chose de mieux. 
Ces personnes, si je ne me trompe pas, n’avaient de point de toilettes, ni de salle de bain. Ces 
personnes avaient comme toilettes la nature et comme salle de bain un simple drap attaché 
autour  de  quelques  arbres.  En  2013,  nous  avons  vécu  cela,  nous  l’avons  vu.  Je  suis  sûr 
qu’aujourd’hui, si le ministre des Finances est venu ensemble avec son collègue, l’honorable 
Roopun, avec des mesures visant à éliminer l’extrême pauvreté, je suis sûr que cette visite les 
a marqués, tout comme moi, énormément. 

On se demande bien ce que pouvaient faire certaines personnes qui étaient à la tête de 

ce pays-là en 2013. Ti ena classe et ti pe rempli coffre pendant sa letemps là. 

Vision! Peut-être lunettes ti fausser ça ! 

(Interruptions) 

Une  promesse  faite  à  ces  personnes  que  nous  avons  visitées :  éliminer  l’extrême 
pauvreté. Le Plan Marshall va s’attaquer à la racine de l’extrême pauvreté. Revoir l’allocation 
financière  n’est  qu’une  première  partie  de  tout  un  plan  établi  pour  régler  le  problème  de 
l’extrême  pauvreté.  L’extrême  pauvreté  ne  peut  pas  être  résolue  seulement  en  augmentant 
l’allocation. Ce n’est qu’une partie de toute une structure qui vise à régler ce problème. Leur 
apprendre à pêcher au lieu de leur donner du poisson tous les jours, les encadrer avec une 
série de mesures, ce Plan Marshall mis en route afin d’être un boost suffisant à ces personnes 
pour leur permettre de sortir la tête hors de l’eau. 

M. le président, nous savons que le combat contre l’extrême pauvreté ne peut être la 
bataille seule du gouvernement. Nous reconnaissons le travail immense qu’abattent les ONG 
sur le terrain, et c’est dans ce sens que le montant des fonds accordés  ONG passe à R 90 

 

80 

millions. Il y a aussi d’autres mesures comme le grant pour la crèche qui passe de R 1,500 à 
R 2,000. C’est important pour les mamans surtout, parce que cela concerne plus les mamans 
qui,  malheureusement,  sont  obligés  de  rester  à  la  maison  pour  s’occuper  de  leurs  enfants. 
Avec ce grant, ces personnes pourront laisser leurs enfants entre de bonnes mains et trouver 
un emploi. 

Je  vais  parler  un  peu  maintenant  de  l’éducation,  toujours  dans  ce  contexte  de 
l’élimination de l’extrême pauvreté. Ventre affamé n’a point d’oreilles! L’honorable Pravind 
Jugnauth a entendu. Pour que les enfants des familles modestes et pauvres puissent se rendre 
à l’école dans de meilleures conditions, il propose l’exemption de la TVA sur les céréales 
pour tout le monde et l’augmentation du meal allowance pour ceux qui fréquentent les écoles 
ZEP. Faudait ventre bien rempli pou capav aprane! Pour encourager nos jeunes à poursuivre 
leurs études - donc, on en a parlé - c’est l’introduction du cash grant pour ceux qui arrivent à 
terminer différents paliers de leur scolarité.  

Par rapport à la réforme dans le secteur éducatif, permettez-moi, M. le président, de 
revenir un peu sur le discours de l’honorable Ramful - qui malheureusement n’est pas là et 
tout le parti travailliste, je pense, a été décimé. Personne pas là ! 

(Interruptions) 

Sauvé !  Je  suis  désolé  de  le  dire  mais  j’ai  l’impression  que  l’honorable  Ramful  n’a  rien 
compris ou il n’a rien suivi ou il fait semblant de n’avoir rien compris. 

(Interruptions) 

Il parle de rat race. Compétition féroce! Et si ma mémoire ne me fait pas trop défaut, je pense 
que  cette  compétition  féroce  est  venue  à  partir  de  2005  avec  un  certain  ministre  de 
l’Education travailliste qui avait introduit le A+.  Zis A pas ti assez ! Ou bizin gagne A+ ! 

(Interruptions) 

Ça même ça ! Et qui a prolongé, qui a continué avec le A+ et avec la compétition féroce ?  
Hélas,  un  deuxième  ministre  de  l’Education  travailliste !    C’était  le  Dr.  Bunwaree,  il  me 
semble en 2010. 

(Interruptions) 

Et l’honorable Ramful a aussi dit que nous ne sommes pas prêts, que les parents sont confus, 
qu’il est confus, qu’il ne comprend pas et qu’il y a toutes sortes de problèmes. Mais si je me 
souviens  bien  pour  une  fois,  cela  a  été  une  belle  initiative.  L’honorable  ministre  de 

 

81 

l’Education avait invité tous les parlementaires, n’est-ce pas, Madame ? Tout le monde, sans 
exception, peu importe quelle couleur de parti vous êtes, à venir assister à une présentation 
par rapport à la réforme d’où ils pouvaient poser toutes ces questions. Parce qu’il avait posé 
sa question, je ne sais pas ; je ne sais pas s’il était venu.  

Il était venu ?  Pas ti ena question lerla ! Il avait beaucoup de questions. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah ! 

Mr  Toussaint :  Et  l’honorable  ministre  et  ses  officiers  ont  fait  un  travail 
extraordinaire en expliquant la réforme. Très, très bien expliqué, parce que Madame est de 
profession... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo ! 

Mr Toussaint : Alors, je ne comprends pas ce qu’il y a à ne pas comprendre. Il dit 
que la compétition va augmenter, que les enfants sont en train de prendre des leçons et ainsi 
de suite. Enfin, lui seul sait où il voulait en venir. Dans son discours il avait aussi parlé qu’il a 
l’impression que la BEC et que l’Eglise Catholique n’est pas très d’accord avec la réforme, 
qu’ils avaient publié des choses sur le website, etc. Là, je crois qu’il se trompe complètement, 
n’est-ce pas ! Il se trompe parce que l’Education Catholique, la BEC a toujours été partenaire 
de l’éducation nationale tout comme l’éducation privée. Et ils sont actuellement partenaires 
dans cette réforme ensemble avec le gouvernement. Donc, ce qui m’a aussi chiffonné c’est 
que  l’honorable  Ramful  a  dit,  et  je  vais  lire  un  petit  extrait  de  ce  qu’il  a  dit,  avec  votre 
permission, M. le président. 

Tous le temps ! Ça c’est l’honorable Ramful qui le dit – 

(Interruptions) 

“I will make a humble request to the hon. Minister: don’t use our students as guinea 
pigs.  Please, don’t!” 

A  l’époque  où  ces  deux  prédécesseurs  avaient  jugé  bon  d’introduire  le  A+  et 
d’augmenter la compétition, où était M. Ramful, s’il vous plaît ? Qu’importe ! La réforme est 
là.  Le budget a prévu des sommes.  Notre ministre de l’Education fait un travail magnifique 

 

82 

et je suis sûr et certain, en tant que pédagogues, parents et politiciens, que nous allons réussir 
dans cette réforme.  Pas bizin prend compte Ramful, on est là avec vous, Madame ! 

(Interruptions) 

L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a confiance dans la jeunesse, et comme tous les jeunes, 
certains méritent une deuxième chance afin de pallier un premier échec à leur examen du SC 
ou  de  la  HSC.  Ces  étudiants  issus  de  familles  modestes  pourront  ainsi  prendre  part  à  leur 
examen de rattrapage en toute quiétude car leurs frais d’examens seront pris en charge par le 
gouvernement une deuxième fois.  

Ce concept ‘d’un toit pour tous’’, M. le président est une chose très importante pour 
tout un chacun. Avoir un toit afin de permettre à une famille d’être unie, digne et cela permet 
à  chaque  occupant  d’avoir  d’autres  rêves  et  projets.  Il  y  a  toute  une  série  de  mesures  par 
rapport  aux  logements,  donc,  construction  de  nouvelles  maisons.  Il  y  en  a  dans  notre 
circonscription à 16eme Mille et on remercie l’honorable ministre des Finances pour cela. 

La réhabilitation des complexes de la NHDC, très importante. Construction de plus de 
8,000 maisons sur les trois prochaines années à des familles à faible revenu. Quelque chose 
qui  nous  a  vraiment  marqué  au  début  de  notre  mandat,  que  ce  soit  vous-même,  M.  le 
président  ou  ma  collègue  l’honorable  Sewocksingh;  c’est  qu’il  y  a  des  personnes  qui,  en 
venant nous voir à la CAB, qui nous disent qu’ils attendent depuis 10 ans, 15 ans, 12 ans, 20 
ans pour avoir une maison de la NHDC. Il y en a qui était sur la liste, le conjoint qui vient et 
nous dit, « mo bolom inn gagne letemps mort » et jusqu’à l’heure ils n’ont pas eu une maison. 

(Interruptions) 

Ti p donne ti baba lacaz ! Exactement ! 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please! No comments ! 

Mr Toussaint : Et quand aujourd’hui l’honorable ministre des Finances vient injecter 
la somme nécessaire pour que chaque mauricien puisse avoir un toit décent, nous ne pouvons 
que le saluer.  

L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a aussi montré qu’il a une admiration particulière qu'il 
pour les personnes en situation d’handicap car elles incarnent la persévérance et la volonté de 
réussir. Afin de leur donner toutes les chances de parvenir à réaliser leurs objectifs et à faire 
face à leur handicap et leur différence, il était urgent de prendre des mesures fortes. Le grand 
argentier  l’a  fait !    Alors  le  plus  important  dedans  pour  moi  c’est,  bien  sûr,  ceux  qui  ont 

 

83 

moins de 15 ans, ils seront maintenant éligibles à une pension d’invalidité. Cette mesure vient 
corriger quelque chose d’extrêmement importante. Imaginez une famille pauvre, très pauvre 
même, où il y a dans la maison un enfant en situation d’handicap, une famille qui n’a pas les 
moyens  de  payer  une  école  spéciale,  de  payer  un  van,  un  taxi  pour  emmener  l’enfant  à 
l’école. Cet enfant reste à la maison et, encore une fois, bien souvent malheureusement, c’est 
la maman qui doit rester pour s’en occuper. C’est le papa seul qui va travailler et la famille 
continue  de  rester  dans  l’extrême  pauvreté.  Avec  cette  mesure,  la  famille  peut  payer  une 
école  décente,  payer  le  transport  et  les  deux  parents  peuvent  aller  travailler.  Et  c’est  aussi 
pour la maman une façon d’être un peu soulagée. Ce n’est pas évident. J’ai beaucoup d’amis, 
je connais personnellement des familles où il y a des enfants en situation d’handicap. Ce n’est 
pas évident, ce n’est pas facile de s’occuper de cet enfant ou d’une grande personne tous les 
jours que Dieu fait ! Ce n’est pas évident ! 

Je  souhaiterai  aussi  faire  quelques  commentaires,  M.  le  président,  par  rapport  au 

domaine des arts et de la culture.  

(Interruptions) 

The  status  of  Artists  Bill  qui  sera  bientôt  introduit  à  l’Assemblée  nationale  fait 
l’unanimité. La majorité des personnes qui se lancent dans la musique ou dans la forme d’art, 
viennent bien souvent des situations modestes et pauvres. Ils veulent, par tous les moyens, 
pouvoir changer de vie et vivre de leur passion, vivre à travers la musique, vivre à travers la 
photographie, à travers le théâtre et  à travers la danse. Le monde artistique leur promet monts 
et merveilles, mais, bien sûr, à part quelques rares exceptions, les autres se retrouvent souvent 
qu’avec les monts à gravir et les merveilles envolées. Nous venons corriger tout cela. 

L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth fait de l’artiste un métier reconnu. Un artiste qui pourra 
dorénavant  aspirer  à  une  carrière  professionnelle.  Et  je  ne  peux  que  saluer  l’initiative 
d’introduire un BA Music à l’Université de Maurice. Et pourquoi pas! Pourquoi ne pas voir 
plus loin encore ! Et là, je lance cet appel à mon ami, l’honorable Baboo.  Pourquoi pas, dans 
quelques années, avoir un School of Arts dans le pays où à part le BA Music, ce serait aussi un 
BA Drama, un BA Photography, un BA Dance et tout ce qui est art ! Et  éventuellement, ces 
personnes,  ayant  été  formées  et  qui  posséderaient  un  BA  dans  ce  domaine,  pourraient  être 
utiles à l’éducation parce que justement dans la réforme de l’éducation, nous aurons besoin 
d’enseignants pour enseigner tout ce qui est art. 

 

84 

De plus, le grand argentier a augmenté la contribution du gouvernement afin que les 
artistes  puissent  bénéficier  de  meilleures  royalties.  La  création  d’un  musée  dédié  à 
l’esclavage. Il était temps ! L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth s’engage à marquer cette période, 
Oh combien triste, mais important de notre histoire, avec la mise sur pied de ce musée ! Une 
reconnaissance méritée à nos ancêtres, à notre histoire et à notre République ! 

Avec votre permission, M. le président, je vais dire quelques mots par rapport à notre 
circonscription, Curepipe/Midlands, le numéro 17. Les habitants de Dubreuil et des environs 
accueillent avec une immense joie la réouverture de l’usine de thé qui s’y trouve. Elle sera 
génératrice d’emploi direct et indirect. Merci à l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth et aussi merci à 
mon  ami,  le  ministre  de  l’Agro-Industrie  et  de  la  Sécurité  alimentaire,  l’honorable  Mahen 
Seeruttun. Avec l’avènement du Metro Express de Curepipe à Port  Louis et vice-versa, ce 
sera le visage même du centre-ville de Curepipe qui changera. Nos mandants attendent cela 
avec  impatience,  et  merci  encore  une  fois  au  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement 
économique  et  aussi  à  notre  protecteur,  celui  qui  nous  encadre  du  mieux  qu’il  peut, 
l’honorable Nandcoomar Bodha. 

M. le président, la République de Maurice a une chance énorme en ayant Sir Anerood 

Jugnauth comme Premier ministre. 

(Interruptions) 

Le meilleur pour la fin, honorable Chief Whip ! Un peu de patience ! 

Une chance énorme de vous avoir aux commandes de notre pays, un vrai Père de la 
Nation. Pendant ces 10 dernières années, notre pays avait été pris pour un grand Monopoly 
par certains qui ne cherchaient que leur avantage et sans oublier leurs caprices de petits rois, 
laissant des quotidiens précaires et des joies éphémères pour le reste de la population. 

La  nomination  du  leader  du  MSM  au  poste  du  ministre  des  Finances  et  du 
Développement  économique  est  tombée  à  point  nommé,  car  l’homme  est  sincère  et  a  du 
cœur. Un grand homme doit prendre soin des personnes vulnérables et protéger son peuple. 
Pendant que d’autres balancent des phrases stériles dénuées de tout sens humain et réaliste, 
l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  s’attèle  à  la  tâche  pour  l’avenir  de  ces  concitoyens.  Et 
aujourd’hui,  il  y  va  sans  doute  que  le  pays  respire,  le  pays  est  soulagé,  le  pays,  comme 
d’autres l’ont dit avant moi, on peut sentir ce feel good factor. L’honorable Pravind Jugnauth 
is the feel good factor, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Sur ces mots, je vous remercie tous pour votre attention. 

 

Merci beaucoup. 

85 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

(5.55 p.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
A.  Perraud):  M.  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  stand  before  this  august  Assembly  to  deliver  my 
intervention on the Budget Speech for the year 2016-2017 which is the second since the team 
of L’Alliance Lepep came into power. 

At the very outset, I must warmly congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development, hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth for the presentation of a Budget 
which, is at the same time pragmatic, visionary and achievable, and, more significantly, it is 
in continuity with the pledge which L’Alliance Lepep took with the people of Mauritius in 
December 2014. 

The pledge of the Lepep Government, as set out in the discours-programme was,  I 

quote – 

“To bring meaningful change in the daily life of our people, and lead them towards 
happiness, prosperity and a better future”. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, with this Budget, Government is further keeping the promise and 
is undoubtedly leading the way for a new era of development for the Republic of Mauritius in 
line with the Government Programme 2015-2019. 

The Budget this year concurrently blazes a clear trail to achieving the Vision 2030 for 
the  Republic  of  Mauritius  through  the  identification  of  10  pillars  and  relevant  measures 
which have been carefully crafted to, inter alia: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

consolidate our existing sectors of activities and creating new ones; 

boost standards of living, investment, employment, the ICT sector; 

foster a wave of new entrepreneurs, and empowering vulnerable groups, 

ensure macroeconomic stability and sound public finances, and reducing the 
unfavorable impacts of climate change amongst others. 

There is no doubt that the Budget responds to the aspirations of the population at large 
and  it  couldn’t  be  otherwise  as  there  have  been  wide  pre-budgetary  consultations  with  the 
private sector, Government departments and the civil society.  

 

86 

At  this  juncture,  I  wish  to  commend  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  for  his  efforts  in  delivering  a  Budget  geared  towards  social  development  to 
create a better life for all citizens of the Republic of Mauritius and better conditions of living 
for families. 

M.  le  président,  je  note  avec  plaisir  la  continuité  dans  cet  exercice  budgétaire.  En 
effet, nous pouvons revoir une vingtaines de mesures que le Premier Ministre adjoint, Xavier 
Luc Duval, avait introduites dans ses budgets successifs, il y a quelques années. Par exemple 
les mesures concernant les PME, comme le SME Incubator Scheme, le SME Industrial Park 
et le SME Financing Scheme. D’autres exemples, comme le Youth Employment Programme, 
le  Film  Rebate  Scheme,  Small-Scale  Aquaculture,  le  Fibre  to    Home,  le  Nine-Year 
Continuous Basic Education ou même l’introduction des tablettes tactiles dans les écoles et la 
subvention pour les crèches. La reprise de ces mesures est l’extension de la vision commune 
des 2 leaders du gouvernement Lepep, Xavier Luc Duval et Pravind Jugnauth. Les mauvaises 
langues auraient beau dire que rien ne va au sein de l’alliance gouvernementale, mais les faits 
parlent d’eux-mêmes.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am also pleased to note that my Ministry has received a 
budgetary allocation of Rs451 m. to cater for Mauritian families including men, women and 
children.  These  provisions  fit  in  the  continuance  of  the  new  vision  of  this  Government  to 
ensure that economic development is not done at the expense of the welfare of the people. 
This effort is very much appreciated as it will help to enhance the services being provided to 
the families of the Republic.  

Beyond the frontiers of my own Ministry, this Budget, M. Deputy Speaker, Sir, makes 
provision  for  a  series  of  concrete  measures  that  will  further  contribute  to  women’s 
empowerment,  consolidate  gender  mainstreaming  initiatives  to  achieve  gender  equality, 
foster the development of our children and youth, and further promote the welfare of families.  

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, domestic violence is and remains ‘le mal du siècle’, ruining 
and dooming our families. From July 2015 to June 2016, 225 new cases for males and 1771 
new  cases  for  females  for  domestic  violence  have  been  reported  to  my  Ministry.  This 
Government  has  lost  no  time  to  flag  this  evil  and  to  start  building  a  wall,  a  wall  against 
perpetrators,  a  wall  to  protect,  to  save  families.    The  National  Coalition  against  Domestic 
Violence Committee, set up under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office, has drawn the 
lines of action for all stakeholders involved to combat this evil. 

 

87 

Regarding my Ministry, a huge step has been achieved with the adoption of the new 
PDVA,  a  few  weeks  back,  to  afford  better  protection  to  victims  of  domestic  violence  by 
widening  the  definition  of  domestic  violence  to  include  intimidation,  harassment  amongst 
others. Increased penalties will also, certainly, act as a deterrent for those who tend to adopt 
domestic violence as an easy solution!  

All  necessary  measures  are  being  taken  for  that  precious  piece  of  legislation  to  be 
promulgated at earliest. Provision has also been made for the setting up of a command centre 
for  domestic  violence  and  it  will  act  as  a  one-stop  department  for  all  issues  pertaining  to 
domestic violence including support to all members of family.  

The  recommendation  to  set  up  additional  shelters  for  women  victims  of  domestic 
violence  is  also  being  addressed  with  the  collaboration  of  NGOs  in  the  field.  A  Domestic 
Violence  Information System is also being implemented on a pilot basis. The DOVIS is a 
computerised system for the registration of reported cases of domestic violence which shall 
be used as a tool to monitor, access, record and generate specific reports on such cases dealt 
at the Family Support Bureaux (FSBx). DOVIS will allow for improved coordination among 
the Family Support Bureaux and better record keeping for faster answers to queries regarding 
domestic violence issues and cases.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a study is currently being carried out to better understand the 
phenomenon of the Intimate Partner Violence and concurrently, a Costed Action Plan on the 
implementation of the recommendation of the Assises de la Famille is being elaborated.  

The Action Plan will enable my Ministry to take concrete measures for the promotion 
of family welfare with the collaboration of stakeholders. There are also ongoing initiatives for 
training  and  capacity  building  of  partners  to  include  components  on  strengthening  family 
values  in  programmes  being  implemented  at  regional  and  national  levels.  The  Special 
Collaborative  Programme  for  Support  to  women  and  children  in  Distress  operated  by  my 
Ministry  will  continue  to  provide  funding  to  NGOs  with  a  budget  of  Rs24  m.  for  this 
financial year. 

As Minister responsible for the promotion of gender equality, child development and 
family welfare, I am taking actions to ensure that a greater number of NGOs and community-
based organisations – big or small - dealing with women and children in distress may take 
advantage  of  the  funding  to  implement  their  projects  or  embark  upon  new  projects. 

 

88 

Government recognizes the immense contribution of such civil society organizations to help 
cure social evils.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  beyond  the  mobile  caravan  which  has  been  adapted  and 
refurbished in order to cater for various services and activities aimed at empowering women, 
children and families, my Ministry will embark on an information campaign on the Special 
Collaborative  Programme  with  the  aim  to  mobilize  the  energies  with  NGOs  and  bring 
innovative solutions to contemporary problems of women and children in distress.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I now come to child protection. As Minister responsible for 
children, I am most delighted to note that the Budget 2016-2017 reiterates the commitment of 
this Government to uphold the principles advocated under the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child. No doubt, amongst the various measures spelt out by the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  the  foundation  of  an  enabling  environment  essential  for  the 
holistic and integral development of the child is set.  

The vast array of programmes and policies available at the level of my Ministry to 
ensure the ongoing promotion and protection of the rights of children do necessitate resources 
in  terms  of  trained  and  skilled  personnel,  logistics  inclusive  of  e-services,  appropriate  and 
adequate  infrastructure.  Since  the  beginning  of  my  mandate,  I  have  initiated  a  thorough 
restructuring exercise of the services related to children.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  some  programmes  are  obsolete  while  others  are  very 
valuable  but  almost  dormant  and  under-performing.    Revisiting,  rehabilitating,  revamping 
and  restructuring  a  sector  that  needs  to  address  issues  being  encountered  by  our  children 
today.  Programmes  introduced  15  to  20  years  back  cannot  provide  solutions  for  evils 
threatening  our  children  in  2016!  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that 
provision has been made for the restructuring of the CDU around 3 proposed pillars – 

(i) 

(ii) 

child  protection  services  -  primary  care  and  intervention  and  emergency 
services;  

rehabilitation and reintegration services - residential care, foster care and child 
mentoring, and  

(iii)  Child  Care/Guidance  and  Development  -  policies,  legislations,  ECD  (which 
means  Early  Childhood  Development),  prevention  and  the  setting  up  of  the 
Child Perpetrator Support Unit.  

 

89 

This unit, the Child Perpetrator Support Unit, une grande première, will be set up to provide 
adequate  psychosocial  support  and  mental  health  care  to  juvenile  offenders.  Till  now, 
psychological  services  in  my  Ministry  have  focused  mainly  on  children  and  families  in 
distress. Little attention has been given to this particular group. This measure will provide a 
proper structure for juvenile offenders to avail of quality and effective mental health services 
that would pave the way towards their rehabilitation and reintegration in the society. We must 
not forget that children are not born violent.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the harm done by their environment draws them into vicious 
circles  of  crime,  but  it  is  our  duty  to  pull  them  out  of  these  circles.  They  can  be  saved. 
Appropriate  rehabilitative  programmes  will  be  designed  and  targeted  to  assist  offenders  to 
develop  skills  to  reduce  reoffending.  I  am  thankful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development for this ever ready support in endowing the Child Development Unit 
with nine additional staff to strengthen psycho-social support to children in distress. As per 
the recommendations of the Fact-Finding Committee on Residential Care Institutions, efforts 
are  being  pursued  towards  de-institutionalising  children  victims  of  violence  who  are  more 
and more placed in smaller units with home-like settings and trained carers; professionalising 
the foster care support to children with conducive familial environment; scaling up the Child 
Mentoring  Programme  for  children  who  lack  adequate  parental  support  and  role  model; 
consolidating  Community  Child  Protection  Programme  for  safe  communities,  and 
rehabilitating  and  empowering  biological  families  of  children  victims  of  violence  for  their 
early reintegration therein.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Attorney General’s Office is on the other hand finalising 
the  Child  Care  and  Protection  Bill,  which,  while  also  making  provision  for  structures, 
services  and  means  for  promoting  and  monitoring  the  sound  physical,  psychological, 
intellectual, emotional and social development of children; shall act as a première in offering 
a  chapter  in  respect  of  guidance  on  implementation  of  the  best  interest  principle  of  the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  an  innovative  measure,  the  provision  in  the  budget  for 
tablets  to  children  for  lower  primary  levels  is  indeed  a  commendable  initiative.  This  last 
decade has brought us into a new era, the ‘smart’ era, smart phones, smart TV, smart toys. A 
new breed has been stepping into this world, ‘smart’ kids! It is not easy, but we need to be 
smarter  than  them!  Their  propensity  to  master  smart  technology  should  be  channelled  to 

 

90 

respond to new ways of acquiring knowledge and take full advantage of being part of this 
full-fledged digital society.  

My Ministry is implementing and reinforcing the Child Protection Register which is a 
key  innovative  computerisation  project  that  aims  at  enabling  the  Child  Development  Unit 
(CDU) to record and address cases of children in distress reported at its level with increased 
efficiency, or should I say, ‘in a smart way’!  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, early childhood is the most prolific period of development in 
a  human  life.  Children  who  participate  in  well-conceived  Early  Childhood  Development 
Programme  tend  to  be  more  successful  later  in  their  schooling.  They  are  more  competent 
socially and emotionally, and show higher verbal and intellectual development than children 
who  are  not  enrolled  in  high  quality  programme.  Investing  in  equal  access  to  adequate 
standard  of  early  childhood  care  is  indeed  an  investment  for  the  future.  In  that  vein,  the 
commitment  of  this  Government  to  increase  the  monthly  grant  under  the  crèche  voucher 
scheme for poor families from Rs1,500 to Rs2,000 per child is acclaimed as it will enable 
more children from vulnerable background to access quality child care services and facilitate 
the entry of more women in the employment sector. Investing in the children of the future is a 
form of grandeur, a legacy by the LEPEP Government for a better world. 

The National Children’s Council will, on the same chapter, multiply efforts to ensure 
that the largest number of eligible existing crèches benefit from the grant of up to Rs200,000 
under the Support to Child Day Care Centres Scheme and thus enhance their level of service 
delivery to small children attending the crèches. My Ministry is also reinforcing the project 
related  to  Early  Childhood  Development.  These  include  supportive  legal  and  institutional 
frameworks, capacity building, licensing of Day Care Centres, development of strategies for 
parent  education  and  community  awareness,  development  of  curriculum  and  learning 
material for ECD and integration of children with special needs to ensure a holistic approach 
to ECD in the interest of the overall development of the Mauritian child.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, once said, and I quote – 

“Gender equality is more than a goal in itself. It is a precondition for meeting 
the  challenge  of  reducing  poverty,  promoting  sustainable  development  and 
building good governance.”  

This budget is impregnated with the belief that we cannot win with only half of the team, but 
we  need  to  rope  in  the  other  50%+  of  our  population  on  this  journey  to  a  fairer  society. 

 

91 

Measures to address women`s empowerment and gender equality are testimony to the strong 
commitment  and  political  will  of  this  Government  to  have  a  just  and  equitable  society  by 
enabling women to be at par with men. 

It is an undeniable fact that women, who constitute more than half of our population, 
are  determined  to  contribute  their  competitive  potential.  It  is,  therefore,  crucial  that  the 
untapped  potential  of  this  large  segment  of  our  human  capital  be  unlocked.  I,  therefore, 
applaud the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for the bold initiative taken 
in terms of requiring all public companies listed on the Stock Exchange to have at least one 
woman on their Board of Directors. This is an important milestone in our history as, through 
this  measure,  more  women  will  be  able  to  break  the  glass-ceiling  and  ultimately  aspire  to 
reach  and  participate  at  the  highest  level  of  decision-making  within  these  organisations.  I 
would wish to refer to the Global Gender Gap Report 2015 of the World Economic Forum, 
whereby  Mauritius  ranked  120  among  140  countries!  The  Economic  Participation  and 
Opportunity  index  has  been  pulling  Mauritius  down  in  the  global  rating  and  this 
revolutionary measure will undoubtedly turn the  tide. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is in our 
mandate to, I quote – 

“ensure  responsible  and  judicious  use  of  public  funds  and  to  pursue  the  crusade  to 
weed out wastage”.  

In  that  respect,  many  institutions  with  cross-cutting  and  juxtaposed  mandates  are 
being  fused.  One  of  the  objectives  of  merging  SMEDA,  Enterprise  Mauritius  and  the 
National  Women  Entrepreneur  Council  into  one  organisation  is  to  avoid  duplication  of 
services  and  provide  one  stop  service  to  women  entrepreneurs.  I  suggest  that  this  merger 
dedicate a unit specifically to guide, advise and mentor women entrepreneurs, especially very 
small ones and beginners, who can somehow become lost in the system when it comes to 
competing  with  male  counterparts,  for  instance,  regarding  funding  or  other  incentives.  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  allocation  of  an  amount  of  Rs200,000  respectively  to  five  key 
Ministries is yet another stepping stone towards ensuring that gender permeates in all policies 
and programmes.  

For the very first time, Government has deemed it strategic to come forward with the 
concept of gender analysis which is an essential element of the socio-economic evaluation of 
a  country.  Ultimately,  this  important  assignment  will  feed  information  into  the  Gender 
Development  Index  that  will  be  developed  in  order  to  monitor  the  progress  of  our  society 

 

92 

towards gender equality. As the House is aware, UN countries have pledged to take national 
commitments for the Planet 50-50 by 2030. This Budget is leapfrogging to reach the target 
and I am confident that we will catch up for lost years through all these measures.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as the National Gender Machinery, my Ministry will also be 
coming up with a National Costed Action Plan for Gender Mainstreaming in the coming year. 
The objective, thereof, is to formally conceptualize concrete measures that all stakeholders 
need to take to promote gender equality. We need not forget that as party to the commitment 
taken  at  international  level,  mostly  in  regard  to  the  new  global  agenda  for  sustainable 
development, Mauritius needs to be bold in achieving the agreed targets. Measures proposed 
in this Budget are, therefore, very much aligned to our commitments. Furthermore, the setting 
up  of  a  Parliamentary  Women  Caucus  will  be  strategic  in  enabling  and  regrouping 
parliamentarians  in  carving  out  a  space  for  them;  around  common  positions  regarding 
women's  empowerment  and  gender  equality  issues;  to  make  their  voices  heard;  and  bring 
forth changes in legislations whilst adopting a gender perspective.  For a long time, women 
have been discouraged to step into politics, but since day one, the  Lepep Government has 
been taking bold measures towards elevating the status and nurturing respect for women.  

In a similar manner, as Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family 
Welfare,  I  have  found  it  strategic  to  repeal  the  National  Women's  Council  Act  of  1985, 
which, in today's society was no more responsive to the aspirations, needs and concerns of 
the contemporary womenfolk. Since my assumption in office, I have made it my priority to 
expedite matters and to have this new legislation passed in the National Assembly, last May. 
This new Act will serve as an appropriate platform to rally Women's Associations and other 
organisations  having  as  primary  objective  to  work  for  women's  empowerment  and  gender 
equality. The ultimate objective is to make the Council more dynamic and vibrant and pave 
the way for the emergence of innovative ideas with a view to addressing prevailing gender 
gaps, whilst adopting a bottom-up approach. Moreover, the National Women's Council is in 
the  process  of  formulating  a  Strategic  Framework  covering  period  2016-2020  that  will 
identify  the  short,  medium  and  long  term  strategies  that  would  be  required  to  enable  the 
Council to achieve its set objectives.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, one of the main thrusts of this Budget focuses on the root 
causes of poverty. We cannot be complacent with a situation where Mauritius is to become a 
high  income  country  whilst  at  the  same  having  a  situation  where  some  6,400  Mauritian 
families are still living below the absolute poverty threshold of US Dollars 3.10 per day per 

 

93 

individual, calculated on the basis of the purchasing power parity set out in the latest World 
Bank Report. Researches around the world have shown that poverty has a woman's face and 
such situation tends to perpetuate a cycle of violence and discrimination. Therefore, it is the 
concern of all of us and we have to act collectively if we really want a united, equitable and 
prosperous society.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Nobel Prize Winner Amartya Sen observed that, I quote – 

“poverty is not just a lack of money. Instead, it is not having the capability to realize 
one’s full potential as a human being”.  

I  would,  therefore,  like  to  express  my  deep  appreciation  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development for the very bold and laudable initiatives announced in 
his Budget Speech regarding the Marshall Plan against Poverty. I am convinced that taking 
direct  action  to  address  absolute  poverty  through  increasing  monthly  entitlements  to  every 
adult on the Social Register, with a minimum threshold of Rs2,720 and a maximum threshold 
of Rs9,520 for a family of two adults and three children, will bring great relief to the poor and 
vulnerable of our society.  

It is also the case that the other measures related to easing access to housing units, 
possibilities to acquire municipal land on which housing units were erected at a nominal price 
and  the  cash  awards  to  address  educational  attainments  of  children  from  poor  families 
provide strategic entry points to tackle poverty in a holistic manner. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  vast,  courageous  and  audacious  measures,  as 
recommended in the Plan, will undeniably support the vulnerable ones. Ultimately, they will 
be able to get out of the vicious circle of poverty. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  different  measures  announced  under  the  10  different 
pillars in the Budget Speech benefits the family in one way or another. Depuis mon arrivée à 
la tête du ministère responsable du bien-être de la famille, je ne cesse de constater à quel 
point la famille mauricienne est fragile. Les mutations sociales, l’évolution du statut de la 
famille et les fléaux de notre temps ont fragilisé l’institution même de la famille. Ce budget 
peut  être  considéré  comme  un  budget  familial  qui  s’applique  à  soulager  les  familles  de 
différentes formes de pressions qu’elles subissent. 

As  a  caring  Government,  we  have  not  relented  in  our  efforts  to  ease  the  financial 
burden that families have to bear to sustain their livelihoods. Basic day-to-day commodities, 
including  clothing,  cereals,  diapers,  toys,  lighting  sets,  household  articles,  glass  mirrors, 

 

94 

drinking glasses, amongst others, have been exempted from customs tariff. Additionally, the 
decrease in price of  cooking  gas by Rs60 will also reduce to a  great  extent the household 
expenditure of families. The abolition of customs duties and the transformation of Mauritius 
into a duty free island clearly demonstrate that this Government cares for families. 

Let’s  take  another  example  which  demonstrates  the  immense  consideration  of  this 
Government for family welfare: Investing in Round the Clock Water Supply. This measure 
will definitely improve the living condition of families in the lower income bracket, thereby 
improving sanitation and hygiene conditions and the immediate living environment. We can 
try  to  imagine  the  load  of  stress  upon  families,  surtout  les  mères  de  famille,  who  have  to 
struggle and juggle due to water supply problems. Serene and peaceful families in a country 
makes a world of difference and, at times, all we need is ‘a few more drops of water’! 

The main challenges facing us as a Nation and the pressing and urgent need for us to 
push back the frontiers of poverty as we strive towards our goals of creating jobs have no 
doubt  taken  into  consideration  the  different  perspectives.  The  decision  of  the  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic  Development to invest  massively in employment creation will also 
bring significant relief to the unemployed. In that respect, we need to applaud the measures 
that are directly linked to employment, namely the upskilling of young unemployed graduates 
under the National Skills Development Programme and the Youth Employment Programme. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I once again congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development for the presentation of a Budget geared towards relieving the low-
income group and the population at large. 

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Abbas Mamode! 

(6.32 p.m.) 

Mr  M.  S.  Abbas  Mamode  (Fourth  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East): Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.   D’abord, avant de féliciter le ministre des 
Finances,  je  voudrais  apporter  ma  solidarité  aux  éleveurs  qui  passent  par  des  moments 
difficiles avec l’épreuve traumatisante de l’abattage, comme mentionné  par ‘Le Mauricien’ 
d’aujourd’hui. 

 

95 

Je  voudrais  féliciter  le  ministre  des  Finances  pour  ce  budget.  Je  le  félicite  pour  de 
nombreuses mesures apportées pour soulager les plus démunis, les moins chanceux et ceux 
au bas de l’échelle. 

 Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  acting  together,  we  can  prepare  ourselves  for  a  better 
future for all. At the very start of his speech, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  stated,  “Today,  we  choose  to  come  on  top.”  Yes,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, we choose to come on top for the benefit of our nation. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  us  have  a  look  at  history.  In  1961,  the  American 
Economist, James Meade, predicted a gloomy future for the small island of Mauritius. For the 
1977 Nobel Prize winner, the outlook for peaceful development was poor, as Mauritius was 
highly dependent on the agricultural sector and with no natural resources. Yet, we are still 
proving that he was wrong. 

I would like to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
for the presentation of this Budget, which has not only touched the heart of Mauritians, but 
also by bringing new hope for them and improving their quality of life as well as the different 
strategies that have been mentioned in this Budget to enhance development. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, different measures and provisions have been undertaken in 

this Budget, which are as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

address the problem of unemployment; 

enhance poverty alleviation; 

promote the development of small and medium enterprises; and last but not 
least, 

other  essential  measures  to  boost  up  economic  growth  in  the  forthcoming 
future. 

This  Budget  shows  that  we  are  a  caring  Government.  This  can  be  justified  by  the 

following – 

By  imposing  a  heavy  tax  on  alcoholic  products  and  cigarettes.  Such  measures  will 
impede  to  induce  the  above-mentioned  products  and  which  in  turn  will  not  be 
considered as a burden to the Government and society as a whole. 

 

96 

In  order  to  combat  unemployment,  much  emphasis  has  been  laid  upon  to  better 
matching of skills and create more job opportunities for our youth, women and men; 

7,200 vacancies will be filled in the public sector; 

900 additional Police Constables will be recruited; 

600 Educators from both primary and secondary schools; 

A special scheme will be launched for the placement of 200 trainee Engineers in the 
public sector bodies; 

Provision of 2,000 employment under the YEP. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  cannot  deny  the  fact  that  we  are  indebted  to  the  hon. 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  who  first  initiated  to  enhance  poverty 
alleviation when he was Minister of Social Integration. His contribution is considered to be a 
landmark  for  others  to  follow.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  present 
Minister who is doing a very good job. Very often, I congratulate him for what he is doing. 

M. le président, le PMSD a toujours été fidèle à ses principes: loyal envers le pays et 
sincère dans ses actions. Pour nous, le peuple passe avant tout. Pour nous, il n’y a pas de 
‘On’ and ‘Off’. Notre priorité c’est la solidarité au sein du gouvernement Lepep. Pour nous, 
on  est  tous  élu  sur  la  base  d’un  programme,  et  nous  faisons  entièrement  confiance  au 
Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who will lead the nation to a better destiny. 

(Interruptions) 

Coq pou contiye santer, soleil pou lever ! Carré carré nou pou dresse sa pei là ! 

In this respect, the hon.  Deputy Prime Minister left a legacy whereby the works have to be 
continued by hon. Pravind Jugnauth … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No cross talking, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Abbas Mamode: …the Minister of Finance and Economic Development to boost 
the socio-economy development of the country. Despite the past Brexit event, he is making 
efforts to strengthen the tourism sector whereby the sector is increasing by 10 per cent. 

Let me remind our colleagues on the other side of the House that, when the MMM 
took power in the City Council of Port Louis, the first thing that they did was to close a child 

 

97 

daycare  centre  at  Cité  Vallijee  which  was  opened,  thanks  to  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval  who 
heard the vulnerable mothers, when he was Minister of Social Integration. 

In addition, Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir,  concerning arts and culture the  credit goes to 
hon. Baboo, Minister of Arts and Culture who has contributed to preserve the historical and 
cultural heritage site and its structures for our new generation. A sum of Rs50 m. has been 
earmarked  for  this  Budget,  thanks  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development.  I  have  heard  the  hon.  Minister  of  Gender,  Child  Development  and  Family 
Welfare, hon. Mrs Perraud, talking about ‘smart’. Fortunately, we have got a smart Minister 
of Finance! 

I would like to draw the attention of the House that the very first synthetic football 

ground, which is found at Magon Street, Plaine Verte, was my doing at the City Council. 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t worry, hon. Aadil Ameer Meea,  I heard you on the radio this morning.  At the NDU… 

Be it! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No cross talking! 

Mr Abbas Mamode: I am from the PMSD and we are in alliance with the MSM and 
the ML, and the Government is going strong. You wait for on and off till I don’t know which 
year you will be waiting for! 

Moreover, all my colleagues will agree… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, thank you Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

Moreover, all my colleagues will agree with me that education is the foundation of 
human development. In this respect, the Budget 2016-2017 provides us with the following 
facilities.  It highlights that students coming from poor families can achieve higher level of 
education.  

I quote page 41, section 304 – 

98 

“Rs15,000 for successfully completing the grade 9 level under the nine year 
schooling; 

-  Rs25,000  for  successfully  completing  the  school  certificate  level  or  equivalent 
vocational certificate, and 

-  Rs35,000  for  those  successfully  completing  the  Higher  School  Certificate  or 
equivalent technical qualification.” 

Moreover, those who have to re-sit for the HSC or SC will be exempted for the first 

 

 
time. 

With regard to decent housing in the context of Marshall Plan, the Government has 

come forward with new mechanisms which comprise the following –  

• 
• 

800 housing units will be constructed over the next three years, and 
Low-income families will benefit under the NHDC Social Housing Scheme 
from Rs10,000 to Rs20,000. 

Least, but not last, a series of drains and road projects for the financial  year 2016-
2017  in  my  constituency  are  ongoing  projects.  Je  voudrais  mentionner  certains :  la  Route 
Desbouchers  à  Roche  Bois,  115  Impasse  Magon  à  la  Plaine  Verte,  Trisnha  Polly  Street, 
Plaine Verte, Pellegrin Street, Louis Vel, Coringa,  Indian Lane, Samuel Fouquereaux, Cité 
Martial. 

Concernant les drains : Depierre à Roche Bois, Allée Tamarin à Roche Bois, Quartier 
Shell,  Canal  Anglais,  Cité  Martial,  Impasse  Makow,  Rohan  Street,  Indian  Street,  Maulana 
Abdul Rashid Nawab à la Plaine Verte pour très bientôt ; Yoloff Street, Camp Yoloff. 

Upgrading  of  roads,  mon  cher  ami !    Impasse  St.  Martin  à  Roche  Bois,  Impasse 
Rohan à Cité Martial ; Samuel Fouquereaux, Cité Martial, Madura Street à la Plaine Verte, 
Dr. Hassen Sakir pour très bientôt, Maulana Abdul  Rashid Nawab… 

(Interruptions) 

Ce sont des projets, l’honorable Amer Meea! Already getting the blessing of the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth!  And very soon there will be the uprading of 
sport facilities around the region.   

The Deputy Speaker: No cross talking, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

99 

Mr Abbas Mamode: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to sum up, I would like to express my 
deep gratitude and appreciation to the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, hon. 
P. Jugnauth, who made  tremendous efforts to satisfy all the social strata of the population.   

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is high time to put our heads together and say ‘Yes, we 
can!’ for the betterment of our society and contribute to the socio-economic development of 
the country. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

 The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to tomorrow Tuesday 09 August 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

MATTERS RAISED 

BEAU BASSIN – BOOKMAKER SHOP - APPLICATION 

(8.46 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  two  items  to  raise  at  Adjournment,  one  is  concerning  the  Ministry  of 
Local Government.  

I would like to make a plea on behalf of the inhabitants of the centre of Beau Bassin. I 
raised the issue sometimes back with the hon. Minister. There has been an application made 
by one firm, Value Plus Ltd. to operate and run a proposed development of a bookmaker shop 

 

100 

and odd betting on football matches played outside Mauritius. This application has been dealt 
with by the municipality of Beau Bassin/Rose Hill.  

There have been strong objections from the College BPS which is in the surroundings, 
the Catholic Church, the residents of centre Beau Bassin with regard to the security of, not 
only  schoolchildren  but  also  people  living  in  the  vicinity.  The  case  has  been  heard  by  the 
Municipality. There have been objections and, unfortunately, on 15 July, one of the persons 
who  had  objected  has  been  informed  that  the  application  has  been  approved  by  the  hon. 
Minister of Local Government. I think it is the procedure. So, I have raised the matter with 
the hon. Minister, my good friend, and I have gathered some information and have been made 
to  understand  that  even  the  Police  des  Jeux  had  made  an  objection  to  that  application. 
Ultimately, I don’t know what happened to the file.  

So, knowing this centre Beau Bassin, the allocation of this permit, if it goes through, 
will create a lot of problems not only security problems but parking problems and, especially 
with  the  children  attending  the  College  BPS  and  those  attending  the  Masses  at  the  Sacré 
Coeur Church.  

Can I appeal to the hon. Minister so that he can have a fresh look at the file and then 

do the necessary, within the parameters of the legislation?  

Thank you. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I 

 
have gone through the file. I understand the concern of the hon. Member. The shop is situated 
at Royal Road Beau Bassin.  

It is in a commercial zone where such activity is permissible according to the outline 
scheme and the PPG.  I have checked about those who are protesting.  There was one person 
objecting out of three close neighbours. We did not find any protester from the school and not 
from any religious organisation or even from the Police.  I can assure the hon. Member. 

I understand your concern and this is why I will go through it again.  The thing is that 
the licence has been given by the GRA. That is why it was approved the last time, but I can 
have a look at it again and then we will see. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

 

(6.49 p.m.) 

101 

CORNER ARIANE & BAMBOUS ROAD, MONT ROCHES - TRAFIC LIGHTS - 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Riviere):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, some two weeks back, I raised a matter here - unfortunately hon. Bodha is not 
here – regarding the concern of the inhabitants of Roche Brunes and Mont Roches concerning 
the security aspect at Corner Ariane and Bambous Road at Mont Roches.  I even made a plea 
to  the  hon.  Minister  to  have  traffic  lights  installed.    Day  by  day,  the  security  problem  is 
becoming more alarming.  Even this morning, unfortunately, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, il y a 
eu un mort et un blessé grave, la collision s’est produite à quelques mètres de la Boutique 
Savannah, Rue Raymond Rivet, Mont Roches à 6.30 ce matin.  One young boy passed away 
and there is one who is severely injured and is at the hospital.   

So, the purpose then of me asking the hon. Minister to have traffic lights fixed.  Had 

there been traffic lights there, that accident would not have occurred in that particular way. 

More so, along Bambous Road, there is the bus service by the United Bus Service for 

the people of Canot and Albion and also illegal parking on both sides of the roads. 

Can I make a plea to Government, through any Minister who will pass on the message 
to the Minister of Public Infrastructure to have this traffic light urgently installed at Corner 
Ariane  and  Bambous  Road,  and,  secondly,  to  have  a  fresh  survey  with  the  Traffic 
Management Unit of the measures which can be taken to avoid any future recurrence of such 
types of accidents? 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have listened to my hon. Colleague. I am going to pass on the message 
to the hon. Minister concerned. I am sure that my colleague is going to take proper action in 
order to remedy the situation. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(6.51 p.m.) 

SCRAP METAL - DISPOSAL 

 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I would like to raise an issue which is addressed to the hon. 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection and it relates to the scrap metal 
business.   

 

102 

As the hon. Minister is aware, export of scrap metal has now been banned since 30 
June 2016 and answering to a PQ on 17 May 2016, the hon. Minister stated that there was a 
proposed agreement with Samlo Koyenco Steel Co. Ltd. pursuant to which Samlo was going 
to buy  all the ferrous and non-ferrous scrap metal from dealers  at a price, and  I quote the 
price – 

“(…) international market rate, that is, the International Scrap Metal Price Index (…)” 

However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the agreement has never been signed and today all 
the  scrap  metal  dealers  are  having  problem  to  dispose  of  all  these  scrap  metals.  
Samlo Koyenco Steel  Co.  Ltd.  is  not  buying  all  of  them.    So,  we  are  having  a  problem 
stocking  all  these  metals.    Some  of  these  metals  especially  those  by-products  from  the 
manufacturing sector are quite toxic. 

Therefore, I would humbly request the hon. Minister, if he can look into the matter 
and if he needs to talk to Samlo or finds alternative means to address the issue of scrap metal 
disposal. 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank hon. Uteem for having raised the issue today.  Definitely, I 
will look into that because I was not aware of the problem that the hon. Member just stated. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(6.53 p.m.) 

ALLÉE TAMARIN, ROCHE BOIS – ROAD REPAIRS 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East):  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Le  problème  que 

je  vais  soulever  aujourd’hui  concerne 

le  ministère  des 
Administrations régionales, c’est-à-dire la municipalité de Port Louis. On a entendu à la radio 
ce matin.  Allée Tamarin à Roche Bois, qui est très fréquentée, se trouve dans un piteux état.  
Il y a le trafic qui vient de la Route Nicolay menant vers la Route Cocoterie et le rond-point 
de Roche Bois.  

Je  demande  au  ministre  s’il  peut  faire  le  nécessaire  rapidement  pour  essayer  de 
rabibocher tous les trous qu’on a sur ce chemin-là et essayer d’avoir une solution temporaire 
avant qu’on refasse le chemin complètement. 

 

Merci, M. le président. 

103 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo):  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if I 
understand well, there are some CWA works going on there.  So, once that is over, we will 
try to sort out the road problem.  

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

(6.54 p.m.) 

PEREYBERE, GRAND GAUBE & GRAND’BAIE - WATER SUPPLY 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. My request is addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Utilities.   

Following my PQ B/624 dated 20 June 2016 on the problem of water supply in the 
regions of Pereybere, Grand Gaube and Grand’ Baie, the hon. Minister referred me to the list 
of projects that he tabled and I had the opportunity to peruse. I have noted that there are, at 
least, two projects that have been identified in the region.  One is from St. François to Cap 
Malheureux, and the second project is at Péreybère. 

Regarding  the  one  from  St.  François  to  Cap  Malheureux,  unfortunately,  there  is  a 
legal problem with the contractor and the one at Péreybère was supposed to start. I hope it 
will start in the coming month, that is, by September 2016.   

For the regions of Grand Gaube and Grand’ Baie where the problem is acute - hon. 
Minister Gungah will confirm - I propose that there is provision in this budget for a service 
reservoir of, at least, 20,000 m3 to 25,000 m3. Well, I have not seen this in the budget, but I 
would request the hon. Minister to please take up the matter at the level of his Ministry first 
if funds could be provided because I am telling you, the problem is really acute and we are 
getting heavy pressure from the inhabitants in the region. Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  one  of  these  inhabitants  happens  to  be  my 
mother; she does not complain to me at all. 

Yes, we are all three of us there. 

(Interruptions) 

 

104 

Let me reassure my hon. friend.  On Cap Malheureux issue, there is an issue as to the 
quality of the pipes which the contractor wanted or still wants to supply.  We do not agree 
with low quality pipes and we are insisting on the pipes being as per specification.  This is a 
big issue.  Long ago, these sorts of issues were settled around a table or should I say under a 
table, 

(Interruptions) 

More likely, under!  Now, today, this is unacceptable.  It is holding up the project, but I told 
the CWA, we are not going to accept any deal which is short of the contractual terms.   

The other areas are being attended to.  I am not too sure whether the situation is as 
dramatic as that in Grand’ Baie.  As I have told you, my information is not the same, but we 
will check everything. 

(Interruptions) 

The  answer  is  not  necessarily  ‘in  a  reservoir’.  You  know  we  can  build  200  reservoirs  in 
Mauritius, but that does not mean we will get more water.  I will come back on this during 
my speech on the Budget. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

(6.58 p.m.) 

MONT ROCHES – ROAD WIDENING & PAVEMENT 

Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière): Merci, M. le 
président. Ma requête est adressée à l’honorable Nando Bodha  concernant le même sujet que 
l’honorable Bhagwan vient de dire.  C’est concernant la route de Mont Roches qui mène vers 
St. Martin.  Vraiment il y a un gros problème. Il y a eu plusieurs accidents là-bas, il y a eu 
mort d’homme. Et pas plus tard que ce matin, il y a quelqu’un qui est mort et puis il y a eu un 
blessé grave qui est à l’hôpital. Moi je pense que le ministre doit faire un site visit et peut-être 
qu’il  y  a  une  possibilité  d’élargir  le  chemin  et  il  faudra  aussi  mettre  des  trottoirs  pour  les 
piétons. 

Merci. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): M. le 
président, mon ami peut compter sur moi. Je vais référer le cas au ministre concerné et on va 
trouver une solution. 

 

105 

At 6.48 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 09 August 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

