No. 15 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 05 JULY 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister 
of 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 15 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 05 July 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

(a)   Virement  Certificates  Return  –  Quarter  3 

(January-March  2016)  

(Estimates 2015-2016). (In Original)  

(b)   Virement Warrant Return Nos. 10, 13 to 21, 23 to 25 & 27 to 31 – Quarter 3  

(January-March 2016) (Estimates 2015 – 2016). (In Original)  

(c)   Virement  (Contingencies)  Warrant  Return  Nos.  17  &  25  to  36  –  Quarter  3  

(January-March 2016) (Estimates 2015 – 2016). (In Original) 

(d)   The Housing and Population Census 2011 – Volume VI: Census Atlas. 
(e)   The Digest of Education Statistics 2015. 

 

B.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

The  District  Council  of  Pamplemousses  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades)  Regulations 
2016 (Government Notice No.136 of 2016). 

 

C.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The Mauritius Cane Industry Authority (Delivery of Canes for Production of Juice) 
Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 135 of  2016)  

 

D.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods)  (Amendment  No.  19)  Regulations  2016  (Government  Notice  No.  137  of 
2016). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E.    Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Co-operatives ‒ 

8 

The Annual Report for period July 2010 to June 2014 of the Co-operatives Division  

 

 

F.    Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 

Management ‒  

The Annual Report 2013 of the Beach Authority. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PARLEMENT DE LA FEDERATION WALLONIE-BRUXELLES – DELEGATION 

Madam Speaker: Honorables membres, j’ai l’honneur et le plaisir de vous annoncer 
la présence parmi nous ce matin de Son Excellence Monsieur Philippe Courard, Président du 
Parlement de la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles et sa délégation composée de – 

(1) 

(2) 

L’honorable Luperto, Député-Bourgmestre, Vice-Président International de 
l’Assemblée Parlementaire de la Francophonie; 
L’honorable Fassi-Fihri, Député, Président de la section Belgique/ 
Communauté Française/Wallonie-Bruxelles de l’APF, et 

(3)  Monsieur Xavier Baeselen, Secrétaire général du Parlement de la Fédération 

Wallonie-Bruxelles. 

La  délégation  est  en  visite  officielle  à  Maurice.  En  votre  nom  et  en  mon  nom 
personnel, je souhaite à Son Excellence Monsieur Philippe Courard ainsi qu’à sa délégation 
un agréable et fructueux séjour à Maurice. 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  our  sovereignty  over  the  Chagos 
Archipelago, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

if he is aware of the positive comments made by Mr Louis Olivier Bancoult in 
relation thereto last Wednesday, indicating if he will meet the latter on his 
return; 

if our mission in London is keeping a watching brief on the appeal lodged by 
the Chagossians before the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom on the 
fishing rights within the so-called “Chagos Marine Protected Area”, and 

the measures taken as at to date concerning an eventual resolution in relation 
thereto at the forthcoming United Nations General Assembly. 

 

10 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  have  always  maintained,  the  Chagos 
Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms and has always formed an integral part of the 
territory of Mauritius. 

Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the 
United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from the 
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence, in violation of international law 
and  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  Resolutions  1514  (XV)  of  14  December  1960, 
2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19 
December 1967. 

My  Government  is  strongly  committed  to  ensuring  that  the  territorial  integrity  and 
sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded.  In this regard, no efforts are 
being  spared  by  my  Government  so  that  Mauritius  can  effectively  exercise  its  sovereignty 
over the Chagos Archipelago. 

I wish to reiterate that the long-standing struggle of Mauritius to effectively exercise 
its  sovereignty  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago  and  the  right  of  Mauritian  citizens,  including 
those  of  Chagossian  origin,  to  return  to  and  resettle  in  the  Chagos  Archipelago  are 
indissociable. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, the UK 
Supreme Court delivered its judgment on 29 June 2016 in the case brought by Mr Olivier 
Bancoult challenging the judgment given by the House of Lords on 22 October 2008.  The 
UK Supreme Court dismissed Mr Bancoult’s application for the 2008 judgment of the House 
of Lords to be set aside and also ruled against a re-hearing of the appeal he had lodged before 
the House of Lords in the Bancoult No. 2 case. 

Madam Speaker, in my reply to Parliamentary Question B/369 which I had tabled, I 
had  indicated  that  Government  will  maintain  close  contact  and  collaboration  with  the 
Chagossian community to ensure that we continue to be on the same wavelength as regards 
the plight of our Mauritian citizens of Chagossian origin who were forcibly removed from the 
Chagos Archipelago by the United Kingdom in the wake of the illegal excision of the Chagos 
Archipelago from the territory of Mauritius and the effective exercise of our sovereignty over 
the Chagos Archipelago.  In this regard, I met Mr Bancoult last year and I propose to meet 
him again shortly if he so wishes. 

 

11 

Madam Speaker,  I have noted that Mr Bancoult has made several comments in the 
press following the UK Supreme Court judgment.  In one of his statements, he is reported to 
have said that the ruling is not the end of the road. 

In another statement, Mr Bancoult has said that he will solicit a meeting with the 

outgoing UK Prime Minister, David Cameron and he believes that the latter will give him a 
positive hearing. 

In yet another statement, on a private radio on 29 June, Mr Bancoult said that he noted 

that, I quote – 

« La communauté chagossienne sort gagnante après ce jugement de la Cour suprême 
britannique » 

and added, I quote – 

« Je note aussi que nous avons gagné sur la Marine Protected Area ». 

No doubt several other comments may have been made and I cannot make out which 
specific positive comments the Leader of the Opposition is referring to.  Be it as it may, when 
I meet Mr Bancoult on his return I will hear from him directly if, as I said, he so wishes to 
meet me. 

Madam Speaker, our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is of national interest 
and I have, therefore, always favoured a concerted approach on this issue.  In this context, I 
will consider the advisability of convening another meeting of the Committee which I have 
set up under my chairmanship following the Award delivered on 18 March 2015 in the case 
brought by Mauritius against the UK under UNCLOS. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, in an article in the Daily Mail 

dated 29 June 2016, it is briefly mentioned and I quote – 

“A further legal challenge by Chagos Islanders about their fishing rights is expected to 
reach the Supreme Court next year.  This should be in 2017.” 

An article of The Guardian, dated 29 June 2016 repeats verbatim the same thing. 

As far as I am aware, there is no such case currently pending before the UK Supreme 

Court. 

 

 

12 

Should such a case come up for the hearing before the UK Supreme Court, our High 
Commission in London, as per the practice for previous cases, will certainly keep a watching 
brief. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to recall that, in its Award of 18 March 2015, the Arbitral 
Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Mauritius  v/s  United  Kingdom,  inter  alia,  stated  that  the  United 
Kingdom was bound to ensure that fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago would remain 
available  to  Mauritius  as  far  as  practicable,  and  that  this is  a  legally  binding  obligation  in 
relation to the territorial sea. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to reiterate what I stated 
in my reply to a Private Notice Question on 17 May 2016.  The Chagos Archipelago should 
be returned by the United Kingdom to the effective control of Mauritius by a precise date to 
be agreed upon and proposed that consideration could be given to the joint management of 
the Chagos Archipelago pending its return to Mauritius.  I had asked for a response to my 
request by the end of June 2016, otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the 
international level including at the United Nations.  Further, at the request of the British High 
Commissioner, I have agreed to extend the deadline by another week. 

It would, therefore, be inappropriate at this precise juncture to go into the specifics of 

the course of action to be taken. 

I wish further to assure the Leader of the Opposition that all necessary steps are being 

taken to enlist the support of the UN Member States in favour of such action. 

Mr Bérenger: I am referring to the statement from Mr Bancoult, which I heard with 
my own ears and watched on ION News amongst others.  I heard him say - this is why I say 
positive comments -  

« Souveraineté d’accord, mais comme dans cas Rodrigues bizin banne representants 
de bannes Chagossiens partie prenante. » 

Which, I believe, is positive because he says, and I repeat –  

« Souveraineté d’accord, mais comme dans cas Rodrigues bizin banne representants 
de bannes Chagossiens partie prenante. » 

Now, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that, in fact, there are several 

dangers after this ruling by the Court? 

13 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

The Supreme Court of the UK has invited Mr Bancoult and his group to go 
again to the Supreme Court to appeal against the 2004 Order which banned 
anybody from being present anywhere on the Chagos Archipelago, including 
the Ilois. That is the first thing which I think is very dangerous; I think it is a 
piège.  
The lawyer representing Mr Bancoult has himself referred to the Gibraltar 
possibility, which we know what that means, Madam Speaker. 
It is clear that London is going to propose resettlement to the Ilois.   

Therefore, can  I  appeal  to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to take the  first step and invite Mr 
Bancoult so that this is a national patriotic effort and we do not allow London to divide us? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  certainly,  if  this  is  the  intention  of  Mr  Bancoult, 
definitely,  on  his  return,  he  will  approach  me,  and  I  never  refused  receiving  anybody.  
Depending on what discussion we will have, he may be invited to join me in the Committee. 

As  regards  the  piège  in  the  invitation  of  the  UK  Supreme  Court  made  to  the 
Chagossians to lodge a fresh application for judicial review, I am sure that the Chagossian 
community and their lawyers will pay careful attention to the risk, if it exists, before lodging 
a fresh case. 

Mr Bérenger: On the same part of my question, Madam Speaker, I think I heard the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  say  that  there  is  no  such  case  before  the  Supreme  Court.  My 
information  is  that  there  was  legal  action  entered  by  the  Ilois  Group  in  August  2010 
challenging the lawfulness of the so-called Marine Protected Area - what is contained in the 
legislation setting up this.  My information is that Mr Bancoult and his group lost in the lower 
courts and that next year the appeal by the same group will be before the Supreme Court. So, 
can I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to double check and see to it that if there is such a 
case we must have a watching brief? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  it  is  always  the  practice  when  there  is  a  case  where 
Mauritians and Mauritius have an interest, the mission in UK always keeps a watching brief. 
I said so in my answer, and it is going to be the same thing again.  

 

 

 

 

14 

Mr  Bérenger:  On  the  last  and  third  part  of  my  question,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister agree with me - because I asked what measures, what actions have been taken to 
date concerning the eventual Resolution before the UN General Assembly - that three things 
need to be done urgently?  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to have the final draft of the Resolution cleared here and with the President of 
the General Assembly; 
to get the help of the President of the forthcoming General Assembly  to put it 
on the agenda, and 
to lobby our friends internationally actively, especially India, China, Russia, 
Japan, the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union, the European Union, 
the  Organisation  of  Islamic  Cooperation  and  Arab  League  and 
the 
Organization of American States. 

Are we actively doing that? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Since  the  Prime  Minister  of  UK  has  asked  for  an  extension, 
which I have agreed upon, it all depends what stand he is going to take, and very soon we 
will be aware of this. We know our responsibilities, we know what we have to do, we know 
what route we have taken. I am not doing fausse route, as some believe.  Therefore, at this 
stage, to enter into what we are doing, what we will be doing and all that, I don’t think it is 
right  to  do  that  at  this  juncture.  But  we  are  very  conscious  of  the  timing,  of  our 
responsibilities. We are working towards what end we want to achieve. 

Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has insisted that he would wish to see the 
Resolution before the General Assembly this year, that is, as from September. Will he agree 
with me that, pending the UK Prime Minister making another offer or another proposal or 
what have you, we should be in touch with the freshly elected Chairperson/President of the 
next General Assembly of the UN who happens to be from Fiji?  The Ambassador of Fiji has 
just been elected to the United Nations.  Have we made contact with him already? 

The Prime Minister: I have said it is no use discussing all this right now. I have said 
we know our responsibilities, what has to be done is being done, and I don’t want to go into 
details. 

Mr  Bérenger:  It  is  already  nearly  a  week  since  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
supposedly extended an extension of one week.  We will see and I will come back, of course. 
Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware - because I started by saying that 

 

15 

the first country that we must get assistance from is India, as usual - of a very tough statement 
made  by  the  US  Deputy  Secretary  of  State  on  Political  Affairs,  the  number  4  in  the  State 
Department, in India, a week ago - very forceful - where he said, if I can quote his statement 
as reported in The Hindu on 30 June, in unusually strong comments – 

“China’s motives to secure the South China Sea are “madness” and intended towards 
the Indian Ocean (…). 

The U.S. will work to ensure India remains the “natural power” in the Indian Ocean 
(…).  

As China works to secure the South China Sea as an area of strategic importance for 
it, it does so not with the intention of going into the blue Pacific, but with going into 
the  Indian  Ocean  and  broadening  its  presence  in  the  Indian  Ocean….[]  So  it  is 
certainly  our  intention  to  work  with  India  to  have  a  strong  and  comprehensive 
presence there (…).” 

So, is Government perfectly aware of the lobbying that is being done by the United 
States on India - and there is the Nuclear Group to bargain with?  Are we in touch not only 
with  Delhi  but  with  all  those  who  are  concerned  by  this  kind  of  statement,  very  strong 
statement made on Wednesday 29 June after that gentleman had met the Foreign Secretary of 
India, Mr Jaishankar? 

The Prime Minister: Well, what do we expect from the United States?  This is their 
stand.    When  we  have  started  taking  our  decision  to  recuperate  the  Chagos,  we  knew  the 
strong reaction of the United States and the United Kingdom.  I have come to the conclusion 
that we have no other alternative than to follow the course that I am following simply because 
United Kingdom has no intention whatsoever – I repeat it, whatsoever – to return Chagos to 
Mauritius.  Therefore, we must have recourse to whatever means and if we get a guidance 
from  the  International  Court  of  Law,  we  will  use  that  afterwards  in  every  forum  to  bash 
against  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  will  hurt  them  a  lot,  I  am  sure.    That  is  why,  Mr 
Cameron,  who  avoided  discussing  with  me  over  the  Chagos,  today,  has  asked  for  an 
extension of one week.   I have been  good enough to accept it.  He says: ‘There will be a 
compromise in which we will be in a win-win situation.’ Let’s see what compromise he is 
going to suggest, but we are not sleeping. As I have said, we are doing our job because I do 
not trust these people.  These people speak so much about democracy, rule of law, justice, but 

 

16 

when  it  comes  to  their  interest,  they  forget  all  these.    Their  philosophy  which  prevails  is 
‘might is right’.  This is my conviction. 

Mr Bérenger: Amongst the groups, organisations that I suggested we need to actively 
lobby  in  the  Non-Aligned  Movement,  which  I  mentioned.  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  is  aware  that  the  Non-Aligned  Movement  is  in  a  terrible  mess.    In  fact,  we  can 
consider that the Non-Aligned Movement these days is non-existent, if I can call it the next 
best.  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that,  on  the  other  hand,  at  the  UN,  there  is  the 
group of 77, and China, which is very powerful and which represents the same Constituency 
as the Non-Aligned Movement, but actively in New York. So, are we in touch with them and 
are we lobbying them also?  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that a few days ago, a new 
Chairman of the group of 77 and China in the UN has been elected and it happens to be the 
representative of Thailand, whereas, I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware, Thailand 
is a major non-NATO ally as designated by the US.  Therefore, can I know whether, as in the 
case of the recently elected President of the next General Assembly, we have been in touch 
with the freshly elected President of the group of 77 and China at the UN? 

The Prime Minister: The hon. Leader of the Opposition spoke of India.  Well, if we 
cannot rely on the support of India then it is better we stop in our struggle, because I do not 
believe that India is one of the countries which we have to lobby.  I take it for granted that 
India will be, as they have always been in the past, in support of the sovereignty of Mauritius 
over the Chagos Archipelago.  There are many other countries also.  The hon. Leader of the 
Opposition wants to know by all means what are actions we are taking, we are doing and all 
that. I just ask him to be patient.  We know what we have to do.  We know that we must try to 
get the support of all the nations who are in the United Nations and we are doing our job. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I hope that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister realises it is 
because  he  has  said,  and  has  insisted,  that  the  Resolution  must  be  before  the  General 
Assembly next September of this year.  He has insisted on that.  That is why I want to know 
because  September  is  derrière  la  porte,  in  a  few  weeks’  time.    So,  can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister – he has extended one week to outgoing Prime Minister Cameron – whether 
he is satisfied, at this stage, that we will be ready with the drafting of the Resolution, that we 
will  get  the  green  light  from  the  President  of  the  next  General  Assembly  and  that  our 
lobbying  will  be  completed  for  us  to  get  a  big  majority,  if  indeed  we  go  to  the  General 

 

17 

Assembly in a few weeks’ time in September? Is he satisfied that we are on target to be there 
in September as he has insisted? 

The  Prime  Minister:  It  all  depends  on  what  the  UK  Prime  Minister  is  going  to 
propose, but whatever be it, in the meantime we are continuing to take our responsibility and 
to do what we have to do. If we can come to an agreement with the UK in the meantime, 
then, of course, we can  withdraw whatever we  are doing and  whatever  Resolution will be 
before  the  United  Nations.    We  are  fully  aware  of  the  timing  and  that  the  United  Nations 
sitting will be in September.  So, I do not want to give more particulars about what is being 
done, what we are doing and what not.  We do our job.  If, in the meantime, UK comes to an 
agreement, then we will not proceed further, even if there is a Resolution before the United 
Nation, we will withdraw it. 

Mr Ganoo:  Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that he will 
call the Inter-Parliamentary Committee on the Chagos issue; I commend him for that because 
there are so many issues which have cropped up recently. With regard to the recent ruling, 
which was delivered last week as a result of the case which was dismissed in 2008, when he 
meets Mr Bancoult, in view of the fact that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has said we 
must be careful lest des pièges be opened to the Mauritian side, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister to keep in mind that, in fact, the ruling in 2008 went the way it went because the 
British Authorities have concealed documents, have not allowed the Court to be apprised of 
the documents which they should have been given?  This is why the ruling went as it went 
last week because, as we know, at the end of the ruling it is said that it will  now be  opened 
to challenge the failure to abrogate the 2000 Order. This was said by Lord Clarke, who was 
one  of  the  majority  Judges:  ‘It  was  opened  to  any  Chagossian  to    challenge  the  failure  to 
abrogate the 2004 Orders in the light of all the information which is now available, because 
there  is  a  new  report,  KPMG  Report,  which  says  that  there  was  no  problem  about 
resettlement’. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo, please ask your question! 

Mr  Ganoo:  Therefore,  can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  when  he  meets  Mr 
Bancoult,  to  keep  in  mind  that  Lord  Clarke  said  that  it  was  opened  for  Mr  Bancoult  to 
institute judicial review proceedings to challenge any future… 

 

18 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo, I am sorry I have to interrupt you.  Don’t dilly-dally 
on  your  question.  I  should  give  the  opportunity  to  other  hon.  Members  also  to  ask  their 
questions.   

Mr  Ganoo:  …  refusal  of  Government.  This  is  what  Lord  Clarke  said:  ‘  (…)  is 
irrational,  unreasonable  and  disproportionate’.  This  is  what  the  majority  Judge  said.  The 
British Authorities are behaved in such a way. 

The Prime Minister: What does the hon. Member want me to do?  Let’s wait!  Let’s 
see whether Mr Bancoult and his group will take the proper action.  But, as I said a moment 
ago, they have to be careful lest it is a piège. 

So, we have to be very careful about all this. And insofar as Chagos Sovereignty is 
concerned, if Mr Bancoult wants to see me, I have said, I am prepared to receive him and 
resettlement, of course, we are concerned with it. I said in my answer to the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition, it is indissociable, sovereignty and resettlement.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  an 
international jurisprudence that states that whenever a country stops a people from circulating 
freely  and  going  to  work  in  the  country  where  they  come  from,  this  international 
jurisprudence  has  described  a  state  of  affairs  as  this  as  apartheid,  as  in  the  case  of  South 
Africa and in the case of Palestine. In this particular case of the Chagossian people, could the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister not, therefore, consider the possibility of consulting the legal advisers 
of the Republic of Mauritius on this issue as to whether we could not take the fight to the 
United States of America and the United Kingdom on a new front altogether which would be 
a simple violation of human rights because by stopping Chagossians to go and circulate freely 
on the Chagossian islands and work from the country where they come from, they are, in fact, 
those two super powers practising nothing else but apartheid? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  must  make  one  thing  clear,  that  the  Chagossians  originally 
were Mauritians, of course, and then, when they were there, the number continued to grow. 
But we can’t separate the question of sovereignty. It is a question of all Mauritians who are 
being deprived. So, that is how I look at it.  

 

 

19 

I have a note here as regards Mauritius. Government will throughout, as it has been 
doing hitherto, act in consultation with its foreign and local legal advisers as well as take into 
account the views of other stakeholders.  And certainly, we’ll take care of the proposal made 
just now by the hon. Member. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Other than asking for a week’s extension, 
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, David Cameron, has also said that he is going to 
make a full statement in the House of Commons in relation to the whole issue surrounding 
Chagos  Island.  In  this  circumstance,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  with  me  that 
insofar  as  discussions,  negotiations  and  lobbying  are  concerned  that  we  should  be  at  this 
stage, optimistically, cautiously approach such discussions and to wait until the statement of 
David Cameron in the House of Commons come public, then, we take further action?  

The Prime Minister: Well, there is a question of timing.  As you know, the United 
Nations General Assembly will be meeting and our resolution must be ready to be presented 
there. So, we can’t wait indefinitely Mr Cameron making a statement in the Parliament there 
and  then  writing  to  us.  He  said,  in  a  week,  he  is  going  to  write  to  us,  making  certain 
proposals. But we just can’t sit down and wait for proposals. If proposals come and if we can 
agree, of course, then we will put a stop to everything.  

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I am cautiously optimistic, but I agree fully with the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, we should be very careful and mobiliser de plus en plus. Now, can I know whether 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  remembers  that  he  himself  and  I,  in  the  past,  not  that  distant 
past,... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether he remembers what he and I, in the not so distant 
past, what we proposed apart from action at the UN General Assembly other initiatives, other 
actions? So, whilst I do hope that there is a positive settlement and that we don’t have to go to 
the United Nations General Assembly, is he prepared even now, to consider other initiatives - 
which I will not mention here but I am sure he remembers - not in lieu of going to the UN 

 

20 

General Assembly, but to support our move and bring the attention of the whole world to the 
injustice that has been done to Mauritius and to the Chagossians? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the past is the past. There has been no positive result and 
the Britishers will very much like that we follow what the hon. Member is suggesting because 
it will be in their interest. I think I have taken the right path and if we have to succeed, it is 
this, what we are doing, will make us succeed, otherwise the Britishers will never voluntarily 
amicably settle this question of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, last. 

Mr Bérenger: I think the Rt. hon. Prime Minister misunderstood me completely. I am 
saying  that  there  are  other  non-legal  non-United  Nations  resolution  ways  of  bringing  the 
attention of the whole world to what we are doing and rightly at the UN General Assembly. I 
think he does not remember what he proposed in the past at one point and which I proposed, 
if I can request him to exercise his memory so that we can possibly take those initiatives. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  after  considering  all  these,  we  have  come  to  the 

conclusion that the initiative we have taken is the best and the right one.  

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

 

POLICE OFFICERS - PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 

(No. B/665) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  provision  of  protective  equipment  such  as  face  mask 
thereto, especially, those who control traffic and who are exposed to pollution. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that Police Officers are issued with personal protective equipment according to the nature and 
specificity of their duties. Those performing traffic duties, in particular those posted to the 
Traffic Branch, are issued with the following protective equipment - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Crash Helmets with sun and wind visors; 

Leather gloves; 

21 

 

(iii) 

Fluorescent jackets; 

(iv)  High visibility jackets; 

(v) 

Top boots; 

(vi)  Rubber boots; 

(vii)  Wet weather gear, and 

(viii)  Goggles. 

As regards the use of face mask by Police Officers deployed for traffic duties, I am 
informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  should  the  circumstances  warrant,  due 
consideration will be given thereto in consultation with the relevant authorities, and keeping 
in mind factors like the level of pollution and comfort of officers. 

However, I wish to inform the House that the roadside monitoring exercises by the 
Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
have revealed that air pollutant levels are currently within the prescribed limit of Ambient Air 
Standards. 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member has a question. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 
these  Policemen  who  have  exposure  to  traffic  and  pollution,  do  they  follow  any  regular 
medical check-up in the Police Force to ascertain whether their health is affected by exposure 
to dust? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that, I don’t know. A specific question may be put; we 

will come with an answer. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

COROMANDEL – POLICE FLATS - MAINTENANCE 

(No.  B/666)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police  Flats  at 
Coromandel, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 
information as to who is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep thereof, indicating if the 
latter has carried out a survey following representations made, especially, for – 

 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

22 

embellishment works to be carried out thereat;  

the lighting of the compound thereof; 

the installation of recreational facilities thereat, and  

the  water  problems  thereat  to  be  addressed  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  measures 
have been taken in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the timeframe for the 
implementation thereof and, if not, why not. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  Police  Quarters  at  Montreal,  Coromandel,  comprising  of  288  apartments  were 
acquired  in  June  1997  from  the  National  Housing  Development  Company.    All  the 
apartments are occupied by Police Officers and their families.   

The maintenance and upkeep works of these quarters are carried out by the Ministry 
of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  following  requests  made  by  the  Police 
Department.    However,  by  virtue  of  the  Police  Standing  Orders  No.  140,  it  is  the 
responsibility of the occupant of the apartment to keep the compound clean and tidy at all 
times.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  addition,  a  Police  Corporal  has  been  posted  at  the  Police 
Administrative Post thereat and the latter is responsible to deal with all issues pertaining to 
the  Quarters  and  channelling  them  to  the  appropriate  authorities.    Further,  the  regular 
cleaning of the yard and the premises is carried out by a Police Gardener posted thereat and 
the collection of refuse is done twice weekly by the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin/Rose 
Hill. 

Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that, in their endeavour to embellish 
their environment, the occupants of the quarters have  approached the Ministry of  Tourism 
and External Communications for embellishment works.  In this context, landscaping works 
have started since 28 June 2016 and are expected to be completed by mid-September, this 
year.    Both  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  and  the  Ministry  of 
Environment  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  have  been 
requested to assist the Police in embellishment works at other Police Quarters namely at Bell 
Village, Mahebourg and Pointe aux Sables. 

 

23 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Energy Services Division 
(ESD) of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport is presently conducting a 
survey for the upgrading of the lighting in the compound of the Quarters. 

In  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  will  have  further 
consultations  with  the  occupants  of  the  Quarters  in  order  to  examine  and  decide  on  the 
appropriate recreational facilities for their benefit. 

As regards part (d) of the question, I am informed that four water pumps have been 
installed in November and December 2015 at a total cost of Rs800,000 in order to remedy the 
problem of water supply. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his reply.  The problem of the 
Police  flats  is  a  recurrent  problem.  My  question  is  on  Coromandel.    Recently  there  was  a 
problem  at  Bell  Village  also.  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  at  least,  instruct  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  so  that  a  sort  of  syndic  be  set  up  with  the  inhabitants,  the  Police 
Officers themselves and a representative of the administration of the Police so that we don’t 
wait for MPs or other Women Police Officers to come up with their grievances, and that there 
is  a  permanent  follow-up  through  committee  set  up  with  the Police,  Administration  of  the 
Police,  they  can  elect  a  few  other  people  so  that  there  can  be  a  follow  up  on  the  issues 
pertaining to their welfare? 

The Prime Minister:  I will ask the Commissioner of Police to look into this. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Being given that the rent charged is around Rs800 per month, can the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister confirm that there is a consideration from the Commissioner of Police to 
increase the monthly rental? 

The Prime Minister:  Increase the monthly rental!  The Police are asking that! They 

want to pay more! 

Madam Speaker:  This is outside  the premise of the question! 

Mr Jhuboo:  Is there a proposition from the Commissioner of Police to increase the 

monthly rent of Rs800? 

The Prime Minister:  Whether there is a request to increase from the Commissioner 

of Police!  I am not aware of that. 

 

24 

(Interruptions) 

I get a note here.  No request has been received. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION – COURT OF APPEAL - 

APPLICATIONS 

(No.  B/667)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the National Human Rights 
Commission, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
number of applications received for an inquiry to be carried out as to whether there exists 
sufficient  fresh  and  compelling  evidence  to  refer  convictions  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  for 
review, since 2013 to date, indicating the outcome thereof in each case. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, as the House has already been informed in 
my  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/55  of  24  February  2015,  the  Protection  of  Human 
Rights  Act  was  amended  in  2013  by  introducing  section  4A,  so  as  to  allow  a  convicted 
person or his representative to apply to the National Human Rights Commission requesting 
the  latter  to  conduct  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  there  exists  sufficient  fresh  and  compelling 
evidence to refer the case to the Court of Criminal Appeal for a review of the proceedings 
under section 19A(4) of the Criminal Appeal Act. 

It is to be noted that this provision only applies to decisions of the Supreme Court and 

not those of the Intermediate Court or District Court. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Human Rights Commission that since 
July 2013, 4 applications have been received for inquiry to be carried out under section 4A of 
the Protection of Human Rights Act. 

In 2 cases, enquiry was carried out and no fresh and compelling evidence was found 
to justify referring the cases to the Court of Criminal Appeal for review in accordance with 
section 19A(4)(b) of the Criminal Appeal Act. 

The third application was rejected as the applicant was tried by the Intermediate Court 

and not the Supreme Court. 

 

25 

The fourth application was also rejected due to non-availability of exhibits and blood 

samples. 

In all cases, the applicants or their legal counsel were informed accordingly. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to the same PQ, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
last  year,  stated  to  a  question  about  whether  he  is  proposing  to  come  forward  with 
amendments to the legislation, that -  

“There has already been an amendment and the Commission is acting under it, 
we will wait for the result and see what happens”.   

One year later we see the results.  Only two cases have been considered and both rejected 
because they don’t satisfy the high criteria of fresh and compelling evidence.  May I ask the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether one year later now he will consider bringing amendments so 
that people, who feel that they have been wrongfully convicted, can seize the Human Rights 
Commission? 

The Prime Minister:   Well, an amendment has already  been made  as  I have said.  
Cases from the Supreme Court are considered, but not Intermediate and District Courts.  I 
don’t see what other facilities we are going to put at the disposal of the population. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:    Would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  in  the  circumstance  where  if  no 
satisfaction has been obtained by whatever the National Human Rights Commission is doing, 
consider setting up a Criminal Cases Review Commission in order that that Commission can 
specifically deal with matters of wrongful convictions? 

The Prime Minister:  That we will have to study and consider for the future. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  In one of the judgements given by the Human Rights Commission, they 
stated that there were disquieting – that is the word used – features which would require the 
intervention of the Supreme Court and re-opening of the case.  However, at the moment the 
Commission can only review cases where there are fresh and compelling evidence unlike in 
England, unlike, my hon. friend has just mentioned, the Criminal Cases Review Commission, 
the Human Rights Commission does not have the same powers as in England.  So, may I ask 

 

26 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he would consider to, at least, extend the powers of this 
Human Rights Commission so that it can have powers which exist elsewhere? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I really don’t know what to say. If we make it so easy, 
every person convicted will try to get his conviction quashed and we will be in front of so 
many cases that it will become just a farce. We can’t go to that length. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  …suggesting  that  every  case  can  be  forwarded  for  review,  but  the 
point is - and when the law was debated here, I raised that time and time again - the criteria is 
the toughest you can have - fresh and compelling evidence. It’s not even the wording that is 
in the UK. The UK allows for extraordinary circumstances and so on. We are not asking for 
an open door to any case. No! But, at least, can’t we align on the wording of the law, as it has 
been  for  years  in  the  UK,  where  not  only  fresh  and  compelling  evidence  is  taken  into 
consideration, but extraordinary circumstances? 

The Prime Minister: Extraordinary circumstances! In extraordinary cases, maybe we 

can look into that. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I have a last question. Answering to a PQ last year, the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself stated, and I quote - 

“In  fact,  we  had  stated  in  our  party  programme  that  we  were  going  to  bring 
amendments in order to facilitate this task.”  

This is why I am asking the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will live up to what he has 
stated in his electoral programme and bring amendments to facilitate the task in exceptional 
circumstances; people who feel that they have been wrongly convicted can ask for a review 
of their judgment. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Most  people  think  they  are  wrongly  convicted.  This  is  the 
mentality of Mauritians. Anyway, I don’t know what we said in our programme, but there 
have  already  been  amendments,  as  I  said,  and  cases  are  being  considered  by  the 
Commissioner. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, next question! 

ATTORNEY GENERAL (FORMER) - ASSAULT CASE - INQUIRY 

 

27 

(No. B/668) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  alleged  case  of 
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice against the then Attorney General in relation to the 
Police inquiry in a case of assault involving himself and Mr F. J. in May 2013, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the outcome of the Police inquiry carried out thereinto, and 

if any prosecution has been initiated in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the 
outcome thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to the alleged case of conspiracy to 
pervert the course of justice against the then Attorney General in relation to the Police inquiry 
involving himself and Mr F. J. in May 2013, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that an enquiry was carried out thereinto. 

After completion of the enquiry, on 07 February 2014, the Police referred the case file 

to the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice. 

On 16 April 2014, the Director of Public Prosecutions advised “No further action” in 

the case. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the case of assault Police vs Varma Yatindra Nath, the 
then Attorney General, the case was dismissed by the District Court of Rose Hill on 10 July 
2014. 

However, on 22 June 2014, the father of the victim made a declaration at the Rose 
Hill  Police  Station  (OB  Number  3848/2014)  alleging  that  a  forged  medical  examination 
certificate  (PF  58)  had  been  produced  before  the  District  Court  of  Rose  Hill  and  had 
submitted to the Police the PF 58 which was issued at Victoria Hospital to his son on the day 
of the accident. 

I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that a new enquiry has been instituted 
to  look  into  the  serious  averments  of  the  declarant  and  the  issues  mentioned  are  also 
expatiated in the judgment 2014 LPW 122 Police vs Varma Yatindra Nath. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that there are 
several troubling facts which come up in what we call ‘The Varma Gate Case’, which was 

 

28 

unveiled by the then Leader of the Opposition whereby he stated to the House that there was 
money  which  was proposed to the  family, there  were several meetings and there was  also 
admission  of  certain  facts  live  on  radio  by  the  PPS  Reza  Issack  which  led  the  then  Prime 
Minister to admit… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Sesungkur,  you  can’t  make  a  statement.  You  can  ask 
questions to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, but you can’t make a statement and then you can’t 
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his opinion on this case. This is not allowed. 

Mr Sesungkur: No, but I was coming to that, Madam Speaker. I won’t be long. The 
then  Prime  Minister,  in  view  of  the  facts  which  were  revealed  by  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition at that time, admitted… 

Madam  Speaker:  Don’t  make  a  statement!  Ask  your  question!  You  have  had 

sufficient leeway! 

Mr Sesungkur: No, I am coming. The Prime Minister stated - 

“I should like to inform the House that in light of the new facts that have come to 
light, I have decided that the Attorney General cannot remain in office as Attorney 
General and I will be asking him to submit his resignation.” 

So,  despite  all these  clear-cut  facts  and  evidences  which  are  presented  to  the  House,  I  am 
surprised that the Police… 

Madam  Speaker:  No!  Hon.  Sesungkur,  I  am  sorry,  I  have  to  interrupt  you.  I  just 
asked  you  not  to  make  a  statement  on  this  question.  You  have  asked  your  question.  You 
cannot  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  his  opinion  as  well  and  you  cannot  make  a 
statement. The object of a question is to get information on a specific issue. So, will you ask 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, if you have a question in mind or else, no? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sesungkur: I have a question. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister ensure that this 

time there is no cover-up in this case? 

The Prime Minister: Well, who is going to make cover-up? If there has been one, it 
has already been done and the hon. Member says he is surprised of what took place. Well, I 
am also surprised! 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

 

29 

METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES – STAFF & TECHNOLOGIES  

(No. B/669) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Meteorological Services, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

if it is adequately staffed with experienced professional in the field of 
meteorology; 

if appropriate technologies are used thereat, and 

the actions being taken to restore public confidence therein and to provide 
reliable forecasts following persistent public uproar about wrong weather 
forecasts made in the recent past. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Director of the Mauritius Meteorological Services that fifteen professional 
Meteorologists are currently serving at the Department, comprising of - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

one Director; 
two Deputy Directors; 
three Divisional Meteorologists, and 
nine Meteorologists/Senior Meteorologists. 

In  addition, two Trainee Meteorologists are undergoing training for appointment as 

Meteorologist/Senior Meteorologist.  

It is also  envisaged to enlist five additional Trainee Meteorologists during the next 
financial  year  to  replace  professionals  who  will  proceed  on  retirement  in  the  foreseeable 
future. 

The  Director  of  the  Meteorological  Services  has  pointed  out  that  the  professional 
Meteorologists  are  holders  of  specialised  postgraduate  qualifications  in  meteorology  and 
related subjects, from overseas universities in UK, France, Australia and India.  In addition, 
as part of the continuous development programme and to keep abreast  of developments in 
technologies, the Meteorologists benefit from various short courses conducted by the World 
Meteorological  Organisation  (WMO)  and  other  specialised  agencies,  both  overseas  and 

 

30 

locally, in fields such as, satellite meteorology, agro meteorology, hydrology, early warning 
system, climate change, numerical weather predictions, among others. 

It  is  relevant  to  point  out  that  the  Mauritius  Meteorological  Services  Headquarters 
houses  a  WMO  Regional  Meteorological  Training  and  Research  Centre  which  dispenses 
specialised training courses to local meteorological staff, as well as those in the region. 

I am informed by the Director of the Meteorological Services that the present pool of 

 
Meteorologists is adequate to provide a round-the-clock coverage of the Department. 

Madam Speaker, concerning part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Director 
that  the  methods  used  for  measuring  weather  parameters,  as  well  as  the  meteorological 
instruments  deployed  for  that  purpose  are  all  compliant  with  the  World  Meteorological 
Organization Standards, Regulations and Guidelines.  The Mauritius Meteorological Services 
is already ISO 9001-2008 certified and is currently transiting to ISO 9001-2015 standards, in 
line with the requirements of the World Meteorological Organization and the  International 
Civil Aviation Organization. 

With a view to monitoring rainfall in near real time, especially in flood prone and data 
sparse  areas,  the  installation  of  Automatic  Weather  Stations  has  been  accelerated.    Since 
March  2015,  eight  Stations  have  been  installed  bringing  the  total  number  to  twenty-six  in 
Mauritius  and  three  in  Rodrigues.    Four  additional  Automatic  Weather  Stations  will  be 
installed in the near future. 

The  forecast  office  of  the  Meteorological  Services  is  equipped  with  the  latest 
 
platforms  to  receive  satellite  imageries  and  products  from  Numerical  Weather  Prediction 
Centres, such as Meteo France, the UK Meteorological Office and the European Centre for 
Medium Range Weather Forecast, among others. 

 
The softwares and hardwares of the Department have been  upgraded in March this 
year in the context of the implementation of the Monitoring of the Environment for Security 
in Africa Project, under the aegis of the African Union Commission. 

in 

reply 

to 

Madam 

Speaker, 

on  
17 November last, I informed the House that a Non-refundable Grant of Rs387.0 m. has been 
made available by the Japanese Government for the implementation of the Weather Radar 
Project at Trou-aux-Cerfs.  I am informed by the Director that the award of the tender for 

Parliamentary  Question  B/881 

 

31 

civil works will be made in mid-July 2016 in Japan.  Constructions works are expected to 
start in August 2016 and completed by March 2018.   

 
The provision of the new Weather Radar System with state-of-the-art technology will 
be an additional tool that will assist the professional Meteorologists in the daily performance 
of their duties.   

Madam Speaker, in regard to the last part of the question, the Director has pointed out 
that the methods used for measuring weather parameters and the instruments and technology 
deployed  for  that  purpose  at  the  Department  are  comparable  to  those  available  in  modern 
Meteorological Stations elsewhere.  In addition to the weather parameters which are collected 
and processed in-house, the Department also obtains numerical weather prediction products 
from authoritative sources from a number of centres, such as Meteo France, the UK Meteo 
Office,  the  European  Centre  for  Medium  Range  Weather  Forecast  and  other  specialized 
bodies in the region. 

 
The information, data and other relevant weather products collected are scrupulously 
scrutinized, compared and assessed by the professional Meteorologists to ensure the accuracy 
of weather forecasts, prior to their dissemination to the public and other stakeholders. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Director  has  also  acknowledged  that  the  effects  of  climate 
change and climate variability are already impacting on all countries worldwide, through the 
manifestation  of  extreme  weather  events,  as  can  be  witnessed  every  day.    According  to 
climate experts, such extreme weather events will occur more frequently and will increase in 
severity.    In  spite  of  all  the  advances  made  in  the  field  of  meteorology,  there  are  still 
uncertainties  in  numerical  weather  prediction  even  in  the  most  advanced  and  developed 
countries.  Notwithstanding  these  challenges,  the  Director  has  given  the  assurance  that  his 
Department will continue its relentless efforts to do everything humanly possible to improve 
service delivery, through its early warning system and to preserve life and property of our 
citizens. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do believe that the Radar System will 
definitely boost up the prediction methods. However, it is going to be ready two years from 
now,  I  heard  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  say  in  2018.  Meanwhile,  can  we,  under  the 
collaboration that we already have with Reunion Island, envisage having radar images from 

 

32 

them because there they produce very high quality radar images and their predictions are very 
accurate? 

The Prime Minister: As far as I know, I know that there is collaboration between 
Mauritius and Reunion insofar as meteorological events are concerned. But, about this radar, 
I am not so sure. I don’t know. 

POLITICAL PARTIES – FINANCING - LEGISLATION 

(No.  B/670)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  financing  of  political 
parties, he will state when new legislation in relation thereto will be introduced in the House. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  Ministerial 
Committee which has been set up by the Government to make recommendations on electoral 
reforms  has  already  examined  the  issue  of  financing  of  political  parties  and  submitted  its 
recommendations thereon. 

These  recommendations  are  currently  being  looked  into,  along  with  certain  other 

 
related issues which will have to be included in the new legislation. 

I wish to reassure the House that the Government will stand by its commitment and 

 
introduce the Bill on the financing of political parties as soon as it is ready. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que je peux savoir de l’honorable Premier 
ministre si le projet de loi se basera uniquement sur le rapport de l’honorable ministre Duval 
ou  prendra  aussi  en  considération  toutes  les  opinions  émises  par  les  différents  courants  de 
pensées,  les  partis  politiques  et  aussi  les  forces  vives  qui  ont  émis  des  propositions  à  cet 
effet ?   

The Prime Minister: Well, we will take into consideration all propositions that have 

been made and we will take up what we consider is the best for our country. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  we  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, after this document was tabled on 05 April in this House, how many sittings we had 
of this Ministerial Committee to look into the reform? 

The Prime Minister: I have not counted the sittings. 

 

33 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  le  rapport  du  ministre  Duval  reconnait 
l’importance  d’une  réforme  du  système  électoral  pour  déterminer  la  formule  pour  le 
financement  des  partis  politiques.  Il  est  un  fait  aujourd’hui  qu’on  ne  sait  pas  encore  si  la 
Chambre  se  composera  de  60,  80  ou  même  100  membres.  Est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du 
Premier  ministre  si  la  réforme  du  système  électoral  est  considérée  concurremment  avec  le 
financement des partis politiques?  

The Prime Minister: Well, we will go step by step. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question No. B/674 in regard to overseas missions undertaken by members of 
the Board of the State Land Development Company Ltd since January 2015 to date will now 
be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  Parliamentary 
Question No. B/691 in regard to the Report of Moody’s on the financial sector will now be 
replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  and  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/699  in  regard  to  works  to  be  carried  out  at 
Batelage, Souillac will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport. PQ B/673 has been withdrawn.  Hon. Rughoobur! 

 

NPF - IMMOVABLE PROPERTY - ACQUISITION 

(No. B/672) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the National Pension Fund, she will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the price and location of each immovable property it has acquired over the 
past  eight  years,  indicating  in  each  case,  the  actual  and  expected  annual  yield  thereof, 
indicating the reasons for variance thereof, if any. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the 
National  Pension  Fund  acquired  two  buildings,  namely  Altima  and  Ébène  Heights  in  the 
Ébène Cyber City from Altius Ltd and Fortius Ltd respectively, both subsidiaries of Altima 
Group on 28 December 2010 for a total amount of Rs823,615,812, inclusive of registration 
duty and notary fees. 

 

34 

I am informed that the acquisition of the Altima and Ébène Heights buildings by the 
National  Pension  Fund  fit  within  the  objective  of  diversifying  the  investment  of  the  Fund 
with a view to optimising their return.  The decision of the NPF/NSF Investment Committee 
at that material time was based on the fact that the interest rates were low and  yielded an 
attractive return.  The expected yield upon purchase of the said building at time of acquisition 
was around 9% on an annualised basis over a period of ten years. The actual yield over the 
last five years since purchase, on an annualised basis, is at 8.5%. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, the last audit report in August 2015 states that the 
financial  statements  of  the  NPF  for  the  three  years,  2013,  2014  and  2015,  have  not  been 
prepared and submitted.  Can I know from the hon. Minister if that has been prepared now 
and submitted, and if same can be tabled to the National Assembly? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I am informed that since the MCB/NPF issue, for a 
couple of years, the National Audit Office did not issue the audit certificate in time despite 
the  fact  that  the  financial  statements  for  the  years  2003  to  2008  were  sent  to  the  National 
Audit Office on time.  For instance, financial statements for year ended 30 June 2003 have 
been certified only in 2009.  So, it is clear that there is backlog.  However, gradually we are 
clearing the backlog. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  There  is  a  working  paper  on  Pension  Reform  in  Mauritius  dated 

June 2015.  Let me quote the IMF report, which states that – 

“(…)  it  will  be  extremely  important  to  improve  the  investment  capacity  and 
governance structure of the NPF to ensure that the investment returns on which the 
NPF’s  sustainability  relies  are  achieved  in  practice.  Regular  actuarial  reviews  with 
automatic adjustment parameters would be useful to keep the NPF sustainable.” 

May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  she  is  contemplating  to  review  the  NPF  structure  and 
functioning and also if actual report is regularly being issued? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: The NPF/NSF Committee has a duty to see to it that the 
investment is made in a transparent, fair and fruitful manner.  So, I am only informed of the 
investment made.  I do not see the point of reviewing the structure for the time being. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, l’honorable ministre a parlé du bâtiment Altima 
à Ébène. Est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre le nombre de locataires, le loyer payé et le 
nombre de loyers impayés jusqu’à présent des différents locataires? 

 

35 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t have all the information now.  But I do know that 
one tenant, DYP Worldwide Ltd., owes rent of an amount of about Rs17 m.  Our office is 
doing the needful to recoup that amount. 

Mr  Uteem:  Following  on  from  the  question  of  hon.  Rughoobur,  there  is  a  report 
which  says  that  we  need  to  review  the  investment  strategy  of  the  National  Pension  Fund.  
There  is  also  a  legislation  which  sets  out  the  three  criteria  which  have  to  be  taken  into 
consideration when making an investment.  So, may I ask the hon. Minister whether – 

(i) 

her Ministry has carried out a study to find out whether any amendment needs 
to be brought to the existing legislation to meet what the IMF has said in their 
report, and 

(ii) 

she is satisfied that, based on the existing legislation, the NPF is sustainable? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: There is a Committee which has been set up at the level of 

my Ministry to look at this aspect, and we will come up with some recommendations. 

Dr. Sorefan: May I know from the hon. Minister whether the National Pension Fund 
has  invested  in  SICOM  -  we  heard  from  the  Minister  last  week  that  they  do  not  get  any 
dividend - and if that is a sound investment in SICOM? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, if the hon. Member can come up with a substantive 

question. 

AFRICAN UNION - AGENDA 2063 - RATIFICATION 

(No. B/673) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the Treaty in regard to the Agenda 2063 of the African Union, he will state where 
matters stand as to the ratification thereof by the Republic of Mauritius. 

(Withdrawn) 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY - BOARD MEMBERS - OVERSEAS 

MISSIONS 

(No. B/674) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the State 
Land  Development  Company,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 

 

36 

information  as  to  the  number  of  overseas  missions  undertaken  by  members  of  the  Board 
thereof since January 2015 to date, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

cost thereof, and  

purpose thereof. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  State  Land  Development  Company  Ltd 
(SLDC) that, since January 2015 to date, the then Chairperson, Mr Gaëtan Siew, is the only 
member of the Board who has undertaken overseas missions.  He resigned as Chairperson of 
SLDC on 26 June 2016. 

Mr Siew is also the co-chairperson of the Smart City Scheme Technical Committee 
and  has  provided  assistance  to  Government  in  connection  with  the  proposal  to  develop 
Technopoles in Ghana and Madagascar. 

With  regard  to  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  Siew  has  participated  in  two 
ministerial missions and attended two international events in relation to Smart Cities.  The 
total  costs  which  were  paid  by  the  SLDC  amounted  to  Rs791,265.    In  this  respect,  I  am 
tabling  the  detailed  costs  incurred  by  the  SLDC  as  well  as  the  purpose  for  each  mission 
undertaken. 

Mr Rughoobur: I have only one supplementary question, Madam Speaker, because I 
know  the  Minister  is  not  the  substantive  Minister.    Will  the  Minister  agree  that  there  is 
nothing  wrong  in  undertaking  foreign  missions  as  far  as  there  is  a  mechanism  in  place  to 
ensure that there are adequate returns in all these missions being undertaken? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, let me say first of all that I am the substantive Minister because I 
am responsible for SLDC and it falls under my portfolio.  With regard to missions, of course, 
every money that is being spent should bring dividends. I hope that those missions that are 
being undertaken will have contributed in one way or the other positively to SLDC. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Mr  Siew  is  known  to  be  the  Mr  Smart  City.    He  was  the  one 
spearheading Smart City.  The hon. Minister rightly said this in his reply.  It is also a small 
department.    Recently,  there  was  one  young  architect,  Mr  Allam,  who  also  left  the 
department.  Is the Smart City Scheme of the Government at stake at this juncture? 

 

37 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, this is a totally different question.  If a specific question is put, I 

will, of course, reply. 

Madam Speaker: It has nothing to do with the main question!  Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Can  we  know  the  reasons  why  Mr  Siew  has  tendered  his  resignation 

from the Board of SLDC? 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry! Hon. Jhuboo, look at the question. This has nothing to 
do  with  the  substantive  question.    The  question  relates  the  number  of  missions.  Next 
question, hon. Mohamed! 

JUDICIARY - COURT INFRASTRUCTURES - MAINTENANCE 

(No.  B/675)    Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Attorney General whether, in regard to the Judiciary, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain information as to – 

(a) 

for the past five years, the amount of money 

(i) 

(ii) 

collected  by  each  court  and  tribunal  of  mainland  Mauritius  and  of 
Rodrigues  in  terms  of  fine,  costs  or    any  other  charges  respectively, 
and 

spent on maintaining and building new facilities such as court houses, 
and 

(b)  

if consideration will be given for the implementation of the Mackay Report on 
the issue of maintenance of court infrastructures. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Office of the Master and Registrar that the amount of money the judiciary 
has collected as fines, costs or other charges in respect of each court for the past five years, in 
the Republic of Mauritius, are as shown in annex A1 to A5, which I am tabling. 

It is to be noted that Tribunals do not fall within the Judiciary and if the hon. Member wishes 
to have a reply with regard to tribunals, he should address his question to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister who is the Minister for portfolio of tribunals.  

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, the only building erected in the past five 
years is the Piracy/ Moka District Court, on land vested in a Judiciary at Moka. This project 

 

38 

was mostly financed by the United Kingdom Government, but the Government of Mauritius 
partly funded the said project in the amount of USD 901,751, which at the equivalent rate in 
2013 amounted to Rs26,885,976.59. The Piracy/ Moka District Court was handed over to the 
Judiciary in March 2015 and is actually housing the Moka District Court. 

 Regarding  the  sums  spent  for  the  maintenance  of  existing  buildings  and  facilities, 

same is set out in Annex B, which I have just tabled. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Mackay  Report  has  recommended  that 
early attention be given to the poor condition of most of our Court infrastructures. I wish to 
reiterate the commitment of Government to bringing reforms in the Judiciary and to improve 
infrastructure of the Judiciary so that both the members of the Judiciary, the legal profession 
and  the  public  can  operate  in  an  environment  which  befits  an  institution  as  important  and 
prestigious  as  the  Judiciary.  Government  will  fully  support  the  Judiciary  in  upgrading  its 
infrastructure.  In fact, on 13 June 2016, at a meeting with the Master & Registrar and the 
Deputy Master & Registrar, we discussed and reviewed existing future renovation projects 
and  ongoing  ones  and  construction  of  new  infrastructure,  in  line  with  the  Government 
Programme 2015-2019 which reads as follows with regard to the Judiciary. I am quoting – 

“Paragraph 158 – 

Reforms will be brought to expedite determination of Court cases and improve 
services to the public. A new independent Court of Appeal will be set up. 

Paragraph 159 – 

In line with the Mackay Report of 1997, Government will introduce legislation 
to set up separate Court of Appeal Section and a separate High Court Section 
of the Supreme Court. 

Paragraph 160 – 

In  the  above  context,  renovations  to  the  Supreme  Court  Historical  Building 
will be undertaken to accommodate the propose Court of Appeal. 

Paragraph 161 – 

A  dedicated  state-of-the-art  Court  Building  for  Supreme  Court  and  all  its 
Divisions will be built. 

Paragraph 162 – 

 

39 

The  required  support  services  for  a  full-fledged  Family  Division  will  be 
improved. 

Paragraph 163 – 

All  District  Court  premises  will  be  reviewed  and  upgraded  to  ensure  better 
services to all stakeholders since the bulk of Court cases are dealt with at this 
level”. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  District  Courts  of  Black  River,  Savanne,  Pamplemousses  and 
Rivière du Rempart have had to be moved to rented premises because of the derelict state of 
the building they were in. There is need to construct new dedicated buildings to house these 
Courts. 

 It has also been noted that the buildings of District Courts of Flacq and Upper Plaines 
Wilhems can no longer accommodate these Courts as they are now inappropriate in terms of 
space  required.  These  Courts  will  be  moved  in  more  spacious  and  adequate  dedicated 
buildings. 

Finally, the historical building accommodating the Supreme Court of Mauritius is in 
great need of considerable repair works. Some works have been undertaken already, but for 
the security of Judges, staff and the public at large, these works can only be undertaken once 
the premises are vacated. The Judiciary has already requested for funds to be allocated for the 
construction of a new Supreme Court building on premises presently housing the Commercial 
Division of the Supreme Court.  

I will be following up the matter with the Master & Registrar. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Attorney General for his answers. 
And having perused very briefly the document that he has tabled, that shows the summary of 
revenue collected for each Court for the past five years, and the reason I asked for the past 
five years  has nothing to do with any party political issue and what has to be looked into is 
also the mistakes prior to 2015. 

Now, I see here that on average there is a collection of approximately Rs300 m. on a yearly 
basis for all the Courts of Mauritius and the Tribunals, whereas, in the last document he has 
tabled, when more than Rs300 m. were received every year from Court fines, costs and what 

 

40 

have you, only approximately Rs3 m. is spent on maintenance of those very Court buildings 
on an annual basis, which is almost less than 1% of what is recovered on a yearly basis in 
those Courts. Therefore, I am sure the hon. Attorney General has seen the conditions.  Let me 
only use one Court, the Curepipe Court, which has been there even before 2015. Could the 
hon. Attorney General .... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, you are too lengthy in your question.  Ask your 

question! 

Mr  Mohamed:  My  question  is  coming.  Could  the  hon.  Attorney  General  consider 
using  his  good  Office  to  try  to  see  that  our  learned  Magistrates  are  not  forced  to  sit  or 
organise sittings in make shift environments, where they are exposed to prisoners whom they 
have to pass sentence against by one centimetre when coming up the stairs because there is 
no other facility? This is urgent and is nothing to do with this regime or the past one as well. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  happy  that  the  hon.  Member  recognises.  I 
wish to state the unflinching support and commitment of this Government, as I stated in my 
answer,  to  improve  things.  I  took  the  initiative  ever  since  the  new  Government  assumed 
office  of  having  regular  meetings  with  the  Master  and  Registrar  and  her  Deputy  on  such 
issues. There are a number of procedural impediments, but my colleague at the Ministry of 
Public Infrastructure is also helping. But just to tell the hon. Member, if we look at the Annex 
B, expenses have, since on maintenance, been improved to Rs4.2 m. last year up to June this 
year to Rs5.6 m. So, we are very conscious and we are taking our responsibilities.  We are 
taking the appropriate steps so that, as I have said, the Judiciary, the public specially - the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister himself was very concerned that members of the public together with the 
Judiciary  and  all  staff  are  operating  sometimes  in  difficult  circumstances  in  certain  Courts 
which I have mentioned. 

Mr Bérenger: May I ask one question? I heard the hon. Attorney General talking of a 
new Supreme Court building. Some years back, there was a project for us keeping the old 
historical building and then destroying the new buildings, rather the old new buildings behind 
the  historical  Supreme  Court  and  building  the  New  Supreme  Court  building  on  pilotis  if 
required, because there is plenty of space at the back of the historical Supreme Court. Is this 
still on? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: There are a number of issues being considered, there is a Standing 
Technical Committee for some years now. One thing is sure, the existing historical Supreme 

 

41 

Court building will be renovated.  It is intended that this would house the Court of Appeal to 
be and a number of  considerations are being  given, including what the hon.  Leader of the 
Opposition said, at the back of that building, but also establishing a New Court at the spot 
where the Commercial Court is. All this has many considerations and we are working in a 
timely  manner.  Nothing  definite  a  été  arrêté  as  at  yet,  but  a  lot  of  consideration  is  being 
given to housing the New Supreme Court. 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Attorney General has made mention of the fact that renovations 
to  the  Supreme  Court  historical  building  will  be  undertaken  to  accommodate  the  Court  of 
Appeal. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Minister where matters stand as regards the introduction of 
legislation pertaining to the appel in Court. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I shall keep the House informed; there are ongoing discussions with 

the Judiciary.  

Mr Ramful:  May I ask the hon. Minister where matters stand as regards the Souillac 
District Court? We know it’s been years now. I think three years ago the whole building got 
burnt down and tenders were launched. May I know where matters stand? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  In  fact,  all  these  issues  have  been  raised  with  the  Master  and 
Registrar and her Deputy. I am awaiting suggestions from them. The House where it has been 
housed right now is clearly inappropriate.  

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Attorney General has mentioned so many times the name 
of the Master and the Deputy Master. I am sure the hon. Attorney General is aware that these 
two, the Master, the Deputy Master are overloaded with Courts work. It is not their duty to 
maintain Court. Can I ask the hon. Attorney General whether it is not time to have a proper 
Maintenance Officer who will look at all our Courts permanently? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  May  I  just  remind  this  House  that  it  is  their  responsibility  which 
befits  upon  the  Master  and  Registrar  to  look  at  such  matters,  including  construction  and 
renovation. There is a Standing Committee with the MPI. This Government is very respectful 
of institutions and we are working in collaboration with all the institutions concerned. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  The last question, Madam Speaker.  In fact, the last segment of my 
question  did  refer  to  the  recommendations  of  the  MacKay  Report  in  relation  to  the 
maintenance of Court infrastructure.  Could the hon. Attorney-General commit to this august 

 

42 

Assembly that he will use his good offices in trying to convince our hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development to at least use all the money that is received from Courts, at least 
Rs300 m. on a yearly basis – you have the funding there – to ensure that each district has 
proper facilities that could be used and could be called Courts of laws and not houses that are 
simply makeshift Courts in 2016? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  The hon. Member would appreciate that since time immemorial, all 
the funds received and the sums and money collected do not go exclusively for maintenance.   

(Interruptions) 

And whilst I can assure the hon. Member that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  is  very  well  aware  and  is  appreciative  of  this  Government’s  initiative  and 
commitment  to  that.  I  certainly  cannot  commit  what  the  hon.  Member  has  asked  to  this 
august Assembly. 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  No.  B/690  has  been 
withdrawn.  PQ No. B/704, with regard to full time courses at Orian Centre Ltd., will now be 
replied by the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport.  I suspend the sitting for 
one and a half hours. 

At 1.04 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.37 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  No.  B/676  has  been 

withdrawn.   

ISLAMIC CULTURAL CENTRE – MR S. S. – BOARD MEMBER 

(No.  B/676)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the Islamic Cultural 
Centre, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to if Mr S. S. 
has been removed as Board Member thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

when; 

why, and  

by whom has he been replaced and when. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

43 

NATIONAL FEDERATION – YACHTING CLUB - AFFILIATION 

(No.  B/677)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the National Federation, he will, 
for the benefit of the House – 

(a) 

obtain therefrom, information as to the = 

(i) 

(ii) 

composition of the Managing Committee thereof, and  

names of the Yachting clubs affiliated thereto, indicating in each case, 
the region, names of the office bearers thereof and date of affiliation 
thereof, and  

(b) 

obtain and table copy of the activities thereof for 2016. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  information  regarding  the 
composition of the Managing Committee of the Yachting Federation together with the names 
of  the  clubs  affiliated  to  the  federation,  their  respective  regions,  the  names  of  their  office 
bearers and the date of affiliation as well as a copy of the activities of the federation for 2016. 
Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir,  après  les  performances  très 
moyennes  de  cette  discipline  lors  des  derniers  Jeux  des  Iles,  si  l’honorable  ministre  a 
rencontré les membres de cette Fédération afin de mettre en place un plan de relance pour 
cette discipline ? 

Mr Sawmynaden : So far, I have not met them, but my Desk Officer is liaising with 

them.  

Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir, Madame la présidente, s’il y a un encadrement technique 
au niveau de cette fédération et, si oui, peut-on savoir comment il fonctionne et qui sont les 
entraineurs? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Tout  encadrement  technique,  tout  entraineur  doit  venir  d’une 

demande de la fédération.  Pour l’instant, il n’y a aucune demande. 

Mr  Quirin:  Une  dernière  question,  Madame  la  présidente.    Peut-on  savoir  si  cette 
discipline, c’est-à-dire la voile, fera partie des disciplines au programme lors des prochains 
Jeux des Iles en 2019? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Jusqu’à preuve du contraire, at this moment it is no.  They are 

not part of the Indian Ocean Games. 

 

44 

Mr  Quirin:  Excusez-moi,  mais  je  n’ai  pas  bien  compris  la  réponse  de  l’honorable 

ministre. 

Madam Speaker:  Can you please repeat! 
Mr Sawmynaden: Pour l’instant, ils ne sont pas sur la liste des disciplines pour les 

Jeux des Iles de 2019. 

Madam Speaker:  Next, question, hon. Quirin! 

WEIGHTLIFTING - ROMANIAN COACH - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/678)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Weightlifting, he will state if the 
contract  of  the  Romanian  coach  U.  C.  as  Directeur  Technique  National  thereof  has  been 
renewed and, if so, indicate the new terms and conditions of contract thereof. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Madam  Speaker,  the  services  of  the  Romanian  Coach,  U.  C., 
were enlisted “Directeur Technique National” in weightlifting with effect from 10 February 
2015  for  an  initial  period  of  one  year.    During  the  one-year  period,  he  was  being  paid  a 
monthly salary of Rs54,275 plus an allowance of Rs17,525, plus board and lodging, duty-free 
privileges  and  travelling  allowance.  The  other  conditions  are  the  same  as  applicable  for 
contract officers in the Civil Service.   

The contract was renewed for a further period of one year as from 10 February 2016 
on  the  same  terms  and  conditions.    However,  following  a  decision  of  the  High  Powered 
Committee, his monthly salary has been converted into a monthly all-inclusive allowance of 
Rs140,000.  The other conditions are the same as applicable for the contract officers in the 
Civil Service. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir si l’honorable ministre a consulté 

la fédération d’haltérophilie avant de renouveler le contrat du DTN? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Bien sûr.  As usual! 
Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir où se trouve actuellement le DTN? 
Mr Sawmynaden: Le DTN actuellement est en Roumanie. 
Mr  Quirin:  Peut-on  savoir  depuis  quand  il  n’est  pas  à  Maurice,  Madame  la 

présidente? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I answered to that in a previous question.  I don’t 
know the exact date, but he was in a training camp in Romania and he was training one of our 
athletes there. 

 

45 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre  trouve-t-il  normal  qu’un 

DTN étranger, avec un si gros salaire, passe la plupart de son temps à l’étranger? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Madam  Speaker,  our  athlete,  Miss  Roilya,  who  is  now  the 
Champion of Africa was doing her training in Romania and before the African Games she 
was there preparing for the African Games.  Then, she went to the African Games and then 
back.  Now she is preparing for the Olympic Games.  This is why they are there because it is 
a training camp as decided by the Federation and the DTN. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  si  l’honorable  ministre  est  au 
courant  que  la  fédération  d’haltérophilie  a  informé  M.  Constantin,  c’est-à-dire,  le  DTN, 
qu’après les Jeux Olympiques, il ne sera plus le DTN d’haltérophilie à Maurice?  Est-ce que 
l’honorable ministre est au courant de cette décision de la fédération ?  

Mr Sawmynaden:  I think it is in the press and everyone is aware of that. 
Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Quirin! Last question! 
Mr Quirin: Quelle décision prendra l’honorable ministre après les Jeux Olympiques, 
vue que le contrat de M. Constantin, le DTN, a récemment été renouvelé? Peut-on savoir si 
l’honorable ministre partage la même opinion que la fédération? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    The  federation  has  said  after  the  Olympic  Games.    After  the 

Olympic Games, we will see.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 

 

MADAGASCAR – 10TH CJSOI GAMES – NATIONAL FLAGS 

(No.  B/679)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the 10th CJSOI Games to be 
held  in  Madagascar,  he  will  state  the  stand  of  Government  following  the  proposal  of  the 
Organising Committee not to hoist the national flags of participating countries during official 
medals award Ceremony. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that,  at  the  last 
Experts’ CJSOI Meeting held in Mayotte in early June 2016, Madagascar made a proposal 
that national flags of participating countries would not be hoisted during the official medal 
award ceremony at the 10th Edition of the CJSOI Games to be held in Madagascar from 30 
July  to  05  August  2016.   Reunion  Island  and  Mayotte  supported  the  proposal.  Djibouti, 

 

46 

Mauritius and Seychelles abstained on the motion and Comoros was absent.  This matter will 
be  taken  up  again  at  the  next  CJSOI  Ministerial  Meeting  scheduled  for  the  18  of  July  in 
Madagascar.      

I wish to inform the House that the Government is not agreeable to the proposal of 
Madagascar. Mauritius will continue adhering to the practice of hoisting national flags during 
the official medal award ceremony as stipulated in the Charter of the CJSOI Games.  

Mr Bérenger: I heard the Rt. hon. Minister say that Comoros was absent from the 
  
last meeting. Do we know, if we know, that it’s for practical reasons or are they objecting to 
the fact that the meeting was held in Mayotte? What is the situation concerning Comoros and 
Mayotte as far as the CJSOI is concerned? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The reason that I have got is that for technical reasons they did not 
attend. We all know the position between Comoros and Mayotte, but the games will be held 
in Madagascar. So, the next meeting will be held in Madagascar on the 18th and let’s hope 
that they will be present. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

CEB - ELECTRICITY SUPPLY – HARDSHIP CASES 

(No. B/680) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
electricity supply, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain form the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to the number of consumers who are in default of payment of their bills 
therefor over the past twelve months, indicating the – 

(a) 

(b) 

number thereof whose connection therefor have been cut, and 

measures, if any, that are being proposed in respect of hardship cases. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  that 
though its regulations provide that any person, who does not settle his bill, is liable to have 
his electricity supply disconnected, it usually resorts to disconnections as a last resort. 

It inserts cautionary notes on the monthly bills to remind the client of unpaid arrears. 
It sends additional reminders to advise the client to settle outstanding claims. It is only when 
the client fails to respond to all these attempts that the supply is disconnected. 

 

47 

I am informed by the CEB that, over the past twelve months, 35972 clients have been 
in default of payment of their electricity bills and there have been 26510 disconnections of 
supply, out of which 22670 were reconnected. 20759 were domestic consumers, out of which 
18255 were reconnected during the same period. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the CEB that it grants to old 
age pensioners an additional period of 14 days to settle their bills without any late payment 
surcharge.  

When confronted to hardship cases, CEB allows payment facilities on a case-to-case 

basis.  

As the House is aware, Government has taken an important decision to support low-

income families by introducing a concessionary electricity tariff.  

Since January 2016, about 60000 vulnerable households are benefitting from a tariff, 

which is 31% lower than the normal tariff. 

Mr  Ramful:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  trying  to  make  a  case  here  for  those  genuine 
hardship  cases.  I  am  given  to  understand  that  once  a  consumer  defaults  from  paying  his 
electricity bill, then the CEB goes and immediately cuts the electricity supply. May I request 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to look into the matter and if there is a plan for those genuine 
hardship  cases,  they  could  be  allowed  some  time  to  pay  their  electricity  bills  before 
disconnecting their supply? 

 

48 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, first of all, we have got to proceed on the assumption that 

all hardship cases are genuine. We cannot proceed on the assumption that some hardship 
cases are not genuine or else that would entail a means test, a discrimination. So, let’s take all 
hardship cases. First of all, what has happened is that CEB puts the unpaid bills in descending 
order of the amounts. Already, if your bill is only Rs1,000 in arrears, you are at the bottom of 
the list, whereas if you owe Rs40,000, you are the first one to be disconnected. 

Secondly, there are immense delays, we all know, because we are in constituencies 
where we meet people who have got these problems. We all know that when we phone CEB 
they  get  supplementary  arrears.  There  are  other  plans  which  can  be  worked  out  for  really 
hardship cases, all of them, whether genuine or not. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister the following 
question: in the not too recent past, there was a project in order to avoid additional costs to 
the CEB and the inconvenience and discomfort to the consumers to introduce the pre-paid 
meters especially in certain depressed areas. Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is 
the situation with this project of pre-paid meters? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. It was introduced about 2011 or 2012. It has not worked. 
There  are  only  one  hundred  or  so.  It  has  not  worked  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  First  of  all, 
Mauritians are not used to it, and secondly, like the Emtel cards, you need to have a whole 
structure of sale of these cards. It has not worked.  It has not worked, what can we say! 

Mr  Mahomed:  On  this  project  of  pre-paid  meters,  I  had  the  chance  to  attend  the 
Samoa Conference, a country which is less advanced than us and there it is working perfectly 
well. May we envisage consulting to see what went wrong because 26000 disconnections, it 
is really, indeed, a very high figure. So, I believe this will go a long way in addressing the 
issue. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, first of all, 26000 is about 5%. Secondly, if we take from 
2011 to 2015 - because I also was impressed by this figure - I see 2011: 21276;  2012: 19201;  
2013: 25895;  2014: 22036;  2015: 21047. So, it’s the same number year by year allowing for 
increase in number of consumers. Finally, it is not that impressive. I am sorry; I forgot the 
first part of the question. 

Mr Mahomed: In countries which are less advanced than us, Samoa, for example, I 
have seen people sending SMS, they get a code and they just key in  the number, the meter is 

 

49 

back again. So, we don’t need to go to the hassle of traumatising the person that is subject to 
disconnection. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. Of course, I entirely agree. I know that CEB is working on 
alternative modes to stop this business of the whole van coming with 10 persons and shouting 
to the neighbours: ‘Ou courant pe coupé’. We all know what this means. When I say we all 
know, I know what I am saying. It is traumatic because some people do it by negligence, they 
forget  not  necessarily  because  they  are  culprits.  But,  we  are  looking  into  other  alternative 
ways. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  It  is  a  follow-up  from  the  question  of  hon.  Mahomed.  When  it 
comes to the cut off, why is it often done as a surprise? Why don’t we inform the people: 
‘your  electricity  will  be  cut  off  on  a  specific  day’?  This  creates  much  inconvenience, 
especially to those who go out in the morning and come late at night and who have stored 
some food in their fridge. This causes much prejudice to these people. It is always a surprise. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  have  looked  at  the  record.  It  is  surprising  how  year  by  year 
since  2002,  the  same  question  comes  up.  Let  me  quote  the  then  Ministry  of  Energy,  hon. 
Ganoo, responding to the now Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Duval – 

“So, the CEB gives a reasonable delay to consumers, Mr Speaker, Sir. It is also in the 
context of putting order in financial situation when the campaign was initiated.’ 

People do receive reminders time and time again!  

(Interruptions) 

People receive reminders but people don’t read reminders, they don’t realise that it is going to 
come and when it comes, it has got to come one day! 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to the reconnection, may I know 
from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is the cost of reconnection and whether there is any 
concession made for hardship cases when there is a reconnection? 

Mr Collendavelloo: It’s Rs450 flat. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/682 

has been withdrawn. Hon. Ramful! 

 

50 

LANDLORD & TENANT ACT – BUSINESS PREMISES - LEASE 

(No. B/681) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Landlord and Tenant Act, he will state if proposed amendments thereto will be introduced to 
provide for the continued application of the provisions thereof to business premises leased 
before 01 July 2005 to a date beyond 31 December 2017. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, I am 
informed that the  Landlord and Tenant  Act was amended in March 2005 to provide, inter 
alia, for existing business lettings to be increased yearly in an amount equivalent to 15% of 
the difference between the market rent of the business premises and the actual rent paid as 
well as for the increase to be spread over a period of seven years, that is, up to 01 July 2012, 
at  which  date  business  lettings  which  were  already  in  operation  before  2005  would  be 
deregulated. 

In  2009,  it  was  observed  that  there  was  need  to  give  incentives  for  landlords  to 
liberate property and to invest in new developments, while at the same time protecting those 
who are most vulnerable. Accordingly, the following amendments were made to the Landlord 
and Tenant Act - 

(a) 

(b) 

increase in rental to 10% instead of 15% of the difference between the market 
rent of the business premises and the actual rent paid, and 

provide for the moratorium after which business lettings would be liberalised 
to be extended to 31 December 2017 instead of 30 June 2012.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  at  this  stage,  there  is  no  case  for  extending 

further the moratorium date of 31 December 2017.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Merci, Madame la présidente. Passée la date du 31 décembre 2017, ce 
seront les termes du Code Civil qui vont s’appliquer où très souvent le propriétaire dans une 
position  de  force  pourra  imposer  ses  conditions.  Est-ce  que  sur  une  base  humanitaire  le 
gouvernement peut considérer une certaine extension pour une certaine catégorie de business 
premises ? 

 

51 

Mr Sawmynaden: As per the actual situation, it does not seem that there is a need for 
that  and  there  is  no  request  as  well  and  we  have  seen  that  the  cases  have  been  on  the 
downward trend. So, I don’t think that there will be any further extension because the trend is 
going down. 

FLIC-EN-FLAC - SECONDARY ACCESS 

(No. B/682) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
project for the urgent provision of a new secondary access to Flic-en-Flac, he will state where 
matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

MOTORWAYS & CLASSIFIED ROADS - OVERGROWN TREES 

(No. B/683) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and  Land Transport whether, in regard to motorways and 
classified roads, he will state if he is aware of the potential dangers represented by overgrown 
trees on the borders thereof and, if so, indicate if urgent  remedial  actions will be taken in 
relation thereto. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun):  Madam  Speaker,  Government  is  fully  aware  of  the  danger  represented  by 
overgrown roadside trees which have unfortunately even caused fatalities recently.  

I am informed by the RDA that an amount of around Rs5m was disbursed in the last 
financial  year  for  the  lopping  of  branches  and  cutting  of  trees  along  motorways  and  main 
roads  to  enable  a  safe  passage  of  traffic.  As  a  practice  a  clear  height  of  4.5  m  is  always 
maintained. However, it is a fact that the existing roads have trees bordering many roads as 
part of the landscape of Mauritius.  

Madam  Speaker,  on  20  May  2016,  Government  approved  that  the  Ministry  of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  takes  over 
under  its  Embellishment  and  Upgrading  Programme  the  responsibility  for  planting  and 
lopping of existing trees, trimming of plants and general embellishment along motorways and 
the major road networks, as well as for the upkeep of the green areas along the roundabouts. 

 

52 

On  its  side,  the  RDA  will  henceforth  give  authorisation  only  for  the  plantation  of 

certain specific plants that will not obstruct the traffic along the motorways and main roads. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Environment  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster, and Beach Management is in the process of establishing a Program of Works and 
that works will start shortly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, I asked a similar question in October of last year in the 
wake  of  the  fatal  accident  which  took  place  in  Vacoas  near  London  Supermarket.  
Subsequent to the question I asked and to the answers which were given by hon. Dayal who 
was  then  Minister,  similar  fatal  accidents  have  taken  place.  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister, 
therefore, whether he can see to it - especially in the town centres or village centres where 
there is a lot of traffic going on - that all these centres are looked after, are surveyed and the 
proper  work  is  carried  out  for  the  lopping  of  trees  which  might  constitute  a  hazard  to  the 
traffic or to passers-by? 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, the remarks of the hon. Member will be transmitted to 
the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management 
for proper action. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

LA FERME DAM - RENOVATION & UPGRADING – COMPULSORY 

ACQUISITION 

(No. B/684) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the Project 
for the Renovation and Upgrading of La Ferme Dam, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Central Water Authority - 

(a) 

information as to the names of the owners whose property are expected to be 
the  subject  of  compulsory  acquisition  in  the  wake  of  the  implementation 
thereof, indicating – 

(i) 

(ii) 

in each case, the extent of the property and the offer made thereto, and  

the  names  thereof  who  have  appealed  against  the  decision  for 
compulsory acquisition, and  

53 

 

(b) 

copy of the report/study which has recommended the implementation thereof 
and table same. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member,  I  take  it,  is  referring  to  the  Water 
Resources Unit and not to the CWA. The rehabilitation works at La Ferme Dam require the 
acquisition of 28 properties located downstream of the spillway.  

I am informed by the Ministry of Housing and Lands that compulsory acquisition of 
14 portions of land has been completed. Notices have been served upon 13 other landowners 
and searches are being carried out to ascertain land ownership of the 28 plots of land. 

With  regard  to  the  information  requested  under  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  it  is 
considered  that  same  cannot  be  disclosed  without  the  consent  of  the  persons  concerned. 
However, all information pertaining to the acquisition is publicly available for having been 
published in the Gazette. 

As regards part (a) (ii), I am informed by the Ministry of Housing and Lands that no 
appeal  has  been  received  against  the  decision  of  compulsory  acquisition,  but  some  of  the 
landowners have made representations on the amount of compensation proposed to them.  

With regard to part (b), the structure of La Ferme Dam is over one hundred years old. 
Any breakdown of the dam structure represents a high risk. A Dam Safety Analysis carried 
out from 1997 to 1999 recommended rehabilitation works to ensure the structural integrity of 
the dam. 

Subsequently,  my  Ministry  appointed  Arup  SIGMA  in  October  2009  to  review  the 

design of the dam and prepare bidding documents for the rehabilitation works.  

One of the terms of reference of the consultant was to review the safety analysis of the 
dam.  The  consultant  recommended  that  due  to  extreme  risk,  property  near  the  spillway 
should be relocated.  

I am unable to table the report at this stage as it contains technical details which will 
be used for the bidding process. I am, however, tabling an Executive Summary of the relevant 
parts relating to the relocation of properties near the spillway. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask one supplementary question to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, 
Madam  Speaker?  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  made  mention  of  the  fact  that  he  has 

 

54 

received  representations  from  the  occupiers.  Can  I  ask  him  whether  all  these  occupiers  or 
their representatives have disagreed to the compensation that is being offered to them? They 
have also suggested or requested the Ministry to see to it that a plot of State land be made 
available to them so that they can construct a new house since they are being asked to leave 
the property they are presently occupying which they have built over the years with their own 
sweat and blood. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, first of all, under the Land Acquisition Act, the procedure 
will  be  that  there  will  be  a  Board  of  Assessment  to  compute  the  adequate  amount  of 
compensation. The compensation must be paid promptly and must be adequate under the law, 
under the Constitution.  

The  question  of  State  land  will  arise  at  a  later  level.  Whenever  the  question  of 
compensation  has  been  decided  then  we  can  see  whether  a  deal  can  be  struck  as  the  hon. 
Member suggests.  

Mr  Ganoo:  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  must  know  that  a  compensation  has 
already been offered to them, as far as I know.  Letters have been sent to them suggesting the 
compensation that should be paid to each and every one of these different families.  So, this is 
why, dissatisfied with the sum that has been offered to them, they have made the proposal 
that, at least, a plot of State land be given to them and they can use the money which has been 
offered to them to construct the building. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, let me just repeat myself.  The first thing is to refer the 
matter to the Board of Assessment promptly, then we shall see what are the facilities that we 
can make as a deal. 

Mr Mahomed:  I do understand the reason why the hon. Minister is unable to table 
the  report  for  reasons  he  has  mentioned.    Now,  insofar  as  upgrading  of  the  reservoir  is 
concerned, may I ask whether this will entail enhancing the storage capacity of that reservoir 
because my colleague, hon. Jhuboo, last week did mention some water shortage problem in 
the region, and if so, by how much, from what capacity to what capacity? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I do not know by how much, but I know that the plan is not only 
to  enhance  the  present  reservoir,  but  also  to  increase  the  capacity.    The  number  of  metre 
cubes is written in the Executive Summary and there is a calculation which has been made. 

 

 

55 

ALBION - LIGHTHOUSE - EMBELLISHMENT 

(No.  B/685)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the Light House at Albion, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the – 

(a)   Mauritius Marine Authority, information as to -  

(i) 

(ii) 

the date of the commissioning thereof, and  

if any uplifting work is scheduled to be carried out thereat in relation to 
the  landscaping  of  the  compound  thereof,  provision  of  parking 
facilities and creation of a museum on the site thereof, and  

(b)  

Tourism Authority, information as to if signage will be provided to facilitate 
visitors find their way thereto. 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I 
am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  (MPA)  that  the  Albion  Lighthouse  was 
commissioned in 1910 and the fenced area of the Lighthouse falls under its responsibility.  
However, the area surrounding the fenced premises is State Land falling under the purview of 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

 
The Lighthouse and its premises are regularly maintained by the MPA.  However, as 
the  site  is  regularly  visited  by  tourists  as  well  as  Mauritians,  I  have  impressed  upon  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority to further embellish the compound. 

The  Albion  Lighthouse  is  an  important  navigational  aid  and  access  thereto  is 

 
restricted for security reasons.  It is not proposed to create a museum on the site. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Tourism 
Authority that directional panels had been installed since March 2006 to guide visitors to the 
Lighthouse.    Moreover,  there  is  an  informational  panel  giving  basic  information  on  the 
Lighthouse which has been fixed at the entrance. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, this site is regularly visited by school children during 
holidays and on planned visits through the Ministry of Education and it is a controlled area. 
Can I impress on the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to, at least, ask the MMA to provide basic 

 

56 

facilities such as toilets for the school children as well as tourists who go there and also for 
the staff? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  I will look into it, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  The  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  has  made  mention  of  the  Tourism 
Authority which has installed a signage, but many of them have disappeared.  So, can I make 
a request to the Deputy Prime Minister to ask the Tourism Authority to make a survey and 
reinstall same as there are also places which can give guidance to the tourists and Mauritians 
who are going there? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  not  aware  if  they  have 
disappeared, but if it is so, then I shall certainly request that they be replaced and appropriate 
signs be put. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT CO. LTD. - GENERAL MANAGER & BOARD 

MEMBERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/686)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  State 
Land  Development  Co.  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to the – 

(a)  

(b)  

terms and conditions of appointment of each Board member thereof, and 

name of the General Manager thereof, indicating;  

(i) his date of appointment, and 

(ii) terms and conditions of appointment, and  

(c)  

total extent of land vested therein, indicating the prescribed procedures or the 
allocation of plots of land vested therein for the implementation of projects. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, the terms and  conditions of appointment of Board 

members of the SLDC Ltd. (SLDC) are determined by the shareholders of the Company.   

At the Annual General Meeting held on 30 June 2015, the monthly fees payable to the 

Chairperson and Directors were fixed at Rs70,000 and Rs25,000 respectively. 

 

57 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  Claude  Wong  So  was  appointed  on  16 
September 2015 as Chief Executive Officer of the SLDC for a period of three years.  He is a 
Registered Professional Engineer and Project Manager reckoning 40 years’ experience in the 
construction industry and in the property sector. 

I am tabling the terms and conditions of employment of the Chief Executive Officer. 

Regarding part (c) of the question, I am informed that SLDC originally owned around 

3,035 arpents of land in the Highlands/Ebene region.   

In addition, SLDC owns around 290 arpents of land at La Tour Koeing for industrial 
purpose, 20 arpents at Camp Ithier and 25 arpents at Bambous.  The SLDC also owns around 
93  arpents  at  La  Valette,  Bambous  where  around  21  arpents  have  been  used  for  the 
construction of the Model Village/SME park and 72 arpents have been earmarked for transfer 
to the Ministry of Housing and Lands.   

Out of 3,035 arpents in the Highlands/Ebene area, 341 arpents have been transferred 
for  the  Bagatelle  Dam  project,  178  arpents  and  57  arpents  have  been  transferred  to  the 
Employees’  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust  and  the  Sugar  Investment  Trust  respectively,  40 
arpents have been used for the Terre Rouge/Verdun Link Road, 125 arpents have been used 
by SLDC for morcellement and VRS and 7 arpents for other projects.  Another 336 arpents 
of  land  are  being  transferred  to  the  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  and  25  arpents  have  been 
earmarked for the Police Academy Project. 

Regarding the remaining area of 1,926 arpents of land at Highlands, a masterplan for 
its development is currently under preparation by  a team of  consultants led by  Luxconsult 
(Mtius) Ltd.  Once the masterplan is finalised, the procedures for allocation of land will be 
determined through call of Expression of Interest (EOI). 

Concerning La Tour Koeing Industrial Park, leases of lands have been made on the 
basis  of  applications  received  from  enterprises  either  directly  or  through  the  Board  of 
Investment. 

I am further informed that at a meeting held on 25 May 2016, the Board of SLDC has 
decided to launch an Expression of Interest for the lease of vacant plots of land within the 
SLDC industrial park at La Tour Koenig after a subdivision plan has been worked out. 

 

58 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, we have been made to understand that the Board has 
been reconstituted last week.  Can we have an idea who are those who have been appointed, 
at this stage, as Chairperson and their members? 

the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 

Mr  Jugnauth:  The  new  Chairperson  is  Mr  Gérard  Sanspeur  who  is  the  Senior 
Adviser  at 
the  other  members  are  Mr  Vidianand 
Lutchmeeparsad, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Mr Javed Suhootoorah, 
Lead  Analyst  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Dr.  Kaushik  Reesaul,  the  Road  Transport 
Commissioner of NTA,  so far.  Of course, other members will be nominated to constitute 
fully the Board. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  Minister  confirm  whether  Mr  Wong  So  is  also  the 
Chairperson  of  the  Road  Development  Authority,  Rodrigues  Airport  and  some  other 
parastatal bodies? 

Mr Jugnauth: I do not have this information in my file.  I can check. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the Minister inform the House whether cane growing activities 
are still undertaken on all the land belonging to the SLDC, and if yes, how much area is under 
cultivation and what has been the yield for the past two years?  If the Minister does not have 
the reply, we can have it afterwards.  Can he confirm now whether cane growing activities 
are still on? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  I  will  request  for  the  information  to  be  circulated  to  the  National 

Assembly. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the Minister also look into the file and see how much land has 
been given to some vegetable growers in the Highlands area and whether all the procedures 
have been followed so that the House can be enlightened?  We have heard that there would 
be  expression  of  interest  in  the  coming  months,  as  far  as  land  is  concerned.  Can  the  hon. 
Minister, at least, confirm whether land given for vegetables was not given au petit bonheur à 
certains petits copains? 

Mr Jugnauth: According to the list that I have, I don’t see whether there are plots of 
land that have been leased to vegetable growers.  Maybe I have been given a list where land 
has been either sold or transferred.  But I will obviously seek the information and provide it 
to the House. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

 

59 

CITE MARCEL CABON - SEWERAGE PROJECT 

(No.  B/687)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Sewerage Project at Cité Marcel Cabon, in Albion Village, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Waste Water Management Authority, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

the expected start and completion dates thereof; 

the name of the contractor thereof; 

the project value thereof; 

the number of houses to be connected thereto, and  

if all the roads and drains thereat will be fully reinstated after completion of 
the works carried out in connection therewith. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, in my  reply to PQ No.  B/588 of 29 September 2015,  I 
informed  the  House  that  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  was  planning  the 
construction of a leaching field to alleviate the sewerage problems faced by the residents of 
Cité Marcel Gabon and procedures had been initiated to obtain a plot of land for that purpose. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Authority  that  the  project  started  on  08  March  2016  and  is 

expected to be completed in October 2016.  

With regard to parts (b) and (c), the contract was awarded to Safety Construction Co 
Ltd. after an open competitive bidding process for the amount of Rs8,315,559.29, including 
VAT. 

The project consists of construction of a septic tank, a leaching field, and connection 
of 13 houses. As at 30 June 2016, 20 metres of sewers have been laid. Construction of the 
leaching field is ongoing and eight house connections have been completed. 

I  am  also  informed  by  the  Authority  that,  in  accordance  with  the  contract,  the 
contractor  has  the  responsibility  to  carry  out  full  width  reinstatement  of  the  roads  as  per 
specifications set by the local authority and to restore the drains in their original condition in 
case they are damaged during the works. 

Madam Speaker: Next question hon. Lesjongard! 

 

60 

DILO POURI, LE MORNE & COTEAU RAFFIN – SQUATTERS 

 (No.  B/688)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
squatters found in the regions of Dilo Pouri, Le Morne and Coteau Raffin, he will state where 
matters stand as to the proposed regularization thereof. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, I am 
informed that, in 2015, a survey was carried out by the Ministry of Housing and Lands to 
take stock of the number of squatters around the island, including the regions of Dilo Pouri, 
Le  Morne  and  Coteau  Raffin,  whereat  59  and  49  families  occupying  State  land  without 
authorisation were identified respectively by the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

With regard to Dilo Pouri, I am informed that the land occupied by some 59 families 
forms part of a larger portion of land of 439.53 hectares that has been leased to “Baie du Cap 
Estate Co. Ltd” by the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security for fishing and shooting 
purposes. 

Madam Speaker, 

I  am  informed  that  for  the  squatters  at  Coteau  Raffin  the 
Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  has  effected  a  complete  survey  in  May  this  year  and  is 
working towards the possibility to regularise these families ‘in situ’.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  May I ask the hon. Minister whether 

he has a timeframe for the regularisation of squatters of the region of Coteau Raffin? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The information that I have is that the survey has been completed 

in May this year. So, it is in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

KARO KALIPTIS & BATTERIE CASSÉE – LAND LEASE 

(No.  B/689)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to Karo 
Kaliptis and Batterie Cassée, he will state if – 

(a) 

(b) 

lands located thereat have already been completely leased to squatters, and  

his  Ministry  has  retrieved  the  land  leased  to  the  Mouvement  Civique  de 
Batterie Cassée. 

 

61 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, I am 
informed that, following a survey in year 2007, it was found that 66 squatters were occupying 
State  land  of  an  extent  of  7A05P  at  Batterie  Cassée  region,  commonly  known  as  Karo 
Kaliptis. 

The then Government approved in 2008 and 2009 the regularisation of squatters. 

I am further informed that, in 2011, it was also decided to relocate squatters from the 
surrounding regions on the remaining plots of land at Karo Kaliptis. As at date, the whole site 
has been parcelled out and 114 lots have been allocated to squatters for residential purposes 
and a plot of land of 480m2 reserved for community facilities. 

As  regards  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  no  lease  has  been  granted  to  Mouvement 
 
Civique de Batterie Cassée. However, I am informed that a letter of intent was issued on 01 
June  2005  to  Mouvement  Bien  Etre  Batterie  Cassée  for  the  grant  of  a  socio-cultural  lease 
over an extent of 79 perches of State land at Karo Kaliptis. The 79 perches form part of the 
whole extent of 7A05P of land at Karo Kaliptis. 

 
In accordance with the Letter of Intent, the association had one month as from 01 June 
2005 to inform the Ministry of Housing and Lands in writing whether it is agreeable to the 
offer  of  the  lease.  Furthermore,  the  association  had  to  submit  evidence  of  registration  and 
project details. 

 
The  association  has  never  informed  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  in  writing 
whether  it  is  agreeable  to  the  conditions  nor  has  it  submitted  any  documents  related  to  its 
proof of registration and project details. 

As such, the lease could not be drawn and, therefore, the question of retrieval does not 
arise inasmuch as the Mouvement Bien Etre Batterie Cassée has never used or occupied the 
land, thus it has never been in possession of the land. Subsequently, this portion of land has 
been allocated for the relocation of squatters. 

Mr Lesjongard: May I ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware that the Mouvement 
Bien  Etre  Batterie  Cassée  is  paying  lease  over  a  plot  of  land  of  3,355  m²  and  they  have 
already paid their lease until 2024? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, I have been made aware of that.  At that time, the procedures 
were that, with a letter of intent, they could pay the rent.  But, now, the Ministry has changed 
the whole procedure. 

 

62 

HAJJ 2015 – STAMPEDE - INVESTIGATION 

(No.  B/690)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the stampede which occurred in Mina, in Saudi Arabia during the Hajj 2015, he will state 
if he has requested the Saudi Authorities for the – 

(a)  

(b)  

submission  of  a  report  on  the  outcome  of  the  investigation  carried  out  to 
determine the causes thereof, and  

payment of compensation to the families of the five Mauritians who lost their 
lives in the course thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

FINANCIAL SECTOR - MOODY’S REPORT 

(No.  B/691)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  PortLouis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
financial sector, he will state if he has taken cognizance of the Report of Moody’s entitled 
“Government  of  Mauritius:  Financial  sector  is  a  source  of  growth  and  diversification  and 
Government of Mauritius – Financial Sector is a Source of Growth and Diversification, But 
Also Systemic Risk” and, if so, indicate the actions, if any, that will be taken in the light of 
the analysis contained therein. 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr  R.  Bhadain):  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  be  grateful  if  I  could  be  given  some  time  to 
answer this question on the Moody’s Report and also actions which, as per the question, will 
be taken. 

Madam Speaker: How long do you propose to take? 

Mr Bhadain: I will try to be very quick, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, but how long?  Five minutes, ten minutes? 

Mr Bhadain: Maybe ten minutes. 

Madam  Speaker,  yes,  we  are  aware  of  the  Moody’s  Report  -  Financial  Sector  is  a 
Source of Growth and Diversification, But Also Systemic Risk. Just by looking at the first 
page of the report, it is confirmed that Mauritius has a Baa1 stable rating from Moody’s and it 

 

63 

states that, as Mauritius financial sector has grown, it has supported economic development 
and  generated  foreign-currency  earnings.  Meanwhile,  the  authorities  have  managed  to 
maintain macroeconomic stability while supporting the sector’s competitiveness by fostering 
financial innovation and preserving tax and non-tax competitive advantages. 

Madam Speaker, the report is in four parts; I am not going to go into all these details. 
I will just go to the conclusion. So, if we look at the macroeconomic stability that has been 
the norm in Mauritius, reference is made to the BAI case and what Moody’s say is that the 
case  revealed  shortcomings  in  the  authorities’  supervision  and  enforcement  capacity. 
Ultimately, the fiscal authority of Mauritius decision to bail out depositors and policyholders 
had the advantage of being swiftly implemented, avoiding a spill over to the rest of the sector, 
but  carried  the  disadvantages  of  increasing  the  risk  of  moral  hazard  and  incurring  a  fiscal 
cost. Now, moral hazard is defined, if we do a Google search, as “the lack of incentive to 
guard against risk when one is protected from its consequences”, and it applies to insurance 
companies and treaties.  During all these years, there has been moral hazard with BAI and 
this has been addressed by this Government.  As we know, Super Cash Back Gold people are 
being repaid now, Bramer Asset people are being repaid now.  In relation to the second part, 
stating the possibility of incurring a fiscal cost, as I have stated to this House on numerous 
occasions,  no  funds  from  the  Consolidated  Fund,  from  public  funds,  have  been  utilised  to 
repay Super Cash Back Gold or Bramer Asset. 

So, the Moody’s Report actually says that we were absolutely right to deal with the 
BAI situation in the way we’ve done it, and we’ve done it in record time, in one year a few 
months, since April last. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  offshore  sector  which  is  also  mentioned  in  the  report,  of 
course,  Moody’s  explains  that  companies  holding  Category  1  licences  are  mainly  pass-
through structures for investment flowing through the country, but their financial flows are so 
large relative to the national scale that they play an important role in Mauritius. Now, we are 
aware  of  that.    We  are  aware  that  a  lot  of  money  is  going  through  Mauritius,  using  GBL 
structures, but these funds are not kept in Mauritius.  That is why we are the largest provider 
of Foreign Direct Investment in India.  So, the funds are being channelled through Mauritius.  
There is no risk in terms of a large amount of money being in deposit in bank accounts in 
Mauritius,  but,  because  they  are  going  through  Mauritius,  it  represents  somehow  a  risk  if 
there is a massive change because, banks operate and people work in banks; there is a risk 

 

64 

there. Now, this risk has always been there.  It is a systemic risk.  If you look at the title, is 
says  ‘Financial  sector  is  a  source  of  growth  and  diversification,  but  also  Systemic  Risk’.  
Systemic risk meaning that there is a risk in the system, which has always been there.  

In  relation  to  the  recent  changes  in  the  Double  Tax  Treaty  with  India,  it  is  very 

interesting to note that the conclusion of Moody’s is follows – 

“We estimate the recent changes to the DTAA with India to have a modest impact.” 

Modest!  And it goes on to say –  

“The amended DTAA is the result of extended negotiations (…) 

We know, for ten years. 

“(…)  and  as  such  any  inherent  risk  to  the  DTAA  with  India,  as  a  result  of  the 
amendments, have been to a large extent incorporated in our Baa1 Sovereign rating 
which we last confirmed in December 2015.” 

And what Moody’s is saying is that we already took everything into consideration because it 
was extended negotiations for a period of ten years.  We know what the risks were and when 
we rated Mauritius Baa1 - Baa1, meaning stable - in December 2015, we had already taken 
into consideration the inherent risks prevailing with the Double Tax Treaty with India.   

Now, what would a responsible Government do in relation to risks which is prevailing 
in  a  system  and  also  look  at  the  potential  for  growth  and  the  potential for  diversification?  
What we have done, Madam Speaker, is we mitigated the risk. How have we mitigated the 
risk?  When we negotiated with the DTA with India, we said one thing: “There should be no 
abrupt  end  so  that  we  could  bring  in  the  ground  favouring  clause  so  that  all  existing 
investments are protected until April 2017”. That has been done. I can confirm to this House, 
now, that according to the statistics of the FSC last month, June, there has been an increase of 
25% in GBCs which has Indian-based activities.  So, what we said is happening.  People are 
coming  to  Mauritius  because  of  the  ground  favouring  clause,  because  none  of  these 
investments will be taxable if they are done in Mauritius before April 2017.  So, the strategy 
is right on that front.   

Now, in the Treaty we also mentioned debt structures because, of course, when people 
invest,  there  are  two  ways  of  investing.    One  is  equity,  shares  and  the  other  one  is  debt 
structure.   Now, equity  structures attract tax when  you sell the shares and this is what we 

 

65 

dealt with.  On the debt structures, what have we done?  We have launched Mauritius as an 
International  Financial  Centre  in  March  this  year,  which  provides  diversification  of  our 
Financial  Services  Strategy.    So,  we  are  enhancing  Mauritius  as  a  regional  platform  of 
solutions for debt structures creating skilled  employment for our  youth. We are increasing 
sophistication  of  our  workforce  to  cater  for  those  debt  structures  investments  through  the 
Financial  Services  Institute  which  has  already  been  set  up,  already  in  place,  already 
operating. This will allow Mauritius as a based investment fund to operate widely.  We want 
them to become issues of CDOs (Collateralised Debt Obligations) and CLO (Collateralised 
Loan  Obligations) to outside investors seeking to have access to frontier market. We have 
also linked up the Stock Exchange of Mauritius with the National Stock Exchange of India to 
promote the MIFC as a Centre for listing debt instruments, derivatives, other securities and 
we are also improving on dual listings.  

 
We  are  now  getting  Asset  Managers  and  Fund  Managers  to  come  and  be  based  in 
Mauritius, do the fund  management work here  in Mauritius, create jobs in Mauritius.  So, 
they will be physically operating from here.  We are bearing in mind all the implication of 
BEPS (Based Erosion Profit Shifting) and, of course, we are implementing policies in that 
sense.   

Mauritius International Financial Centre is also becoming a pooling jurisdiction.  We 
are bringing in regional headquartering and also global headquartering to Mauritius, regional 
treasury activity as well.  There are firms which we have already discussed with during the 
missions that we have done and I can say now: Philips, Samsung, ZTE from China, Shoprite, 
the Mahendra Group from India.  They are all negotiating to basically come and set up the 
regional headquarters for Africa in Mauritius.   

Law firms! We have discussed with a number of law firms. I have stated that to the 
House before.  I can confirm to the House that we have genuine interest from Norton Rose, 
Herbert Smith, DLA Piper, Ozan, Nishith Desai Associates from India who want to set up 
their law firms in Mauritius.   

To remain at the forefront as a clean, transparent, compliant jurisdiction the FSC is 
working  to  set  up  its  online  KYC  system  to  facilitate  the  processing  licencing  so  that 
everything happens very quickly.  We have also diversified, Madam Speaker.  As the House 
is  aware  the  Captive  Insurance  Act  was  passed  in  December  last  year.    We  have  made 
progress.  We went to London; we discussed with Barclays UK.  Their clients were present.  

 

66 

Now, I can confirm to the House that Willis, one of the large insurance groups, has set up in 
Mauritius.    Marsh,  the  second  largest  in  worldwide  group  has  set  up  in  Mauritius;  Palm 
Captive. CIM Group in Mauritius has launched its own Captive Insurance side.  They have 
recruited people and it is operational now.  Hyperion is another one.  They are doing the same 
with Overseas Family Corporation. 

Now, Madam Speaker, I come to the second part which is in relation to what the hon. 
Leader  of  the  Opposition  mentioned  regarding  Brexit.  Brexit  is  an  opportunity  for  our 
Financial Services Sector… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, … 

Mr Bhadain:  This is action to be taken…. 

Madam Speaker: …I have given you ten minutes for this question.  It’s already ten 

minutes.  How long will you be? I’ll give you three more minutes, if you can wind up. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain:  I will, very quickly! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  Moody’s does not refer anything about Brexit! 

Mr Bhadain:  I will very quickly reply to that.  It is in relation to the question which 
has been asked because the Moody’s Report which the hon. Member is referring to is dated 
07 June.  Brexit happened on 23 June and now everything has changed because Moody’s has 
downgraded UK.  Moody’s has downgraded England also.   

So, Moody’s Report basically states in terms of what is happening to finances now. 
When we launched the Mauritius International Financial Centre in March, the Lord Mayor of 
London  was  present.    We  signed  an  agreement  with  London.    The  City  of  London  and 
Mauritius are promoting financial services together.  That has already been done.  That was 
prévoyant.   On 09 June this year, we went to London and we addressed 200 private equity 
firms and, I must say, Madam Speaker, that the response is in today’s newspaper –  

 ‘En Afrique Australe: Maurice, la plateforme financière préférée des professionnels’ 
– 

 

67 

“La juridiction mauricienne, en tant que plateforme financière, est appelée à devenir 
le  centre  offshore  préféré  de  la  région.  C’est  le  choix  exprimé  par  des  conseillers 
financiers indépendants dans le cadre d’une étude réalisée par l’assureur Providence 
Life. Au moins 60 % des 200 professionnels interrogés ont été en faveur de Maurice” 

And it goes on to quote – 

“Le Chief Executive of Providence Life, Austin Blair explique que la décision, sans 
précédent, du Royaume-Uni de quitter l’Union européenne, le 24 juin, a soulevé (…)” 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please, wind up!  I have given you ample time for 

you to explain. 

(Interruptions) 

I understand that the question is a leading question of national importance, so I have given 
you, at least, 15 minutes. 

Please, allow for questions!  Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not sure whether we are reading the 

same Report.  The Report from Moody’s is very clear, and I read – 

“The DTAA with India will weaken – will weaken! - an industry that contributes to 
approximately  9%  of  GDP  and  15%  in  net  foreign  inflows  annually.  Moody's 
estimates  that  the  DTAA  changes  with  India  could  curtail  net  financial  flows  by 
between 1% and 2% of GDP annually.” 

This  is  what  Moody’s  says!    And  my  question  was:  does  the  Government  agree  with  the 
analysis of Moody’s that the DTAA will have an impact on the offshore industry? Did the 
Government  carry  out  its  own  independent  survey  to  estimate  the  impact?    This  is  the 
question. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  when  the  hon.  Member  says  that  ‘it  will  weaken, 

weaken’, he reached ‘weaken’ too much. 

(Interruptions) 

The answer is in the  conclusion. You take one  part of what is quoted in a report and  you 
make a sensation out of it. Read the conclusion after the analysis! The conclusion says – 

 

68 

“We  estimate  that  recent  changes  to  the  DTAA  with  India  will  have  a  modest 
impact.” 

It’s  a  modest  impact.  It  goes  on  to  say  that  the  amended  DTAA  is  the  result  of  extended 
negotiations  and  any  inherent  risks  through  the  DTAA  has  already  been  taken  into 
consideration when they gave the B1 rating. Let’s not just say things! Let’s be patriotic as 
well! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, what Moody’s has stated is nothing else than confirm 
what IMF in Staff Report for 2015, Article IV Consultation stated in February 2015, and I 
quote – 

“Revision of the DTAA Treaty with India (…) could worsen Mauritius’ balance of 
payments position, lead to exchange rate pressure, a weakening of reserves, and rising 
inflation and external debt servicing costs.” 

So, this is what we are facing here, not only Moody’s, but also the IMF is saying so. So, my 
question  -  I  repeat  it  -  has  the  Government  done  a  serious  study  by  serious  economists  to 
analyse the impact which the Revision of the DTAA will have on the balance of payment, on 
the exchange rate, on all these things that have been mentioned in Moody’s and IMF? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  has  read  it  out,  it  says  ‘could’, 
‘could  worsen’.  It  didn’t  say  ‘did  worsen’,  meaning  that  these  are  issues  which  are  being 
looked  at.  This  Government  has  been  working  on  the  financial  services  side  like  no  other 
Government has worked before and this is proven by the Statistics Mauritius Report which 
came out this week. 

When you look at manufacturing, in 2014, contribution to GDP, it was 15.4%, now, it 
is 14.4. The second largest industry in Mauritius, Financial Services, was 11.9, this week, in 
2016, it’s 12.2%. It means we are doing things right. 

Now, what about the part relating to whether serious economists, serious people have 

looked at serious things? I will answer that when we have a serious Opposition. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Uteem! 

69 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, this is why… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! We are discussing serious matters! Allow the hon. Member… 

No remarks, hon. Bhadain! Please! 

Hon. Bhadain, please, calm down! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  why  I  had  addressed  the  question  to  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  We  are  talking  about  impact  on  the 
economy,  impact  that  Moody’s  Report  has  on  the  economy  and  one  of  the  things  that 
Moody’s highlights is the vulnerability of our banking sector because the Segment B Banks 
pay only 3% tax, so they have an over exposure in global business companies and Moody’s 
rings  the  alarm  bell  that  a  change  in  DTAA  would  affect  the  banking  sector,  again, 
confirming what has already been said before by the International Monetary Fund as far back 
as February 2016. So, I want to know again whether the Ministry has held consultation with 
the banking sector, with the Bank of Mauritius to see what are the risks to the Segment B 
Banking Sector. 

Mr Bhadain: There are no such risks, Madam Speaker. I will quote from the report 
itself,  what  the  hon.  Member  is  mentioning  about,  is  the  paragraph  which  says  there  is  a 
contingent liability risk because the assets are 3 times GDP, that’s in relation to the banking 
sector. But if the hon. Member would be serious and turn to the last page and if you look at 
the last page, the end note relating to this paragraph, and I am going to read it out to this 
House – 

“Mauritius is 3 times GDP.” 

But when you look at, for instance… 

 

70 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, I am sorry! 

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry! 

Mr Bhadain: When we look at Malta… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Please, calm down! 

Mr Bhadain: When we look at Malta, for instance, we are talking about… 

It’s in relation to the… 

6.5. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No! Order, please! Hon. Bhadain, just wind up! 

Mr Bhadain: I am answering the question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Please, because we have got other questions as well! 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, but I have to give the answer. It’s in the report. 

Madam Speaker: Please, but be brief! 

Mr Bhadain: What the hon. Member is mentioning is the banking sector because the 
figures, the assets are 3 times GDP, but if you look at Malta, it is 6.5 times GDP. If you look 
at Cyprus, it is 5 times GDP, if you look at Hong Kong, it is 8 times GDP and if you look at 
Luxembourg, it is 15 times GDP. We are just making sensation. That’s all. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you.  In his first reply, the hon. Minister has been very broad, 
including listing several multi-nationals wanting to invest in Mauritius. Now, may I ask him 
whether there have been concrete offers on behalf of Prudential and Old Mutual, which he 

 

71 

has, time and again, announced in this august Assembly, themselves wanting to invest again 
in Mauritius? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  Old  Mutual  is  already  operating  in  Mauritius  and 
many  other  names  that  have  been  mentioned  before  this  House  have  already  started 
operations in Mauritius and recruited people. Old Mutual is one of those. We also have Palm 
Captive, we also have Willis, we also have Marsh and local companies, the CIM Group, but 
with regard to Prudential, Prudential was one of the bidders for National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
which  I  have  stated  before.  The  offer  is  still  there,  we  are  still  in  contact  with  the  CEO 
Mantili and we will deal with that after we’ve repaid the Super Cash Back Gold people and 
the Bramer Asset people. We know what we are doing. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

BRITAM (KENYA) LTD. – SHARES – SALE 

(No.  B/692)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the sale of the shares of Britam (Kenya) Ltd., he will, for the 
benefit of the  House, obtain from the Financial  Services Commission, information as to if 
anyone has acted as adviser in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the fees/commissions paid 
thereto in Mauritius and/or in Kenya. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I will be very quick on this one. 

I am informed by the FSC that nobody has acted as adviser in relation to the sale of 
shares of Britam (Kenya) Ltd. The negotiations were conducted by the Special Administrator 
of BAI (Mauritius) Ltd. and its lawyers ENSafrica directly with the existing shareholders of 
Britam (Kenya). No fee or commission has been paid to any adviser whether in Mauritius 
and/or Kenya. 

Mr Uteem: Is the hon. Minister aware that BDO has been sending around information 
memorandum  stating  that  it  has  been  appointed  as  transaction  adviser  to  assist  in  the 
disposition of the business of Britam to potential acquirer, that is, in February 2016? 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  am  not  aware  of  what  has  been  sent,  but  I  know  that  transaction 
advisers have not been appointed because Britam shareholders have, basically, exercised their 
pre-emption  rights  and  said  that  they  will  buy  those  shares  themselves.  They  flew  to 
Mauritius, they had meetings with the FSC, Special Administrator, with myself and at the end 

 

72 

of the process they went back to Kenya and they  checked with their regulators what’s the 
process for them to acquire those shares. Those shares have been acquired, the money has 
already  been  obtained,  it  is  in  US  Dollars  sitting  in  the  bank  account  of  NPFL  to  be 
distributed to Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset people. 

Mr Uteem: Answering to a PNQ on 03 May 2016, the Minister stated that the Special 
Administrators have already signed with the existing shareholders of Britam (Kenya), for the 
sale of Britam (Kenya) shares, for an amount of Rs2.9 billion. So, may I know from the hon. 
Minister whether the selling price is still Rs2.9 billion or Rs2.6 billion, as has been reported 
in the press? 

Mr  Bhadain:  What  has  been  agreed,  Madam  Speaker,  is  Rs2.6  billion  to  be 
straightaway  and  Rs300  m.  is  conditional  upon  the  share  price  going  out.  So,  there  is  a 
potential  of  getting  Rs300  m.  more,  but  what  has  been  agreed  and  paid  to  date  is  Rs2.6 
billion. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

BANK OF MAURITIUS – BANKNOTES - REPLACEMENT 

(No.  B/693)  Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  and  Port 
Louis Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether in regard 
to the local currency, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, 
information  as  to  whether  there  is  a  project  for  changes  to  be  brought  thereto  and,  if  so, 
indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

reasons therefor; 

extent thereof, and 

total estimated costs thereof. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  kind  permission,  I  shall  reply  to 

Parliamentary Questions B/693 and B/705 together as they relate to the same subject matter. 

I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius that its Board of Directors was apprised on 
19 February 2016 about the decision of the Bank to launch a new family of banknotes and the 
setting up of a Banknote Design Committee. 

Furthermore, on 17 June 2016, the Bank of Mauritius issued a communiqué informing 
the public that it has been decided that the portraits of personalities on the existing banknotes 

 

73 

will  be  replaced  by  illustrative  elements  that  may  include  a  country’s  national  heritage, 
history, culture, endemic species of the Mauritian flora and fauna and distinctive landscapes. 

As to the reasons put forward by the Bank of Mauritius for the issue of the new family 
of banknotes, I am informed that the Bank considers that after 17 years, there is a need for a 
new family of banknotes to preserve the integrity of the currency, especially in a world where 
technological innovations have facilitated counterfeiting. Other reasons are the need to ensure 
the  supply  of  good  quality  banknotes  to  incorporate  the  latest  developments  in  banknote 
technology and security, to refresh the image of the currency as well as for economic reasons. 

The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  estimated  that  the  proposed  new  family  of  banknotes 

would cost around Rs600 m.  

Pursuant to section 36 of the Bank of Mauritius Act, currency notes to be issued are 

determined by the Central Bank after consultation with the Minister of Finance.  

I have already conveyed to the Bank of Mauritius that I do not support its proposal to 

issue a new family of banknotes. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  think  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  there  was  a  Bank  Design 
Committee that was set up and that came up with this brilliant idea. Can I know who chaired 
that Committee and who the members of that Bank Design Committee were? 

Mr Jugnauth: The Banknote Design Committee is chaired by Mrs Marjorie Heerah-
Pampusa  who  is  Assistant  Director  of  the  Financial  Market’s  Division  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius and comprises the following members –  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Mr Yves Chan Kam Lon; 
Mr Yacoob Ghanty; 
Mr Yvan Martial; 
Dr. Vijaya Teelock, and 
Mr Grooduth Daboo. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 

 

 

74 

ROAD ACCIDENTS – DISABLED PERSONS – SOCIAL ASSISTANCE 

(No. B/694) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
whether, in regard to the persons who have become disabled as a result of the road accidents 
that have occurred since January 2015 to date, she will state the number thereof who have 
applied for any form of social assistance from her Ministry. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that there is 
no  record  in  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
regarding persons who have become disabled as a result of road accidents for period January 
2015 to 01 July 2016 and who have applied for any form of social assistance. 

I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that, for the period January 2015 to 01 
July  2016,  189  cases  of  serious  road  accidents  have  been  reported  to  the  Police  whereby 
victims were admitted to hospital health institutions.  

In these circumstances, the persons calling at the Ministry of Social Security, National 
Solidarity and Reform Institutions normally apply for basic invalidity pension and/or social 
aid.  They  produce  medical  certificates  from  their  treating  doctor.  The  diagnosis  on  their 
medical  certificate  does  not  always  indicate  that  the  sustained  injury  has  been  caused 
specifically by road traffic accidents. 

Furthermore,  there  is  no  indication  of  the  date  and  time  of  accident  in  the  medical 
certificate issued by the doctor. If a specific list of persons who became disabled as a result of 
road accidents is to be drawn up the names of such persons and their identity card numbers 
must be made available to the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions for necessary verification to be done from the system at the level of the Ministry. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

EDUCATIONAL REFORM - SENIOR EDUCATIONAL ADVISOR - 

RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/695) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether  in  regard  to  the  proposed  recruitment  of  a  Senior  Educational 
Advisor under the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat to support the System-Wide 
Educational Reform and the Development of a Regulatory Framework for Higher Education 

 

75 

in Mauritius, including the Nine Year Continuous Basic Educational Reform Programme, she 
will state where matters stand. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  submitted  a  project 
proposal  for  technical  assistance  to  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  in  October  2015  for 
assisting us in the implementation of the Educational Reform Project. 

This request proposal for technical assistance was approved in January 2016 by the 
Commonwealth Secretariat. It involves the deputation of consultants which includes a Senior 
Educational Adviser as well as a Legislative Drafter for the purpose of supporting us in the 
drafting of the Higher Education Bill. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the Senior Educational Adviser, the selection process has 
been initiated at the level of the Commonwealth Secretariat in consultation with my Ministry 
and we are in the process of making the selection of the candidate for the post. The selection 
exercise will be completed shortly. 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you. We are on the eve, six months away from the beginning 
of the implementation of the Nine Year Schooling Programme. Are we going to be in time 
because we are talking about a major reform and the Adviser is not there, the Action Plan is 
not submitted? Are we going to be in time? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, let me inform the hon. Member that the 
person coming from the Commonwealth Secretariat is to assist us in the implementation of a 
project  which  is  spread  over  a  number  of  years  and  we  are  not  at  all  late  in  the 
implementation  process.  The  person  coming  would  be  assisting  us  and,  furthermore,  the 
Commonwealth Secretariat has been telling us that they would like to see the review in the 
curriculum that we have brought within our system and try to see how it can be used also as a 
model  for  other  countries  with  similar  background  taking  into  consideration  the  fourth 
Sustainable Development Goal which is based on Education. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Some time ago, I had a chance to question the hon. Minister above an 
Action Plan for the Nine Year Schooling Programme and the reply was that it is going to be 
submitted soon. May I ask whether this has been already done? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  talked  about  the 
whole reform project and I said that the document is ready and will be made public soon. As 

 

76 

far as the Action Plan is concerned, the Ministry has got eight implementation committees 
and they are working on the implementation in a phased manner. Now, we have logistics, we 
have the curriculum, we have got the assessment, all these different committees are working 
continuously. Now, there is no report as such that I will be submitting. This is a continuous 
work that is being done at the level of the Ministry. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

SCHOOLS – ACADEMIES – RESOURCE ALLOCATION 

(No. B/696) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether  in  regard  to  the  schools  which  will  be  transformed  into 
academies, under the Nine Year Continuous Basic Educational Reform Programme, she will 
state how parity in resource allocation will be maintained between the said academies and the 
existing regional colleges. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Nine  Years  Continuous  Basic 
Education Reform provides that each and every school, be it a regional one or an academy, 
has  to  be  subject  to  the  same  consideration  and  treatment  in  terms  of  resources  whether 
human, material or financial. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to reassure the House that the same policy in respect of parity 
of  resource  allocation  will  therefore  prevail  for  all  schools.  There  will  be  no  difference  in 
terms  of  staff  entitlement  and,  as  per  the  current  practice,  teaching  and  non-teaching  staff 
may be called upon to work in any secondary institution at a particular point in time. 

Madam Speaker, the principle of equal consideration to all schools will be maintained 
in  respect  of  grant  to  PTAs  and  other  forms  of  support  as  may  be  the  case  in  line  with 
priorities set by my Ministry irrespective of whether they are in respect of regional schools or 
academies. Hence, both regional schools and academies would be on a level playing field for 
the appropriation of resources such that each and every student is provided equal treatment in 
terms  of  learning  opportunities  and  prospects  for  their  future  development  and  career 
advancement. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

 

 

77 

TERTIARY EDUCATION – AUDIT & INSTITUTIONS 

(No. B/697) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Tertiary Education Commission, she will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

the composition of the Board of Management thereof; 

if an audit of the tertiary education sector has recently been carried out and, if 
so, indicate the main observations thereof and, if not, why not; 

the number of approved tertiary institutions as at to date, and  

since January 2015 to date, the names of the institutions in respect of which 
the licences have – 

(i)  

been revoked, and  

(ii)  

been issued. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Board  of  the  Tertiary  Education 
Commission has last been constituted in March 2015 with Mr Surendra Bissoondoyal as the 
Chairman  and  Mrs  Nema  Devi  Goorah,  Permanent  Secretary  at  my  Ministry  as  my 
representative on the Board. I am tabling the current composition of the Board. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commission  that  there  has  been  no  sector  wise  audit  of  the  tertiary  education  sector. 
However, the Tertiary Education Commission has carried out periodic academic audits at the 
University of Technology, Mauritius (UTM), the University of Mauritius, the MIE and the 
MGI in 2008, 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively.  

It is planning a second cycle of audit at the UTM as well as the first cycle of audit at 
the Open University of Mauritius and l’Université des Mascareignes in 2017. This is in line 
with section 4A of the Tertiary Education Commission Act which states that and I quote –  

“(1)  

In furtherance of its objects, the Commission shall- 

 (h)  

undertake  periodic  academic  audits  of  institutions  offering  post-
secondary education in Mauritius (…).” 

 

78 

Madam Speaker, as to part (c) of the question, I am further informed that today there 

are 54 registered tertiary education institutions which are operational.  

In  regard  to  part  (d)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  registration  of  the 
London Graduate School, as a tertiary educational institution, was revoked on 26 April 2016. 

As  to  part  (d)  (ii)  of  the  question,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  advised  that  since 
January 2015, five institutions have been granted registration to operate as Tertiary Education 
Institutions, and these are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Greenwich University Pakistan; 

Atlantis Business School; 

(iii)  African Leadership College; 

(iv)  Amity Global Business School, and  

(v) 

The Ceridian Learning Centre Ltd. 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Madam  Speaker,  can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many 
foreign students are currently studying in Mauritius and how are we progressing with the plan 
to make Mauritius a knowledge hub of reputation? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I am afraid I do not have this particular 

information as it is not related to the question. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  with  respect  to  education  institutions  which  were 
offering  courses  and  taking  money  from  the  public  when,  in  fact,  they  did  not  have  the 
necessary authorisation from India and elsewhere, can I know from the hon. Minister whether 
any legal action had been taken against these institutions by the TEC? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam Speaker, I would like to have exact information 
regarding  which  institution  in  particular  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  because  I  do  not 
have this particular information right now. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Some of these institutions have closed down.  Have there been any 
students  who  have  been  penalised  in  the  process  or  have  they  been  transferred  in  other 
intuitions to carry on their course? 

 

79 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam Speaker, we do not have any such record at the 
TEC regarding students who have been penalised.  Normally, when such things happen, the 
students are conveyed to other institutions. 

FOOTBALL - PROMOTION 

(No. B/698) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Semi-professional Football 
Project, he will state the - 

(a)  

(b)  

number of clubs currently benefitting from a subsidy thereunder, indicating 
the quantum thereof, and  

actions taken by his Ministry to promote football and to raise the standard of 
our national football team. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that there is no semi-
professional football project.  I presume that the  hon. Member is referring to the Mauritius 
Professional Football League (MPFL) project. Ten professional football teams form part of 
the MPFL and each of them is benefitting an annual grant of Rs1.2 m.  

As regards part (b) of the question, I would like to inform the House that my Ministry 
has taken a series of measures to further promote football and to raise the standard of our 
national football team. 

First, Government is financially supporting the MPFL project to the tune of Rs26 m. 

annually.   

Second, our Embassy in Berlin has approached the German authorities with a request 

for technical assistance.  

Third,  since  I  took  office  our  Écoles  de  Foot  which  were  not  operational  were 

reactivated. Action has already been initiated to increase the number of Écoles de Foot.  

Fourth, we are upgrading the Centre National de Formation François Blaquart (CNFF) 

and working in close collaboration with the MFA and activities have already started. 

Fifth,  Government  is  providing  financial  support  to  the  tune  of  Rs3  m.  for  the 

organisation of U17 COSAFA football competition from 21 to 31 July 2016.  

 

80 

Sixth,  together  with  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education,  we  will  be 
introducing  sports  in  schools  including  football  and  a  yearly  competition  among  schools, 
colleges and universities will be held. 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  may  agree  with  me  that  our 
national football team has not shined for quite a long time and there are many reasons for 
that.  Can I know from the hon. Minister what concrete action his Ministry is taking to really 
put the national football team up to international standard? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we have started to shine. Before 2015, we were ranked 

209th internationally and now, we are ranked 140. So, we have gained places.    

Secondly, we are putting everything in place, the École de Foot, so that we have the 
kids now who will be promoting.  My Ministry has also been working on scholarships which 
will be offered to these kids for their education as well as to promote sports. 

Mr Rughoobur: Can I ask the hon. Minister, since he mentions the collaboration of 
the  Ministry  of  Education,  whether  the  project  of  allowing  inhabitants  in  villages  to  use 
compounds of secondary schools is on or is it still under discussing at the Ministry? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The project has already started. The MoU has already been signed. 
All premises which are completely separate from the school compound have been opened. 
For those compounds which include the school compound, we are getting funds so that we 
can make the necessary  amendments and open it to the public.  So, it will be done in this 
financial year. 

   LE BATELAGE, SOUILLAC - LANDSLIDES - REMEDIAL WORKS 

(No. B/699) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management    whether,  in  regard  to  the 
works which ought to be urgently carried out under the supervision of the National Disaster 
Risk  Reduction  Management  Centre  at  place  called  “Batelage”  in  the  village  of  Souillac 
following landslides about eight months ago, he will state where matters stand. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 

Roopun): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this question.  

 

81 

Following a landslide which occurred on 23 December last at Le Batelage, Souillac, 
the Landslide Management Unit of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
in collaboration with the Road Development Authority, visited the site to take stock of the 
situation and carry out a preliminary risk assessment.  The services of experts from the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and of Korea Expressway Corporation (KEC) were 
also solicited to advise on the way forward.  The experts advised to conduct a geotechnical 
survey to determine the stability of the soil.  The RDA, in consultation with the Landslide 
Management Unit, is preparing the bidding documents for the appointment of a consultant to 
conduct the survey. In the light of the findings and recommendations of the survey, adequate 
remedial works will be undertaken on the site. 

Madam Speaker, in the meantime, on 01 June 2016, a site visit with all stakeholders 
was held at Le Batelage where a number of recommendations were made. In this connection, 
branches  of  the  la  Fourche  tree  have  been  trimmed  down  and  an  old  building  has  been 
demolished.  In addition, the RDA has awarded the contract for the erection of a retaining 
wall at a cost of Rs7.1 m. The works have started on 28 June and expected to be completed 
by mid-September.  Furthermore, in view of the sugar cane harvest, the Traffic Management 
and Road Safety Unit (TRMSU) has come up with a new temporary traffic scheme which 
now allows for two-way traffic at Le Batelage and the cancellation of the one-way scheme 
along La Fosse street.  The speed limit has been reduced to 40 km/hr. 

Dr.  Joomaye:    I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  National 
Disaster Risk Reduction Management Centre has carried out a survey on the whole southern 
coast where similar events can happen in order to act preventively in the future? 

Mr Roopun:  I believe that this question should be addressed to the hon. Minister of 

Environment because it concerns the whole region.  I am not aware of any such detail. 

PUBLIC & PRIVATE HEALTH INSTITUTIONS – MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE 

(No. B/700) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  cases  of  alleged 
medical  negligence  in  public  and  private  health  institutions,  he  will  state  if  Government 
proposes  to  establish  a  full-fledged  Medical  Tribunal  with  jurisdiction  to  inquire  thereinto 
and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

 

82 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, there is no Medical Tribunal set up for hearing alleged 

cases of medical negligence against public and private health institutions.   

As at present, there have been no complaints against any public health institution.  All 
complaints which are received at the Ministry were made against medical staff for alleged 
medical  negligence.  In  such  cases,  an  internal  enquiry  is  carried  and  if  shortcomings  are 
established, the cases are referred to the Medical Council, the Dental Council or the Nursing 
Council for further enquiry and further actions as required. 

Madam Speaker, with respect to private health institutions, four complaints have been 
received at the level of my Ministry over the last three years against them.  Most of the other 
cases,  around  30,  over  the  last  three  years  were  against  medical  staff  and  the  complainers 
were advised to refer the case to the Medical Council for further enquiry. 

Madam  Speaker,  under  the  Private  Health  Institutions  Act,  my  Ministry  grants 
licences to private health institutions which are renewed every year on terms and conditions 
which are spelt out in the law.  However, the Private Health Institutions Act is silent on the 
issue of alleged cases of medical negligence, but in cases of serious adverse reports against a 
private health institution, my Ministry considers not renewing the licence of that particular 
institution.    But  we  are  also  contemplating  the  need  to  legislate  in  order  to  set  up  a 
transparent  system  to  investigate  into  alleged  cases  of  medical  negligence  against  health 
institutions. In this regard, the Medical Council Act and the Private Health Institutions Act 
will need to be amended. The amendments which are being contemplated would be inter alia 
to the effect that prior to a private health institution admitting a patient, the latter would be 
informed of the cost estimates of the treatment to be given to him. In addition, the schedule of 
fees charged for respective health services or treatment in private health institutions would 
have to be displayed in order to allow the patient to make an informed decision. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister mentioned that the 
Ministry is looking into the possibility of bringing amendments. Can we know whether the 
consultations have already started with the office of the Attorney General or is it still at the 
Ministry of Health level? 

Mr Gayan: Well, there is a process of internal consultations and when we are ready 

with whatever we want to do, then the matter goes to the State Law Office. 

83 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you,  Madam. I would like to ask the hon. Minister if any case 
of  medical  negligence  in  any  private  institution  has  been  reported  and  the  license  of  that 
institution has been considered for non-renewal? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I have mentioned that there have been over the last three years four 
complaints which have been received, but most of the complaints were against a college of 
dentistry  and  there  is  another  one  regarding  a  private  clinic.  But  the  matter  is  under 
investigation. 

BAMBOUS VIRIEUX - FISHERMEN - GRIEVANCES 

(No.  B/701)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 
Outer Islands whether, in regard to the fishermen of Bambous Virieux, he will state if he is 
aware  of  the  grievances  thereof  claiming  that  the  activities  of  the  Ferme  Marine  de 
Mahebourg have negatively impacted on the marine ecosystem and on the issue/renewal of 
fishing cards thereto and, if so, indicate the actions taken by his Ministry, if any, in relation 
thereto. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to the first part of the question, yes, I am 
aware  of  the  grievances  of  the  fishermen  of  Bambous  Virieux.  In  fact,  the  Regroupman 
Pêcheur Bambous Virieux has made complaints to my Ministry in November 2015 to the fact 
that  the  activities  related  to  the  expansion  of  Ferme  Marine  de  Mahebourg  were  having 
negative impacts on the marine ecosystem. 

However, I wish to inform the House that the fish farming sites operated by the Ferme 
Marine de Mahebourg are monitored on a monthly basis by officers of my Ministry for water 
quality and marine ecosystem. I have to assure the House that, as at date, no adverse impacts 
have been observed.   

Regarding  the  issuing  or  renewal  of  fishermen’s  cards,  I  am  further  informed  that 
insofar  as  the  Ferme  Marine  de  Mahebourg  is  concerned,  there  is  no  problem  regarding 
fishermen cards.   

I also wish to inform the House that fishermen’s cards that have already been issued 
need not be renewed.  However, the fishermen have to report to the nearest Fisheries Post 

 

84 

between the 01st and 08th of every month for signing and stamping of the same in order to 
benefit from the bad weather allowance. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the 

representatives of the fishermen have claimed any compensation for loss of business. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, I don’t think that any fisherman has 

received any compensation for loss of business in Bambous Virieux. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has said that regularly the water 
around the fish farm is tested. Could he tell us what are the standards by which those tests are 
carried out. Whether those standards are provided for by any regulation or approved by any 
other international organisation and whether he could table the results of those tests, let us say 
for the past one year? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  samples  are  taken  to  Albion  Research  Centre 
where they are tested by Officers who are working according to the international norms and 
this is done every month and I said there is no adverse report, so far the water is concerned 
and also about the eco-system is concerned. 

Mr  Ramful:  I  will  go  along  the  same  line  as  hon.  Mohamed.  Has  there  been  any 
research  or  any  survey  that  has  been  carried  out  recently  as  regards  the  impact  of  the 
operation of the Ferme Marine and, if so, would the hon. Minister table a copy of the report? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, Ferme Marine has got its license after the EIA Report 
has been given to that company and so far, as I know, there is no adverse report in so far the 
water  and  the  eco-system  are  concerned.  I  know  that  people  are  complaining,  they  are 
looking  for  compensation,  but  the  Ferme  Marine  de  Mahebourg  is  working  and  we  are 
looking  after  everything  so  that  people  don’t  suffer,  especially  the  fishermen.  It  is  my 
Constituency, I am concerned about it, I give my word to the House that everything is done 
perfectly in transparency. 

Mr Mohamed: My good friend hon. Ramful and myself, we have both asked, on two 
separate  occasions  now,  the  table  report  or  to  table  the  test  results.  The  hon.  Minister  has 
managed to swim around that particular part of the issues that we are trying to reach at. Now, 
could he therefore address his mind to this particular issue, Madam Speaker, whether he will 

 

85 

consider, yes or no, to table those test results as he says they are carried out monthly and the 
report referred to by hon. Ramful. 

Mr Koonjoo: I have no problem on that Madam, thank you. 

HOSPITALS - ACCIDENT & EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS - SHIFT 

SYSTEM 

(No.  B/702)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the recent 
implementation  of  the  shift  system  in  the  accident  and  emergency  departments  of  public 
hospitals, he will state if – 

(a) 

(b) 

same would be extended to the other departments, and  

negotiations  have  resumed  with  the  medical  practitioners  with  a  view  to 
compensating them for loss of income as a result thereof. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the answer is yes. 
The shift system which  was introduced in April 2016 on a pilot basis in the Accident and 
Emergency Departments of all regional hospitals will be extended to other departments in the 
near future. 

The  reply  to  part  (b)  of  the  question  does  not  arise  as  there  is  no  loss  of  income 

involved with the implementation of the shift system. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Regarding  part  (a),  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 
whether the Consultant Physicians of the Medical Department and the Consultant Surgeons 
of the Surgical Department have been consulted and have they approved to move to the shift 
system in their respective departments? 

Mr Gayan: Well, the shift system for that category of doctors has not been addressed 

and I do not think they are part of the picture at the present. 

Dr. Joomaye: As far as loss of income is concerned, I would like to know from the 
hon.  Minister  about  the  Doctors  who  are  working  33  hours  weekly  in  the  Accident  and 
Emergency Department and now they will have to work 38 hours weekly. So, is there any 
compensation that will be given to them for the additional hours of work? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I think I need to set the record straight. Since the 
1998  PRB  report,  the  Doctors  have  been  considered  to  be  shift  workers  and  they  were 

 

86 

expected  to  work  for  40  hours.  Doctors  all  over  the  world,  in  India  France  and  in  the 
European Union, work a minimum of 48 hours. It just happened that because of a shortage of 
Doctors that particular provision of the PRB could not be implemented. So, technically the 
Doctors were earning more than they ought to have earned. Now, that we have the new PRB 
and they have all opted for the 40-hour week, this is the system that we are implementing. 

Madam Speaker: Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank  you Madam. Grievances do not concern the amount of hours 
that are being worked because, as everybody knows, Doctors work a lot in hospitals, may it 
be public or private, but they need to be paid according to the amount of hours that are being 
worked. 

Mr Gayan: Of course, they will be required to work 40 hours a week and anything 
that they work extra will be paid according to the PRB rates.  So, there is no question of loss 
of income or any doctor being deprived of his just earnings. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

HOSPITALS - PAEDIATRIC SURGERY - SURGEONS 

(No.  B/703)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the surgeons, 
he  will  state  the  number  thereof  on  the  permanent  establishment  of  his  Ministry  who  are 
specialized in paediatric surgery. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I am informed that presently there are five Consultants-
in-Charge  and  21  Specialists/Senior  Specialists  in  the  field  of  General  Surgery  on  the 
permanent and pensionable establishment of the Ministry. 

All  general  surgeons  are  trained  in  paediatric  surgery  during  their  medical  studies.  
They, therefore, treat routine paediatric surgical cases in their respective regional hospitals.  
There is one Senior Specialist in General Surgery who followed a sub-speciality training in 
paediatric surgery for a period of one and a half years in 2006 in Australia.  The surgeon is 
presently posted at Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital and deals with all complex paediatric surgical 
cases which are referred to him from all regional hospitals. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 

87 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to ask the hon. Minister if 
he is satisfied with the situation of having in the five regional hospitals only one paediatric 
surgeon in that sub-speciality, as he said, giving service for the whole island? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, of course, ideally, we need to have more. In fact, there 
was another doctor, but despite having been given all the facilities that he was asking for, he 
decided to leave the service. So, it is out of our hands.  But we have one paediatric surgeon 
who is looking after everything.  We have also said that, with the system that has changed 
with  the  overseas  treatment  of  patients,  we  are  getting  doctors  from  India  and  from  other 
parts of the world to come and look after these cases. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Minister said that the ideal 
situation is not to have the situation, if I understand him correctly, that we have today, but to 
have what we had recently, another doctor or more specialised mainly in paediatric surgery.  
What has the hon. Minister done, therefore, since he has referred to what the ideal situation is 
like?  What is he proposing to do or what is he doing in order to reach this ideal situation?  Is 
he at all proceeding to recruit internationally or locally and, if that is the case, when did the 
process start and when does the process normally end? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I have to say, again, that the legacy that I have inherited 
from the previous Government is very, very heavy, and what we are trying to do is to try to 
undo all the damages that were done in the past… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, please! 

Mr Gayan: This is why we have encouraged the doctors to go and specialise in these 
scarcity  areas,  and  we  have  also  advertised  internationally  to  get  paediatric  surgeons.  
Unfortunately,  despite  the  international  advertisement,  there  was  only  one  person  who 
applied, and that person was not qualified. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure the hon. Minister would admit 
that running a paediatric surgery unit with one person is impossible.  The main reason that the 

 

88 

surgeon  resigned  -  he  is  the  only  paediatric  surgeon  qualified  recognised  by  the  Medical 
Council of Mauritius - is because he was not able… 

Madam Speaker:  Ask your question! We are out of time! 

Dr. Joomaye: … to run a unit by himself and being on call for 365 days a year.  So, 
is the hon. Minister contemplating to open a unit and to call for un appel de candidatures 
international pour la chirurgie pédiatrique? 

Madam Speaker:  This question has been asked! 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  the  person  to  whom  the  hon.  Member  was  referring 
was, in fact, employed in the Ministry as paediatric surgeon.  He wanted to resign last year, 
and I wanted to know why he was resigning.  I called him to my office and he explained the 
problem and he wanted one operating theatre all to himself and he did not want to work under 
any other Regional Health Director.  I agreed to everything that he asked.  We gave him an 
operating  theatre  at  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Hospital.    We  improved  that  operating  theatre  by 
investing about Rs17 m., and then I heard that he was about to resign.  I asked why, and I was 
told  that  he  wanted  to  be  considered  as  a  consultant.    But  there  are  procedures  before 
becoming a consultant.  There are a number of years that you have to serve. The next I heard 
is  that  he  had  resigned,  he  was  working  in  a  private  clinic;  and  now  he  is  writing  to  the 
Ministry, asking the Ministry to send him patients. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

Mr Jugnauth rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

 

 

 

(4.17 p.m.) 

89 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

PAILLES & CAMP CHAPELON - FOOTBALL GROUNDS – LIGHTING 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker,  I wish to 
refer to the issue raised upon adjournment by the hon. Third Member for GRNW and Port 
Louis West at the sitting of 28 June 2016 regarding the defective lighting at Pailles and Camp 
Chapelon football grounds. 

I am informed by the Municipal City Council of Port Louis that the project for the 
lighting  of  these  football  grounds  was  undertaken  by  the  NDU  and  handed  over  to  the 
Council for maintenance.  However, the floodlights have been fixed at such heights where the 
aerial platform for the street lighting vehicle of the Council cannot have access for repairs.  

The Council, therefore, launched tenders for the hire of the lighting tower vehicles, so 
that  the  necessary  maintenance  of  the  lighting  facilities  at  these  football  grounds  could  be 
carried  out.    Unfortunately,  no  offer  was  received.    The  Council  then  decided  to  seek  the 
services of private contractors for these repairs.  The bidding exercise has been completed 
and the contract will be awarded soon. 

I wish to inform the House that the Council has also launched tenders for the purchase 
of  a  lorry  with  aerial  platform  of  about  13  metres  high,  which  could  be  used  to  carry  out 
repairs for the floodlights in football grounds. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION BILL 

(No. XIV of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  move  that  the 

Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill (No. XIV of 2016) be read a second time. 

The main aim of the Bill is to provide a legal framework for the establishment of an 
Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  to  investigate  into  complaints  made  against 

 

90 

Police Officers in the discharge of their duties, other than allegations of acts of corruption and 
money laundering offences. 

I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  establishment  of  an  Independent  Police 
Complaints Commission was highlighted in the  Government Programme 2015-2019, and  I 
am happy that we are today debating on this Bill for the setting up of such an institution. 

Madam Speaker, as the House may be aware, a Police Complaints Bureau was set up 
under the aegis of the Commissioner of Police in 1999, to investigate into cases of complaints 
against  the  Police,  mainly  from  the  general  public.  Prior  to  this,  all  cases  of  complaints 
against the Police were enquired into by the regular Police. 

However, both systems were perceived as being unsatisfactory because of the inherent 
risk of bias which may exist when Police Officers are called upon to enquire on their own 
colleagues. 

This perception was confirmed by the National Human Rights Commission as, in its 
Report of Year 2005, it stated that the system of Police enquiring on the Police has proved to 
be  unsatisfactory  and  recommended  that  another  mechanism,  independent  from  the  Police 
Department,  be  established  to  investigate  into  complaints  made  by  the  public  against  the 
Police with a view to removing any perception of partiality. 

It is one of the main reasons why the Protection of Human Rights Act was amended in 

2012. 

The Amended Act created within the National Human Rights Commission, a Police 
Complaints Division to investigate into complaints against the Police; as well as two other 
Divisions,  namely,  the  Human  Rights  Division  and  the  National  Preventive  Mechanism 
Division.  The other objective behind the creation of these three Divisions was to broaden the 
mandate  and  functions  of  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission  in  line  with  the 
international best practices. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  setting  up  of  the  Police  Complaints  Division  within  the 
National  Human  Rights  Commission in July  2013  the  Commission  has  received  a  total  of 
1,741 complaints. 

Out of these, 893 cases were transferred from the Complaints Investigation Bureau of 
the Police Department, which had ceased its operation in October 2013. As at 30 June 2016, 

 

91 

1,244 of these cases have been set aside as being unfounded or frivolous and 455 cases are 
still under investigation. 

However, although I do commend the significant number of cases which have been 
dealt with by the Police Complaints Division, I am of the view that the investigation in such 
cases should have been conducted and completed in a more prompt and expeditious manner, 
as any undue delay in these situations may give rise to the impression that there is reluctance 
to  investigate  or  there  is  connivance  between  investigators  and  Police  Officers  to  conceal 
wrongdoings. 

Moreover, any such delay could be construed as an abuse in the process, which may 
result  in  the  failure  to  bringing  the  offender  to  justice  despite  the  existence  of  evidence 
against him. 

On the other hand, delays in dealing with these cases would be very much unfair to 

the officers against whom unjustified or frivolous complaints may have been made. 

I am also of the view that the fact that three Divisions of the National Human Rights 
Commission are headed by a single Chairperson and share the same administrative staff is a 
major constraint in the early consideration and disposal of complaints that are channeled to 
each Division, including the Police Complaints Division. This has created a perception in the 
public  opinion  that  the  outcomes  of  cases  of  Police  complaints  which  are  reported  to  the 
National Human Rights Commission are not dealt with as expeditiously as they should have 
been and that the outcomes of the complaints are not communicated to the complainants in a 
timely manner. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  why  the  creation  of  an  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission, separate from the National Human Rights Commission, is high on the agenda 
of my Government. 

The Bill provides, therefore, for the replacement of the Police Complaints Division, as 
a Division of the National Human Rights Commission, by a full-fledged Independent Police 
Complaints Commission, separate from the National Human Rights Commission. 

Madam Speaker, let me now highlight some of the provisions of the Bill - 

Part  II  of  the  Bill  provides  for  the  establishment  of  the  Commission  which  will  be 
composed  of  a  Chairperson  and  two  other  members  with  the  relevant  qualifications  and 
experience. 

 

92 

The Chairperson shall be a person having served as a Judge of the Supreme Court or 
as Magistrate for not less than 10 years or having been a law practitioner for not less than 10 
years or has been  a Magistrate and a law practitioner for an aggregate period of not less than 
10 years. 

The  Members  other  than  the  Chairperson  shall  be  persons  having  knowledge  and 
experience in, inter alia, the field of human rights, law, sociology, psychiatry, psychology, 
and medicine or prison management. 

The Commission will also be served by a Secretary who shall be a public officer of 
the  rank  of  a  Deputy  Permanent  Secretary  and  such  other  administrative  staff  as  may  be 
required. 

Part III of the Bill regulates the functions and powers of the Commission as well as 
the procedures regarding the conduct of investigations and hearings which are the same as 
that of the current Police Complaints Division. 

Part  IV  of  the  Bill  makes  provisions  for  the  Commission  to  operate  as  a  body 

corporate. Specific clauses have accordingly been included, inter alia, as follows – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the protection of members and officers of the Commission from civil or 
criminal liability in the exercise of their powers or functions; 

the non-disclosure by members or officers of the Commission to any 
unauthorised persons, of information related to the work of the Commission; 

the setting up of a General Fund for the receipt and payment of funds by the 
Commission, and 

the preparation and submission of annual reports and audited statement of 
accounts on the operations of the Commission, to be laid before the National 
Assembly. 

Part  IV  also  provides  for  the  repeal  of  the  Police  Complaints  Act;  consequential 
amendments to the Protection of Human Rights Act; and the termination of the contract of 
the  Deputy  Chairperson  and  members  of  the  current  Police  Complaints  Division  upon  the 
Commencement of this Act. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  now  commend  the  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission 

Bill to the House. 

93 

 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Uteem rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 12 July 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTER RAISED 

(4.28 p.m.) 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madame  la 
présidente,  je  vous  remercie  de  m’accorder  la  parole  sur  nos  îles  Chagos,  enlevées 
illégalement au peuple mauricien. 

Je félicite aussi l’honorable Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth et aussi le Leader 
de l’opposition, l’honorable Paul Bérenger, pour leur lutte courageuse, datant des années 70, 
pour le retour des Chagos au patrimoine territorial mauricien. 

Je veux attirer l’attention du Premier ministre sur la nécessité : 

Premièrement, de mobiliser tout le pays contre cette illégalité flagrante dans le droit 

international en contravention avec plusieurs conventions internationales aux Chagos. 

Deuxièmement, de mobiliser les Chagossiens, à nos côtés, pour le retour à la légalité 

et à leur retour au Chagos sous le drapeau mauricien. 

 

94 

Troisièmement,  de  venir  de  l’avant  avec  un  plan  pour  l’avenir  des  Chagos  lorsque 
Maurice  aura  récupéré  ses  droits  sur  ces  îles  pour  faire  contrepoids  au  plan  de  Londres, 
préparé sans consultation avec Maurice pour le retour des Chagossiens. 

L’Article 111 de notre Constitution définit l’Etat mauricien comme suit, et il faut que 
cela ne soit jamais oublié, car l’oubli, Madame la présidente, est le plus sûr moyen de perdre 
à jamais cet archipel. Je cite cette section de notre Constitution ici – 

 “"Mauritius" includes – 

(a) 

the  Island  of  Mauritius,  Rodrigues,  Agalega,  Tromelin,  Cargados 
Carajos and the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia and any 
other island comprised in the State of Mauritius;” 

La Constitution ajoute à cela – 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

le territoire marin et l’espace aérien de l’archipel ; 

le plateau continental, et 

tous  les  endroits  ou  régions  désignés  par  des  règlements  faits  par  la 
Premier  ministre  sur  lesquels  Maurice  aura  ou  pourra  accueillir  des 
droits. 

En présentant la motion de remerciement au discours présidentiel, le 10 février 2015, 

j’avais préconisé, je cite – 

« (…)  une  politique  -  oui,  une  politique  -  qui  vise  la  récupération  de  nos  îles 
illégalement occupées de Tromelin et des Chagos. » 

Nous  avons  une  coalition  d’unité  nationale  de  tous  les  partis  dans  cette  Chambre  sur  la 
nécessité de convaincre les pays concernés qu’ils n’ont rien à perdre, mais tout à gagner s’ils 
respectent  les  nombreuses  résolutions  de  l’ONU  dans  le  droit  international  qui  accorde  la 
souveraineté  à  Maurice  sur  la  totalité  de  son  patrimoine  territorial.  Maurice  n’a  pas  été 
totalement décolonisée et ne le sera que le jour où nos îles nous auront été rendues.  

L’honorable  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  avait,  dès  qu’il  avait  pris  le 
pouvoir pour la première fois en 1982, fait des Chagos une de ses grandes priorités. Il n’a 
jamais fléchi, il n’a jamais faibli. Il a derrière lui tous les partis politiques parlementaires sur 
une même plateforme pour continuer la lutte. Je fais appel à tous les partis dans et en dehors 

 

95 

de cette Chambre et à toute la population de soutenir l’effort pour récupérer les Chagos et ne 
jamais oublier nos droits légaux de souveraineté. 

Nous  sommes  à  moins  de  six  mois  d’un  accord  entre  Londres  et  Washington  pour 
prolonger l’occupation étrangère de 20 ans après déjà un demi-siècle d’une telle occupation. 
Londres et Washington savent que Maurice et ses représentants qui sont dans cette Chambre, 
ne sont pas contre la base militaire américaine aux Chagos.  

Nous ne sommes pas hostiles, Madame la présidente, parce que la Grande Bretagne et 
les États-Unis sont des pays amis depuis des siècles et rien n’y changera. Nous voulons être 
inclus dans les discussions sur les conditions d’une nouvelle concession sur Diego Garcia à 
nos amis américains. Or, l’Angleterre nie notre souveraineté et nos droits qu’elle nous avait 
garantis  dans  un  undertaking  signé  en  1965  sur  l’archipel  et  la  mer  environnante.  Notre 
souveraineté nous est niée alors que sur les sept atolls et une soixantaine d’îles que comptent 
les Chagos, seule Diego Garcia est jugée nécessaire et utilisée for defence purposes, le reste 
étant négligé et abandonné à des touristes de passage qui naviguent les mers et polluent les 
îles abandonnées. 

Maurice a pourtant gagné! Maurice a pourtant gagné son procès intenté par l’ancien 
gouvernement,  soutenu  avec  compétence  par  l’ex-Attorney-General    et  le  DPP  et  cela  à 
l’unanimité des juges du tribunal international du droit de la mer. Ces juges ont trouvé que 
Londres ne respecte pas la United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea. Il faut que cette 
Chambre se rappelle la conclusion suivante de ce jugement. Je cite ici le jugement prononcé 
le 18 juin 2015 où le Tribunal international du droit de la Mer (ITLOS), dans le procès intenté 
en 2010 par l’État mauricien aux Britanniques a trouvé –  

“(i) 

 (ii) 

(iii) 

That  the  United  Kingdom’s  undertaking  to  ensure  that  fishing  rights  in  the 
Chagos  Archipelago  would  remain  available  to  Mauritius  “as  far  as 
practicable” is legally binding insofar as it relates to the territorial sea; 

that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to 
Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally binding, and 

that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to reserve the benefit of any minerals 
or oil discovered in or near the Chagos Archipelago for Mauritius is legally 
binding.  

 

96 

Declares  unanimously  that  in  establishing  the  MPA  surrounding  the  Chagos 
Archipelago, the United Kingdom breached its obligations under Articles 2 (3), 56 (2) 
and 1944 of the Convention.” 

Cela veut dire que l’Angleterre n’a pas respecté plusieurs undertakings qu’elle avait 
signés  avec  Maurice  en  1965.  Ce  ne  sont  pas  les  seuls  manquements.  Comme  l’a  dit  le 
Premier ministre le 17 mai dans cette même Chambre, il y a eu plusieurs infractions en droit 
international,  notamment  des  quatre  résolutions  et  d’une  convention  suivante  votée  par 
l’Assemblée générale des Nations Unies. La United Nations Convention on the Law of the 
Sea du 10 décembre 1982, résolutions numéro 1514 du 14 décembre 1960, numéro 2066 du 
16  décembre  1965,  numéro  2232  du  20  décembre  1966  et  numéro  2537  du  19  décembre 
1967. Ces résolutions et la Convention du droit de la mer, Madame la présidente, font partie 
du droit international. 

J’attire l’attention du Premier ministre sur le fait que plusieurs autres conventions et 
lois  internationales  n’ont  pas  été  respectées.  Le  grand  juriste  Britannique,  Sir  Geoffrey 
Robertson,  QC, a écrit dans l’University of Western Australia Review et déclaré aux médias 
anglais  et  mauriciens  qu’il  n’y  a  aucun  doute  sur  la  souveraineté  de  Maurice  et  que  les 
Chagos sont un trou noir d’inégalité. Il parle de colonial dispossession, unlawful severance of 
the Chagos Islands et de torture. Il explique que les faits indiquent ‘that the UK’s claim to 
sovereignty  over  the  Chagos  Islands  is  weaker  than  that  of  Mauritius’.  Il  ajoute  plusieurs 
autres violations, violations of international law que Londres has ratified but the US has not, 
for example, la Convention de Bâle sur le contrôle des mouvements transfrontières de déchets 
dangereux et de leur élimination, la Convention sur l’accès à l’information, la participation 
du public au processus décisionnel et l’accès à la justice en matière d’environnement et la 
Convention sur la diversité biologique et le protocole de Kyoto. 

Sir Geoffrey Robertson ajoute: ‘such omissions suggest a determined policy to protect 
the  Chagos  Islands  from  the  operation  of  international  law.’  Des  autorités  internationales 
parlent d’autres infractions à des conventions suivantes signées par l’Angleterre et Maurice et 
non  pas  les  États-Unis :  Dublin  Convention  on  Cluster  Munitions,  30  mai  2008 ;  Ottawa 
Landmine Ban Convention, 18 septembre 1997. Cela fait, en tout, une dizaine de conventions 
dans le droit international qui ne seraient pas respectées aux Chagos. C’est beaucoup ! Je suis 
donc confiante que Maurice gagnera devant la Cour internationale de justice. 

 

97 

Je conclus en rappelant au Premier ministre que les Chagossiens sont très divisés par 
rapport  à  la  souveraineté  mauricienne  et  à  ce  que  ferait  Maurice  quand  nous  récupérerons 
notre  souveraineté  parce  qu’ils  sont  très  peu  informés  et  certaines  personnes,  hostiles  à  la 
souveraineté  mauricienne,  en  profitent.  Il  y  a  beaucoup  de  Chagossiens  dans  ma 
circonscription  et  ce  sont  des  citoyens  fidèles  au  drapeau  national  mais  ils  pourraient  être 
vulnérables à certaines pressions de l’étranger.  

Ce que je conseillerais au Premier ministre et au Leader de l’Opposition ainsi qu’aux 
autres  leaders  au  sein  de  cette  Chambre  c’est  de  s’unir  et  de  s’adresser  directement  aux 
Chagossiens,  qu’on  leur  explique  qu’ils  pourront  retourner  dans  leur  île  sous  le  drapeau 
mauricien, qu’on développera ces îles avec l’agro-industrie, des cocotiers, qu’ils exporteront 
leurs  produits  vers  Maurice  pour  remplacer  les  importations  mauriciennes,  de  fibres  de 
cocotiers  et de l’huile de coco, qu’on développera la pêche et le tourisme écologique, que 
nous acceptons qu’ils travaillent à la base américaine et que les Chagos auront une assemblée 
locale  élue.  Il  nous  faut  un  projet  social  et  économique  durable  pour  les  Chagos.  Nous 
convaincrons  mieux 
justice  que  Maurice  assumera  ses 
la  Cour 
responsabilités d’État souverain. 

internationale  de 

Je vous remercie, Madame la présidente et je remercie tous les parlementaires pour 

m’avoir écouté. Merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister! 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for her concern on 

the Chagos Archipelago and the plight of the Chagossians.  

I agree hundred percent with her that all Mauritians as a nation should be united in 
this struggle to get our sovereignty of our territory so that our independence be completed. 
But  she  has  raised  so  many  points.  As  the  issue  she  has  raised  has  been  addressed  in  the 
Private Notice Question this morning, I hope she has been reassured and maybe I shall ask 
her to come and support me as a Legal Adviser… 

(Interruptions) 

… in the struggle.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

98 

At 4.43 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 12 July 2016 at 

11.30 a.m.  

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

VESSEL HSIN CHUN NO. 16 – MAURITIAN TERRITORY – 

AUTHORISATION TO LEAVE 

(No. B/671) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the vessel named Hsin Chun 
No.  16,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to the circumstances in which it unlawfully left the Mauritian territory on or 
about 15 June 2016, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

if the identity of the person who issued the authorisation thereto to leave, if 
any, has been established, and 
the actions, if any, taken against the Coast Guards who were on duty at the 
material time. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that Fishing Vessel Hsin Chun 
No. 16 has never been in the custody of the National Coast Guard.  According to information 
obtained from the Mauritius Ports Authority, the vessel, flying Taiwanese flag, called at Port 
Louis on 08 May 2014 with a crew of 30 persons for the purpose of unloading fish cargo and 
loading bunker.  After completion of the operation, the crew members left Mauritius and the 
vessel was abandoned in the Port. 

I  am  further  informed  that  on16  June  2014,  the  vessel  was  subject  to  a  “Saisie 
Conservatoire”  issued  by  the  Supreme  Court,  following  an  application  made  by  Baharia 
Security  System  &  Services.    However,  no  action  could  be  taken  for  the  execution  of  the 
“Saisie Conservatoire” as the vessel was abandoned.  The vessel thus remained idle in the 
Port. 

In  November  2015,  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  issued  a  public  Notice  under 
Section 32 (3) (5) of the Ports Act 1998 informing that the Port Master was in the process of 
disposing  the  vessel,  and  inviting  any  person  likely  to  be  affected  to  make  a  written 
representation to the Mauritius Ports Authority.  Subsequently, the local agent of the vessel, 

 

99 

Messrs Mercor Shipping Ltd made a representation and informed that the owner intended to 
carry out repairs to the vessel. 

In May this year, the owner of the vessel came back to Mauritius and effected repairs 
to the vessel.  During the same period, on 13 May 2016, Bahria Security System & Services 
filed  a  fresh  application  for  a  “Saisie  Revendication”  to  the  Supreme  Court,  which  was 
authorised.  However, following the repair works, on 29 May 2016, the owner attempted to 
move the vessel out of the port without prior authorisation of the Mauritius Ports Authority.  
The National Coast Guard was informed thereof and a team managed to bring the vessel back 
to  Port  Louis  Harbour.    Thereafter,  on  07  June  2016,  the  vessel  Master  was  fined  by  the 
District Magistrate of Port Louis, for the following offences – 

(i) 

(ii) 

leaving Port without the direction of the Port Master; 

failing to stop upon being hailed by a vessel of the National Coast Guard, and 

(iii) 

failing to report to the Immigration Officer whilst leaving Mauritius. 

On  14  June  2016,  the  Supreme  Court  waived  the  “Saisie  Revendication”.    On  the 
same day, the Mauritius Revenue Authority issued Certificate of Clearance in respect of the 
fishing  vessel  and  the  owner  also  settled  all  his  dues  to  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority 
amounting to Rs1.3 m. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Mauritius Ports Authority 
that on 15 June 2016, the owner of the vessel requested and obtained permission from the 
Port Master, for an engine trial.  The National Coast Guard was informed accordingly.  The 
vessel left the port for the trial at about 17.05 hrs on that day, and was supposed to return to 
the port after a few hours.  However, she failed to come back. 

I am further informed that the matter has been referred to the CCID for enquiry as the 
ship’s crew did not clear immigration formalities.  The enquiry into the circumstances which 
led to the ship leaving the Mauritian territory is in progress. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that no action is being envisaged, 
so  far,  against  any  officer  of  the  National  Coast  Guard  as  the  vessel  was  not  under  the 
custody of the National Coast Guard. 

 

 

 

100 

BANK OF MAURITIUS - BANK NOTES  - ISSUE 

(No. B/705) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the decision 
taken by the Bank of Mauritius to issue new bank notes, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) reasons therefor;  
(b) date on which the Board of Directors took the said decision, and  
(c) estimated cost of the project for the issue of new bank notes. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/693) 

 

NATIONAL COLLEGES - ACADEMIES 

(No. B/706) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Nine Year Basic Continuous Schooling Programme, she 
will state the number of State Owned Colleges and Bureau d’Education Catholique Colleges 
respectively which will be converted into Academies. 

Reply:  Twelve  National  Colleges  have  been  identified  to  become  Academies,  a 
number  that  we  at  the  Ministry  consider  to  be  adequate.  All  other  State-owned  secondary 
schools will remain as Regional Secondary Schools for the purpose of admission to Grade 7. 
As regards Colleges operating under the aegis of BEC, let me inform the House that, 
in  the  course  of  earlier  consultations,  the  BEC  and  other  private  colleges  were  invited  to 
express their interest in transforming one or two secondary schools into Academies. 

BEC  has  indicated  that  it  could  possibly  favourably  consider  doing  that  but  in  due 
time. Up to now, no proposal has as yet been received. Should they come forward with such a 
proposal, due consideration will be given by the Ministry. 

 

SOUTH WEST COAST - PROTECTED MARINE AREA PROJECT   

(No. B/707) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, 
the  proposed  Protected  Marine  Area  Project  proposed  for 
implementation on the west coast by the Mauritius Marine Conversion Society, he will state 
the outcome of the feasibility study carried out in connection therewith. 

in  regard 

to 

 

101 

Reply: I am informed that a feasibility study for the setting up of a Marine Protected 
Area  in  the  South  West  Coast  of  Mauritius  was  carried  out  for  the  Mauritius  Marine 
Conservation Society by an independent consultant from Reunion Island in 2010. 

The  study  aimed  at  providing  recommendations  on  the  creation  of  the  Marine 

Protected Area. 

The outcome of the study showed that it was feasible to create the Marine Protected 

Area in the South West Coast of Mauritius.  

However, the implementation of the project will have to be carefully looked into after 
taking into account the various possible implications in terms of social and economic impacts 
of  the  project  on  the  coastal  users,  tourist  operators,  fishermen  community  and  other 
stakeholders of the region. 

Moreover, within this area of the south west coast, there are prescribed fish farming 

zones/sites for Aquaculture development under the Aquaculture Master Plan. 

GRSE, GRAND GAUBE AND TROU D’EAU DOUCE - MARINE 

RANCHING PROGRAMME 

(No. B/708) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Marine  Ranching  Programme  in  Grande  Rivière  Sud  Est,  Grand 
Gaube and Trou D’eau Douce, he will state the commercial success or failure thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  Marine  Ranching  Programme  refers  to  the 
enhancement of fish stocks in the lagoon through the release of fingerlings or juveniles of 
different commercial species of fish with a view to increasing fish production. 

My Ministry is successfully implementing this project and each year some one million 
fingerlings  of  guêule  pave  and  cordonnier  are  released  at  selected  sites  in  the  lagoon, 
including  Grand  Gaube,  Trou  d’Eau  Douce,  Grand  River  South  East  and  Quatres  Soeurs 
regions. 

Moreover,  with  respect  to  aquaculture  in  floating  cages,  I  wish  to  inform  the 
House that floating fish cages were placed at Grand Gaube, Trou d’Eau Douce and Grand 
River South East and Quatres Soeurs regions on a pilot basis.  

At Grand River South East and Quatre Soeurs, 7 fish cages were placed and managed 
by  fishermen  cooperative  societies  whereby  about  1.2  tonnes  of  fish  have  been  harvested 
during the last two years and sold to members of the public at a low price. 

 

102 

At Grand Gaube and Trou d’Eau Douce, one floating fish cage was placed at each of 
the  sites.  However,  after  the  first  harvest  of  fish,  the  two  fishermen  cooperative  societies 
ceased their operations and my Ministry has re-allocated both the floating cages to two other 
fishermen cooperative societies.   

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST - NHDC HOUSING ESTATES – SEIZED 

HOUSING UNIT 

(No. B/709) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to the NHDC 
Housing Estates in Constituency No. 1, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
NHDC Company Ltd., information as to if seized houses are available thereat, indicating the 
prescribed procedure for the acquisition thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC) that 
there is presently no seized housing unit available for sale within the NHDC Housing Estates 
located in Constituency Number one. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  procedures  for  seizure  and  sale  of  a  NHDC 

Housing Unit are governed by the Sale of Immoveable Property Act.  

The defaulters are given ample time and facilities to make the necessary arrangements 
to  settle  their  arrears.  It  is  only  as  a  last  recourse  that  the  housing  units  are  seized  by  the 
NHDC and referred to  Court for sale by levy.  The NHDC also participates in the bidding 
process in order to safeguard its financial interests.  

Once the NHDC has repossessed the housing unit, it starts procedures for the resale of 
the unit to eligible applicants. The list of seized housing units is posted on the website of the 
NHDC and these houses are allocated according to the following criteria - 

(a) the applicant should not be owner of a house or of a residential plot of land; 
(b) the applicant should have the repayment capacity to service the mortgage debt for 

the purchase of the house, and 

(c) the applicant should be able to make a deposit of at least 10% of the selling price. 

 

LA TOUR KOENIG - NHDC HOUSING ESTATE - RENOVATION 

(No. B/710) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to the NHDC 
Housing  Estate  in  La  Tour  Koenig,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
NHDC Ltd., information as to if consideration will be given for the – 

 

103 

(a) realization of landscaping  works thereat on  completion of the  renovation works 
being carried out of the building and structure thereof, indicating if a maintenance 
plan has been worked out therefor, and  

(b) renovation of the commercial complex found thereat. 
Reply:  I am informed that the National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC) is 
 
presently undertaking rehabilitation works at La Tour Koenig Malaysian 1 Housing Estate, 
which include repairs to the structural elements of the housing blocks, repairs to cracks and 
spalled  concrete  externally,  and  painting  and  waterproofing  treatment  to  external  wall 
surfaces.  

As regards part (a) of the question, I am informed by the NHDC that the contract for 
the rehabilitation works also includes the reinstatement of the green areas disturbed as a result 
of the execution of the works. However, the maintenance of the green areas and buildings 
rests with the Syndics of the Housing Estate. It is to be noted that Government contributes 
Rs200  monthly  per  housing  unit  to  all  Syndics  of  the  NHDC  Housing  Estates  for  the 
maintenance and upkeep of the common areas. This amounts to some Rs2.4 m. annually for 
the La Tour Koenig Malaysian I Housing Estate. 

Notwithstanding the above, the beneficiaries of NHDC Housing Units who become 
full-fledged owners upon the signature of their deeds of sale should maintain their housing 
units as well as upkeep the common areas through their Syndics. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the NHDC that the 73 shop 
owners  at  La  Tour  Koenig  Commercial  Complex  have  set  up  a  ‘Syndicat  des 
Copropriétaires’,  named  Syndicat  des  Copropriétaires  de  La  Tour  Koenig  Center,  for  the 
maintenance  and  renovation  of  the  common  areas  of  the  complex.  Thus,  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  ‘Syndicat  des  Copropriétaires’  to  carry  out  any  renovation  works 
thereat. 
 

POINTE AUX SABLES - BEACHES – RENOVATION & MAINTENANCE 
(No. B/711) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Pointe aux Sables Public Beaches 
which do not fall within the purview of the Beach Authority, he will state if consideration 
will be given for - 

(a) projects for the renovation thereof to be budgeted for implementation during the 

next financial year, and  

 

104 

(b) vesting  thereof  within  the  purview  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 

Development, and Disaster and Beach Management for the maintenance thereof. 

Reply:    As  the  House  is  aware,  all  proclaimed  public  beaches  are  managed  and 
maintained  by  the  Beach  Authority  whereas  other  beaches  which  consist  of  Pas 
Géométriques are under the control of the Ministry of Housing and Lands.  However, there is 
no clarity as to which authority should be responsible for the cleaning and maintenance of 
these beaches. 

I have taken note of the proposal of the hon. Member and shall invite my colleague 
the  Vice  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  to  convene  a  meeting  with  all 
stakeholders concerned with a view to addressing this issue. 

CENTRAL MARKET - UPGRADING 

(No. A/27) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the old building of 
the Central Market, in Port Louis, he will state if he is aware of the bad and derelict state 
thereof, of the unhygienic conditions prevailing thereat with the presence of stray dogs and 
cats and the proliferation of rats thereat and, if so, will he, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as to if consideration will be given for 
a complete upgrading and refurbishment thereof and, if so, indicate when and, if not, why 
not.  

Reply: I am informed by the Municipal City Council of Port Louis that – 
(i) 

the lower part of the building which houses the Meat and Fish Shop is old but 
not in a derelict state; 
the Poultry Section was completely renovated five years ago at the cost of Rs2 
m.; 
painting and minor works have been carried out at the Beef and Pork Sections 
last year; 
the  toilet  blocks  at  the  Beef  and  Fish/Goat  Section  have  recently  been 
completely renovated; 
regular cleaning, washing of the floor and flushing of drains are carried out by 
a permanent team in order to maintain hygienic conditions; 
there are no stray dogs in the compound as well as in the market premises and 
cats found roaming are chased by the personnel posted thereat, and 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

105 

 

(vii) 

deratisation  is  carried  out  on  a  weekly  basis  by  the  contractor  appointed  by 
Council and pulverisation of insecticide is done by an in-house team in order 
to prevent infestation of insects. 

I am further informed that the Council is in favour of the complete upgrading of the 

market, but funds have not yet been identified for this purpose. 

 

SAINT FRANÇOIS XAVIER REGION – ROAD SAFETY 

(No. A/28) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in 
regard the Saint François Xavier region, in Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain  from  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit,  information  as  to  if  it  is  in 
presence of a letter dated 15 June 2016 sent by the Defenders Social and Welfare Association 
requesting  for  the  conversion  of  several  streets  thereof  into  one-way  streets  due  to  their 
narrowness and, if so, indicate if consideration will be given thereto and, if not, why not.   

 

Reply:    The  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  (TMRSU)  has  in  fact 
received a correspondence from “Defenders Social and Welfare Association” dated 15 June 
2016  where  a  request  has  been  made  to  convert  a  number  of  roads  in  the  Saint  Francois 
Xavier Region into one-way.  

The “Defenders Social and Welfare Association” have requested that Velore Street, 
Little Bridge Street, Calicut Street and Maharatta Street be converted into one-way as these 
streets are actually relatively narrow.  However, these streets are essentially residential access 
roads with low volume of traffic.  

One-way street system is more suitable for roads carrying a significant volume of traffic 
with high proportion of vehicles passing through the road towards other destinations.  It is 
worth  pointing  out  that  one-  way  roads  in  residential  areas  have  certain  inconveniences, 
amongst the following - 

(i)  Residents have to travel longer routes to and from their residences; 
(ii)  Vehicles  will  be  compelled  to  use  certain  roads,  which  otherwise  they  would  have 

avoided; 

 

106 

(iii)  Traffic which would have been distributed on a number of roads, will henceforth be 
concentrated on the one-way roads. This increase in volume could result in other traffic 
problems; and  

(iv)  Vehicles tend to speed in one-way roads, giving rise to other road safety problems. 

One  of  the  problem  mentioned  in  the  letter  from  “Defenders  Social  and  Welfare 
Association”  is  that  when  car  owners  park  their  vehicles  in  front  of  their  residence,  this 
renders access difficult for other vehicles.   However, this problem will not be resolved with 
the one-way system as vehicles will still have to pass parked vehicles. Normally the problem 
of  obstruction  caused  by  parked  vehicles  is  addressed  by  parking  prohibition,  that  is,  by 
painting double yellow lines.  

In view of the above implications all factors will have to be carefully studied before 
recommending  any  sustainable  measure  taking  into  consideration  the  main  aspect  of  road 
safety for all road users. 

Meanwhile a preliminary survey has already been carried out for the proposed one-
way  scheme  at  the  requested  location.    However,  in  order  to  provide  a  more  effective 
network,  the  proposed  one-way  scheme  has  to  be  extended  to  other  adjoining  roads.  The 
approval  of  the  residents  and  the  road  users  are  required  prior  to  implementation.  The 
Defenders  Social  and  Welfare  Association  will  have  to  submit  a  signed  petition  from  the 
inhabitants of the region concerning the proposed scheme. 

The applicant will be accordingly informed. 
 

ROUTE DES PAMPLEMOUSSES, MILITARY ROAD, BERNARDIN DE 

SAINT PIERRE STREET - TRAFFIC CONGESTIONS 

(No. A/29) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in 
regard to the junctions at the Route des Pamplemousses and the Military Road and the Route 
des Pamplemousses and the Bernardin de Saint Pierre Street, in Port Louis, he will state if he 
is aware of acute traffic congestions occurring thereat during peak hours and, if so, indicate if 
– 

(a) urgent remedial traffic measures will be taken in relation thereto, and  
(b)  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  provision  of  a  new  second  access  road  to 
Vallée  des  Prêtres  having  regard  to  the  increasing  number  of  vehicles  in  the 
regions and, if so, when and, if not, why not.  

 

107 

Reply:  The congestion on Pamplemousses Road is a local congestion, but its main 
causes are external. It is a case where congestion is triggered at “micro level”, that is, on a 
local  road  and  driven  at  the  “macro  level”  by  factors  that  contribute  to  the  causation  and 
severity of congestion.   

The movement of people of all categories including school children, factory workers, 
office workers, private businesses and goods vehicles occur at the same time, resulting in an 
excessive travel demand from all categories of road users. This inevitably results in congested 
roads as road space becomes saturated. 

Pamplemousses Road forms part of the classified road B32 and is a main route for 
traffic from the North entering and leaving Port Louis.  Consequently, during peak hours, and 
especially  during  the  morning  peak  hours,  there  is  a  high  volume  of  traffic  on  this  road, 
which causes traffic congestion.  

Furthermore,  Pamplemousses  Road  is  a  very  densely  built-up  area  with  mixed 
commercial and residential buildings, but with a predominance of commercial activities. The 
dense commercial activities generate significant volume of local traffic which adds up to the 
already  high  volume  of  passing  traffic.    This  has  the  effect  of  worsening  the  traffic 
conditions thereat. 

Part of the vehicles from the North also uses Military Road to accede and leave Port 
Louis.  In addition, the Military Road has a high density of residential buildings and there is 
also a market fair along the road which is not far from its junction with the Pamplemousses 
Road. Consequently, the local traffic generated is relatively high. Resulting in the junction of 
Pamplemousses Road/Military Road operating at over capacity conditions. 

The Bernardin de St Pierre Street which links with Pamplemousses Road is the main 
access to the Vallee des Pretres region.  Bernardin de  St Pierre Street is a classified Road 
(B143) and the responsible highway authority is the Road Development Authority(RDA).  As 
such,  it  carries  a  high  volume  of  traffic  which  has  to  go  through  the  junction  with  the 
Pamplemousses Road.  
(a) 

The  following  immediate  measures  are  recommended  with  a  view  to  reduce  traffic 
congestion  along  Route  des  Pamplemousses  near  its  junction  with  Bernardin  de  St 
Pierre Road - 
(i) 

Setting up of a one-way scheme along part of Military Road and Sirdars Street 
at Cite Martial.  This measure will reduce traffic conflicts at the busy  cross 
junction of Route des Pamplemousses and Military Road. 

108 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

Prohibiting  vehicular  traffic  along  Military  Road  to  egress  onto  Route  des 
Pamplemousses during both morning and afternoon peak hours from 07.00 to 
09.30 hours and 14.30 to 19.00 hours.  This measure will also reduce traffic 
conflicts at the above mentioned busy cross junction during rush hours. 
Prohibition of on-street parking along A R Mohamed Street during peak hours 
from  its  junction  with  Cite  Laval  Street  to  its  junction  with  Magon  Street.  
This is essential to ensure a safe and smooth traffic flow along this busy street. 
Provision of an additional lane along A R Mohamed Street from its junction 
with  Military  Road  to  its  junction  with  Cite  Laval  Street  with  a  view  to 
increase the capacity of A R Mohamed Street to moving traffic in the direction 
of Plaine Verte and vice versa during rush hours.  On-street parking along both 
sites of A R Mohamed Street will have to be prohibited during rush hours to 
enable this traffic measure to be implemented. 

A yellow box has been purposely provided to prevent the obstruction of the junction 
and of access to Bernardin de Saint Pierre Street by queuing vehicles. However, it has been 
observed that drivers tend to ignore the yellow box and as a result the junction of Bernardin 
de St Pierre remains obstructed. 

Normally,  at  major  junctions,  traffic  flow  during  peak  hours  is  controlled  by  the 
Police.  Both  the  junction  of  Pamplemousses  Road/Bernardin  de  St  Pierre  Street  and 
Pamplemousses Road/ Military Road can be considered as being major junctions, hence the 
need for Police control during peak hours.  To ease the traffic flow during peak hours, two 
Police Officers regulate traffic at both junctions as from 07 30 hours to 09 15 hours in the 
morning and as from 16 00 hours to 17 30 hours in the afternoon. 
(b) 

Concerning  the  provision  of  a  second  access  to  Vallee  des  Pretres,  the  Road 
Development Authority will investigate into the possibility of providing an additional 
lane along Route des Pamplemousses from its junction with Bernadin de St Pierre to 
its junction with Militiary Road.  Surveys will have to be carried out. 
 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN - ROADS, PAVEMENTS & DRAINS 

- UPGRADING 

(No. A/32) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
roads,  pavements  and  drains  on  classified  roads  in  Constituency  No.  12,  Mahebourg  and 

 

109 

Plaine Magnien, he will, for the benefit of the  House, obtain  from the  Road Development 
Unit, information as to the measures that are being taken to upgrade the ones which are in bad 
state, indicating in each the – 

(a) location thereof; 
(b) scope of works thereof, and  
(c) expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply:  According  to  information  obtained  from  the  RDA,  the  list  of  roads  in 
Constituency  No.  12,  falls  under  the  purview  of  the  RDA  and  their  present  state  are  as 
follows – 

 

Road Name 

Road 
No. 

Motorway 
PLouis-
Plaisance 
Phoenix-
Plaisance Rd 
PlaineMagnien-
Mahebourg Rd 

1 

10 

12 

Deux  Bras-Cent 
Gaulettes Rd 

7 

La Baraque Rd 

Flacq-
Mahebourg Rd 

8 

28 

Location 

Approximate 
Length/Km 

Condition 

Cemetry 
to  Plaine 

From 
R/About 
Magnien R/About 
From  Mare  D’Albert 
to Plaine Magnien 
From 
Magnien 
Mahebourg 
From 
R/About  
Grand  Bel  Air  on 
South 
Eastern 
Highway 
to  Ville 
Noire 
From 
Magnien 
Bois  
From  Steel  bridge 
Riv  des  Creoles  to 
Petit Bel Air 

Plaine 
to 

Plaine 
to  Plein 

1.0 

4.9 

7.1 

3.1 

8.9 

1.5 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Good 

Fair. 

Frequent  excavation 
by  CWA  for  pipe 

 

Beau  Vallon-
Blue Bay Rd 
Gros 
L’Escalier Rd 

Bois-

67 

79 

New 
Chaland Rd 

Le 

80 

New Grove Rd 

Mon Desert Rd 

PteD’Esny Rd 

82 

85 

87 

From Beau Vallon to 
Blue Bay 
From  Gros  Bois 
R/About  M1 
to 
L’Escalier 
From  junction  with 
Mon  Desert  Rd  to 
Shandrani Hotel 
From  Mare  Tabac  to 
Riv du Poste 
junction  La 
From 
Rd, 
Baraque 
PlaineMagnien 
to 
Junction  La  Baraque 
Rd, Trois Boutique 
From  Mahebourg  to 
Blue Bay Beach 

CarreauEsnouf 
Rd 

132 

Trois 
to  Mon 

From 
Boutiques 
Desert Govt School 

110 

repair. 

3.8 

5.9 

3.5 

5.8 

9.6 

5.9 

2.7 

Good 

Good 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Stretch  from 
Loretto Mahebourg to 
Cite La Chaux in poor 
condition. 
Works 
scheduled  during  the 
next financial year. 
Approx 150m in poor 
condition  because  of 
frequent  CWA  pipe 
repair 
work. 
Forthcoming  CWA 
pipe 
replacement 
project thereat. 

 
As  part  of  its  upgrading  works  the  RDA  carried  out  the  following  works  from 

December 2014 to June 2016.  

 

 

Work 
Description 
Resurfacing M1  

works 

Drain 
along A10  

Location 

From  Cemetry  R/About 
to 
PlaineMagnien 
R/About 

R/About 
From 
PlaineMagnien  to  traffic 
light 
Trois 
Boutiques 

towards 

111 

Approximate 
Length/Km 
1.0 

Status 

Completed 
 

Start date:10/09/14 
Completion date: 21/10/14 

0.7 

Completed 
 

Resurfacing A10  Chemin 

La  Grotte, 

0.5 

PlaineMagnien 

Start date:10/02/14 
Completion date:09/05/14 

Completed 
 

Start date:17/10/14 
Completion date: 21/11/14 

Start date:16/10/14 
Completion date: 11/07/14 
On 
completed by July 2016. 

going.  Works  will 

 

Start date:06/04/16 
Completion date: 27/05/16 

Completed 
 

Start date:11/07/14 
Completion date: 10/09/14 

Completed 
 

Start date:09/06/14 
Completion date:06/08/14 
On 

going.  Works  will 

Resurfacing A12 

From  Solitude  R/About 
to Beau Vallon Link Rd 

2.5 

Completed 
 

Drainwork  along 
A12 

Near SBM Mahebourg 

0.3 

Resurfacing B7  

From  Grand  Bel  Air  to 
Ville Noire 

Between  Gros  Bois 
M1 
R/About 
and 
L’Escalier Village 

Rehabilitation  of 
Gros 
Bois-
L’Escalier 
Rd 
(B79) 
Resurfacing B85 

From Le Bouchon, Camp 

3.7 

2.5 

2.9 

 

112 

Carol,Kenya, Mon Tresor 
Mon  Desert  to  Desplace 
Street  and  from  Holiday 
Inn  to  Junction  B8  at 
PlaineMagnien 
From Loretto Mahebourg 
to Cite La Chaux 

completed by July 2016. 

 

Start date:01/07/16 
Completion date: 15/08/16 

0.9Km  On 

going.  Works  will 

completed by July 2016. 

 

Start date:10/05/16 
Completion date: 29/07/16 

Rehabilitation  of 
Pointe 
d’Esny 
Road 
I) 
B87 Rd 

(Phase 

 

For  the  financial  year  2016/2017,  RDA  is  proposing  to  undertake  the  following 

projects - 

•  construction of cross drain across La Baraque Road at Trois Boutiques, and 
• 

rehabilitation  of  Pointe  D’Esny  Road  (B87)  –Phase  2  (Project  consists  of  the 
realignment of the road and the upgrading of footpath). 

 

In  addition  in  line  with  the  New  National  Road  Safety  Strategy,  the  RDA  is  proposing, 
subject  to  appropriate  budgetary  provision  being  made,  to  embark  onto  a  Road  Pavement 
Programme island-wide with a view to enhancing the safety of pedestrians. 

 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN – ROADS - RESURFACING 

(No. A/33) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  roads  which  have  been 
resurfaced in Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, since December 2014 to 
date by the District Council of Grand Port, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the Council, a list thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) length thereof; 
(b) date of resurfacing thereof; 
(c) cost thereof, and  
(d) name of the contractor thereof. 

Reply: The information requested at parts (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the question is given 

hereunder -  

 

Name of Village  Road/ Location 

Length 

(m) 

113 

L

Date 
Resurfaced 

Trois Boutiques 

School Road 

40.2 

14.05.15 

Mare D’Albert 

Baboolall Street 

221.9 

Grand Bel Air 

La Grotte Lane 

28.8 

26.05.15 
and 
27.05.15 
02.06.15 

Cost/Rs 
incl. 
VAT 
79,240 

356,458 

27,124 

Grand Bel Air 

Sunassee Lane 

72.6 

02.06.15 

102,881 

Petit Bel Air 

Beau Vallon 

Mahebourg  

Camp Carol  

Mare Tabac 

Indira  Gandhi 
Street 
Allée 
Saracas 
Fabien Street 

des 

Chapelle  Road, 
Le Bouchon 
Bhoyrub Street 

54.6 

03.06.15 

77,564 

49.1 

03.06.15 

73,492 

54.2 

03.06.15 

86,228 

 

63.6 

04.06.15 

143,101 

32.5 

15.06.15 

55,678 

Trois Boutiques 

School Road 

30.2 

27.07.15 

74,757 

Contractor 

Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 

Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 
Transinvest 
Mauritius Ltd 

 

 
 
 

 

