No. 17 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 19 JULY 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTER  

MOTIONS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 17 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 19 July 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Public Officers’ Protection (Amendment) 
Bill  
(No. XVI of 2016). (In Original) 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

The Finance and Audit (Lycée Polytechnique Sir Guy Forget Fund) (Revocation) 
Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 147 of 2016)  

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ELECTORAL REFORMS 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to electoral reforms in mainland Mauritius and 
in Rodrigues, he will state –  

(a)  

if  the  United  Nations  Human  Rights  Committee  has  been  informed  of  the 
stand of Government in relation thereto, and  

(b)   when  the  Ministerial  Committee  chaired  by  the  Honourable  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications, is expected to 
publish the recommendations thereof on the –  

(i)  

(ii)  

introduction  of  a  dose  of  proportional  representation  in  the  National 
Assembly, and  

proposed amendments to the electoral system in Rodrigues, indicating 
if  the  State  Law  Office  has  already  prepared  a  draft  Bill  in  relation 
thereto. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  as  I  explained  in  my  reply  to  the  Private 
Notice Question on 20 October 2015, prior to the last general election, every candidate at any 
general election was required to declare his community pursuant to section 3(1) of the First 
Schedule to the Constitution.   

In 2007, the political party Rezistans ek Alternativ challenged the above requirement 
before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC).  The Committee concluded 
that  the  requirement  of  mandatory  classification  of  a  candidate  for  a  general  election 
constituted  a  violation  of  Article  25  of  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political 
Rights.  The UNHRC also reminded that Mauritius was under an obligation to provide the 
complainants with an effective and enforceable  remedy and  avoid similar violations in the 
future.   

In  December  2011,  following  a  judgment  of  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy 
Council,  Rezistans  Ek  Alternativ  entered  two  constitutional  plaints  which  are  still  pending 
before the Supreme Court.   

9 

 
In  July  2014,  Parliament  passed  the  Constitution  (Declaration  of  Community) 
(Temporary Provisions) Bill, which removed the mandatory requirement for a candidate to 
declare his community. 

However, that piece of Legislation was applicable only to the first general election 
held after the commencement of the Act.  For subsequent general elections, candidates will 
still have to declare their community if no change is brought to the Law.  For this reason, 
Rezistans Ek Alternativ has maintained its constitutional plaints.   

The case was last called before Supreme Court on 07 April 2016 and Counsel for 
Plaintiff  stated  that  his  client  had  taken  note  that  the  Ministerial  Committee  on  Electoral 
Reform has submitted a first Report on the financing of political parties, but argued that the 
issue of mandatory declaration of community has still not been addressed by the Committee.  
The case has now been fixed for trial on 03 November 2016. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
in the same reply of 20 October 2015, I underlined the fact that Mauritius can only report new 
developments to the Human Rights Committee once the matter has been resolved at the level 
of the Supreme Court. 

Nevertheless, in our Fifth Periodic Report on the  International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, which was submitted to the Human Rights Committee in April 2016, we 
did inform the latter that in the light of its findings, Government is pursuing its discussions 
and consultations to work towards an electoral reform that will suit the long term interest of 
the country and that would be based on the following five criteria - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 

stability; 
fairness; 
inclusiveness to ensure representation of all components of the Mauritian 
rainbow nation; 
gender representation, and 
transparency and accountability. 

We also informed the Human Rights Committee that Government stands committed 
to reform the electoral system so as to introduce a dose of proportional representation in the 
National  Assembly  and  guarantee  better  women’s  representation.    The  issue  of  mandatory 
declaration of community will be addressed in the wider context of the electoral reform.  In 
this context, a Ministerial Committee has been set up to examine the various implications of 

 

10 

the proposed changes and make recommendations. Thereafter, appropriate consultations will 
be held with all the stakeholders prior to implementation. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part b(i) of the question, the introduction of proportional 
representation  in  our  electoral  system  does  form  part  of  the  Terms  of  Reference  of  the 
Ministerial  Committee  chaired  by  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and 
External Communications. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  Ministerial  Committee  has  already  submitted  its 
recommendations  on  the  financing  of  political  parties.    The  State  Law  Office  has  already 
been requested to prepare the draft Bill.  In fact, the Deputy Prime Minister made a statement 
in the National Assembly in this context on 05 April 2016. 

I  also  understand  that  the  Ministerial  Committee  has  already  started  to  examine 
other issues in the Terms of Reference, including the electoral system in Rodrigues, women’s 
representation and the powers of the Electoral Supervisory Commission.  The Committee has 
not  yet  considered  the  issue  of  proportional  representation,  mandatory  declaration  of 
community and anti-defection measures. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b)(ii) of the question, at the time the Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly Act was being passed in 2001, a new electoral system was introduced for 
electing  Members  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  (RRA),  so  as  to  address  the 
disproportionate differences that are often observed between the percentage of votes and the 
percentage of seats obtained by the Party in the First Past the Post System.  

Thus,  a  new  Mixed  Member  Proportional  System  was  accordingly  introduced  in 
Rodrigues whereby out of a total number of seats, 12 seats are returned through the First Past 
the Post System in the 6 local regions, with each region returning 2 elected Members. On the 
day of the Poll in Rodrigues, a voter has to complete two ballots, one to indicate his or her 
choice of two candidates in the local region and one for the island region vote. 

All parties that poll 10% or more of the total votes cast are eligible for a total of 6 
Proportional Representation (PR) seats. The allocation of the 6 PR seats is supposed to take 
into account any disproportionality which builds up between the percentage of votes polled 
and the number of seats obtained in the First Past the Post System. 

Since  the  introduction  of  this  new  system,  three  elections  have  been  held  in 

Rodrigues in 2002, 2006 and 2012, respectively.  

11 

 
In 2002, the OPR obtained 8 seats and the MR 4 seats from the First Past the Post 
vote. The OPR, the winning Party, was allocated 2 PR seats and the MR, the losing Party, 
was allocated 4 PR seats. This had the effect of shrinking the difference between the initial 
number of seats obtained by the OPR and the MR from 4 seats to only 2 seats.  

In 2006, the MR and the OPR obtained 6 seats each under the First Past the Post 
System. With the allocation of the PR seats the MR obtained a total of 10 seats and the OPR a 
total of 8 seats. Here, due to the PR system the difference in the number of seats between the 
two  parties  has  been  increased  by  2,  making  one  Party  the  Winner  and  the  other  one  the 
Loser. 

In  2012,  under  the  First  Past  the  Post  System,  the  Front  Patriotique  Rodriguais 
(FPR) won no seat, the MR 4 seats and the OPR 8 seats. With the allocation of the PR seats, 
the FPR was allocated 2 seats, the MR 4 seats and the OPR 3 seats, thereby again shrinking 
the difference of seats between the winning party and the two losing parties this time from 4 
to 1. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is,  therefore,  clear  that  this  system  has  some  important  flaws 
which are not conducive to political stability and prosperity of any country or region. It is not 
acceptable that a Winning Party which has won a comfortable majority of seats through an 
election system which has stood the test of time in both Mauritius and elsewhere is unjustly 
penalised due to the existing system.  

Madam Speaker, no electoral system is perfect, but one cannot continue with a system 
which,  on  one  hand,  addresses  the  percentage  issue,  but  on  the  other  hand,  makes  an 
allocation of seats which jeopardizes, the stability, confidence and thrust of a Party to conduct 
the affairs of the region under its jurisdiction, in this case the Rodrigues Regional Assembly.  

This  is  why  my  Government  will  soon  introduce  a  Bill  to  bring  a  new  election 

system to Rodrigues which will do away with the shortcomings of the PR system. 

Madam Speaker, however, I am fully conscious that no system is perfect. But I have 
taken note that the two main Parties in Rodrigues, namely, the OPR and the MR are in favour 
of the new amendments. However, this is not enough. The inhabitants of Rodrigues should 
also  be  made  aware  of  the  amendments  before  they  go  to  vote  for  the  next  Regional 
Elections.  

12 

 
I am informed that the services of Sir Victor Glover were retained for the drafting of 
the Bill.  I am further informed that he had consultations with the leaders of the main political 
parties in Rodrigues during the drafting of the Bill. 

The first draft which has been submitted to my Office is not it its final form.  

There  is  still  some  fine  tuning  and  consultations  to  be  made,  including  with  the 

Ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of the Deputy Prime Minister.  

I  am  also  given to understand that the Electoral Supervisory Commission has been 
apprised by the Electoral Commissioner of the amendments which are proposed to be brought 
to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act, notwithstanding the fact that such consultation is 
not mandatory under the Constitution. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  reassure  everybody  that  I  will  make  it  a  point  to  take  the 
necessary  steps,  through  my  Office,  to  ensure  that  the  Rodriguans  are  informed  of  the 
amendments prior to the Bill being introduced to the National Assembly. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, if I can start with the first part of my question that 
refers to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in Geneva, can I have the date?  It was 
difficult  to  catch  when  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  was  saying  the  date  on  which  we 
communicated Government of Mauritius stand to the United Nations Committee.  The date! 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t have the date with me.  

I don’t have the exact date, but it was in April 2016. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  April 2016! Can a copy of that communication to the United Nations 

Human Rights Committee be laid? 

The Prime Minister: Sorry! 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  repeat  my  question.    My  question  is  whether  a  copy  of  that 
communication on behalf of Mauritius to the UN Human Rights Committee - we don’t have 
the exact date, I hope it is not 01 April, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said ‘April’ – be laid in 
the Assembly? 

The Prime Minister: Yes. I am laying, on the Table of the Assembly, a copy. 

13 

 
Mr Bérenger:  Thank you.  Can I know whether there has been any reaction from the 
UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva, any communication from the Committee after we 
have sent the document? 

The Prime Minister: There has been no reaction, so far. 

Mr Bérenger:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself reminded us that Rezistans ek 
Alternativ case before the Supreme Court is coming for merits on 03 November 2016. Can 
we know what stand Government is going to take before the Supreme Court on that day? 

The Prime Minister:  There is no stand to be taken by us. We are waiting for the 

decision of the Supreme Court. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the second point of my question, that is, the dose of 
proportional  representation  to  be  introduced  in  our  Electoral  System  for  the  National 
Assembly  here.    The  idea  of  introducing  a  dose  of  proportional  representation  was  in  the 
present Government’s Electoral Programme, in the Government Programme; it has therefore 
been referred to at the United Nations and forms part of the very first Terms of Reference of 
the Ministerial Committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister, the introduction of a dose 
of proportional representation, and yet, these recent times, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has 
made statements that gave a different impression.  Can I, therefore, have it from the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister that indeed the introduction of a dose of proportional representation in our 
Electoral System in Mauritius, Government still stands committed to that? 

The Prime Minister:  Yes, we are committed and there will be a dose of proportional 

representation, but I cannot say more because the Committee is still working on that. 

Mr Bérenger:  Still on the same subject, when I put a PNQ to which the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister has referred to on 20 October 2015, right at the end of my questions and with 
the replies from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I said – 

 “A lot of work was done at the Attorney General’s Office until the eve of the last 
general elections. I am not saying that the work was completed, but a lot of progress 
was made. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister been able to get help from the Attorney 
General  to  trace  the  latest  drafts  that  had  been  ready  at  the  level  of  the  Attorney 
General’s and Solicitor General’s Office?” 

And the reply from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was – 

“We will certainly consult all these. We will certainly do that.” 

 
Has it been possible to trace, at the Attorney General’s Office, the latest draft and 

14 

has this been communicated to the Committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister? 

The Prime Minister:  The Attorney General forms part of the Committee and what 
he is doing there, what has been done there, so far I cannot say.  We will have to wait until 
they conclude. 

Mr Bérenger:  If I can move on to Rodrigues.  I have pointed out that the sixth Term 
of  Reference  of  the  Ministerial  Committee  chaired  by  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  the  Deputy 
Prime Minister, is ‘Amendments to the Electoral System of Rodrigues’.  Can I know, whilst 
this Committee is supposed to work on Amendments to the Electoral System in Rodrigues, 
why in parallel have discussions taken place, and even from what I heard, a draft of Electoral 
Reforms  to  be  brought  about  in  Rodrigues,  why  has  this  taken  place,  including  the 
involvement of the Attorney General’s Office in parallel with the Duval Committee whose 
Terms of Reference include precisely that? 

The  Prime  Minister:    They  proceeded  in  that  way,  I  have  been  told,  because  the 

Regional Elections are due in Rodrigues early next year. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Does  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  think  that  it  is  healthy  for  such 
amendments to be brought on the eve of elections to be carried out in Rodrigues?  And can I 
ask whether - because I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that the Electoral Commission 
has  reacted  to  the  first  draft  of  that  piece  of  legislation  –  the  Electoral  Commission  has 
objected in any way to such amendments being brought to the Electoral law of Rodrigues on 
the eve of elections there? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, the draft Bill will be submitted to the Committee after 

consultation by my Office.  

I am being told that discussions are being held with the Electoral Commission.  But 
insofar as the eve of elections is concerned, I don’t think it will be on the eve, but it won’t be 
a long time before; but I say it is better late than never. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  make  two  requests:  firstly,  has  the  Electoral  Commissioner 
reacted in writing to that proposal?  I understand that it is not the Prime Minister’s Office or 
the Attorney General’s Office which communicated a copy of that first draft to the Electoral 
Commission.  It was communicated to the Electoral Commission by somebody else, that is, 
the  Solicitor  General’s  Office  which  is  not  a  normal  procedure.    Has  the  Electoral 
Commissioner reacted in writing, and, if yes, can we have a copy of their reaction?   

15 

 
Secondly,  being  given  that,  on  directives  of  Government,  the  Attorney  General’s 
Office has prepared a first draft - what I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say – of the law to 
come, is there any harm in circulating that first draft right from now? 

The Prime Minister: Meetings with the Electoral Commission is still going on, and, 
insofar  as  other  information  is  concerned,  once  the  Bill  is  ready,  it  will  be  circulated  and 
thereafter Rodriguan organisations, including NGOs, will be consulted. We will request Sir 
Victor  Glover  to  undertake  the  consultancy  exercise,  as  late  Justice  Robert  Ahnee  did  in 
2001. At this moment, I don’t think it is advisable to circulate the draft as it is. 

Mr  Bérenger:  These  recent  days,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been  widely 
reported  as  saying  that  what  pertains  in  Rodrigues  and  by  extension  what  could,  with  the 
introduction  of  a  dose  of  proportional  representation,  pertain  in  Mauritius,  is  that  minorité 
vine majorité. From what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, himself, has said, the systems set up in 
Rodrigues on the recommendation of feu former Judge Ahnee, would he agree with me – he 
said it on three occasions - it reduced the difference in seat, but will he agree that, including 
the  last  elections,  in  no  case,  has  it  faire  minorité  vine  majorité?  At  least,  will  he 
acknowledge that? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we have seen how unstable it has been in Rodrigues and 
with the shifting of one Member from one side, the majority went to the other side. Don’t try 
to fool us! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Precisely,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  with  me  that  the 
majority  changed  not  because  of  the  electoral  system,  but  because  two  elected  Members 
changed sides. Therefore, come with an anti-transfuge legislation! Can I ask him… 

(Interruptions) 

Shut up! You don’t understand anything! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree, in fact, he is confirming that, in 

no case, did the majorité vinn minorité?  Will he agree with that? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  system  has  shrunk  the 

difference of six. 

 

16 

(Interruptions) 

The new system proposed has received the concurrence of the two major parties. 

Mr Bérenger: Wrong! Wrong, as usual from your advisers! But, in due course, you 
will  hear  the  detail!  Not  the  OPR,  but  the  other  party  I  mentioned,  you  will  hear  further 
development!  But,  anyway,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  with  me  that  there  is 
agreement on one thing, that 12 is very tight. And I think, today, there is agreement that 12 
elected Members, instead of being 12, should be 18. Has he got that? Will the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  agree  with  me,  on  that,  there  is  unanimity,  in  fact,  for  12  elected  Members  to 
become 18? But, supposedly, what is contained in the first draft is that, apart from these 18, 
after the results are out, the winner will appoint 2 additional elected Members and the losers 
will appoint 2. Being given at regional level, elections were very tight, that proposal, does the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  realise,  if  results  are  divided  in  2  at  the  level  of  constituencies, 
regions, and when you allot 2, it is total deadlock? Has this been pointed out to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, the possibility of a complete deadlock? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  agree  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  His 
information is wrong. In any case, I said I am not going to discuss about the draft. They are 
still working on it. When the whole thing will be finalised, then I will be prepared to bring it 
to the National Assembly. In any case, we have to. So, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will 
know what are the contents. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  the  Rt.  Hon.  Prime  Minister  made  speeches  in  Rodrigues, 
spelling out the details of what is proposed to be amended. That is why I am reacting; the Rt. 
Hon. Prime Minister has gone in public with the idea of 4 appointed Members. Is he aware of 
what has just taken place in Tobago? As we know, hon. feu Judge Ahnee went there, Trinidad 
and Tobago, with Serge Clair and so on. And there, they have 12  elected Members  and 4 
appointed Members, three by the winning party and one by the loser party. Is he aware that, 
that went wrong completely at the last regional elections in Tobago in 2013? Why? Because 
they have got their 12-0! Therefore, there was no one to appoint from the Opposition side. 
So, it is very possible that this will happen with what is being proposed at this stage, with the 
result  that  in  Tobago,  the  new  Chief  Minister  has  had  to  appeal  to  the  President  of  the 
Republic  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  to  appoint  2  independent  people  to  represent  the 
Opposition.  Can  I  point  out  that  in  Tobago,  the  Opposition  did  not  get  a  single  elected 

 

17 

Member  and  the  whole  system  is  stuck  although  they  have  got  36%  of  the  vote?  Has  the 
present situation and the problem in Tobago been pointed out to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? 

The Prime Minister: Well, what has happened in Tobago did not necessarily happen 
in Rodrigues. In any case, the allocation of seats is still to be finalised. Therefore, as I said, I 
am not prepared to discuss that now. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  I  have  the  following  question.  In  2001,  the  Government  sent 
hon. Serge Clair, feu juge Ahnee and feu Prudence, all the way to Tobago, to learn from their 
difficulties  and  their  experience.  Will  the  Government  in  Mauritius  as  Prime  Minister,  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, agree with me that, at least, what we can do is to go and find out what 
went wrong there with this system of appointing 4 after results and that is apparently being 
proposed these days, contained in the first draft? 

The Prime Minister: Well, so far, there has not been a request for that and personally 
I don’t think it’s necessary. If they have gone wrong in Tobago, we are not prepared to go 
and learn from them again. 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition is wrong! 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Jhugroo! 

HORSE RACING – ALLEGED CHEATING – LEGISLATION 

(No. B/768) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to horse racing, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority, information as to the 
number of reported cases of breaches of the Mauritius Turf Club Rules, including cheating, 
which have allegedly been committed in the course of meetings thereof over the past three 
years, indicating if consideration will be given for a toughening of the legislation in relation 
thereto, including the provision of terms of imprisonment therefor. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  advised  by  the  Gambling  Regulatory 
Authority that the Mauritius Turf Club has not specifically reported any case of breach of the 
Mauritius Turf Club Rules to the Authority from 2013 to date.  According to the Mauritius 
Turf Club, the Racing Stewards Reports dispatched to the Authority are self-explanatory and 

 

18 

they  did  not  deem  it  necessary  or  compulsory  to  address  formal  communication  to  the 
Authority.  

Taking this into account, a Directive namely Directive 4 was issued, on 16 October 
2015, under Section 100 of the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act whereby the Mauritius 
Turf  Club  was  required  to  notify,  forthwith,  the  Authority,  in  writing,  if  it  has  decided  to 
apply sanctions against a jockey. 

Despite  this  Directive,  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  failed  to  report  accordingly  on 
sanctions taken against Jockey Noel Callow in June 2016.  The Mauritius Turf Club has been 
advised,  on  10  June  2016,  that  henceforth,  in  compliance  with  Directive  4  of  16  October 
2015, it is required to communicate, in writing to the Authority, the sanctions imposed on a 
jockey  immediately  after  the  jockey  is  informed,  even  verbally,  of  the  sanctions  imposed 
upon him.  The Mauritius Turf Club was also advised that any comprehensive written report 
that includes the detailed facts and circumstances pertaining to such sanctions should, as in 
the past, be forwarded to the Authority within 24 hours of the completion of the inquiry.  

I  am  further  informed  that  following  the  communication  issued  by  the  Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority,  on  10  June  2016,  there  have  been  15  instances  where  jockeys  have 
been suspended under section 160 A of the Rules of Racing where the Mauritius Turf Club 
has still not notified the Authority in the precise manner required.  The Gambling Regulatory 
Authority is looking into any action warranted in such cases of non-compliance. 

According to the Commissioner of Police, since January 2013 to date, that is 14 July, 
there have been 10 cases of cheating in breach of the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act 
2007, out of which 7 were reported by the Mauritius Turf Club to the Police. 

As  at  date,  7  cases  of  cheating  are  pending  before  Court.    Three  cases  have  been 
shelved, the reasons being that one case has been filed, the second case has been dismissed by 
the Court and in the third case, the Director of  Public Prosecutions has advised no further 
action. 

However, from information available in the Racing Stewards Reports, since 2013 to 
date, it is noted that there have been 251 cases of breaches of the Rules of the Mauritius Turf 
Club, as follows – 

•  both fines and suspension, 44 cases; 

• 

fines only, 104 cases; 

19 

 

•  suspension only, 100 cases, and  

•  3 cases are minor offences.  

The offence of cheating in horseracing is defined under section 146 of the Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority  Act  2007,  and  both  the  quantum  of  the  fine  and  the  term  of  the 
imprisonment are provided under this section and are related to the nature of the offence.  

As regards the proposal of the hon. Member to toughening the legislation, including 
the provision of terms of imprisonment, I am advised that the penalty for any offence must be 
proportionate  to  the  offence  and  this  principle  is  already  incorporated  in  the  Gambling 
Regulatory Authority Act. 

In  practice,  it  has  been  very  difficult  so  far  to  sustain  any  suspicion  of  cheating  in 

Court, due to a lack of expertise and evidence. 

I have stated in my replies to previous Parliamentary Questions, namely B/607 and 
B/608, that the Gambling Regulatory Authority is in the process of setting up an Integrity and 
Intelligence Unit which could be provided with the necessary expert resources and logistics 
to  be  able  to  probe  further  into  matters  relating  to  cheating  and  eventually  initiate  Police 
enquiry and subsequent legal action. 

In  addition,  in  the  restructuring  plans  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority, 
provisions are being made to ensure better compliance and accountability of the Mauritius 
Turf Club towards the Authority. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  apart  from  the  GRA,  does  not  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister think that it is also essential to beef up the knowledge of the Police des jeux in terms 
of training and adaptation to modern electronic equipment, that is, new technologies? If the 
Police des jeux is not capable to trace these fraudeurs then it is useless to follow up. 

The Prime Minister: I understand that this is being done. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ms Sewocksingh! 

16ÈME MILLE, FOREST SIDE – POLICE STATION 

(No.  B/769)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the village of 16ème Mille, 
in Forest Side, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 

 

20 

information  as  to  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  construction  of  a  Police  Station 
thereat. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the village of 16ème Mille, Forest Side has a small population of around 3,500 inhabitants 
and is adequately covered by the Curepipe Police Station and Midlands Police Station.  These 
two  Police  Stations  are  situated  at  a  distance  of  3.8 kilometres  and  1.5  kilometres, 
respectively from the village. 

Furthermore, different specialised units of the Police Force, such as the Emergency 
Response  Service,  Criminal  Investigation  Department,  Anti-Drug  and  Smuggling  Unit, 
Divisional  Support  Unit,  Divisional  Traffic  Police,  also,  carry  out  regular  foot  and  mobile 
patrols thereat by day and by night. 

Therefore, as at present Police do not contemplate to set up a Police Station at 16ème 

Mille, Forest Side.   

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ms Sewocksingh! 

Ms  Sewocksingh:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime  Minister  for  the  answer.    May  I  request  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to,  at  least, 
consider  if  the  Government  could  add  more  effectifs  and  logistics  to  the  Midlands  Police 
Station  as  in  Midlands  the  number  of  inhabitants  is  increasing  with  the  development  of 
morcellements, State lands and so on?  

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  if  the  number  increases  to  such  an  extent  which  will 

warrant to consider this, then it will be considered. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

POLICE CUSTODY - MR I. T. – DEATH   

(No.  B/770)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police inquiry initiated 
into the death of Mr I. T. whilst being in Police custody, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to where matters stand. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the inquiry initiated into the death of Mr I. T. has been completed and the case file has 
been referred to the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

21 

 
Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, there has been a judicial inquiry into the death of Mr 
Toofany  which  has  concluded  foul  play.    May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
whether he has any information as to what happened to the four Policemen who are involved 
in this alleged case of foul play? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am being informed that they have been interdicted. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS - US DEPARTMENT OF STATE REPORT 

(No. B/771) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the combatting of trafficking 
in  persons  in  Mauritius,  he  will  state  the  actions  taken  since  January  2015  to  date  to 
implement the recommendations contained in the Trafficking in Persons Reports of the US 
Department  of  State  for  Mauritius,  particularly,  regarding  the  protection  of  the  children, 
indicating the reported number of victims thereof over the past two years. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the US Department of 
State Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 published on 30 June 2016.  I must say that the 
contents relating to Mauritius are grossly exaggerated and inaccurate though Mauritius has 
been  placed  under  Tier  2,  as  opposed  to  last  year  when  we  had  been  placed  under  Tier  2 
Watch List.  I must also add that every year, the US authorities consult Mauritius to gather 
information and statistics prior to the publication of their Report on Trafficking in Persons.  
However,  my  attention  has  been  brought  to  the  fact  that  the  information  submitted  by  the 
relevant Ministries and Departments are not fully taken into consideration at the time of the 
publication of the Report. 

Madam Speaker, in the recent past, I have also expressed my serious concern on the 
inaccuracies of the US Department of State Report on Human Rights in respect of Mauritius, 
to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 

I wish to emphasise that Mauritius enjoys a solid reputation not only on the African 

 
Continent, but also internationally for its respect for Human Rights. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/622  at  the  sitting  of  the 
National Assembly on 06 October 2015, I mentioned that a series of measures were being 

 

22 

taken  to  address  the  issue  of  Trafficking  in  Persons  in  line  with  the  recommendations 
contained in the US Department of State Report on Trafficking in Persons.   

In fact, since January 2015, measures taken by the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child 
Development  and  Family  Welfare,  the  Ministry  of  Labour  and  Employment,  the  Police 
Department as well as the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions Report include the 
following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the setting up of a hotline to enable the public at large to report any alleged 
case  of  child  abuse,  including  Child  Trafficking  and  Commercial  Sexual 
Exploitation of Children either anonymously or otherwise; 

joint interviews by the officers of the Police and the Child Development Unit 
to avoid repeated narrations of incident; 

provision of assistance to victims of child trafficking for medical and Police 
Medical Examinations as well as HIV testing and pregnancy tests; 

(iv) 

provision of psycho-social counselling to victims and their families;  

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii) 

(viii) 

a close collaboration between the Brigade Pour la Protection des Mineurs and 
other stakeholders to assist in the identification of victims and providing them 
support.    The  Brigade  Pour  la  Protection  des  Mineurs  carries  out  raids  in 
game houses, hotels, discotheques and also investigates any suspected/alleged 
cases of child trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children; 

the  setting  up,  on  26  May  2016,  of  L’Oasis  Residential  Drop-In-Centre  at 
Grand River North West which presently houses 25 victims of Sexual Abuse 
and Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, including Child Trafficking; 

the  establishment  of  a  Protocol  of  collaboration  by  the  Ministry  of  Gender 
Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare with other stakeholders by 
way of a ‘Working Together” Committee to ensure that a continuum of care is 
provided to children victims.  

the  setting  up  of  a  Community  Child  Watch  Committee  for  surveillance  of 
children  exposed  to  any  form  of  violence  inclusive  of  commercial  sexual 
exploitation and trafficking at local levels.  It operates with the collaboration 
of a pool of volunteers, social workers, NGO’s, community leaders and other 
key stakeholders;  

 
(ix) 

23 

the  setting  up  of  Child  Protection  Committees  at  district  level  for  the 
implementation of Government’s policies related to the survival, development, 
protection  and  welfare  of  children  through  the  adoption  of  a  participatory 
approach, and 

(x) 

the  preparation  of  a  National  Action  Plan  on  Combatting  Trafficking  in 
Persons at the level of my Office in consultation with all stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, emphasis is also laid on capacity-building for officers having to deal 
with  cases  of  Trafficking  in  Persons  at  different  levels.    From  January  2015  to  date,  five 
training  sessions  have  been  organised  on  Trafficking  in  Persons  for  Law  Officers  of  the 
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Attorney General’s Office as well as 
Law Enforcement Officers. 

Insofar  as  statistics  are  concerned,  according  to  Police  records,  only  one  case  of 

Trafficking in Persons has been reported since January 2015 up to 15 July 2016. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that an Inter-Ministerial Committee has 
been set up under the chairmanship of the Attorney General to ensure proper coordination on 
issues relating to Trafficking in Persons. 

Mr Baloomoody: Madam Speaker, in the 2015 Report, and I quote – 

“Despite this measure, the Government did not demonstrate overall increasing 
anti-trafficking reports compared to the previous reporting period”.   

Therefore, Mauritius is placed on the Tier 2 Watch List.  This year again, we are still on the 
Tier 2 Watch List. 

This is what they have to say – 

 “The Government of Mauritius does not fully  meet the minimum standards 
for the elimination of trafficking.” 

When I asked the previous PQ last year, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister informed us that there 
was a Ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of the Attorney General.  May I know 
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister how many times this Committee has sat and whether there 
is a report as far as this Committee is concerned? 

The Prime Minister: I understand numerous sittings have been held and a report was 

submitted. 

24 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  know  whether  that  report  was  submitted  to  the  United 
Nations Commission, and if so, can a  copy of the report of the Committee chaired by the 
Attorney General be laid on the Table of the National Assembly? 

The Prime Minister: The answer is yes. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, can a copy of that report be laid on the Table of the National 

Assembly? 

The Prime Minister: Yes. 

Mr Baloomoody: May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister since the last report, 

how many convictions and arrests there have been for human trafficking in Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister: I think I mentioned it.  There has been only one case. 

Mr Baloomoody: May we know what Government intends to do with regard to the 

2016 report? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not pay much attention to that report because it is not 

a reliable one and I have said it before in public. 

Mr Baloomoody: May the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that such a report which is 
published not only by the UN, but also on the Internet, gives a very bad image of Mauritius 
and something positive should be done so that this report is not taken for granted by any other 
person? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we are doing our work. I do not care about those people. 

 

 

 

 

 

ROGUE & VAGABOND OFFENCE – REPORTED CASES 

(No. B/772) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  offence  of  rogue  and 

 

25 

vagabond,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to the number of reported cases thereof over the past two years. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that, from July 2014 to 14 July 2016, 969 cases of Rogue and Vagabond have been reported 
and their outcomes are as follows - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

in 587 cases, the accused have been fined or sentenced to imprisonment; 

in 322 cases, police enquiries are still in progress; 

59 cases have been filed since the accused are unknown or dead or cases have 
been withdrawn, and 

(d) 

in one instance, the case has been dismissed. 

Mr Baloomoody: It is clear that the number of convictions is very high with regard to 
rogue and vagabond.  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will see to it with the 
Commissioner of Police because rogue and vagabond is an arrestable offence and the fine is 
very low?  So, most  of the people who cannot afford to pay the bail, prefer to plead guilty the 
next day that they are arrested.  It is a simple offence where very many times, Police officers 
abuse of their position. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody, put your question! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  will  consider 
requesting the Commissioner of Police or the Police Superintendent to seek advice from the 
DPP’s Office before asking for bail and before trying to prosecute the accused party? 

The Prime Minister: I do not think it is necessary to do that. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:   Madam Speaker, in my Constituency, since the start of the year, 
more specifically in the region of St François Xavier, Route Nicolay and Camp Yoloff, there 
has  been  an  increase  in  the  number  of  reported  cases  in  relation  to  rogue  and  vagabond.  
Therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to see to it that there are regular patrols by 
the Police, especially at night in the regions that I have just mentioned? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Very  soon  we  will  be  asked  to  put  a  Police  officer  in  every 

house! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker:  The Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/776, B/801 and B/821 

26 

have been withdrawn.  Questions addressed to Ministers! Hon. Bhagwan! 

MAURITIUS TELECOM - CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/773)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius Telecom, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
the – 

(a) 

(b) 

name  of  the  present  Acting  Chairperson  thereof,  indicating  when  the 
Chairperson thereof will be appointed, and  

date  and  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  of  the  representatives  of 
Government appointed to serve on the Board thereof. 

Mr Sinatambou:   Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for his question.  
With regard to part (a) thereof, I am informed that the present Acting Chairperson of 
Mauritius Telecom Ltd. is Mr Sateeaved Seebaluck, the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the 
Civil Service, and that the appointment of the Chairperson is a matter for the shareholders of 
the company.   

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  it  has  been  the  policy  of 
successive Governments not to give details about private companies.  Mauritius Telecom Ltd, 
being a private company, Government is not prepared to depart from this policy.   

I  will,  therefore,  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Mauritius 

Telecom Ltd. which gives all the relevant information about the company. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr  Bhagwan:    Without  going  into  the  merits,  we  all  know  that  the  Secretary  to 
Cabinet is a very competent person. But can I know from the hon. Minister whether, like in 
the past, the Secretary to Cabinet is holding the post on a temporary basis or Government 
intends to appoint, as in the past, an independent person to chair the Board of the Mauritius 
Telecom? 

Mr Sinatambou:  As I said, I am informed that the present Acting Chairperson is Mr 
Seeballuck and that the appointment of the Chairperson is a matter for the shareholders of the 
company, not Government. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

27 

 
Mr  Uteem:    Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  Telecom  is  bound  to  follow  the  code  of 
corporate governance which has been given effect to under the Financial Reporting Act 2004.  
We  have  from  the  hon.  Minister  that  Mauritius  Telecom  now  has  an  Acting  Chairperson, 
whereas it is clear from the code that we need a Chairperson with the objective leadership of 
a Chairperson with satisfactory performance and there is a series of role and function of that 
Chairperson.    May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  is  happy  that  Mauritius  Telecom  is 
flouting  the  code  of  corporate  governance  insofar  as  appointment  of  a  full-fledged 
Chairperson is concerned? 

Mr  Sinatambou:    As  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  Telecom  is  a  private 
company governed by its own Articles of Association.  It has got its Board of Directors, a 
Chairman and Management.  Now, if I am stating this, Madam Speaker, it is because this is 
exactly what the sector Minister stated in a reply dated 11 December 2001 - a Minister who 
was  from  the  party  now  sitting  in  Opposition.    That  is  why  I  have  stated  earlier  that 
Government  is  not  prepared  to  depart  from  the  policy  of  not  giving  details  about  private 
companies. If the hon. Member has anything regarding any impropriety, he may just refer to 
the company itself. 

Mr Bérenger:  Is the hon. Minister aware that in the meantime legislation has been 
passed so that there be full-time Chairperson separate from Chief Executives?  Is the hon. 
Minister aware that we are supposed to have a Minister for Good Governance and the b.a.-ba 
of good governance is having a full-time Chairperson and a full-time Chief Executive? 

Mr Sinatambou:  If the hon. Leader of the Opposition is so sure of improprieties, he 
can refer the matter to the hon. Minister for Good Governance, to the Financial Intelligence 
Unit.  There are so many  institutions.   It is not  within my prerogative to actually reply to 
those matters. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Next question! Hon. Ms Sewocksingh! 

DUBREUIL & MONTAGNE BLANCHE – ACCESS ROAD 

(No.  B/774)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  and  Midlands) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether  he  will  state  if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  implementation  of  a  link  road  between  Dubreuil  and 
Montagne Blanche. 

28 

 
Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Road  Development  Authority 
(RDA) that access between the villages of Dubreuil and Montagne Blanche is currently via 
Belle Rive roundabout at B6 through  the Quartier Militaire Road (B6)  and the Providence 
Road (A7) to Montagne Blanche (B27) over a length of 14.1 kms.   

I am further informed that the road network connecting the two villages is in good 

condition and there is no major traffic congestion issues along that route.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  that  there  already  exists  an  untarred  track  of 
approximate  width  of  4.5  metres  and  length  of  5  kms  between  Montagne  Blanche  and 
Dubreuil.  The RDA has, in fact, studied the possibility of implementing a direct link between 
these  two  villages  and  a  survey  was  indeed  carried  out  in  January  2016.  It  was,  however, 
observed that the project would require the upgrading of the existing track to an engineering 
standard road of width of 7 metres and the construction of two bridges.  The project would 
also entail substantial land acquisition and would cost about Rs300 m., excluding the land 
acquisition costs.  

Madam Speaker, the RDA considers this project is not presently viable, so we will 

look after it later. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT ACT – CONTRACTS – VARIATIONS 

 (No.  B/775)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre 
d’Or) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Public Procurement Act, he will state if consideration will be given for proposed amendments 
to be introduced thereto relating to the conditions regarding variations in contracts after the 
award thereof. 

Mr Jugnauth:  Madam Speaker, cost overruns due to the variations in contracts have, 
in the past, been the subject of much concern and consideration will be given to address this 
issue.  

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam Speaker, I think section 46(3) of the Public Procurement 
Act speaks of variation.  We have got a threshold of 25%.  May I kindly request the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development to look into this particular section, which I 
believe should be amended, so that there is no such abuse as it has been in the past? 

Mr Jugnauth:  In fact, Madam Speaker, more important is section 46(4), which says 
that “no formal amendment of the contract shall be required where the public body wishes to 

 

29 

make a variation or invokes a contract price adjustment which is expressly authorised in the 
contract”.  That is why in the past there have been such wide variations and even prices have 
doubled in cases which we know.  Therefore, I agree that consideration, as I have stated in 
my answer, will be given to address this issue. 

FOOTBALL - PROMOTION 

(No. B/776) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  football,  he  will  state  the 
measures taken by his Ministry for the promotion thereof among the children below the age 
of 15. 

(Withdrawn) 

PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOLS (PRIVATE)  

(No. B/777) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  private  paying  new  primary  and  secondary 
schools, she will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the number thereof 
registered zone-wise since 2015 to date, in each case. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:    Madam  Speaker,  registration  of  private  fee-paying 
primary  schools  is  carried  out  by  my  Ministry  whereas  the  private  fee-paying  secondary 
schools are registered by the Private Secondary Schools Authority.  

There are a total of 70 private fee-paying schools that are registered as follows – 

• 

• 

46 private fee-paying primary schools, out which only one new school was 
registered in 2016, and  
24  private  fee-paying  secondary  schools,  out  of  which  2  were  registered  in 
2015 and 2 newly registered in 2016. 

I am tabling the list of registered schools zone-wise. 
Mr Mahomed:  Madam Speaker, may we know the cost of registration for primary 
and secondary schools and are there any yearly or monthly charges for them to be run in the 
country? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  In fact, I don’t think there are any charges or costs for 
registration. At least, I am not aware of this.  I will check and let the hon. Member know later 
on, but I don’t really think that there are charges. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question! 

 

30 

CPE – PRIVATE CANDIDATES  

(No. B/778) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to the Certificate of Primary Education Examinations, 
she  will  state  the  number  of  private  candidates  registered  to  take  part  therein  in  2016, 
indicating  the  number  thereof  who  had  taken  part  therein  in  2013,  2014  and  2015, 
respectively. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:    Madam  Speaker,  private  candidates  wishing  to  sit  for 

CPE examinations have to normally register directly at the MES.  

I am advised that for the year 2016 and as at 18 July 2016, the number stands at 463. 

Madam Speaker, I am tabling the information obtained from the MES on the number 

of private candidates who sat for CPE Examinations in respect of years 2013 to 2015. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Out  of  these  numbers,  may  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how 

many of them are from Standard V wanting to sit for the exam beforehand? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  private  candidates  are  normally 
students above the age of 13 and who would wish to enroll for the exams, but we rarely have 
cases of students in registered primary schools wishing to take Standard VI, but we do have 
the numbers and I will give you the number. We rarely have these, but I will give you the 
numbers that have requested to sit for the examination in the earlier years as well. I have here 
from the MES a batch of students from a private fee paying school requesting to be allowed 
to  sit  for  the  examination.  But,  according  to  Regulation  18.3  of  the  Education  Act,  the 
Director  of  the  MES  can,  upon  her  discretion,  exceptionally  allow  students  to  sit  for 
examinations. We have had a number of requests at the MES, but the MES is scrutinising 
these requests and trying to find out whether there is, in fact, a justification for students to be 
allowed to sit for Standard VI. We have to note, Madam Speaker, that we are in the last year 
of the CPE Examinations and there is this year a certain craze on behalf of parents to get their 
children to sit for the examinations. But, as I have said earlier, there are certain hierarchical 
pedagogical issues that we have to consider and we have to see whether it would be right to 
allow students coming out of Standard IV in Standard V  to sit for examinations meant for 
CPE students. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 

 

31 

CEB –WASTE – ENERGY PRODUCTION 

(No. B/779) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the production of electricity from municipal wastes, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to if a feasibility study has 
been carried out therefor and, if so, indicate the main outcomes thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  electricity  generation  from  waste  is  referred  to  in  the 
report  of  the  National  Energy  Commission  and  Long  Term  Energy  Strategy  2009-2025, 
which set a target of 4% of annual energy generation from waste to energy projects.  

One waste to energy project is already operational since 2011, namely the Landfill gas 
to  energy  and  one  unsolicited  project  was  approved  by  the  then  Government  in  2006.  No 
prior study was carried out by the Central Electricity Board. 

I am informed by the CEB that on 01 June 2015, it launched an Expression of Interest 

for the installation of Renewable Energy Technologies and received 17 applications.  

On  11  April  2016,  it  has  invited  request  for  proposals  and  the  date  limit  is  02 

September 2016. 

I am further informed that the promoter is required to carry out a full feasibility study 
as  well  as  an  Environmental  Impact  Assessment.  One  of  the  mandatory  conditions  for  the 
project is that it should abide by the European Directive with regard to gas emission. 

Mr Mahomed: So, no prior feasibility study was done by the CEB. Is the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister aware that, on the other hand, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable 
Development has embarked onto the updating of the strategy for managing solid waste, an 
exercise that is being funded by the Agence Française de Développement, the closing date of 
which is 22 June, and the objective of which is to come up with an Action Plan to reduce and 
recycle waste and not to produce energy from waste? Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware 
of this? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  You  should  be  careful  not  to  mix.  Yes,  there  is  a  plan  at  the 
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development for the management of waste, but it 
does not mean that the object is to reduce the amount of waste which is going to be used for 
energy  production.  The  use  of  waste  is  going  to  be  used  for  energy  production.  We  are 

 

32 

working  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Sustainable 
Development, the Solid Waste Management Office or whatever you call it and we have to 
fine-tune along the way, but we are getting there. We are almost there, in fact. 

Mr Uteem: Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that in the past there were projects 
for generating electricity from waste which did not go through because of the cost involved in 
sorting out the waste and to ensure that plastic bottles and other high pollutants are not being 
used and recycled for producing electricity? So, does this report, which he referred to, take 
into consideration the cost of sorting out the waste before generating electricity out of them? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That could probably have been the case a very long time ago, but 
I am not sure that I agree with that statement of fact. The fact, at present, is that the question 
of sorting is no longer an issue because the techniques have evolved so much that sorting out 
plastic bottles, etc., is not an issue. This is not the issue. The issue is to ensure that we have 
adequate waste to furnish these generation stations. The sorting out is not really a problem. 

Mr Mahomed: With regard to that same project mentioned by hon. Uteem and with 
regard  to  quantity  of  waste  to  be  used  to  produce  electricity,  does  the  State  have  any 
commitment still for a waste supply agreement in respect to that promoter for 20 Megawatts 
of electricity because the case was referred to the Environment Appeal Tribunal and to what I 
understand, has not been… 

Gamma-Covanta.  

(Interruptions) 

And has not been finalised as yet? Does the State still have a commitment for a waste supply 
agreement with that promoter? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Yes,  Gamma-Covanta  has  got  stuck  along  the  route,  but 
Gamma-Covanta is not the only one which is in issue. Now, we have 17 bidders who are on 
this project. Well, let me just read what I have in my note – 

“CEB  guarantees  to  purchase  the  entire  amount  of  energy  exported  to  CEB’s  grid 
under the PPA while the Solid Waste Division of the Ministry of Environment has 
taken the commitment to supply an average of 600 tonnes a day of municipal solid 
waste to the successful project developer.” 

This answers the previous question and this one as well. 

33 

 
There are 17 bidders and there have been 5 applications for inter-connection study. 
So, we have moved a long way away from Gamma-Covanta and Sotravic which is again one 
of the bidders, but from the Sotravic Landfill Gas and the Gamma-Covanta, we have moved a 
long way now. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister give us an idea whether there has 

been any specific site identified for the solid waste management? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I know that each promoter has earmarked the site, but I would 

not be able to list the sites here. I don’t think I have that information. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (LOCAL) – TONNAGE 

(No. B/780) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to local 
agricultural  produce,  he  will  state  the  tonnage  thereof  for  the  year  2015,  indicating  the 
percentage change thereof compared to the year 2014. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  local  agricultural  produce,  I  am 
informed that according to the official records compiled by Statistics Mauritius, the tonnage 
of agricultural produce comprising sugar cane, tea, food crops and livestock production for 
year  2014  was  4,222,124.80  tonnes.    For  the  year  2015,  from  interim  and  unpublished 
statistics compiled by the Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute (FAREI) 
and  other  Institutions/Departments  falling  under  the  aegis  of  my  Ministry,  the  tonnage  of 
local agricultural produce was 4,169,429 tonnes.  These statistics indicate an overall decrease 
of around 1.25% in the total production level of local agricultural produce. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  At  a  time  we  were  talking  about  food  security  and  the  different 
statements made by the Financial Secretary to reengineer our economy towards agricultural 
economy what is being done concretely to reverse this trend? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, we have, at the beginning of this year, come up with 
a new Strategic Plan to address the problems of food security and food production, and we 
have come up with a series of measures to see to it that we increase our food security level 
and also we increase our production of food crops in general. So, we have listed a series of 

 

34 

measures, including other ways of doing agriculture be it bio farming, be it sheltered farming. 
Also, when we talk about agricultural produce we also talk about the livestock sector. We are 
also  coming  up  with  a  series  of  measures  to  accompany  the  breeders.  So,  probably  in  the 
forthcoming Budget we will see a series of new measures that are going to be proposed to 
address the problems being faced by farmers and breeders. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Minister whether 
he  has  the  figures  for  the  amount  of  arable  land  which  used  to  be  utilised  for  agricultural 
purposes and which has been converted into residential or industrial purpose over the past 
five years and, if he does not have these figures, can he table them? 

Mr Seeruttun: Well, I don’t have that information with me now, but I can look for it 

and probably have it made available. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Agricultural yield depends on the quality of the land. What is being 
done concretely at the level of the Ministry to preserve these grade A, grade B agricultural 
land  at  the  expense  of  other  developments  like  morcellements  which  could  be  done 
elsewhere? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I must say that, since I took office, I put a team to 
look into all the agricultural lands that are available, what are those that are abandoned, what 
are those that are being used for agricultural produce and we have come up with, what we 
call, a land suitability map to ensure what are the regions and what are the different crops that 
are  most  appropriate  in  those  regions  depending  on  the  temperature,  the  climate,  the  soil 
fertility. So, we are looking into that direction to ensure that we can optimise the agricultural 
production in Mauritius so that we, like I said, raise the level of food security in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, there is one organisation which has been very active 
at community-based level with regard to the production of vegetables. It is the Mouvement 
pour l'autosuffisance alimentaire. Can I know from the hon. Minister what further incentive 
his Ministry is planning to give to this very reliable association which is the Mouvement pour 
l'autosuffisance alimentaire? 

35 

 
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I have met the President of that Mouvement, Mr Eric 
Mungur and he is someone very helpful, I must say, in promoting agriculture in Mauritius 
and we are working together. I have met him several times. With the measures that we are 
contemplating to boost up the agricultural sector, I am sure we will also address his request. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

HOSPITALS - SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS - VISITING SURGEONS 

(No. B/781) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to patients requiring surgical 
interventions, he will state the number thereof who – 

(a)  

have undergone same under the hands of visiting surgeons since January 2015 
to date, indicating the costs incurred in relation thereto, and  

(b)  

are presently on the waiting list therefor, indicating the type thereof required. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  after  identifying  a 
group  of  patients  in  the  fields  of  cardiac  surgery,  ophthalmology,  ear,  nose  and  throat 
operations, paediatric surgery, plastic surgery and orthopaedic surgery, my Ministry invites 
foreign visiting teams to come and operate. The costs of airfare, accommodation and other 
related costs of the visiting teams are met by my Ministry. 

I am informed that 451 patients have been operated by visiting surgeons from January 

2015 up to June 2016. The total costs incurred for such visits amount to Rs7,467,664.19. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am tabling the number of cases waiting to be 
screened and assessed in the different specialities by visiting surgeons for complex surgeries. 
Visiting  teams  are  also  invited  to  participate  in  continuous  professional  development 
programmes for doctors. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to emphasise that there is a transparent procedure for patients 
to  be  seen  by  visiting  doctors.  Complicated  cases  from  each  region  are  first  screened  and 
assessed  by  the  consultant  in  charge  of  the  region.  One  of  the  consultants  in  charge  in  a 
specific speciality is designated to coordinate the visit of the foreign team. The cases are then 
sent from each region to the consultant in charge who is coordinating that particular unit. A 
further screening and assessment is carried out by the coordinating consultant in charge and 
the foreign team. It is at the end of the visit that the foreign team also submits a report to my 
Ministry on what they have done. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

36 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the hon. Minister how 

many times the same team came back to Mauritius for the same operation? 

Mr Gayan: I am sorry, could the hon. Member repeat his question? 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Minister how many times 

the same team came back to Mauritius for the same operation? 

Mr Gayan: Well, they don’t come back for the same operation. They come to operate 

on different patients. But we have… 

(Interruptions) 

…a group of doctors who keep coming for a number of years. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Madam. I would like to know from the hon. Minister in 

which speciality the list is longer and what is the average waiting time in each speciality? 

Mr Gayan: Well, let me see if I have the information from my file. It used to be in 
ophthalmology  that  the  list  was  longer  but  that  has  considerably  reduced;  for  example,  in 
2015, we had 172 cases but today we have so far 29.  For ENT as well, the number has gone 
down. For orthopaedics unfortunately the number has gone up. For the cardiac surgery, it has 
gone down. But, these are the areas where the visiting teams come to operate. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Can we know from the hon. Minister whether the doctors that come to 
Mauritius have made any complaint to his Ministry that they are not too happy with our set 
up? For example, for brain surgery when they do it in the theatre, the ICU is far away and 
there is a high incidence of infection? 

Mr Gayan: I am not aware of this, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether there is proper collaboration 
between our visiting doctors, specialists, and our local doctors, especially with regard to the 
follow-up  following  the  operation  because  there  have  been  some  complaints  that  some 

 

37 

patients do not get the proper attention because they were not operated by the local specialists 
or the local specialists were not involved? 

Mr Gayan: Well, it is a fact that the foreign visiting teams come for a short period of 
time but this is why I mentioned about the screening and the follow-up with the consultant in 
charge  who  follows  the  patients  afterwards,  but  then  I  have  not  had  any  such  complaint 
mentioned by the hon. Member. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

PLEASURE CRAFTS – SKIPPER LICENCES & LIFE JACKETS 

(No. B/782) Mr  A. Ameer  Meea  (Second Member for  Port Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications  whether,  in  regard  to  the  pleasure  crafts,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Tourism Authority, information as to the – 

(a)  

number of – 

(i)  

skipper licences issued constituency-wise, since 2010 to date, and  

(ii)  

contraventions booked for failure to be equipped with life jackets, and  

(b)  

additional  security  measures  that  will  be  taken,  if  any,  following  the  fatal 
incident which occurred on or about Wednesday 08 June 2016 at Grand River 
South East. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, 

I am informed by the Tourism Authority, that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

3,201 skipper licences have been issued from January 2010 to June 2016. I am 
tabling the list of licences issued district-wise, and 

a  total  of  3,168  contraventions  have  been  established  by  the  National  Coast 
Guard for non-compliance with conditions of the skipper’s licence.  However, 
given that it is mandatory for pleasure crafts to be equipped with life jackets 
prior to issue of a pleasure craft licence, no contravention has been established 
in this respect. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that since February 
2015, a series of additional measures have been taken to reinforce safety and security at sea.  

These are - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 
(vii) 

38 

setting up of a special flying squad of National Coast Guard commandos to 
carry out regular inspections at sea; 
wearing of life jacket or other personal floating device made compulsory for 
all nautical activities outside the lagoon by commercial pleasure craft.  This is 
also compulsory for non-swimmers inside the lagoon; 
hoisting  of  red  flag  at  Flat  Island  to  warn  operators  about  potential  dangers 
regarding the practicability of the pass; 
suspension of skipper’s licence and pleasure craft licence upon establishment 
of a minimum of 3 contraventions;  
demarcation of a speed limit zone and snorkelling zones at Belle Mare; 
organisation of refresher courses to keep skippers abreast of new safety norms 
and standards; 

(viii)  setting up of boat free zones at Pereybere and Mon Choisy and the project is 

(ix) 

(x) 
(xi) 

(xii) 

being extended to Flic-en-Flac; 
issue of SMS by the Tourism Authority to warn pleasure craft operators and 
skippers of adverse sea conditions; 
prohibition of Jet Ski; 
requirement  for  all  pleasure  crafts  with  carrying  capacity  above  12  persons 
operating  outside  the  lagoon  to  be  equipped  with  a  life  raft.    In  the  first 
instance, this measure is being applied to new pleasure craft licences; 
the Monitoring and Compliance Unit has been reinforced with the recruitment 
of additional Tourism Enforcement Officers at the Tourism Authority, and 

(xiii)  one year moratorium on the issue of new pleasure craft licence for commercial 

purposes with effect from 01 June, 2016. 

Madam Speaker, following the incident at  Grand River South East,  I  requested the 
Tourism  Authority  to  carry  out  a  complete  review  of  the  existing  policies  with  a  view  to 
reinforcing safety and security of pleasure craft activities. 

The new policy framework will comprise three main components, namely - 

(i) 

the “Design and construction of Crafts” component which takes into account, 
among others, the strength, stability, freeboard and down flooding of the craft 
in  accordance  with  ISO  12217.    Consultations  are  being  held  with  the  boat 
builders for design and construction standard for ferry and excursion activities 
in the future. 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

39 

the “Pleasure Craft Operations” component which provides for categorisation 
of  pleasure  crafts  and  skippers,  navigation  equipment  and  a  list  of  safety 
equipment on board of pleasure crafts, and 

the  “Pleasure  Craft  Management  System”  component  which  provides  for  a 
new  method  for  determining  the  carrying  capacity  of  crafts  not  ISO  12217 
certified, and training of skippers and crew members. 

Madam Speaker, it must be emphasised that the sea remains a dangerous place.  

Ensuring maximum level of safety and security at sea at all times is a challenge which 

requires special attention and effort from all stakeholders. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  in  relation  to  security  measures,  can  I  ask  the 
hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether - be it for accident or randomly - there are any alcohol 
tests being performed on skippers and whether this is in the law, and if not, whether he is 
considering to amend the law so as alcohol tests are being done for cases of accidents and 
also randomly? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Often,  Madam  Speaker,  I  remember  that  there  is 
provision in the law for maximum alcohol in the blood.  As to the number of tests that has 
been carried out, I need prior notice of that. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in relation to what I have just said, is there any 
medical  certificate  that  the  skipper  has  to  produce  before  getting  the  licence?    Is  there 
something like this in the law that he should be deemed fit to have his licence? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: We are looking at the whole question of the courses 
and the exams that have to be taken, Madam Speaker.  The new regulation will provide for 
the skipper on board of a commercial pleasure craft to be accompanied by a helper and the 
helper also will have to have basic skills in order to be able to take the boat back should there 
be anything happening to the skipper proper.  I am not aware whether there are medical tests 
carried out. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister enlighten the House as to whether 
there are any provisions in our regulations or law as to the admission of babies or children of 
tender age on board? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Not really.  What I must stress, Madam Speaker, is we 
are looking at the whole thing. A comprehensive document, a draft is already available and I 

 

40 

presume  within  a  fortnight  it  will  actually  be  finalised  and  issued.    We  are  looking  at  the 
whole question.  I think there must be some responsibilities also with regard to the parents, 
Madam Speaker. I mean, you cannot put a regulation for everything. That is one thing.   

Secondly,  certainly  before  taking  on  board  a  child  or  even  a  baby,  I  think  it  is  the 
responsibility of the skipper to ensure that he has appropriate life jackets for these persons. I 
am told that there are no appropriate life jackets for very young children. 

Dr. Joomaye: I would like to ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether, during the 
course  of  training  prior  to  issue  of  licence  to  a  skipper,  they  are  being  given  appropriate 
notions of lifeguard and first aid. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: In fact, this is one module that is being included in the 

new regulations, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister state whether the 

National Coast Guards are equipped to track the skippers from exceeding speed? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  We  bought,  some  time  ago, 
some speed guns and they are not totally easy to operate in conditions at sea, but they have 
equipment. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, last question! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  informed  by  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister that the wearing of life jackets is compulsory by law, but we all know, what the case 
is presently, that people do not wear these life jackets.  So, can I ask the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister  to  ensure  that  the  National  Coast  Guards  make  regular  patrol  and  when 
contravention has to be taken, it has to be taken, and at the same time to educate the people 
who are taking the boat that the wearing of life jackets is compulsory? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, you will be surprised, over the last 
month, I have given a lot of attention to the wearing of life jackets once you leave the lagoon.  
This is being done daily because we have a number of Tourism Enforcement Officers who 
have been recruited and we see generally, I must say, compliance with this regulation and this 
is  happening.    Sometimes,  the  crews  are  not  wearing  and  we  are  insisting  that  the  crew 
members also wear life jackets.  But generally speaking, I must say that the recent experience 
is that people are abiding to this, at least, when they leave the lagoon. 

41 

 
Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 
withdrawn: PQ Nos B/802, B/810, B/811, B/818 and A/35. I suspend the sitting for one and a 
half hours. 

At 1.04 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.42 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker:   Hon. Ameer Meea! 

SUPER CASH BACK GOLD & BRAMER ASSET MANAGEMENT – 

VICTIMS - REPAYMENT 

(No.  B/783)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the Super Cash Back Gold Scheme and Bramer 
Asset Management policies of the former BAI Co (Mtius) Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the National Property Fund Ltd., information as to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

quantum  of  money  recovered  by  the  Special  Administrators  as  at  to  date, 
indicating the forecasted amount to be recovered;  

amount  of  money  that  have  been  disbursed  for  the  repayment  of  the  policy 
holders of the - 

(i) 

Bramer Asset Management Ltd., and  

(ii)  

Super Cash Back Gold Scheme  

(c) 

when the policies which are assigned to the other financial institutions will be 
repaid, and  

(d) 

the subsequent amount that will be refunded, indicating – 

(i) 

(ii) 

when same will be effected, and  

the mode thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the victims of 
Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management Ltd. are being repaid a total of Rs10.3 
billion of which Rs6.8 billion was recovered by the Special Administrators to date and Rs3.5 

 

42 

billion was raised by the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development with the Bank 
of Mauritius in June 2015.  

For the forecast amount to be recovered as at date, I am informed that it is premature 
to put a figure as the Special Administrator is still in the process of recovering and realising 
assets  of  the  ex-BAI  Group  including  BAI  Exchange,  Diplomat  Gardens,  Bramer  House, 
among others.  

Added to these, I am also informed that the two biggest assets, the National Insurance 
Company Ltd. and the MauBank Holdings Ltd. will open up their share capital to potential 
investors so as to meet the future commitment made to repay eligible SCBG policyholders 
and loans of the Bank of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) (i) of the question, for the 3,177 investors of 
Bramer Asset Management Ltd, I am informed that an amount of Rs1.8 billion has been paid 
to 3,152 investors in full and final settlement as at date. For Bramer Asset Management Ltd, I 
am further informed that the FIU is scrutinising the cases of 184 investors.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, I am informed that a total 
amount of Rs7.3 billion has been repaid to 14,982 policyholders as at date out of a total of 
16,341 policyholders.   

I  am  further  informed  that  16,283  policyholders  out  of  16,341  are  eligible  for  the 
repayment and there are 475 cases which are currently being scrutinised by the FIU.  I am 
also informed that there are cases of suspected money laundering, drug  related trafficking, 
use of prête–nom and unexplained wealth. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the 

pledged policies are being repaid together with other policies.  There is no distinction. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, the repayment process is still 
on-going and the 325 victims of SCBG Scheme are yet to choose their preferred repayment 
option. 

Madam  Speaker,  for  part  (d)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  question,  those  who  have  chosen 

Option 1 will be repaid on 30 June 2017, 30 June 2018, 30 June 2019 and 30 June 2020. 

For  those  who  have  chosen  Option  2,  after  a  deduction  of  25%  of  the  capital, 

including bonuses, half is being paid immediately and half will be paid on 30 June 2019. 

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  that  the  substantive  Minister  will  make  a 

43 

comprehensive statement to further update the House on this matter. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  listened  carefully  to  what  the  hon. 
Minister  stated,  but  in  relation  to  section  (d)  (i),  the  question  was  about  the  subsequent 
amount that will be refunded. I recall the hon. Minister gave the date, but he did not give the 
amount that is remaining to be paid to Super Cash Back Gold policyholders. Does the hon. 
Minister have the amount that is left to be paid to the Super Cash Back Gold clients? 

Mr Soodhun: As I mentioned, Madam Speaker, the substantive Minister is coming 
and he will give a comprehensive statement. I am sure I am going to inform my colleague 
about the question that has been raised by my hon. friend. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Referring what the hon. Minister just stated, if he can also pass the 
message about the option that was available. As he is aware, there were Option 1 and Option 
2, but on 28 June, this year, at adjournment time, I have raised the matter of Super Cash Back 
Gold  to  the  effect  that  the  communiqué  that  was  issued  by  NPFL  for  the  client  to  choose 
between Option 1 and Option 2, they gave a notice of only four days. At adjournment time, I 
stated that this was not sufficient for the person to take into account what is Option 1 and 
Option 2 and today, there are many cases where people who have chosen Option 1 want to 
change to Option 2.  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister pass this information as well to the 
substantive Minister so that these people can be repaid as soon as possible? 

Mr Soodhun: I will, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Mahomed: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister pass on to the substantive Minister 
the following as well. There are many old people, above 90 years old, whose money are stuck 
and they need money badly. In my constituency, there are many cases. They need to go for 
surgery  and  to  do  all  kinds  of  things.  Can  consideration  be  given  to  them  as  a  matter  of 
priority for repayment purposes? 

Mr Soodhun: I will pass on the message to the hon. Minister, but I know that he will 
not  make  any  discrimination  between  young  and  old  or  those  who  are  suffering  and  have 
been victims. I think my hon. colleague is going to see to it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

 

 

44 

HAWKERS – ARTICLES SEIZED 

(No.  B/784)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the articles 
seized  by  Police  Officers  and  Inspectors  of  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis  from  the 
hawkers since January 2015 to date, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain a list thereof, 
indicating in each case – 

where same have been stored, and 
the mode of disposal thereof. 

(a) 
(b) 
Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Municipal Council of Port Louis 
that the seized articles are kept at the Central Market and at the Council’s main office. The 
mode  of  disposal  of  the  seized  articles  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  articles  seized.    For 
example -  

(i) 

(ii) 

Non-Foodstuff (haberdashery, fancy goods, plastic wares, etc.) are kept at the 
Central Market and at the main office pending the outcome in Court and in 
case the hawkers have disappeared or have bolted away, same are disposed of 
through an auction sale by the Council. 
Fruits  and  vegetables  are  usually  sent  to  orphanages  and  homes.  Foodstuff 
(cooked  foods)  are  usually  destroyed  and  sent  to  the  dumping  ground  for 
disposal due to health safety. 

I am placing in the Library of the Assembly the list of articles seized by the Police 

officers and the Inspectors of the City Council of Port Louis. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  been  informed  that  these  articles  are 
being kept at the Central Market of Port Louis. Can  I ask the hon. Minister whether there 
have been cases where these articles have been returned to its owners? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  No,  Madam  Speaker.  Usually,  these  articles  are  kept  as  exhibits  for 

Court cases.  Normally, they are not returned to the hawkers. 

Mr Ameer Meea: The hon. Minister also mentioned in his reply that these are taken 
to  auction  and  put  on  sale.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  items  had  been  put  on 
auction  and  how  much  money  has  been  realised  during  these  auctions,  if  he  can  give  the 
figures to the House? 

45 

 
Dr.  Husnoo:  The  stuff  that  was  put  on  auction  was  for  those  people  who  have 
disappeared, who have bolted away. But, as for the actual figure, in terms of amount, I don’t 
know, but I can ask for the information and let the hon. Member have it. 

Mr Uteem:  This question has been raised previously in the House and  we had the 
same  answer.  Vegetables  and  foods  that  are  seized  are  given  to  orphanages.  I  have  asked 
these orphanages, they don’t receive them. So, may I ask the hon. Minister to go and have an 
enquiry about all the vegetables and fruits that have been seized by the Inspectors and Police 
and to make an audit as to what actually happened by cross-verifying with the orphanages, 
whether they actually receive those foods or is it just a means for Inspectors to do their bazar 
for free? 

Dr. Husnoo: Well, Madam Speaker, I have got the list here on what date these foods 

were collected and sent to the orphanages. Obviously, I am going to circulate the list. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister stated that there are Court cases. May  I know 

how many Court cases there are and how many have been done with? 

Dr. Husnoo: I am afraid I won’t be able to give the hon. Member this information 

because we have a long list here.  Again, I can let him have it later. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I am going to table it. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: In relation to the articles that have been seized, can I ask the hon. 
Minister whether he has a list of the articles with their respective owners from whom these 
articles have been seized? And also, coming back to the auction sale, I think if there has been 
any sale that has been auctioned, the hon. Minister must have a figure of how much money 
has been realised. How come he has sent all the articles at auction and he does not have the 
amount of money received from this auction! 

Dr.  Husnoo:  I  mentioned  that  I  don’t  have  the  amount  now,  but  I  can  ask  the 

Municipal Council to let you have it.  They must have it somewhere. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

 

 

46 

CATTLE, GOATS & SHEEP (LIVE) - IMPORTATION 

(No. B/785) Mr A. Ameer  Meea (Second Member for  Port Louis Maritime & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection 
whether, in regard to live cattle, beef, goats and muttons, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

importers; 
sellers, and 
resellers thereof 

the number thereof imported since September 2015 to date, indicating the 
names of the – 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
the number of complaints received in connection with the 2015 Eid-Ul-Adha 
festival, indicating the outcome of the inquiries carried out thereinto, and 
if the price thereof has been fixed in the context of the forthcoming Eid-Ul-
Adha festival, indicating the – 
price per kilogramme thereof, and 
countries of origin thereof. 

(i) 
(ii) 
Mr Gungah:  Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed by 
the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  that  the  number  of  live  cattle,  goats  and  sheep  imported 
from September 2015 to 30 June 2016 is as follows – 

•  Cattle 
•  Goats 
•  Sheep 
I am further informed that Socovia (Belle Vue) Ltée was the sole importer during that 

7,633 
   831 
   823 

- 
- 
- 

 
 
 

period. 

With regard to part (a) (ii) and (iii), I am informed that normally there is no seller of 
live  animals  as  the  importer  takes  the  live  animals  to  the  Mauritius  Meat  Authority  for 
slaughtering and their carcasses are sold directly  to butchers.  It is only during the Eid-Ul-
Adha festival that live cattle are sold through resellers. 

With  your  permission,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  a  list  of  resellers  who  were 

involved in the trade of live cattle during that period. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that in my reply to PQs 
B/434  and  B/459,  at  the  sitting  of  08  September  2015,  I  informed  the  House  that  22 

 

47 

complaints, relating to the sale of cattle during Eid-Ul-Adha 2015, had been received at the 
Consumer Affairs Unit of my Ministry. 

No contravention had been established on account of lack of documentary evidence.  

Subsequently, eight more complaints were received from 14 to 22 September 2015. 
Seven at the Consumer Affairs Unit and one at the Legal Metrology Services out of which 
three were  anonymous.  The complaints related to prices being higher than the fixed price, 
inaccurate weighing scales and country of origin of the animals. Investigation was carried out 
in all the cases and no illegal practice was found. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the price thereof 
has not been fixed yet as we were waiting for the end of Ramadan in order to start the process 
of compiling information on the importation of live animals for Qurbani.  

In this regard, my Ministry has issued a press communiqué inviting all importers of 
live animals to submit their proposals to the Ministry by Thursday 21 July 2016. Once all 
information  is  obtained  a  meeting  with  relevant  stakeholders  will  be  held  early  next  week 
under the aegis of my Ministry to look into the issue of price-fixing and regulations will be 
made accordingly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Last  year  after  the  celebrations  of 
Eid-Ul-Adha whereby the price of live cattle had been fixed at Rs125 per kg, just after that 
the price of carcasses to the consumers had increased although the price had been fixed for 
the public for Eid-Ul-Adha as soon as the celebrations were over the prices of meat increased 
on the local market. So, this  year as  well, as the hon. Minister stated, there is only a sole 
importer and a sole seller, il est dans une situation de quasi monopole can I… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister to ensure that this year also this is not 

the case that when the price is fixed after that throughout the year the price is increased? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  I  can  assure  the  hon.  Member  that  after  the 
celebrations of Eid-Ul-Adha the price of beef or any other meat that is going to be sold will 
be the normal price that is being sold. But, I have got some information concerning the prices 
of cattle and beef meat for the period of Qurbani and for home consumption.  

48 

 
In fact, for Qurbani like for last year if we consider an animal of 500 kg, the price was 
Rs125 per kg that was fixed for that period. So, the purchase price came to Rs62,500. There 
is no slaughter fee and the effective price that was paid was Rs106 per half kg. Whereas for 
home consumption, if we consider the same weight of animal, that is 500 kg, it is sent to the 
slaughterhouse  and  the  carcass  weight  normally  comes  to  590  pounds, half  kg,  the  price  I 
think was Rs120 which comes to around Rs7,800 purchase price which makes the effective 
prices at Rs111.20 per half kg and this is sold at Rs120 to butchers.  

So, I can assure the hon. Member that the prevailing price that is on the market right 

now, once after the celebrations are over will be maintained for that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you. Is the Ministry envisaging putting some sort of control on 
the age of the animal that is going to be imported this year because last year there was huge 
uncertainty  about  the  age  because  according  to  the  rules  they  are  not  supposed  to  be  too 
young… 

(Interruptions) 

Two years. What precautions are being taken this year to alleviate this uncertainty? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  last  year  the  question  was  raised  and  I 
explained to the House that officers of my Ministry and that of the Ministry of Agro-Industry 
and  Food  Security,  that  is,  the  Veterinary  Services  were  present  to  check  the  age  of  the 
animal and it was found correct. But, I can assure the hon. Member that in the communiqué 
that was released from my Ministry it is precisely written that cattle intended for Qurbani 
must be aged more than two years, free from wounds and bruises and free from any handicap. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  past,  in  order  to  prevent  exploitation  during 
Qurbani period, there were suggestions that the State Trading Corporation may itself import 
live cattle and sell it.  Is this an option being  considered at this point by the State Trading 
Corporation or not? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  I  had  several  meetings  with  different 
stakeholders  on  that  issue  and  it  was  not  found  to  be  economic  because  the  market  of 
Mauritius compared to the vessels, that is, the cattle carriers do not match. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo has a question! 

 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  whether  last  year  the  market  price  of 

49 

cattle, goat and sheep had gone down? 

Mr Gungah: If we are talking about Eid-Ul-Adha, that is, Qurbani, the price went 
down  compared  to  what  it  was  in  2014  and  I  must  also  say  that  for  the  end  of  the  year 
celebrations, we had reduced the price of imported live goat and imported live sheep as well. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Yes,  last  year  there  was  confusion  on  the  price.  Firstly,  it  was 
announced that it would be Rs125 per kg, then the figure Rs140 per kg for different breed of 
cattle  was  also  announced  namely  the  Charolais.  So,  there  was  so  much  confusion  on  the 
price and some people had paid the price of Rs140. Therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister to 
ensure that this year these kinds of situations do not repeat and we have a single price for all 
types of cattle? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I agree that last year there was some sort of confusion 
in the beginning, but I also explained to the House that those who had paid more than Rs125 
would be refunded.  That was done and a communiqué was issued to clarify the situation. I 
can assure the hon. Member that this time we will make sure that everything is done properly. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

HAJJ 2015 – STAMPEDE - INVESTIGATION 

(No. B/786) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the stampede which occurred in Mina, in Saudi Arabia during the Hajj 2015, he will state 
if he has requested the Saudi Authorities for the – 

(a)  

(b)  

submission  of  a  report  on  the  outcome  of  the  investigation  carried  out  to 
determine the causes thereof, and  

payment of compensation to the families of the five Mauritians who lost their 
lives in the course thereof. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): It is 

a very good number, Madam Speaker, 786. It starts by the name of God. 

50 

 
Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Islamic Cultural Centre that the enquiry on last 
year’s stampede is still on and it is expected that the outcome thereof will be rendered public 
by the Saudi authorities in due course. 

As  regards  the  payment  of  compensation,  I  am  further  informed  that  no  country 
including India, Pakistan, Indonesia or any other country has made any claim to the Saudi 
authorities and as such the question of payment of compensation does not arise. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I did not hear properly with respect to the first part. Is it 
investigation by the Islamic Cultural Centre or by the Saudi authorities which the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister was referring to… 

Mr Soodhun: As I mentioned, the Saudi authorities will in due course and not the 

Islamic Cultural Centre. 

Mr Uteem: Last year after the event the hon. Vice-Prime Minister made a statement 

in the press and on radio with regard to, and I quote –  

« J’ai demandé une enquête afin de faire toute la lumière sur cette affaire (…) » 

And he was pinpointing a specific Hajj organiser. So, has there been any follow-up on this 
matter? 

Mr Soodhun: I have asked for the former president of the Islamic Cultural Centre to 

come up with an enquiry. In fact, they have submitted the report to us. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

CEB - ELECTRICITY METERS – TAMPERING  

(No. B/787) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the electricity meters, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to the number of reported cases of alleged tampering thereof over the 
past five years, indicating the estimated quantum of revenue lost as a result thereof and table 
a list thereof, indicating the – 

(a) 

measures taken for the recovery thereof, and  

(b)  

amount thereof recovered as at to date. 

51 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  statistics  on  the  number  of  cases  of 
tampering detected by the CEB from 2011 to date.  

 

I am informed by the Central Electricity Board, that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

It  has  a  special  cell  to  detect  cases  of  tampering.  The  cell  carries  out 
inspections on a daily basis island-wide; 

It  has  put  in  place  a  dedicated  phone  number  (401  2007)  for  the  public  to 
denounce any suspected case of tampering, and 

It  has  installed  automated  meter  reading  which  provides  more  data  and 
facilitates the detection of cases of illegal use of electricity. 

I am also informed that in any case of suspected tampering – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Initially the consumer is invited before the Revenue Protection Committee of 
the Board for explanations and to agree on the terms of payment to be made to 
the Board; 

In case no agreement is reached, the CEB issues legal notices for recovery of 
any amount due; 

In case of non-payment, the Board enters civil proceedings and/or refers the 
case to the Police as may be appropriate, and 

(iv) 

The Board may also resort to disconnection of electricity supply. 

Mr  Ramful:    I  have  been  informed  that  there  is  a  problem  at  the  level  of  the 
inspection and all depends on the frequency at which the inspections are being conducted.  
May I request the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to have a look into the matter and if instructions 
could be given so that inspections could be carried out on a timely basis, right from the start, 
so that we do not discover the tampering at a late stage, thus resulting in an increase in the 
amount of revenue lost? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I am sure that they must have a schedule of work and they 
cannot  inspect  all  houses  at  the  same  time.    I  suppose  this  is  why  sometimes  frauds  are 
detected at a late stage, resulting in heavier amounts having to be paid, but I have not much 
sympathy for fraudsters.  I am sure the hon. Member also does not share any sympathy with 

 

52 

them.  The issue is, in cases where the Fraud Detection Unit makes an error and believes that 
there is fraud.  When there is a litigious situation, then the issue must be set right very quick. 

Dr. Sorefan:  I am sure the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is aware that we have two types 
of electric meters, the old one and the new one which is tamper-proof. May we know from 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister how many of these old ones have been replaced and how many 
are left to be replaced so that we can get away with tampering? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I will need a specific question for that.  There are two types of 
meters: one is the electromechanical meters which we have mostly in our house and now, the 
automated meter readings.  I am not aware of the number of meters which we have in each 
category. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Normally,  I  would  think  that  tampering  occurs  at  the  level  of  the 
meter  itself,  the  bypass.    But  is  it  not  the  duty  of  the  meter  readers,  while  going  for  the 
monthly inspection, to read and to also verify that everything is okay? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Yes,  if  the  meter  readers  detect  it,  but  I  do  not  think  that 
fraudsters do their bypass in such a way that it is easily detected.  Normally, they have better 
ways to tamper them with the meter than in this case.  What I see is, normally, the inspections 
are targeted to the heavy consumers of electricity and the shift in meter readings alerts that 
Unit that there is a problem with this heavy consumer. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Can we know if the document that is going to be tabled also contains the 

quantum and the amount of revenue loss to the CEB over the last five years? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Absolutely, yes!  It has got the estimated loss of revenue and the 

amount actually collected. 

FLIC-EN-FLAC - SECONDARY ACCESS 

(No. B/788) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
project for the urgent provision of a new secondary access to Flic-en-Flac, he will state where 
matters stand. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/741  on  20  October  2015,  I 
informed the House that the RDA had identified an alignment for the proposed ‘Link Road to 
Flic-en-Flac’  which  extended  over  an  approximate  length  of  7  kms,  starting  near  Junction 

 

53 

Palma Road (B2) and Geoffroy Road (B91) at Beaux Songes crossing the Rivière Noire Road 
(A3)  at  Cascavelle  and  ending  at  the  Flic-en-Flac  Road  (B34)  in  the  region  of  Flic-en-
Flac/Wolmar.  

However, the RDA did not proceed with the project as the cost was on the very high 

side and the alignment passed through environmentally sensitive areas.  

Consequently,  the  RDA,  in  consultation  with  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road 
Safety  Unit identified another alignment extending from Wolmar with a link to the A3. A 
comprehensive feasibility study will be required before proceeding with the project. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed by the RDA that, in this context, a sum of Rs9 
m. has been earmarked in the budgetary proposals for this Financial Year for Consultancy 
Services for the study and design of the alignment that would also take into account the road 
safety issues in the area. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether there will be need for 
any compulsory acquisition of land or will the State land which is available there be made use 
of? 

Mr Bodha: Yes, we will make use of State land available but, definitely, we will have 

to go through some land which belongs today to the Medine Sugar Estate. 

Mr Ganoo:  May we know what will be the length of the road? 

Mr Bodha: The former alignment, Madam Speaker, was 7 kms. I think it is going to 

be around that figure. 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has mentioned that the RDA did a study for the first 
alignment and the cost was on the excessive side. May we know from the hon. Minister what 
was the amount that they proposed? 

Mr Bodha: In fact, the amount was about Rs40 m. per kilometre.  But the issue was, 
in fact, the connection with the main road and they proposed flyovers. That is why it was 
about Rs1 billion. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  there  will  be  any 

displacement of the families living in the region? 

 
Mr Bodha: From what I have been told, I think we can have an alignment where we 

54 

will not have displacement of families. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Barbier! 

PIGS – IMPORTATION  

(No. B/789)   Mr J. C.  Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW &  Port Louis West) 
asked the  Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to pigs, he  will 
state, in respect of the past five financial years, the total value and quantity thereof – 

(a) 

(b) 

imported, and  

reared locally. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  advised  that  importation  of  live  pigs  is  not 
authorised  except  for  breeding  purposes.  In  that  context,  during  the  last  five  years,  a  total 
number of 56 piglets (50 females and 6 males) have been imported from Reunion Island for a 
total value of  22,000 Euros, i.e. approximately Rs900,000.  

With regard to frozen and chilled pork meat and pork products, total imports during 
the  last  five  years  amounted  to  a  total  of  6,511  tonnes  for  a  total  value  of  Rs936  m.  As 
regards local pig production, the number of pigs reared by breeders over the last five years is 
as follows - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Year   

          Qty 

 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

23,285  

15,287  

15,961    

17,511  

21,964  

However, statistics available at the Mauritius Meat Authority (MMA) indicate that a 
total  number  of  46,266  pigs  were  slaughtered  at  the  Central  Abattoir  for  the  period  2011-
2015 as follows - 

2011 

2012 

2013 

 

 

 

- 

- 

- 

9,540 

9,990 

9,656 

55 

 

2014 

2015 

 

 

- 

- 

8,516 

8,564 

The  total  value  of  the  pig  carcasses  slaughtered  amounted  to  Rs456  m.  It  is  worth 
pointing out that the slaughter statistics do not reflect the real picture as it is suspected that a 
large number of pigs are slaughtered illegally. 

Mr Barbier:  Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Minister whether he has 
had  the  opportunity  to  meet  the  representative  of  pig  breeders  from  the  Mauritius  Pig 
Marketing  Cooperative  Federation  recently  or  whether  he  has  received  any  representation 
from any association of pig breeders and what has been the outcome? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I have set up a Pig Steering Committee at the level 
of my Ministry and since the beginning of this year, they met on two occasions, on 18 April 
2016  and  14  July  2016.    There  are  a  number  of  representatives  of  pig  breeders  who  are 
members  on  that  committee.    Their  doléances  are  being  taken  up  at  the  level  of  that 
committee. 

Mr Barbier:  The hon. Minister will agree with me that during the past years, there 
has been a considerable increase in the importation of pig carcasses and this is, I would say, 
causing much difficulty  for the pig business actually in Mauritius.  Will the hon. Minister 
consider  the  possibility  of  giving  all  the  necessary  support  so  that  the  local  producers  can 
have a maximum part of this market? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Yes, Madam Speaker, I am quite aware of that particular problem.  
That is why this committee is in place to look at ways and means as to how to improve the 
quality of the meat, and also the way the local breeders are breeding their animals.  There are 
two  problems  that  arise  with  regard  to  the  meat  that  is  being  produced  locally  which  is 
claimed by the importers that it is of poor quality and that the husbandry is off norm and that 
we  don’t  have  an  abattoir  which  is  HACCP  certified.    So,  we  are  working  towards 
overcoming those two problems with regard to having meat of better quality.  We have asked 
for a consultant to come, analyse and test the quality of the meat that we produce locally to 
ensure  whether  the  claims  made  by  the  importers  are  justified  or  not.  And  secondly,  with 
regard to the certification of the abattoir, we have already embarked on a project to make that 
abattoir HACCP certified. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

 
Mr Barbier:  With regard to the quality, the hon. Minister may be aware…. 

56 

Madam Speaker:  That is the last question on this! 

Mr Barbier:  I have two last questions, if you will allow me. 

Madam Speaker:  We have got so many other questions! 

Mr Barbier: I will go to the last one.  It is about the teledon which the pig breeders 
mentioned  in  the  Press  yesterday.    May  I  know  where  the  Rs20  m.  recovered  from  this 
teledon are, and what has been the use of it? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  that  issue  also  was  taken  up  at  the  level  of  that 
committee.  I have been told that they are claiming that - at the time when they made that 
fundraising  after  the  swine  fever  outbreak  -  there  were  some  Rs20  m.  collected.    But 
according  to  the  figures  that  I  have  obtained  from  the  Ministry,  there  were  some  Rs3  m. 
raised and the money was transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  So, that was a few  years 
back and it has already been used in the national Budget. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

CATTLE BREEDERS - GRANTS 

(No.  B/790)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  cattle 
breeders, he will state if they are entitled to a yearly grant per head of cattle or otherwise and, 
if so, indicate why some breeders have not received their grants over the past two years. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, there is no scheme at my Ministry for the payment 

of an annual grant per cattle to cattle breeders. 

However,  the  Small  Farmers  Welfare  Fund,  which  operates  under  the  aegis  of  my 
Ministry,  is  since  2013  running  the  Calf  Productivity  Incentive  Scheme.  This  Scheme 
provides for the payment of a cash grant of Rs2,500 to registered small scale cattle breeders, 
for  each  calf  of  dairy  type  on  reaching  the  age  of  3  months,  subject  to a  maximum  of  30 
weaned calves annually. 

The objective of the Scheme is to increase milk production by giving an incentive to 
cattle breeders to take better care of their calves to bring them to a later stage when they can 
be ready to produce milk.  

 
In December 2015, Government decided to extend the Scheme to calves of beef type 

57 

to encourage production of meat as well. This measure is effective as from January 2016. 

In  order  to  benefit  from  the  Scheme,  breeders  should  be  registered  with  the  Small 
Farmers Welfare Fund and the calves should be born out of artificial insemination and tagged 
by the Division of Veterinary Services prior to the application for the grant.  

I am advised by the Small Farmers Welfare Fund that all eligible breeders have been 

paid the cash grant during the last two years. 

Mr Barbier:  Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I heard on the radio recently that some 
breeders were complaining that they have not been paid since the last two years. I don’t know 
whether the hon. Minister is aware. So, may I know, apart from the criteria mentioned by the 
hon.  Minister,  whether  it  is  also  a  criterion  to  be  rearing  a  certain  number  of  heads  to  be 
eligible to have this grant? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Firstly,  I  must  say  that  from  the  information  that  I  have  from  the 
Small Farmers Welfare Fund, there is no breeder to whom money is owed.  All those who 
have sent their claims, have been refunded as per the eligibility criteria.  In terms of criteria, I 
know that there are no minimum criteria but there are upper limit criteria.  So, there is no 
minimum as such. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

BEACH AUTHORITY – IRON SHEETS STRUCTURES 

(No.  B/791)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
beaches, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Beach Authority, information 
as to if consideration will be given for the advisability of stopping the proliferation of the use 
of iron-sheet structures by commercial traders thereat and making provision for appropriate 
buildings to be erected in dedicated areas for the location of the said traders. 

The  Minister  of  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):    Madam  Speaker,  I  am 
informed that the Beach Authority has not issued any new Beach Trader’s Licence as from 
the year 2015… 

Madam Speaker:  Are you replying to PQ B/791? 

Dr. Husnoo:  PQ B/791, yes! Sorry, I will start again.   

58 

 
I  am  informed  that  the  Beach  Authority  has  not  issued  any  new  Beach  Trader’s 
Licence  as  from  the  year  2015  with  a  view  to  stopping  the  proliferation  of  all  trading 
structures (including iron sheet structures) on public beaches.  

I am also informed that action has already been initiated by the Beach Authority for 
the preparation of a Beach Management Plan which includes measures to harmonise beach 
activities through implementation of traders’ zones.   

In this context, all beach traders will be relocated to the designated traders’ zones in 

an environmentally friendly structure.  

Mr Barbier:  Madam Speaker, I am happy to hear that some actions are being taken.  

May I know whether there is a time frame for that plan to be completed? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Well, actually the meeting took place at the Beach Authority on 26 June 
2015.  So, they are just waiting for the availability of funds and then they are going to start 
the project. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  situation  at  the  Flic-en-Flac 
beach  is  also  being  looked  into?   I  have  myself  raised  the  matter  previously  in  the  House 
about  the  proliferation  of  many  beach  traders  building  their  commercial  slots  in  whatever 
way they want.  Is the situation at Flic-en-Flac beach also being addressed? 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Yes,  Madam  Speaker.    On  a  pilot  basis,  the  structures  would  be 
implemented  on  three  public  beaches,  namely,  Grand’Baie,  Trou  aux  Biches  and  Flic-en-
Flac. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Barbier! 

POINTE AUX SABLES & BAIE DU TOMBEAU – CLEANING & MAINTENANCE 

(No.  B/792)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  beaches  of  Pointe  aux 
Sables and of Tombeau Bay which do not fall within the purview of the Beach Authority, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the measures taken by his Ministry 
for the cleaning and maintenance thereof. 

59 

 
Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, all proclaimed public beaches 
are managed and maintained by the Beach Authority whereas other beaches which consist of 
Pas Géométriques are under the control of the Ministry of Housing and Lands.   

As far as Baie du Tombeau is concerned, Baie du Tombeau, the upper part near the 
bus stop is not a proclaimed public beach and cleaning is being done by the District Council 
of Pamplemousses.   

Tombeau Bay, lower part, known as Le Goulet public beach is a proclaimed public 
beach  and  cleaning  is  being  done  by  the  scavenging  contractor  and  the  Ministry  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, Disaster and Beach Management.   

As far as Pointe aux Sables is concerned, Pointe aux Sables, near Débarcadère is not a 
proclaimed public beach.  This beach is vested in the Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine 
Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands,  the  Fisheries  Division  and  cleaning  is 
being done by that Ministry. 

Pointe aux Sables, near Ti Lac, is a popular beach and not a proclaimed public beach. 
Cleaning  is  being  done  by  the  scavenging  contractor  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment.  The 
five lots at Pointe aux Sables are proclaimed as public beach and cleaning is being done as 
follows – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

Pointe aux Sables, near Martello Tower, by the FSU of the Local Government; 

Pointe aux Sables, near the Fisheries, FSU of the Local Government; 

Pointe aux Sables (main), scavenging contractor, Ministry of Environment; 

Pointe  aux  Sables  (La  Pointe),  lot  1,  scavenging  contractor,  Ministry  of 
Environment; 

Pointe  aux  Sables  (La  Pointe),  lot  2,  scavenging  contractor,  Ministry  of 
Environment; 

Mr Barbier: You will agree with me, Madam Speaker, with the lots of authorities 
concerned, it is not easy for even the public to  know to whom to address when there is a 
problem.  So,  as  concerned,  still  we  have  some  beaches  which  are  pas  géométriques  and 
which are not on the list of these authorities. For example, in Pointe aux Sables, there are 
frequently dead trees which cause an obstruction to the people around. Will the Minister see 
to it that, at least, a Committee be set up to manage all these cleaning needed so that those 
parts of the pas géométriques are taken care of too? 

60 

 
Dr.  Husnoo:  Yes.  I  agree,  Madam  Speaker,  that  there  are  lots  of  people  who  are 
looking  after  the  beaches,  but,  as  you  are  aware,  as  far  as  the  proclaimed  beaches  are 
concerned,  we  have  about  118  under  the  Beach  Authority.  As  far  as  the  other  pas 
géométriques are concerned, we have hundred kilometres. I agree that, at present, it is a bit of 
a mess; there are so many actors trying to clean these places. I think the hon. Member is right. 
I will have a meeting with all the Ministries concerned: Environment, Fisheries, Housing and 
Lands to try to sort it out. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Oree! 

PUMP ROAD, ROCHE BOIS – AUCTION MARKET – SECURITY MEASURES 

(No.  B/793)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Local Government whether he will state if he is aware of the 
precarious security situation at Pump Road, in Roche Bois, during the early morning auction 
sales  of  vegetables  and  fruits  and,  if  so,  will  he,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
information  as  to  the  measures  taken  to  ensure  the  safety  of  the  stakeholders  thereof, 
especially, that of the planters. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Municipal Council of Port Louis 
that the auction site operates as from Mondays to Saturdays and is open from 1.00 a.m. to 
10.30 a.m. the site is adequately lighted and provided with watchmanship services. 

I have requested the Municipal Council to be more vigilant in the management of the 

Auction Market and prevent any unlawful economic activity to take place. 

The Municipal City Council of Port Louis has responded promptly to this request and 
illegal sellers are now prevented from operating in these areas. During the last weekend, a 
large amount of goods was confiscated and the illegal hawkers were prevented to carry out 
their trade. Obviously, this operation is going to continue. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Fanfaron  Police  Station  is  providing  both  foot  and 
mobile patrols between midnight and 10.30 a.m. during the operation of the auction sales. A 
static police vehicle with two Police Officers are also deployed at the site. In addition to these 
measures, the Divisional Supporting Unit and the ERS personnel are also providing regular 
mobile patrols thereat as from 18.00 hours on the eve and until the auction sale is over, that 
is, around 10.30 a.m. 

 

 

61 

MPs - OVERSEAS MISSIONS - EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/794)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the overseas 
missions undertaken by  the hon. Ministers, he will state the number thereof effected since 
January  2015  to  date,  indicating  the  expenditure  incurred  in  relation  thereto  in  terms  of 
airfares, per diem and other allowances. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, the number of missions undertaken by hon. Ministers 
during the 18-month period from 01 January 2015 to 30 June 2016 was 184. The expenditure 
details are being compiled and will be tabled. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the schedule of per diem payable to 
officials, including Ministers and Members of Parliament proceeding on missions abroad, has 
been reviewed  and rationalised and for  certain categories, the rates of  per diem have been 
revised downward. In addition, the rates of entertainment allowance payable have also been 
reduced. 

Furthermore, with a view to making judicious use of the funds allocated for missions 
abroad,  financial  clearance,  as  from  01  July  2016,  has  been  centralised  at  the  level  of  my 
Ministry and strict control is being exercised with regard to disbursement of funds.  

In this respect, Supervising Officers have been requested to - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

prepare an Annual Mission Plan with the objective to prioritise and plan 
missions abroad; 
keep the number of delegates to strict minimum, except for missions where 
specific technical skills may be required; 
have  recourse  to  our  representatives  in  Overseas  Embassies  and  High 
Commissions  for  attending  those  international  events,  conferences  and 
meetings where possible, and  
also  make  maximum  use  of 
telecommunication facilities. 

teleconferencing  and  other  modern 

Mr Bhagwan: I thank the hon. Minister of Finance for the first part of his reply - 184. 
Can I know from the hon. Minister when the Assembly will be apprised of the figures on how 
much had been spent? I am sure it won’t take so long to be compiled. So, can we have an idea 
when the figures can be made available to the National Assembly? 

 
Mr Jugnauth: Well, Madam Speaker, when all the information have been compiled 

62 

and sent to the Ministry, of course, we will give the information. 

Mr Bhagwan: I am sure the message has been well received four-by-four by certains 
pigeons voyageurs. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether there has been a circular 
sent to the different Ministries, especially the Ministers who travel so often, so that they can 
start preparing themselves for téléconference? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  in  fact,  the  circular  has  been  sent  to  all  Ministries  because 
everybody is concerned. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we should see to it that whenever we 
need to proceed on mission, it must really be in the interest of the country; whatever missions 
we attend must bring certain dividends to the country. That’s why we need to analyse and 
judge according to each mission; first of all, according to our resources because the resources 
are  limited,  whether  we  are  able  to  afford  to  send  not  only  Ministers  but  officers  also  to 
attend those conferences. 

Mr Mahomed: Prior to the centralisation of missions at the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development as from 01 July 2016, would the hon. Minister be able to indicate to 
the House whether there have been Ministries that had exceeded their allocated budget for 
missions and which have had to come to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
to seek for additional funds to sustain missions that they had to go for? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I  don’t have the information, but I, probably, can  recall there 

must have been some Ministries. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware that there is a small 
trick  going on. When there is no fund available at the level of the Ministry of  Finance or 
other  Ministry,  there  is  a  small  trick  of  travelling  through  the  parastatal  bodies  of 
Government-owned companies falling under the Ministers’ purview? Can the hon. Minister 
check whether there are Ministers who have travelled through the vote of certain parastatal 
bodies, companies, State-owned companies? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, as a matter of principle, the Minister cannot do that. They have 
to apply to the Ministry. Well, previously, it was under their own vote, but, as I have just 
answered in my reply, now it is being centralised. In fact, we are going back to the old system 
where they will have to seek the approval of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of 
Finance, so they cannot. I mean, I don’t see somebody, a Minister who is going to use the 
funds of a parastatal body; in the event that somebody does that, he will have to account for. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

63 

Last question on this! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  while  compiling  questions  asked  by  the  hon.  Government  Chief 
Whip, at the same time give us information… 

… for the past five years… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

….for  all  Ministers  who  have  been  travelling,  the  countries,  the  per  diem,  allowance  and 
everything… 

… so that we can compare what is going on… 

(Interruptions) 

Compare and contrast… 

Mr Jugnauth: I can… 

I can certainly do that, but… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Since  2015.  No,  I  am  just  drawing  attention  that  the  question 

relates since January 2015. 

Mr Jugnauth: Yes. The hon. Member wants an extension backwards! 

(Interruptions) 

So, probably we can do that. But, that will take me even more time! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

 

64 

STATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION - INVESTMENT 

(No.  B/795)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  State 
Investment Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom – 

(a) 

details  of  the  returns  thereof  which  have  been  invested  into  the  Mauritius 
Telecom, since January 2015 to date, and  

(b) 

the status of the investments thereof abroad. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the State Investment Corporation 
has no investment in Mauritius Telecom and therefore no return. Therefore, as regards part 
(b), the question does not arise. 

ROBINSON-GLEN PARK LINK ROAD PROJECT 

(No.  B/796)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Robinson-Glen Park Link Road Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Road Development Authority, information as to –  

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

the estimated cost thereof; 

the expected start and completion dates thereof, and  

if compulsorily acquisition of lands will be resorted to therefor and, if so, give 
details as to the plots of lands that have been earmarked therefor, indicating in 
each case the – 

(i)  

extent thereof, and  

(ii)  

estimated amount of compensation to be paid therefor. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the RDA that the Robinson-Glen Park 
Link Road project consists of the upgrading and widening of an existing track road of length 
1.6 km into an asphaltic concrete single carriageway 6.0 m wide from  Malakoff  Bridge at 
Glen Park running across agricultural lands and ending near Robinson Government School in 
Curepipe. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the project 
was estimated to cost Rs49.9 m. (including VAT). However, following a tendering exercise 

 

65 

launched  by  the  RDA  on  11  March  2016,  the  lowest  evaluated  bidder  proposed  a  sum  of 
Rs43.8 m., including VAT. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  project  will  start  after 
completion of the land  acquisition procedures by  the Ministry  of Housing  and  Lands. The 
project is expected to last eight months. 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed by the Ministry of Housing and Lands that there 
are  41  plots  of  land  which  are  being  compulsorily  acquired  for  the  project.  Notices  under 
section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act have been published in the Government Gazette on 18 
June 2016 and on 02 July 2016.  In line with the legal provisions of 14 days’ delay after the 
second  publication  of  Notice  under  Section  6  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  Notices  under 
section  8  are  being  submitted  by  my  Ministry  to  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for 
publication.  

In the meantime, the RDA is seeking permission with the landowners to have entry on 

land for survey purposes. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  am  tabling  information  in  regard  to  the 

landowners and the corresponding extent of land to be acquired from each one. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) (ii), I am informed by the Ministry of Housing and 
Lands that the amount of compensation payable to landowners will only be determined by the 
Valuation Department upon the first publication of the Notice under Section 8 of the Land 
Acquisition Act in the Government Gazette. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, thank you for the supplementary question. Can the 
hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  a  Traffic  Impact  Assessment  Report  has  been 
prepared in view of the delicate site of the region? 

Mr Bodha: Well, what I can say is that this project has been on for the last 15 years. 
In fact, different Ministers have addressed this project and between 2010 and 2015 a cement 
track was proposed and this is seen as a bypass between Glen Park and Curepipe which will, 
in fact, alleviate traffic to go through La Marie to Curepipe.  

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether on Thursday 22 June 
2016,  there  was  a  meeting  chaired  by  him  and  the  planters  where  some  of  them  made 
representations concerning the extent of land which was going to be compulsorily purchased? 

66 

 
Mr Bodha: Yes, we had a meeting to inform the planters about the project and some 
of  them  were,  I  think,  surprised  by  the  extent  of  land  that  we  are  taking.  Well,  this  is  a 
technical alignment. So, we are trying to talk to them to see to it that the project would be 
implemented and it will be to their benefit. 

Mr Bhagwan: One more question, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister inform us 
whether  he  received  representations  concerning  the  alignment  itself  from  several  planters 
because  they  have  been  there  for  years?  Will  the  Minister  also  consider  the  possibility  of 
reviewing,  with  his  technicians,  the  alignment  because  these  people  have  been  growing 
vegetables for  years and it would be a problem for them? So, can the Minister inform the 
House whether he is agreeable to meet again the planters to review le tracé?  

Mr Bodha: Anyway, the area of land we need for the road, Madam Speaker, is going 
to be the same. So, if we don’t take it from one planter we have to take it from somebody 
else. But, I am prepared to reconsider the alignment. The problem is that we have already 
awarded the contract. We have now to allocate the land for the project. This may, to some 
extent, postpone the project for some time, but what we can do - because it is also my own 
constituency - I think we will have a meeting with the planters to see whether we can have 
another alignment in such a manner that nobody feels that he has been to some extent the 
person who is giving more land than others. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Recently  we  have  had  cases  of  accidents,  so  can  the  hon.  Minister 
inform the House whether within the contract all these questions of road accidents, security 
aspect and lighting have been taken into consideration? The hon. Minister just informed us 
that the contract has been awarded, can we know to whom the contract has been awarded? 

Mr Bodha: The contract has been awarded to Gamma Construction, Madam Speaker, 
and the issue of lighting and road safety has been taken into account when we have designed 
the alignment of the road. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question! 

FREE PUBLIC TRANSPORT SCHEME - STUDY 

(No. B/797) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Free 
Public  Transport  Scheme,  he  will  state  if  consideration  is  being  given  for  a  review  of  the 

 

67 

present  policy  thereof  and  for  the  introduction  of  alternative  measures  in  respect  of  the 
elderly persons, the students and the other beneficiaries thereof. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  Question  B/468  at  the  sitting  of  the 
National Assembly on 08 September 2015, I drew the attention of the House that the present 
system is fraught with a number of flaws and a study would be carried out to re-engineer the 
whole  public  transport  system.  This  would  include  an  assessment  of  the  free  bus  travel 
scheme  and  recommendations  for  a  more 
transparent,  efficient  and  cost-effective 
management  of  the  free  transport  payment  mechanism  effected  by  Government  to  bus 
operators since a number of years now. 

Madam  Speaker,  after  a  tender  exercise  the  contract  for  consultancy  services  for  a 
study to re-engineer the public transport industry in Mauritius was awarded on 29 June 2016 
to  PricewaterhouseCoopers.  The  consultant  would  start  the  assignment  on  the  date  of 
signature of the contract agreement which is due in the days to come and the study will be 
completed within a period of six months.  

We  will  await  the  recommendations  of  the  Consultants  and  I  welcome  any  valid 

proposal from Members of the House for this study to be the best we can have. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House since the introduction of this 
scheme, how many cases have been reported to his Ministry whereby bus drivers refused to 
pick up elderly persons and students in the morning while going to school? 

Mr Bodha: I don’t have the exact figure, but we know that we have had numerous 
complaints  and  there  have  been  disciplinary  committees  which  have  been  held  by  the 
National Transport Authority. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister state whether there have been cases where bus 
owners have been paid while the buses were not operating and, if so, can we know how many 
and what action has been taken against these bus owners? 

Mr Bodha: No, I don’t have the number, Madam. But, I know that there have been 
many complaints and we know that this system which has cost us over the years from 2005 to 
now about Rs10 billion and it is costing us today Rs1.2 billion and it is a system where, in 
fact,  the  NTA  just  acts  as  a  paying  agent.  There  is  no  accountability.  In  fact,  there  was  a 
Private  Notice  Question  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  when  the  poor  student  fell 
down from the bus. Then we implemented a system where we have now accountability and 

 

68 

we know which bus goes to which school, at what time, who are the drivers, the conductors 
and the number of students travelling. We have no account. 

In  fact,  as  regards  the  elderly,  it  is  based  only  on  a  presumption  that  40%  of  the 
elderly travelled.  We know all the abuse that has been done, students, old age pensioners and 
disabled people are not picked up; students arrived late at school and that school buses picked 
up  students  late  at  school  in  the  afternoon.  Bus  operators  are  unwilling  to  provide  school 
buses and also of buses staying at home and getting the allowance!  So, for the first time it is 
going to be a thorough study which will see to it that we have an accountable system. I think 
we should have an electronic system where we pay only when the students have travelled or 
when  the  elderly  have  travelled.    I  think  this  study  will  help  us  to  see  also  a  more  cost-
effective system. I am sure that we should be able to make less wastage in the way this is 
being done.  It has been, at least, one billion per year for the last ten years. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether in that study he will include 
the fate of students who are disabled, who cannot travel by public transport and that a specific 
provision be made for them so that they can attend universities and schools? 

Mr Bodha: That is where the semi-low floor buses come in.  In fact, everywhere now 
we  have  low-floor  buses.    I  think  that  addressing  this  problem  for  the  elderly,  for  the 
disabled, is going to be a priority in the study. 

the  hon.  Minister 

inform 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Will 

that 
PricewaterhouseCoopers  is  an  auditing  company,  whether  it  has  the  experience  in  doing 
transport studies or will it subcontract this study to other people and knowing very well also 
that  we  have  studies  from  the  University  of  Mauritius.    In  fact,  Mr  Raghuputt  did  some 
studies.  What happened to all these studies which we have been hearing in the past years? 

the  House,  knowing 

Mr Bodha: The Cahier des Charges, terms of reference has been made.  A tender 
exercise  was  carried  out.    We  have  also  had  the  approval  of  the  Agence  Française  de 
Développement as regards the choice of the Consultant.  This consultancy is going to cost us 
Rs15 m. and it is going to be funded by l’Agence Française de Développement. 

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister confirm to the House that since the introduction 
of this scheme, there have been many school vans all over the island carrying school children 
in the morning and in the afternoon whereby these school children do not get the privilege of 
having free transport, and if so, what measure will the hon. Minister consider to take? 

69 

 
Mr  Bodha:  I  think  we  should  not  start  something  we  cannot  stop.  I  would  like  to 
answer to what hon. Dr. Sorefan said with regard to the studies done.  In fact, a few studies 
have  been  done  and  the  terms  of  reference  is  to  see  to  it  that  we  make  good  use  of  the 
available data and documents.  Madam Speaker, all the studies carried out in the past have 
shown one thing, that it was the least worst solution. I think what we should do now is to find 
the best effective solution. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Will the hon. Minister agree with me that the school vans carrying the 

students are doing a better job than the bus owners carrying students in the morning? 

Mr Bodha: This is a matter of opinion, Madam Speaker.  I do not think so. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question! 

NTC – BUS ROUTES 

(No. B/798) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg &Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
National  Transport  Corporation,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  routes  presently  serviced  by  buses  belonging  thereto, 
indicating the routes which are non-profitable and the measures that will be taken in relation 
thereto. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Transport Corporation 

that, as at date, the Corporation has a fleet of 589 buses.  

  Out of the 284 bus routes over the island, 92 routes are regularly serviced by buses 
of  the  National  Transport  Corporation  (NTC)  while  two  routes  are  operated  on  special 
occasions for Maha Shivaratri and Ganga Asnan (Route 125) from La Caverne to Curepipe 
via Vacoas. Out of these 92 routes, 53 routes are non-profitable ones, while 39 are profitable. 

On  a  daily  basis,  150,000  passengers  commute  through  the  NTC  buses  with  an 
average revenue of Rs5,000 per bus.  However, a profitable bus should bring in a revenue of 
around of Rs7,500, which is not the case in some routes. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the fare structure has been made in 
such a manner that it has impacted negatively on the National Transport Corporation. There 
is a pressing need to re-engineer some of the routes. In fact, this is being considered in the 
study and this will be taken care as I said in the study. For example, presently from Rivière 

 

70 

des Galets to Port  Louis, the fare is Rs37, while from Rivière des Galets to Curepipe it is 
Rs34  only,  implying  that  from  Curepipe  to  Port  Louis,  the  fare  is  Rs3.  However,  the  fare 
from  Curepipe  to  Port  Louis  is  Rs34  when  you  take  the  bus  in  Curepipe.    So,  the  fare 
structure itself has to be re-engineered. 

The Corporation is accordingly taking a series of measures to redress the situation. 
One of these strategies is the re-engineering of the bus routes. The followings are among the 
main remedial measures that are being taken – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Conversion  of  social  routes  into  routes  where,  at  least,  operating  costs  are 
recuperated; 

Rationalisation  of  off-peak  services  on  non-profitable  routes  into  profitable 
ones; 

(iii)  Bus routes should be shortened so as to eliminate unproductive kilometres and 

recuperate short distance passengers; 

(iv) 

Smart  buses  with  smart  lines  will  be  operated  using  the  GPS  with  online 
monitoring of services through a Control Centre.  These smart lines will be 
introduced from Curepipe to Quatre Bornes via Floreal and St Paul, provided 
that the necessary infrastructures are put in place; 

(v) 

Tracking down illegal operators plying along the route networks of the NTC 
with the collaboration of the National Transport Authority and the Police; 

(vi)  Reducing duty curtailment and lateness on schedule and tracking of pilferage; 

(vii)  Strengthening  of  profitable  routes  by  abiding  to  schedule  timetable  and 

readjusting increasing frequency of departures during peak time, and 

(viii)  Providing real time information to passengers via mobile applications. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  objective  of  the  Corporation  is  to  have  one-third  of  its  routes 
profitable, one-third to be social and the remaining one-third to break-even.  
We  will 
not  forget  the  mission  of  the  Corporation  which  is  to  become  the  backbone  of  the  public 
transport system with quality service. 

Mr Jhugroo: I just heard the hon. Minister saying that CNT is going to re-engineer 
the  system  where  the  53  routes  are  non-profitable.    Would  the  hon.  Minister  ask  the 
management  to  try  to  consider  if  there  is  a  possibility  to  use  smaller  buses  without 

 

71 

conductors, as it was before, or having mini-vans where the routes are not so profitable and 
where there are less passengers? 

Mr Bodha: Well, this is a suggestion that we are going to consider. 

Mr Mahomed: Are these 53 routes non-profitable because precisely there vans are 

plying along these routes as ‘vans marron’? 

Mr Bodha: No. Most of them are what we call ‘social routes’, that is, they are routes 
which are, in fact, provided  for where the bus transport system is provided only by the CNT. 
No  public/private  company  or  no  private/individual  bus  owners  want  to  operate  on  those 
lines. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform us right now how many routes are served 
by the semi-low floor buses and whether he has received representations to that effect?  We 
have heard recently that the running cost of these semi-low floor buses are a bit higher. 

Mr Bodha: I would like to thank the hon. Member for putting this question, in fact. 
First of all, we had buses which were, in fact, based on chassis for lorries.  They were 64 
seats with three seats and two seats and the engine was just underneath the driver, Madam 
Speaker.   

So, for 10 or 15 years, the drivers were sitting on an engine.  The semi-low floor bus 
has changed this dramatically because the engine is at the back. The second fact is that the 
semi-low  floor  bus  is  more  adequate  for  people  to  access  those  buses,  the  elderly  and  the 
disabled. There is an increase in the consumption, but the buses, in fact, are providing a better 
service.   

As regards the routes, the NTA has done a study, a survey of routes where the semi-
low floor buses can travel and they are the main routes, in fact. It is Route No. 3. They are the 
routes from Rivière du Rempart to Port Louis and semi-low floor buses will not be used on 
routes  where  technically  this  is  not  possible,  for  example,  in Rodrigues.    But  the  law  was 
passed  by  the  former  Government  and  never  implemented.    We  are  going  to  make  an 
adjustment because I think it is a very valid suggestion that semi-low floor buses should be 
used as intra-urban buses, that is, where it is possible to drive in all comfort.  But the solution 
for  Mauritius,  Madam  Speaker,  is  electric  buses  and  we  should  gradually  move  from  the 
diesel buses to the hybrid buses and then to the electric buses because we are told that we 
have got one of the purest air in the world, and the best way to do that is to control the carbon 

 

72 

emission as regard to public transport; when you imagine that we have 589 buses only at the 
CNT; 2,000 in the country and we have about 150,000 people travelling every day. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Would the hon. Minister agree with me that consumption of fuel is not 
only on model of buses, it also depends on the drivers, the way they drive, the route, whether 
it is on hill, it is steep, all depends on this, not only on the model of the buses? 

Mr Bodha:  It is a very valid suggestion, Madam Speaker. In fact, we are starting a 
day course for 200 drivers and with my colleague at the MITD, the Ministry of Education and 
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, we are having a three months’ 
driving course.  I think it is not only the consumption of fuel, but the spare parts; the amount 
of spare parts we use; the maintenance of the buses depend a lot on the way the drivers adjust 
to the new buses and we have brought some engineers from China to help us to make the 
drivers better. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS TRIBUNAL - RECONSTITUTION 

(No. B/799) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training whether, in regard to 
the Employment Relations Tribunal, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to if it has been reconstituted for a period of three years since April 2016 and, 
if not, why not. 

Mr  Callichurn:    Madam  Speaker,  the  Employment  Relations  Tribunal  commonly 
known  as  ERT,  set  up  under  section  85  of  the  Employment  Relations  Act  2008,  was  last 
reconstituted for a period of three years in December 2012.   

Following amendment brought to section 85 (2) (c) of the Employment Relations Act 
2008 in 2013, three additional members were appointed for a period of three years in August 
2013.   

Consultations are presently being carried out to reconstitute the ERT.  

In the meantime, pending the next reconstitution exercise, the Tribunal is functioning 

by virtue of section 31 (3) of the Interpretation and General Clauses Act. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

73 

 
Dr.  Sorefan:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  this  lateness  in 
constituting this ERT, doesn’t come from your Ministry that is late in selecting people?  The 
Syndicates  have  already  proposed  their  names.    It  is  only  from  the  Government  side  that 
nomination of people is late. 

Mr Callichurn:  Like I said, following the amendment brought to the Employment 
Relations Act in 2013 three additional members were added to the existing list of members.  
Their appointment will come to an end in August 2016. So, I don’t see why I should rush 
when the Board will have to be reconstituted again. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

MAUBANK - EX-NCB & EX-MPCB LTD –  EMPLOYEES 

(No. B/800) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the employees of 
the ex-Bramer Bank (ex-NCB) and the ex-MPCB Ltd, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the MauBank, information as to – 

(a) 

the  number  thereof,  in  each  case,  who  have  been  re-employed  in  the 
MauBank,  indicating  their  respective  terms  and  conditions  of  employment, 
and  

(b) 

if there is any disparity in salary for the same grade in the MauBank. 

Mr  Jugnauth:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  MauBank  that  on  04  January 
2016, all the 354 employees of ex-NCB and the 331 ex-MPCB employees, that is, a total 685 
employees were re-employed by MauBank.  Their terms and conditions upon transfer were 
those prevailing in December 2015 with their ex-employer. 

The  Board  then  immediately  initiated  a  harmonisation  exercise  which  became 

effective on 01 May 2016.  

All  employees  were  offered  the  new  terms  and  conditions  and  all  of  them  have 

accepted. 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Those  who  are  from  the  ex-Bramer,  ex-NCB  employees,  have  their 

salaries been brought down to that of the ex-MPCB? 

74 

 
Mr Jugnauth:  Well, I don’t know about whether any officer’s salary has changed, 
but what I know is that I have been informed that all of them were being offered their new 
terms and conditions and that all of them have accepted. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Minister has just mentioned that 
all the 685 staffs have agreed to the new terms and conditions.  May I know from the hon. 
Minister  what  happened  to  those  employees  who  were  performing  identical  tasks?    I  am 
talking  about  things  like  Human  Resource  Managers.  I  mean,  we  don’t  need  two  Human 
Resource Managers once you have done the exercise. How has that been resolved? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, I suppose the new management that is at MauBank they must 
have looked at the duties of all the employees coming whether from the NCB and MPCB and 
have found it fit that these people were going to be employed in probably a capacity that they 
would be fulfilling their responsibilities that are required by MauBank and, therefore, offered 
these new terms and conditions for the employment. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development compile 
and table the salaries of all the Senior Management officers of the ex-Bramer Bank and the 
ex-MPCB Bank? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, I don’t think it would be proper to compile all the salaries and 
then to table.  If there is any specific question with regard to an officer, if any hon. Member 
finds maybe something is not appropriate, maybe a question can be put or I can also find out 
off record and give the hon. Member – any hon. Member, I am talking in this House - but I 
do not think it is going to be appropriate and proper to table. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last question! 

Dr. Sorefan:  I was about to go on one line of asking the salary of the CEO, but the 

hon. Minister has said.  I will come with a proper question. 

PUBLIC SECTOR – EARLY VRS – RE-EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT 
(No. B/801) Dr R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, Sustainable 
Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the employees of 
the  public  sector  who  have  retired  under  the  Early  Voluntary  Retirement  Scheme  since 

 

75 

January  2015  to  date,  he  will  state  the  number  thereof  who  have  been  re-employed  on 
contract, indicating in each case, the terms and conditions of contract thereof, including the 
duration thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MITD – BOARD COMPOSITION & DIRECTOR 

(No. B/802) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development, she will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) composition of the Board thereof, indicating in each case, the terms and conditions of 

appointment thereof, including the allowances drawn; 
(b) name of the Officer-in-Charge thereof, indicating the-  

(i)  terms and conditions of appointment thereof, including the allowances drawn, and  
(ii) the reasons as to why no Director has been appointed following the retirement of 

Professor Dubois on or about 2012, and  

(c) reasons as to why the transfer of staff from the ex-IVTB to the MITD has not been 

completed as at to date. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn: PQ Nos. B/819, B/820, B/823 and B/824.  Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

  

 

 

 

 

 

(4.01 p.m.) 

76 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTER 

TRANQUEBAR – SQUATTERS - RELOCATION 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  wish  to  make  a  statement  in  reply  to  the  issue 
regarding occupation of State land at Tranquebar by squatters raised at the Adjournment time 
by hon. Uteem on 12 July last.   

Due to the implementation of the Ring Road Project, 82 squatters at Tranquebar are 
being  relocated  at  Pointe  aux  Sables.    Drawing  of  lots  exercise  was  carried  out  on  13 
November 2015 whereby the squatters have been allocated their respective lot.  Since then, 
my Ministry has been working on the modalities to enable these squatters to become owners 
of their respective housing units and leases of their respective plot of land.  

The  current  policy  of  my  Ministry  is  to  grant  a  building  site  lease  and  the  lessee 
constructs  his  own  residential  unit.    However,  in  the  present  case,  the  squatters  are  being 
allocated State land on which already stands a residential unit.   

According to discussions which were held with officers of the State Law Office and 
the  various  possible  options  for  the  drawing  up  to  the  lease  agreement,  two  options  were 
proposed by the State Law Office. 

Firstly,  the  Ministry  had  the  possibility  to  draw  up  two  separate  pieces  of  legal 
documents, that is, a notarial deed for the sale of the residential unit and the lease agreement 
for the lease of the State land on which stands the residential unit. 

The second option would be the drawing up of only one legal document whereby all 
the conditions attached to the lease of the land  and conditions attached  to the lease of the 
residential unit would be embodied in a single lease agreement. In this case, the residential 
unit  would  not  have  been  sold,  but  would  have  been  leased.  After  payment  of  the  rental 
equivalent of the subsidised cost of the housing unit, a notarial deed would then have been 
drawn for the sale of the residential unit. 

Madam Speaker, it was observed that the two options raised complex issues. In the 
first option, in the case of lease defaults in the payment of the instalment of the residential 
unit: the lease may be cancelled. However, if the other conditions related to the lease of the 

 

77 

land  have  been  complied  with,  it  would  be  difficult  to  cancel  the  lease  and  request  the 
occupier to vacate the land and building. 

With respect to the second option, if the beneficiary is paying his monthly rental for 
the  residence,  but  he  is  not  complying  with  other  conditions  for  the  lease  of  the  land,  the 
same  problem  would  arise  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  cancel  the  lease  and  request  the 
beneficiary to vacate the land and building. 

After thorough examination of these two options, my Ministry has decided that the 

National Housing Development Co. Ltd be requested to manage the project. 

I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  residential  units  were  constructed  by  the  State  Land 
Development  Co.  Ltd.  for  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  and  the  handing-over 
exercise is being finalised. The housing unit is, thereafter, sold by my Ministry to the NHDC 
at the nominal price and the latter will sell it to the beneficiary. Conditions related to the lease 
of the land will be incorporated in the deed of sale of the housing unit. 

The  Central  Electricity  Board  and  the  Central  Water  Authority  have  already  been 
requested to do needful to provide power and water supply respectively when a beneficiary 
makes an application. 

I want to reassure the House that I am addressing this issue with the diligence that it 

warrants.  

HAJJ 2016 – VISAS & SERVICE FEES 

Madam Speaker, with your permission.  Recently there has been much interest shown 
in this House and in the general public in the matters relating to Hajj organisation and the 
cost implications thereof. 

I would, therefore, with your permission, Madam Speaker, wish to inform the House 

on some pertinent issues concerning the Hajj 2016. 

During  my  recent  stay  in  Saudi  Arabia  where  I  went  for  the  Umrah  pilgrimage,  I 
seized  the  opportunity  to  meet  various  dignitaries  of  the  Kingdom,  including  His  Majesty 
King Salman and His Royal Highness Prince Mohammad Bin Salman, to discuss Hajj matters 
for which I have been given the responsibility by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

The  main  issues  for  the  Hajj  2016  relate  to  visas  for  Mauritian  pilgrims  and  the 

various costs of the services that will be provided to the pilgrims.  

 
Costs of Hajj include various components. The main ones are service fees, the local 

78 

Hajj operators, Qurbani ritual, airfare and accommodation in Saudi Arabia. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  exercise  of  selection  and  issuing  of  licence  to  the  local  Hajj 
operators has been finalised. The maximum recommended fee payable to the operators for the 
service they provide has been agreed upon by all stakeholders. 

Saudi  Authorities  recommended  agencies  for  the  Qurbani  rituals  and  the  price 

indication is around 390 Riyals. 

In  my  statement  made  to  the  House  at  the  sitting  of  14  June  2016,  I  had  already 
informed the House that the Government had used its good office to ensure that the airfare for 
Hajj 2016 be maintained at Rs35,000. I wish to inform the House that, prior to 2015, the fare 
was negotiated in US Dollars with the risk of fluctuation of the foreign exchange.  Emirates 
Airline has guaranteed the transport of all pilgrims from Mauritius to Saudi Arabia and back.  

The other major advantage that has been reached with Emirates Airline is that all our 
pilgrims will return from Madina and not from Jeddah. This, in itself, gives a major relief and 
travel comfort to pilgrims after spending about one month or more in Saudi Arabia. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  other  costs  for  Hajj  include  accommodation  in  Makka  and 
Madina,  Tanazul  services  (local  transportation  and  other  facilities),  Special  Services 
(provided during the five days of Hajj) etc. These exclude Qurbani and local operators’ fees.  

Last  year,  pilgrims  stayed  in  four  different  buildings  and  complaints  were  made 

regarding shortcomings in the special services provided. 

During my last visit, Madam Speaker, I met the Chairman and all the members of the 
Board of the Establishment Mutawifs for Pilgrims (commonly known as the Muassasa). Our 
request for better services, including air conditioning in Mina, was acceded to. The cost of 
these services was quoted to us at 1,500 Riyals and after negotiations a special rate of 1,200 
Riyals only for the Mauritian pilgrims for Hajj 2016 has been agreed. 

Furthermore, we have been able to find appropriate accommodation for all Mauritian 
pilgrims  in  one  location  in  Makka  and  in  one  location  in  Madina  also.  This  will  certainly 
improve logistics and give better comfort to our brothers and sisters.  

 
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that the total costs for Hajj this 
year, excluding Qurbani and local operators’ fees will be 99,700 Mauritian rupees compared 
to the amount paid last year which ranged from Rs106,500 to Rs110,500.  

79 

 
 
Madam Speaker,  I have had the total support of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in the 
negotiations  I  had  with  the  Saudi  Authorities  to  obtain  additional  visas  for  the  Mauritian 
pilgrims.  I  am  pleased  to  inform  the  House  that,  after  intense  negotiations  with  the  Saudi 
Authorities,  Mauritius  has  now  obtained  1,500  visas  for  Hajj  2016  as  compared  to  the 
previous quota of 1,040.  

Thank you very much. 

PUBLIC BILL 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Public Officers’ Protection (Amendment) Bill (No. 

XVI of 2016) was read a first time. 

MOTION 

“This  Assembly  is  of  opinion  that,  further  to  the  resolution  of  the  House  dated  07 
June  2016  recommending  the  setting  up  of  a  Broadcasting  Committee  for  the 
monitoring of the live broadcasting of the proceedings and debates of the House and 
matters ancillary thereto, it is now necessary and expedient that the Standing Orders 
Committee  be  empowered,  and  it  is  hereby  empowered,  to  look  into  the  Standing 
Orders and Rules of the National Assembly 1995 presently in force, more specifically 
Standing Order 69(5), to make recommendations to increase the number of members 
of the said Committee from eight to ten.” 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I do not propose to move the motion standing 

in my name. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I take a point of order, at the same time a point of 
clarification. Standing Order 33 relates to ‘Withdrawal of Motions’. I have listened to the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister. Is he, therefore, proposing to withdraw his motion? 

The Prime Minister: I am not proposing to move the motion. 

Madam  Speaker:  So,  the  motion  automatically  lapses  when  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister does not move the motion. 

I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.15 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.50 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

 

80 

 

Second Reading 

THE INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION BILL 

(No. XIV of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 

Commission Bill (No. XIV of 2016). 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Toussaint! 

(4.47 p.m.) 

Mr J. C. Toussaint (Second Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Thank you, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. Simé la lumière, racine pé briler, fam dan zil, Joseph Reginald Topize, 
Kaya. Le 21 février 1999 le corps de ce dernier avait été retrouvé dans sa cellule numéro 6 à 
Line Barracks. Le lendemain, le 22 février 1999 un autre chanteur, artiste trouva la mort. Il 
s’agissait de Berger Agathe qui voulait apaiser la foule dans les manifestations qui ont eu lieu 
par rapport au décès de Kaya. Il avait été tué par les forces de l’ordre.  

Après ce drame qui secoua notre si beau pays, notre petite île, il y eut bien sûr une 
conscience populaire. Il y eut des manifestations pacifiques, des marches symboliques, des 
émissions à la radio et à la télévision, des campagnes de sensibilisation pour dire plus jamais 
ça! Malheureusement ce ne fut pas le cas et d’autres personnes encore, hélas, ont trouvé la 
mort pendant qu’ils étaient en détention policière, pendant qu’ils étaient sous la responsabilité 
des  forces  de  l’ordre.  C’est  vraiment  navrant  d’apprendre  qu’un  membre  de  sa  famille, 
quelqu’un  qu’on  connaît,  qui  pour  ‘x’  raison  s’est  retrouvé  en  détention  et  qui 
malheureusement perd sa vie.  

Ce  projet  de  loi  vient  à  un  moment  important  parce  qu’aujourd’hui  dans  le  monde 
nous parlons beaucoup de human rights. Aujourd’hui dans le monde nous parlons beaucoup 
de  la  sensibilisation  vis-à-vis  de  la  protection  et  du  respect  des  droits  humains.  Et  l’île 
Maurice, bien que nous soyons une toute petite île au milieu d’un si grand monde, n’est pas 
en reste et je peux même dire avec conviction que l’île Maurice peut donner l’exemple. Et 
quand notre très honorable Premier ministre a proposé ce projet de loi, cela nous donne espoir 
et nous envoyons un signal fort aux Mauriciens, aux autorités et au monde entier pour dire 
que nous avons besoin de protéger nos concitoyens, pour dire qu’à l’île Maurice les droits 

 

81 

humains  sont  respectés  et  qu’avec  ce  projet  de  loi  les  droits  humains  seront  encore  plus 
respectés. 

En parcourant les différentes parties de ce projet de loi dont la partie 4 - Functions of 

Commission (a, b, c, d, et e)  

(a) investigate into any complaint (…); 

(b) investigate into the cause of death of a person (…); 

(c) advise on ways in which any police misconduct may be addressed (…); 

La  partie  (d)  m’interpelle  et  je  trouve  que  c’est  une  partie  très  importante  dans  ce  que  la 
commission aura besoin de faire – 

“promote better relations between the public and the Police.” 

Très important! Le mauricien doit avoir confiance dans sa police parce que comme les autres 
orateurs, avant moi, ont dit, la police est là pour protéger tout le monde, qui que nous soyons! 
Et le mauricien, quand il regarde un policier, il a besoin de comprendre que cette personne est 
là  pour  le  protéger  dans  n’importe  quel  cas.  Donc,  cette  partie  (d),  c’est  vers  cela  que  la 
police moderne, d’une l’île Maurice moderne doit aller. Il y a aussi quelquechose qui est très 
importante, c’est par rapport à la partie 5, Powers of Commission, et là, je me suis attardé un 
peu sur la partie (a)(ii) –  

“to  produce  any  article,  or  any  book,  record,  accounts,  report,  data,  stored 
electronically or otherwise, or any other;” 

Ce qui va de pair avec, bien sûr, des campagnes de sensibilisation. Sensibiliser ! Comme on 
dit souvent : Prévenir vaut mieux que guérir. Bien sûr, la loi va être là, on va dire ‘will be a 
deterrent’, mais ce n’est pas suffisant dans le sens que ce serait trop dommage que, malgré le 
fait que la loi soit là, une personne puisse se retrouver en difficulté pendant une détention par 
les forces de l’ordre et c’est pour cela que je mets l’accent sur la prévention.  

J’ai été très heureux qu’en faisant mes recherches d’être tombé sur un article, où l’on 
parle de ‘Teachers in Mauritius trained to educate students on Human Rights’,  et là, avec la 
réforme de l’Education,  je salue l’initiative du ministre de l’Education d’inclure les Human 
Rights dans le curriculum, non seulement pour informer nos enfants, nos jeunes des droits 
humains,  mais  il  ne  faut  pas  oublier  que  ces  enfants  et  ces  jeunes  seront  peut-être, 
éventuellement demain, de futurs policiers, qui, déjà à l’école, auraient eu droit à des cours 
sur les Human Rights et d’apprendre le respect de la vie, le respect des droits d’autrui et ils 

 

82 

seront  de  meilleurs  policiers  encore.  Ce  projet  de  loi  arrive  aussi  avec  tout  un  arsenal  de 
facteurs  qui  seront  là  pour  faire  de  sorte  que  Maurice  devienne  un  champion  de  Human 
Rights. 

Il  y  a  aussi  une  autre  façon  de  mettre  en  avant  la  prévention,  c’est,  bien  sûr, 
l’utilisation de la technologie qui est très importante, et c’est aussi pour la protection de celui 
qui  se  retrouve  en  difficulté  ou  qui  est  dans  une  cellule  policière.  Mais  c’est  aussi  une 
protection pour les policiers eux-mêmes parce que, bien sûr,  des fois il se peut qu’il y ait des 
allégations non fondées contre certains policiers dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions, et quoi de 
mieux  que  la  technologie  pour  contrôler  tout  cela,  c’est-à-dire,  un  système  de  caméra  de 
surveillance  pour  veiller  à  ce  que  et  le  detenu  et  les  policiers  soient  protégés.  Je  redis,  la 
partie  prévention  est  aussi  importante  sinon  plus  même  que  la  loi  qui  sera  votée  dans 
quelques instants. 

Je  salue  aussi  les  amis  qui  sont  dans  le  domaine  légal  et  qui  ont  depuis  quelques 
années  démarré  une  lutte  par  rapport  à  tout  ce  qui  est  droits  humains.   Il  y  a  pas  mal,  ici 
même, à  cette Assemblée. Je salue votre initiative, votre courage et votre dévouement pour 
ce  que  vous  avez  déjà  démarré  et  j’espère  qu’avec  cette  nouvelle  loi  -  bon,  zot  pas  pu 
retrouve  zot  au  chomage,  mais  vous  n’aurez  pas  beaucoup  de  travail  dans  ce  sens-là.  Je 
connais beaucoup de policiers et j’ai beaucoup d’amis policiers, et je dois dire qu’en général 
ce sont des personnes très correctes. Il y a, bien sûr, comme dans n’importe quel domaine, 
quelques brebis galeuses ; malheureusement c’est comme ça. Mais ce n’est pas pour autant 
qu’il faut taper sur les policiers en général. Ils sont là pour faire leur travail et du moment 
qu’ils sont empowered, je pense que cela ira mieux. 

Je ne vais pas être trop long parce que pas mal de choses ont déjà été dites, que ce soit 
la semaine dernière. J’espère qu’avec cette loi, notre ‘Kaya’ trouvera ‘so simin la lumière’, 
que ce soit lui ou les autres qui ont malheureusement perdu la vie. 

Je vous remercie, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, pour votre attention et toute l’Assemblée. 

J’ai été ravi en tant que PPS d’intervenir sur ce projet de loi.  

Avant de terminer, je tiens à dire que nous, les PPS, nous ne sommes ni paresseux, ni 

des parasites ; nous ne sommes ni serviles. A bon entendeur, salut ! 

Merci beaucoup. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon Rughoobur ! 

 
(5.00 p.m.) 

83 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or): Mr Deputy 

Speaker, Sir, thank you for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on this Bill. 

 I would like to thank all the hon. Members who have intervened before me for their 
valuable contribution. I would like also to congratulate and thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
for  coming  forward  with  this  Bill.    We  should  not  forget  that  it  was  in  our  Government 
Programme in January 2015. Once again, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for this bold 
decision. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  have  been  concerns  expressed  by  so-called  opinion 
leaders outside this House and by hon. Members on the other side of the House on this Bill. 
Outside the House, some have gone as far as stating that the Bill is devoid of any substance. 
Only last week, a hon. Member on the other side of the House stated that the Bill is only a 
copy and paste exercise. I am sorry, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I do not share this view.  

I  am  going  to  define  those  comments  as  an  expression  of  the  healthiness  of  our 
democratic  system,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  but  I  believe  we  should  understand  that  this 
Parliament is not a Court of law.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the legal component in the Bill is one of the components, but 
what we are to debate with this Bill is the setting up of a structure. We should all put our 
heads together and try to see how best we can debate on issues and factors that can enable 
that structure to perform effectively, to bring results and to deliver. This is our priority in this 
House with this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

There are two issues upon which I want to elaborate today. One which I believe to be 
very important concerns the objectives. I have identified three. The second issue is: what are 
the means that you have to devise to meet those objectives?  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  those  who  are  exposed  to  the  challenges  of  the  corporate 
world, those who regularly manage companies, know what it is to handle a structure, to set up 
a structure, ensure that they are run effectively.  

As I stated, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have identified three major objectives for the 
Bill, but, at the same time, the structure that we are going to put in place for the Commission.  

The first objective, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is the objective of structures that you can 
find in other parts of the world as well; winning over public perception and trust. We take the 

 

84 

case of Trinidad and Tobago.  Let us take the case of UK where in 2013, the Home Affairs 
Select  Committee’s  report  –  let  me  quote  part  of  the  report,  what  it  said  on  this  public 
perception - 

“The  public  do  not  fully  trust  the  IPCC  and  without  faith  in  the  Commission,  the 
damaged public opinion of the police cannot be restored. Unfortunately, too often the 
work of the Commission seems to exacerbate public mistrust, rather than mend it.” 

This is the main challenge, whether it is India, the States, UK, Trinidad or Tobago; whether it 
is, à côté, South Africa; this is the challenge. 

The  second  objective  is  -  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  my  friend,  hon.  Toussaint  - 
prevention. I know that in the mandate of the Commission, we don’t have that part relating to 
corruption by public officers.  But a preventive strategy, as an Objective, would help also in 
that direction to prevent misconduct from Police officers whether it is corruption or any other 
forms of misconduct. 

Third is, of course, as an objective, protection of the fundamental rights - not only of 
the normal citizens, but of the Police officers themselves - as guaranteed by our Constitution. 

I believe these are the three objectives that the Commission, as a structure to be, once 
this  Bill  is  voted,  will  have  to  address.  Now,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  to  ask 
ourselves: these are the objectives, what are the ways and means that we are going to devise 
to ensure that we meet those objectives?  This is what should be the debate! This is, I believe, 
what should be the debate with this Bill.  

I have, once again, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, identified three key factors.  The legal 
component is one of them, but you have other issues that you have to address which is there 
in the Bill, but the effectiveness through which you are going to implement, is going to bring 
results.    We  are  here  to  bring  results  whether  it  is  on  the  Opposition  side  or  on  the 
Government side. 

First is the issue of resources and delegation. I think we have, in this Bill, the means.  
What are the resources that we require for the commission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? Funds! I 
am sure that the Government is going to ensure that appropriate funding is provided, but, at 
the same time, in terms of resources, we should understand that in other jurisdictions where 
such  structures  exist  increasingly  these  jurisdictions  are  having  less  and  less  recourse  to 
people like retired Police officers or Policemen coming from the Police Force. But Mauritius 
being a small country, it would be extremely difficult in the short-term, in the medium-term 

 

85 

for us, to have investigators outside the Police Department, maybe retired Police officers. I 
think  it  would  be  a  bit difficult,  but  then  with  this  emphasis  on  training,  when  we  talk  of 
resources, I have talked about funding, but I believe that for the investigators, we will need to 
have an appropriate budget pour la formation. Resources and - to cut short on this first key 
factor, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir - appropriate delegation would be extremely important.   

The second factor that I wanted to mention is the issue of scope of the Commission.  
Scope and powers! I have seen that in the Bill, contrary to other jurisdictions, I mentioned a 
few; the issue of corruption by Police officers, tampering with evidence by Police officers 
does not form part of the mandate of the Commission. It is my humble opinion that this might 
be wrong. I thought that it might be in the mandate of the Commission because giving this 
particular  responsibility  to  the  ICAC,  might  raise  the  question  of  whether  the  Police  will 
continue  to  investigate  into  the  Police.  So,  I  was  thinking  that  probably  this  issue  of 
corruption, we will have to think over it may be afterwards.  We will have to think over it and 
try  to  see  if  it  is  a  good  decision  to  exclude  this  corruption  by  police,  tampering  with  the 
evidence  from  the  mandate  of  the  Commission,  but,  at  the  same  time,  powers  of  the 
Commission.   

When we talk about the powers of the Commission, let me remind the House that in 
as  far  back  as  in  2006,  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  issued  7  directives.  One  among  the 
directives is that it proposed the creation of a Police Complaints Authority in the different 
States in India. This is what the Supreme Court had to say, and I quote - 

“Once the inquiry is completed, the Authority (…).” 

That is, the Police Complaints Authority that he proposed to set. 

“(…) can recommend a suitable disciplinary punishment to the appointing Authority 
which will be bound by it.”  

The Supreme Court at that time proposed that the recommendation of that Authority should 
be binding.  

Now, what I propose here also, because from section 16 subsections (2) and (3), you 
can read that the Commission does not have statutory powers in as far as its recommendation 
is concerned. I know that my time is up, but still only one minute more. That was the second 
key factor I was proposing.   

86 

 
The third key factor, I believe, is also important in ensuring that there is effectiveness 
in the work of the Commission, it is the issue of operation and accountability.  I hope that 
what has been included in this Bill and as per the law, the Statutory Bodies; we had a series 
of complaints by the Director of Audit that the Annual Report is not submitted on time.  I just 
hope that with the setting up of the Commission, there will be proper accountability and year 
after year, the Assembly takes note of what has been undertaken by the Commission and we 
have the opportunity to assess their work. 

These  were  my  contributions,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    I  would  like  to  thank 

everybody for their attention. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Boissézon! 

(5.11 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):    Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, thank you.  I note with regret that hon. Veda Baloomoody said that he was not 
voting this Bill, arguing that it was a rebranding exercise.   

In  fact,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  July  2012,  the  hon.  Member  who  intervened 
during the debates of the Police Complaints Bill said that he was welcoming the Bill which 
was coming at a very important time of renewed demand to review the way Police complaints 
were handled. 

Hon. Steven Obeegadoo said in his intervention on that date, and I quote –  

“So, on the basis of the points raised, we would like to say to the hon. Prime Minister 
that the MMM, and I understand the whole of the Opposition is supportive of these.” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  has  changed?    Why  the  introduction  of  the  IPCC?  
Though he commended the work performed by the Police Complaints Division, the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  thought  that  matters  could  be  dealt  in  a  more  expeditious  manner  for  the 
following reasons - 

(1) 

(2) 

To fade out the perception that the National Human Rights Commission was 
not dealing expeditiously the complaints reported to them. 

Delays  could  be  construed  as  an  abuse  in  the  process,  preventing  the 
conviction of an offender despite existence of evidence against him. 

 
(3) 

87 

On  a  compassionate  issue,  delays  are  unfair  for  an  innocent  officer  against 
whom frivolous and unjustified complaints have been made. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, three reasons for the need to be more expeditious and effective, 
Government has decided to create a new stand alone, Independent Commission, headed by a 
learned  Legal  Commissioner,  with  two  qualified  Members  and  a  Secretary  of  the  rank  of 
Deputy Permanent Secretary. 

In fact, in 2012, when the Government decided to review and increase the efficiency 
of  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission,  it  intended  to  have  four  Divisions  within  the 
Commission – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The Human Rights Commission; 

The Police Complaints Division; 

The National Preventive Mechanism Division; 

The Equal Opportunities Division. 

The  then  Prime  Minister  said  that,  during  consultations,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  Equal 
Opportunities  Division  should  be  a  full-fledged  separate  independent  Commission  which 
would  give  better  results.  Same  is  being  done  today  for  the  enhancement  of  the  services 
against Police complaints. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, returning to the intervention of hon. Veda Baloomoody during 

the debates on the Police Complaints Bill, I would like to quote – 

“The Government has the will for human rights to be observed in Mauritius. 
We, in the Opposition, are supporting that project. But those who will take up 
the institution must play their role and Government should see to it that we 
should  not  hesitate  to  sack,  because  this  law  allows  the  President,  on  the 
advice of the Prime Minister, to remove a Commissioner, if he feels that he is 
not delivering. We should apply this, if need be, because human rights, as I 
said, is very important in our democratic institution.  

I have finished, Sir. Thank you.” 

What has changed? Today, only the set-up has changed as a hon. Member, before me, said. 

88 

 
I shall not lose the time of the House to elaborate on the speech of hon. Mohamed, 
who  clearly  misunderstood  the  motives  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  enhance  the 
services. I would rather say: select and delete. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  I  shall  refer  to  the  present  Bill,  at  section  4  which  relates  to 
functions of the Commission. Clauses (a) and (b) which are the core operational functions of 
the Act have been dealt with by the previous orators. 

I think that the present Bill provides the necessary and clear line of accountability to 

enable the Commission to perform well. 

The IPCC should make sure that the organisation structure is responsive to increasing 
the number of investigators, when the number of complaints increases, to avoid delays and 
back log in the interventions. 

Regarding section (c), as said by hon. Toussaint, advises on ways in which any Police 

misconduct may be addressed and eliminated. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  we  must  not  forget  that  independence,  confidence  and  human 

rights are the drivers of the IPCC. 

We welcome the decision of the Government to allow the Commission to recruit its 
own  prosecutors  thus,  showing  a  clear  demarcation  between  the  Police  Force  and  the 
Commission. 

Investigators (Civilian investigators), as described in section 8 (5) – 

“Notwithstanding this section, no serving police officer shall form part of the 
staff of the Commission.” 

We  shall  train  those  people  who  are  not  in  the  Police  Force  as  they  will  deal  with  Police 
officers who are accustomed to this exercise. 

The new organisation should ensure, through a good communication system that the 
population  perceive  that  things  have  changed  and  that  decisions  and  actions  are  taken 
promptly in full independence. 

The  Police  Officers  and  the  population  will  be  aware  that  any  infraction  will  be 

sanctioned, thus securing confidence in the Police Force. 

And  last  but  not  least,  human  rights  culture  can  be  achieved  through  training  and 

sensitisation. The IPCC has a duty to eliminate Police misconduct. 

89 

 
The  Commission,  through  its  sensitisation  programme,  should  ensure  that  Police 
Officers should be formed and sensitised, that it is not rational to deprive a human being of 
his rights just on presumption that he has done an illegal activity. 

As suggested in the Annual Report of the National Human Rights Commission of the 
year ended 2014, the Commission should ensure that members of the Police Force conquer, 
abide  and  be  guided  by  the  Southern  African  Regional  Police  Chiefs  Cooperation 
Organisation, signed in  Zimbabwe in 2002, which considers that it is desirable that Police 
officers have the active moral and physical support of the public they are serving. 

Furthermore,  regarding  the  respect  of  human  rights,  Police  Officials  may  only  use, 
when strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance of their duties adhering 
national legislation and practices. 

Secondly, regarding torture, no Police, under any circumstances, shall inflict, instigate 
and tolerate any  act of torture and Police Officials shall ensure protection of the health of 
persons in their custody. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, we must consider the root of the misconduct. The misconduct of 
Police happens in the Police station; there also much have to be done, but the administration 
of  the  stations  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  Bill;  I  shall  be  very  brief.  Police  orderly 
responsibility  in  stations  should  not  be  conferred  to  officers  of  lesser  rank  than  sergeant. 
Many of the problems we encounter occur at night when the station is left in the hands of a 
Policeman who has much difficulty to maintain his command on his peers. 

Suspects should be informed that they have a right to legal aid at the initial stage of 
the  investigation,  as  stipulated  in  the  Legal  Aid  Act  2012.  This  will  help  to  lessen  the 
allegations of brutality to extract confession. 

To end, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I shall take this opportunity to pay tribute to honest 

and reliable Police officers who are proud of the uniform they wear. 

I  end  by  congratulating  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  the  introduction  of  the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill which is in line with the proposals of the 
Manifesto of L’Alliance Lepep. 

Thank you. 

 

 

 

 (5.22 p.m.) 

90 

Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, in order to have a picture about the present situation on human rights and Police 
brutality in the country, I propose to make reference to the Country Report of last year on 
human rights practices. I will also make reference to the facts of two cases, quite recently, the 
case of Iqbal Toofany as well as the judgment that was delivered recently this year in the case 
of DPP versus Jagdawoo V. & ors. 

I know the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has got his opinion about the Country Report. I do 
agree;  I  do  endorse  his  view  that  the  US  is  not  an  example  as  far  as  Police  brutality  is 
concerned. We know what the minority in the US suffer from the hands of Police officers.  
But that does not mean that what they have said in the report is not true and I shall refer to the 
Executive Summary of the Report where it is stated, and I quote –  

“The  most  important  reported  human  rights  problems  (in  Mauritius)  were  security 
force abuse of suspects and detainees (…)” 

It goes on to say that –  

“The government took steps to prosecute and punish officials who committed abuses, 
whether in the security services or elsewhere in the government, but enforcement was 
inconsistent,  and  sometimes  politically  motivated,  resulting  in  the  appearance  of 
impunity.” 

Reference  is  also  made  to  the  case  of  Mr  Toofany  as  well  as  the  case  of  the  Attorney 
Thandrayen who was arrested when he came to Mauritius. 

So, this report is relevant. It gives us an indication of the situation as far as human 
rights abuses are concerned in Mauritius. My friend, hon. Toussaint, has made reference to 
the case of Kaya which is an unfortunate one. I endorse whatever he has said about the case, 
but I propose also to make reference to the case of Iqbal Toofany. A young father of 43 years 
old arrested by the Police of Black River Police Station in the early morning of 02 March 
2015  for  a  simple  case  of  rogue  and  vagabond.  At  the  time  of  his  arrest  he  was  in  good 
health. Unfortunately, a few hours later he was found dead in hospital under Police custody, 
leaving behind three minor children, including a seven-year old daughter. This is what the 
autopsy has revealed: “The cause of death was due to acute pulmonary oedema and injuries 
were noted on several parts of his body.” 

91 

 
The Police officers involved in the enquiry were initially charged for torture by public 
officials and it was following a Private Notice Question addressed by the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition  and  the  intervention  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  eventually  the  Police 
officers were charged with murder. This is the situation in Mauritius! 

I  am  also  going  to  make  reference  to  the  case  of  DPP  against  Jagdawoo  which 
involves a suspect who was arrested at Lallmatie in a case of murder. That was back in 2006. 
Again,  in  that  case  as  well,  the  suspect  was  arrested  and  he  was  in  good  health. 
Unfortunately, a few days after he was found dead and the cause of death was “as a result of a 
large  intra-cerebral  haemorrhage”.  Four  Police  officers  were  arrested  and  they  have  been 
acquitted on the evidence that was placed before the Court. But it is important, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, that I make reference to the judgement of the Supreme Court. The case went on 
appeal. The DPP appealed; the case went before the Supreme Court and I feel it very relevant 
to refer to what the learned Judges stated in that case. This is what they stated –  

“We feel bound however to raise some matters of grave concern which the crude facts 
of this case have brought to light in connection with the treatment of persons detained 
by  the  Police.  Ramlogun  was  in  good  health  and  condition  prior  to  his  arrest  and 
detention  by  the  Police.  Although  the  evidence  fell  short  of  establishing,  in 
accordance  with  the  legal  standards  of  proof,  the  infliction  of  any  inhuman  and 
degrading  treatment  by  the  particular  Police  officers  who  were  charged  with  an 
offence under section 77 of the Criminal Code, it is beyond dispute that Ramlogun 
was  subjected  to  physical  abuse  and  was  killed  whilst  in  Police  custody.  Those 
responsible remain unpunished.” 

So, we have a suspect being arrested in good health. He dies in Police custody and 
those  who  are  responsible  remain  unpunished!  And,  this  is  what  also  the  learned  Judges 
stated – 

“The  treatment  of  detainees  who  are  placed  in  a  vulnerable  position  is  a  matter  of 
even greater concern when it comes to protection of these human rights. The detainee 
is virtually cut off from the outside world and is placed in a situation of weakness and 
vulnerability,  being  left  to  a  considerable  extent  to  the  mercy  of  Police  or  Prison 
officials. 

The  State  has  positive  obligations  to  afford  security  and  protection  of  the  law  and 
human rights to all categories of its citizens. The State has a duty to secure and not to 

92 

 
violate the right to life and the right to protection from torture and inhuman treatment. 
The more so, in respect of its more vulnerable citizens.” 

i.e. those who are in Police custody, and they concluded by saying this –  

 

“We  say  so  because  the  infliction  of  torture  or  inhuman  treatment  and  the 
killing  of  a  person  in  such  circumstances  cannot  be  treated  with  levity. 
Constitutional  rights  and  criminal  law  provisions  would  remain  purely 
theoretical and illusory unless there is in place an effective law enforcement 
machinery  endowed  with  the  appropriate  legal  and  investigative  mechanism 
for  the  prevention,  investigation  and  punishment  of  any  such  violation  of 
human rights.  

When  the  State  kills  one  of  its  citizens  in  police  custody,  it  constitutes  an 
intolerable violation of the human rights of the individual. But when the State 
kills  with  impunity,  it  rocks  the  very  foundation  upon  which  a  democratic 
State rests, i.e. the Rule of Law.” 

This is why… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No cross-talking! 

Mr Ramful: Well, sorry! Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in issues like these, forget about  

political colour! Let’s think about those victims… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, this is why I had taken the first opportunity following this judgement to put a question 
to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and I asked him whether in the light of this judgement would 
he  be  coming  before  this  Assembly  with  an  appropriate  mechanism,  with  the  appropriate 
investigative tools so that we can, once for all, finish with those human rights abuses. And, he 
did say that he will be coming before this House with an appropriate Bill and this is the Bill 
before the House. 

Unfortunately, I have to say that I don’t think that this Bill will solve the problem and 
I say so because we have seen under the Police Complaints Act 2012 tht they had the same 
investigative and legal mechanism. Nothing has changed except from one marked difference, 
that is, we have separated the Division from the National Human Rights Commission and we 
have under this Bill one body, a stand-alone Commission. This is the only change that has 

 

93 

been brought under this Bill with the same investigative tools and I don’t think things will 
evolve. 

There was a question – let us see and we will have an idea about the situation when 
there was the Police Complaints Division. Hon. Sesungkur had put a question to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister. He asked for the number of complaints that were lodged against members of 
the Mauritius Police Force since 2015. He also asked about the number of prosecutions and 
convictions.  And  this  was  the  reply  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  that  there  were  693 
complaints that were lodged at the Police Complaints Division against members of the Police 
Force. Out of which one case has been referred to the DPP in accordance with section 14; 
four complaints have been withdrawn, 366 complaints have already been set aside and the 
remaining are still under investigation. And there has been no prosecution, so far.  Since the 
introduction  of  this  Police  Complaints  Division,  there  has  been  no  prosecution  so  far  as 
regards human rights abuses. Therefore, my point is this: if you are going to stick to the same 
investigative  tools,  if  you  are  going  to  stick  to  the  same  provisions,  then,  again,  the  same 
thing will repeat again, we will not have any prosecution. When I look at the sections of the 
Bill, for example, we have inserted the word ‘Independent’ in the title. Well, the insertion of 
the  word  ‘Independent’  in  the  title  of  the  Bill  appears  to  be  merely  cosmetic  because,  in 
substance, it would appear that the operation of the Commission would largely depend on the 
Executive. I am making reference here to the appointment of the Chairman and the members. 
I am making reference here to section 3(5) - 

“The Chairperson and the members shall be appointed by the President, acting on the 
advice  of  the  Prime  Minister,  on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  President  may 
determine.” 

And we all know how it works. 

“The Prime Minister shall, before tendering advice to the President under paragraph 
(a), consult the Leader of the Opposition.” 

We  know  how  it  works.      Finally,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  will  have  his  say  on  the 
appointment of the Chairman.  

Then – 

 

 “Subject to subsection (7), the Chairperson or any members shall hold office for a 
period of 4 years and shall be eligible for reappointment.” 

 

Also - 

94 

“The President may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, remove the Chairperson or 
any member from office for inability to perform the functions of his office, whether 
arising from infirmity of body or mind, or for misbehaviour.” 

Again,  the  final  say  will  rest  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  the  termination  of  the 
appointment of the Chairperson and the members. There is no security of tenure. So, if we 
really want to have an independent Commission why don’t we create a constitutional post for 
the post of Chairperson? 

When I look again to the investigatory powers of the Commission, again nothing has 
changed. The powers on investigation under the Police Complaints Act and under the new 
Bill are the same. Nothing has changed. The staff of the Commission shall include persons 
from the public service on secondment as well as persons employed on contract to work as 
investigators.  This  was  the  problem  with  old  Division.  We  brought  people  with  no 
experience, no training, they are not aware of the Police powers, they have not made use of 
the Police powers, and then what has happened, the DPP’s Office has found itself with cases 
where the investigative procedures and Police procedures have not been followed and now 
they cannot prosecute any of those cases. So, without proper training, nothing will happen. 
This reminds me of the early days of ICAC. There again, at the ICAC in the early days, we 
had  investigators  who  were  brought  on  contract  without  any  knowledge  about  the  Police 
powers. And what has happened to all these cases that ICAC investigated? They all finished 
in Courts, being dismissed, because the Police procedures have not been followed. 

Now, there is the other issue about the Powers of arrest. In the UK, the Independent 
Police Complaints Commission makes use of Police officers who are temporary on service at 
the Commission. These Police officers exercise the Powers of arrest and investigation. What 
is  important  is  that  those  Police  officers  are  under  the  control  of  the  Chairman  of  the 
Commission, not the Police Commissioner. And here, although we want to make it appear 
that the Police officers won’t be involved at all in the investigations when it comes to Police 
officers  who  are  suspected  of  having  committed  an  offence,  but  still,  we  will  require  the 
permission of the Commissioner of Police to proceed with the arrest of those Police officers. 
Who  are  going  to  arrest  those  Police  officers?  We  will  need  the  Commissioner  of  Police. 
Now, will the Commissioner of Police exercise his discretion when it comes to arresting his 

 

95 

own Police officers? Will he be bound by the recommendation of the Commission? Nothing 
is mentioned in the law. So, this is another issue. 

I  will  come  finally  to  one  important  issue  that  was  raised  by  hon.  Baloomoody  on 
section 5(2). There has been much debate from both the Government side and the Opposition 
side on the power to compel someone who is being interrogated to disclose evidence and to 
produce  document.  Now,  I  agree,  true  it  is  that  even  at  the  level  of  investigation,  an 
investigator cannot compel a person to give evidence because that would incriminate him and 
this is against the principle of the right of silence as guaranteed by the Constitution. However, 
this  might  hamper  the  investigation  of  the  Commission,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  hon. 
Baloomoody. If the Police officer comes and says: ‘Well, if you ask me for this question, this 
is going to incriminate me. Therefore, I am not going to answer any question and I am not 
going to produce any document.” But we know how this is done. We have a group of Police 
officers who normally carry out the beating. In the ICAC law, there is a very interesting tool. 
In the ICAC law, it is provided under section 50(3) and (4) that, a person under investigation 
may be compelled to give evidence if there is an undertaking from the Commission that the 
evidence given shall not be used in a Court of law against that person. So what you can do? 
You  can  bring  anyone,  use  him  as  a  witness  against  the  co-accused;  this  would  be  an 
important investigatory tool to be given to the Commission. So, we have to consider this.  

I don’t have much time, but then, as I have said, if we are going to stick to the same 
legal  and  investigatory  tools,  nothing  will  change,  we  will  have  the  same  result,  zero 
prosecution and, therefore, this would be my intervention. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

(5.41 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart):  Thank you, Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me start by saying – 

Friends, Romans, Mauritians, countrymen, lend me your ears! 

 I have not come here today to bury Caesar, but, today, I have come here not only to 
bury Jangi but also to bury all those evil Police officers who are involved in commission of 
crime.  

96 

 
I have also come to bury the Police Complaint Act of 2012.  Today this House will 
give  birth  to  the  Independent  Complaints  Commission  which  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
brings in this House. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me say this very candidly, that the majority of the Police 
officers  in  this  country  are  hardworking,  industrious  civil  servants  who  fight  daily  against 
crimes, antisocial behaviour and all sorts of evil in society.  My friend, hon. Eddy Boissézon 
called them brebis galeuses, but, of course, there are a few who act like organised criminals 
and gangsters. In my profession, I have very openly said in open Court in a case, and I will 
never  hesitate  to  say  that  there  are  certain  Police  officers  who  act  like  real  gangsters  and 
criminals. 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah!    We  are  not  in  a  Court  of  Law.    We  have 
Standing  Orders  that  govern  the  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly  and  I  will  refer  you  to 
Standing Order 40 (5).  I will read it out to you – 

“The conduct of the President and the Vice-President of the Republic or the person 
performing  the  functions  of  the  President’s  Office,  Mr  Speaker,  Members  of  the 
Assembly, Judges, Members of Statutory Commissions or other persons engaged in 
the  administration  of  Justice  shall  not  be  raised  except  upon  a  substantive  motion 
(…).” 

I will, therefore, ask you to watch your language concerning Police officers. 

Mr Rutnah:  I am glad that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, you have read it and nowhere it 
says that I cannot say about Police officers. I am sure if we debate this point, you will not be 
able to rule on this.  I am so sorry to say. 

(Interruptions) 

But I am entitled today, in this House, to say what I have to say because I have a mandate 
from my constituents and I owe a duty to my country today when I speak here in relation to 
this Bill.   

Now,  true  it  is that  there  are  certain  officers.    I  have  experienced  it,  as  a  barrister, 
going to CCID, going to MCIT, going to various CID offices.  I have experienced it when my 
client has already finished giving his statement, when I have gone home and my client has 
been taken back into custody. The Police officers went and asked him “fer enn déclaration 
contre to avocat ki li linn dire twa dire ça.  Dimain nou largue li lor caution”.   

 

97 

(Interruptions) 

And then, they also make allegations on barristers.  These are the kinds of things today we 
are going to put an end to. These are the kinds of things that we are going to put an end! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today, when we think about the case of Ramlagan - my very 
able and learned friend, hon. Ramful spoke about it. This man walks into the Police station as 
a healthy man, a few days later a corpse comes out of the Police station. Kaya walks in as a 
healthy man, then a corpse comes out of the station. Iqbal Toofany walks in as a healthy man, 
but  a  corpse  comes  out  of  the  Police  station.  Ramdhony,  in  relation  to  the  Roches  Noires 
affair, Rivière du Rempart Police station, enters the Police station as a healthy man, comes 
out  a  corpse.    Today,  like  Mark  Anthony’s  heart  was  buried  in  Caesar’s  coffin,  today  my 
heart is buried in those people’s coffins. And thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, for bringing 
this piece of legislation.  The other day, I heard someone in Vallée Pitot saying that the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister has no leadership, criticising the Prime Minister.  But this is the Prime 
Minister who leads his alliance, whereas there, they are led by their respective parties. And 
thank  you  that  a  new  era  is  going  to  come  into  the  spheres  of  attacking  the  very  heart  of 
Police harshness and Police brutality.  

Now, let me come, to the Bill! 

(Interruptions) 

Indeed, I will say everything that I have to say today because, as a lawyer, I had a great career 
in  England,  but  when  I  came  here  in  2010,  I  was  ashamed  the  way  the  Police  were 
performing their duties in cases in which I was involved. I am glad that the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister is bringing this Bill and I am going to say everything that I have to say about this 
Bill today. Independent Police Complaints Commission! ‘Independent’ is no cosmetic word.  
You might call it ‘cosmetic’ because you want to say so by virtue of the political affiliation 
you have.  ‘Independent’ means independent because when we look at clause 3 and the way 
this Commission is going to be constituted, there is obviously independence. Are we going to 
challenge a Supreme Court Judge to say that he or she is not independent?  Who has got the 
guts?  There are many barristers here in this House.  Who can go and challenge and say that 
the Supreme Court’s Judge is not an independent person?  Who?  But one thing I will say 
because I can candidly say it, if the Rt. hon. Prime Minister can consider in this section of the 
law where it says – 

“The Chairperson shall be a person who has – 

 

98 

(i) 

served as a Judge of the Supreme Court;” 

To add if possible the following –  

“served as a Judge of the Supreme Court who has got at least five years’ experience at 
the Defence Bar and who has substantial expertise or a track record in dealing with 
cases at investigatory stage.” 

(Interruptions) 

That’s the problem!  This is what happened with the Human Rights Commission. We have an 
ex-Judge at the Human Rights Commission.  And why, up to 2012, not only 2012, let it go 
back  to  1998  when  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  was  passed  –  thereafter  why  no 
successful  prosecution?    It  is  because,  unfortunately,  in  our  country,  the  way  Judges  are 
recruited is completely wrong and we have to look at this.   

You may say ‘hmmmm’ or whatever! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, you may, but we have to look at it and if only officers of a prosecution background will 
become Judge in this country and Magistrate, we will continue to have problems with our 
system. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah, this is the second time that I am drawing your 
attention to Standing Order 40 (5).  Do not comment on any member in the administration of 
justice or any service commissions or independent Statutory Bodies!  Thank you. 

Mr Rutnah:  So be it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  The truth will always  remain the 
truth! Now, clause 3 (4) (a) is overwhelming evidence that this Commission is going to be 
independent and we also know, to supplement this Act, sooner rather than later the Police and 
Criminal Evidence Act will be passed in this Assembly.  I have on various occasions spoken 
to my very able and learned friend, hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo, the Attorney General and he has 
given me his undertaking because I have been one of the barristers who have, in this country 
since 2010, on my own, solo, fought against Police brutality and provisional charge.  And 
when  I  was  fighting  against  Police  brutality  and  against  provisional  charge,  there  were  no 
journalists who were writing about it.  There were no members of the Bar who ever came and 
supported  me.  There  was  no  Bar  Council  or  Bar  Association  who  ever  said  anything,  but 

 

99 

since 2015, I see that many Barristers and many members at the Mauritius Bar Association 
and journalists have become very, very eloquent in this area of law. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes! Where were they? Where was everybody when I was arrested? Where was everybody 
when hon. Bhadain was arrested? Where was everybody when the Speaker of this House was 
once arrested? Where was everybody when hon… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, don’t mention the Speaker of this House in your 

speech! 

Mr Rutnah: Where was the then? Where? Where were all these people when hon. 
Pravind  Jugnauth  was  arrested?  Where  were  they  when  hon.  Showkutally  Soodhun  was 
arrested? Where were they when hon. Yogida Sawmynaden was arrested – ‘ou koner moi ki 
sann  là!  But,  today,  I  am  glad,  at  least,  some  people  have  suddenly  woken  up  from  their 
coma, so to say! 

Now, let me come to what certain Members of this House said because I was not here 
last Tuesday, but I made it a duty to read a little bit about what other Members of this House 
had said. Last week, my very able and learned friend, hon. Baloomoody flew urgently from 
Madagascar so that he could take part in the debate. Unfortunately, I could not do so. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Baloomoody, no cross-talking, please! 

Mr Rutnah: It’s okay! Hon. Baloomoody was in the Opposition in 1998 when the 
Protection of Human Rights Act was passed. He took part in the debate then. When the Police 
Complaints Bill later on became Act, he was still here in the Opposition and today, in 2016, 
he is still in the Opposition. 

Constant! 

(Interruptions) 

 

100 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Rutnah: It’s okay! It’s okay, Mr Deputy Speaker!  

The Deputy Speaker: No, no. I apply the rules of this House, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: My grandmother used to say: “Dhobi ka kutta na ghar ka na ghaat ka. 

Samjhne wale samjh gaye jo na samjhe anari hai” 

Now, it is okay. Hon. Baloomoody knows what I am going to come about because it 

is going to be a bit difficult for him to digest, but leave it. 

Now,  there  is  a  difference  between  ‘disclosure’,  ‘right  to  silence’,  ‘right  to  the 
protection against self-incrimination’ and there is a difference between ‘investigative stage of 
a proceeding’ and ‘trial’. Now, hon. Baloomoody, I respect him. He has been a barrister of 
long standing and I respect him for that. But, unfortunately, on this occasion, he has faulted 
and  I  am  going  to  correct  this  so  that  we  give  the  right  impression  to  the  people  of  this 
country. He says – 

“Now we say that during the investigation, not the hearing, a person may refuse to 
answer  any  question,  to  provide  any  information  or  to  produce  any  article  or 
document which will incriminate him. This was in the Police Complaints Act, and 
we  know  this  was  the  main  obstacle  which  the  Commission  had.  It  could  not 
inquire  because  the  Police  were  not  disclosing  documents,  were  not  disclosing 
information, they were not producing any document or any article because they 
said this would incriminate them.” 

And he goes on to say – 

“But what about this incrimination? Why should the Police have this protection at 
the  inquiry  level?  He  may  have  his  right  of  silence  when  he  comes  to  the 
hearing.” 

Now, we have a Constitution in this country and by virtue of section 10 subsection (2) of the 
Constitution,  everybody  has  the  right  to  be  treated  innocent  until  guilty  and  by  virtue  of 
section  10  subsection  (7)  of  the  Constitution,  everybody  has  the  right  to  protect  himself 
against self-incrimination. This means… 

(Interruptions) 

 

101 

Yes. Trial! There is Jurisprudence in this country that fair hearing, under section 10 of the 
Constitution, starts from investigative stage until trial stage. 

So, any person in this country can exercise his right to silence, not just because he is a 
Police officer who has been accused of wrongdoing his rights are taken away from him. We 
could  have  amended  the  Constitution  today.  But,  imagine  if  we  would  have  come  in  this 
House to amend section 10 subsections (2) and (7) of the Constitution, then we would have 
been told that we are a despotic Government, an undemocratic Government, because we are 
taking away the rights of the citizens. No! But one thing I agree is that we have not evolved 
as in the United Kingdom, as in England and Wales, where we have sections 34 to 36 of the 
Public Order and Criminal Justice Act 1994 which came into force in 1995. We don’t have 
that. We have not evolved where a Court may draw adverse inference against an accused if 
he  chooses  to  retain  his  right  to  remain  silent.  However,  in  our  Jurisprudence,  in  our 
Jurisdiction what can we do? We can call evidence in Court, we produce all evidence against 
the accused and if he continues to choose his right of silence, that means that he has got no 
explanation.  If  the  case  is  proved  beyond  reasonable  doubt  against  him,  then  he  could  be 
found to be the author of the crime. So, it is all down to how the investigation will proceed. It 
is all down to competence; it is all down to how people, who are involved in the inquiry will 
compile  their  evidence.  This  Commission  will  not  work  on  the  basis  of  confession  based 
evidence, but the intention of this Commission will be to work on the basis of evidence and 
evidence only can convict a person of wrongdoing. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  know  my  learned  friend,  hon.  Baloomoody  also  drew  a 
parallel with Terrorism Act, but let me tell a little bit about how, in case of terrorism, accused 
are  compelled  to  give  evidence.  We  already  have  in  England  section  34  of  the  Criminal 
Justice and Public Order Act. With that Act, against that background, a Judge or a Magistrate 
can draw adverse inference. But, when it comes to the terrorism cases, because they relate to 
internal security, national security, the UK Government then, before passing this law, asked 
for advice, whether it will be human rights compliant. Mind you when this law was being 
passed,  it  was  being  passed  after  England  joined  European  Union  and  they  had  to  be 
compatible with whatever law is being passed with the European Conventions and that’s why 
the  Terrorism  Act  made  it  compellable  for  anybody  to  come  and  give  evidence  in  cases 
where terrorism is concerned. 

Now, in relation to what has been said about all these issues - I am referring to clause 
5 Powers of the Commission - a person may refuse to answer any question or provide any 

 

102 

information  or  to  produce  any  article  or  document  which  would  incriminate  him.    But,  of 
course, as I said, under our Constitution, under our law we have the protection against self-
incrimination. But, those who have perpetrated crime there will be a complaint somewhere 
and  that  complaint  will  be  disclosed  wherever  that  complaint  has  to  be  disclosed.  That 
complaint will be disclosed at investigatory stage. That complaint will be disclosed at trial 
stage.  That  complaint  will  be  disclosed  any  time  when  the  accused  party  makes  an 
application for disclosure. 

Now, I have to deal with the case which my very able and learned friend hon. Ramful 
spoke about. The case of, other than Toofany  which  I dealt with, Ramlogun which  I dealt 
with, I have not yet dealt with the case of Attorney Thandrayen which he referred to. The 
case of … 

Thandrayen…  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I will come to that as well if you want me to… 

(Interruptions) 

The case of Thandrayen, I am so sorry to say, he was never arrested! When he landed, when 
he was asked questions, he voluntarily and there are statements… 

No, there are statements… 

there are statements, let me finish… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

There is a statement and I can produce that statement in this House, if need be. There is a 
statement in which he voluntarily… 

(Interruptions) 

…  surrendered  all  his  information  and  that,  I  wonder  why  no  one  has  taken  disciplinary 
action against him for having voluntarily tendered materials which were confidential between 
him and his client. But, there was never an arrest in that case! Never! It was when he came 

 

103 

out and realised that he did something wrong, someone started to give that search a political 
dimension to score political points. That is what it was! 

Now,  you  want  me  to  speak  about  Valayden?  I  will!  I  will!  When  Valayden  was 

stopped… 

(Interruptions) 

He was told that he was being arrested. Then he was taken at the CCID at 5:30. At 8 o’clock 
at night he was told by the officers of the CCID that: “we have not arrested you, but we have 
brought you here to take a statement from you as a witness.” Is it how the Police work? And 
then there will be some people from the Opposition who will go and campaign outside to say 
that gouvernement pe fer sa! Do you think someone sitting here will give instructions to the 
CCID to go and arrest people? 

Yes? 

Have you got any evidence? 

Touria Prayag! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Do me a favour, I just spoke about it! No one wrote this. No one wrote books like this prior to 
2014! 

(Interruptions) 

And let me tell you one thing, I am glad because he is a good friend of mine. Let me tell you 
one thing, whatever this lady is writing today in Mauritius… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I can see where you are coming with this. Don’t 

mention people outside of this Assembly in a negative way! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! I am busy making a ruling right now! Hon. Rutnah, we have already ruled this 
in this session that you should not be talking about people outside of this Assembly especially 
a journalist in a negative way! 

 

104 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: When I am dealing with this aspect, I am not naming any journalist. But, 
shame on the journalist who now wrote about this! Why can’t she write in relation to all the 
arrests prior to December 2014… 

Why only now? Because now we know, we know that her friends are in trouble! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes. And let me tell you this lady, I am not naming her… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I have just ruled. 

Mr Rutnah: Yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: Sit down when I am on my feet! This is the third time that I am 
calling you back to order! I am warning you now, if you go against my ruling, I will have no 
other choice than to rule your intervention out of order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  I  am  again  saying  I  am  not  naming  the  the 

journalist. 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah,  we  are  talking  about  the  Independent  Police 

Complaints Commission, come back to the Bill! 

Mr Rutnah: I am on my feet doing the debate. I am not naming this journalist! I am 
saying the journalist who has written about  whatever she has written, had she been in her 
country she would never have dared writing any such thing in her country! But, here we are a 
democratic State and that is why here we can pass laws like this. And, if today  I speak,  I 
speak  because  my  country  and  my  people  have  given  me  the  right  to  come  and  voice  my 
opinion  in  a  manner  which  is  compatible  with  democracy,  in  a  manner  which  they  have 
empowered me here to come and say things in order to make wrong right and I will never 
dither on doing so! 

Now, let me come back to the question of judge given that… 

(Interruptions) 

 

105 

Let me come back to the question. In 1998 what did the Leader of the Opposition say about 
judges in the protection of the Human Rights Bill? Look at what he said, the then Leader of 
the Opposition and still Leader of the Opposition –  

“The Chair Committee... 

(Interruptions) 

“The Chairman shall be a person who has a right standard of personal integrity and 
probity exhibited in previous offices held.” 

This was in the Bill. Then he said –  

“It could be a judge, it could be somebody else. You can think of other people who 
can do a better job than a judge. A judge has been a judge his whole life. There is a 
mindset,  there  is  an  approach  to  things  and  you  can  imagine  better  qualified  than 
judges even to chair Human Rights Commission.” 

(Interruptions) 

Why  I  cannot  make  reference  to  judges?  But  I  am  doing  it  here  because  I  am  honest  in 
whatever I am saying and today I will urge upon the Prime Minister to consider bringing the 
Judicial Complaints Commission Bill in this House, a new Sentencing Guideline Council Bill 
in  this  House.  Together  with  this  Bill,  these  two  other  Bills  plus  the  Police  and  Criminal 
Evidence  Act  will  make  our  country  a  safe  country,  will  make  our  country  an  exemplary 
country, human rights compliant within the African continent and at international level where 
others will come and follow our path. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Now I will urge upon every Member of this House to support this Bill so that as of tomorrow 
there  will  be  an  independent  Commission,  not  a  copy  paste  Bill,  but  an  independent 
Commission that is going to decide. 

On this note, thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dayal! 

 

 
(6.12 p.m.) 

106 

Mr R. Dayal (First Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has to be commended for bringing a paradigm shift in policing 
the Police in the interest of the Police and people of the Republic of Mauritius through this 
Bill.  It  is  happening  in  the  context  of  unpredicted  changes  in  community  policing  and 
transnational security environment. Some two and a half centuries since the establishment of 
the Police Force in 1768 by the French colonial powers and after 1810 revisited by the British 
colonial powers. Subsequently, after Independence in 1968 the Police Force started anchoring 
itself through the Police Act in Mauritian culture and tradition in enforcing the law.  

I  joined  the  Police  Force  in  1971  and  I  commanded  the  Mauritius  Police  Force  in 
1994  as  Commissioner  of  Police,  the  days  when  complaints  were  handled  by  the  internal 
mechanisms of Police, I must hasten, however, to state that we had a different generation of 
Police officers within the confine of recruitment, training and operational policy in the proper 
maintenance of law and order in the public interest.  

 
Our Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, was the privileged witness of the 
whole  process.  Policing  environment  has  drastically  changed  since  then  and  will  continue 
even faster. 

The Independent Police Complaints Commission will act as an effective safeguard to 
ensure that Police conduct is under other scrutiny in the provision of liberty and security. The 
function of combating, preventing and investigating crime in all its ramifications are part of 
the  responsibility  and  is  anchored  in  legality.  This  Bill  also  ensures  the  highest  degree  of 
ethical  professionalism  from  all  Law  Enforcement  Officers  to  ensure  committee  support, 
cooperation  and  adoption  of  a  training  policy  consonant  with  soundman  management.  It 
should be based on a credible leadership, firmly anchored in proper command, control and 
communication,  eliminating  to  a  great  extent  the  mushrooming  of  complaints,  more 
specifically through self-discipline.  

I am convinced that this Government is instituting a bold legislation of control and 
accountability  through  the  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  Bill.  This  will, 
undoubtedly,  pave  the  way  forward  for  a  modern,  transparent,  acceptable  and  democratic 
policing  system  ensuring  safe  and  secure  working  and  living  environment  for  Mauritians, 
foreign nationals and tourists alike.  

107 

 
The Mauritian Police Service, as the right arm of democracy, under custody of the 
rule of law, operates with a number of contexts, social, political, economic, psychological, 
cultural, natural security and so on. Accordingly, the Police perform three core functions of 
policing, namely: law enforcement, service provider, maintenance of safety and security, the 
more  so  because  law  and  order  is  the  rock  foundation  of  stability  and  peace  in  any 
democracy.  

It  is  important  to  highlight  that  the  Police  is  subjected  to  a  first  level  of  internal 
accountability  under  the  Police  Act,  Police  Standing  Orders,  Instruction  Book,  Law 
Enforcement  Guide,  Administrative  Orders  to  ensure  discretion,  restraint,  discipline, 
adherence to ethical code of conduct in fulfilling its role and responsibilities in the national 
interest.  The  Police,  headed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  under  section  71  of  our 
Constitution,  enforce  the  law  for  the  triumph  of  truth  and  justice  without  fear  or  favour, 
affection or ill will. This is why this Bill, in part (3) – Investigations, and section 4, strike the 
right balance between the protection of the ordinary citizen against arbitrary use of power and 
the risk of hard-working Police officers who have to bear the brunt of false and malicious 
denunciation in writing.  

The Police have, in the exercise of its duties and responsibilities, a second level of 
judicial control and accountability to the Courts and the Judicial System as befits un état de 
droit, which Mauritius is. The fundamental rights and liberties of the citizen are protected and 
there are safeguards to prevent the miscarriage of justice.  

The  Police  is  also  at  a  third  level  answerable  to  the  Legislature  through  its  inter-
ministerial rules and regulations, and the Committee, by virtue of its terms of reference for its 
omissions,  acts  and  doings,  hence,  the  whole  importance  of  committee  policing  for 
accountability when complaints are filed. The maintenance of public confidence of the Police 
does not rest solely on the complaints system, but that system is a factor in public confidence 
in  the  service.  It  is  imperative  for  the  Police  to  operate  with  public  consent  and  not  by 
coercion,  hence,  the  need  for  mutual  trust  and  confidence  for  public  police  relationship  in 
combating crime and social ills. 

This Government has taken the bold decision to institute a fourth level of control and 
accountability  through  the  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  to  replace  the 
existing system with a view to ensure safeguard in terms of both people and system integrity 
without undermining the authority of the Police, the prime objective being to ensure greater 

 

108 

transparency  and  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  in  the  investigation  of  complaints.  This 
initiative, no doubt, will have to be accompanied by capacity-building of the Police service in 
the  state-of-the-art  support  systems  in  human  factor  engineering  on  retrospective  and 
proactive  accountability  to  enhance  the  credibility  and  respect  of  the  Police  Force,  as  it  is 
elsewhere in credible democracies.  

Section 16 deals with the completion of investigation, bringing an important element 
of  expediency  in  the  furtherance  of  justice  within  a  set  timeframe.  We  all  know:  Justice 
delayed  is  justice  denied.  Under  section  13  –  The  Hearings,  it  will  be  vital  for  the 
Commission to see to it that there is no trial by the Press and Police bashing against Police 
officers consonant  with fair reporting all throughout the investigative process. The  general 
case for an independent system rests on the view reflected in Lord Scarman report in 1981, 
that it would enhance public confidence in the complaint procedure and arguably produce a 
more  rigorous  machinery  of  internal  review  of  Police  conduct  and  strengthen  Police 
accountability.  This  demarche  espouses  the  sacrosanct  philosophy  of  modern  policing  as 
stipulated by Sir Robert Peel – 

“The police are the public and the public are the police.” 

 This is what committee policing is all about and this is what this Government is doing.  

The Police, as an emanation of democracy, are vested with constitutional powers to 
maintain  the  rule  of  law  for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people  of  the 
Republic  of  Mauritius.  Anyone  from  the  community  of  nations  by  virtue  of  bilateral 
agreements  and  international  conventions,  and  in  this  respect  Mauritius  aligned  itself  with 
South African Regional Police Chief Co-operation Organisation (SARPCCO), which I helped 
to create as Commissioner of Police for enhancing regional policing.  Our alignment is with 
Interpol and the United Nations Convention on Law enforcement on Transnational Organised 
Crimes and Drugs.  

In the present context, where the benefits of hindsight and lessons learnt in terms of 
positive feedback, the Police Complaints Division and the Human Rights Commission, the 
legislator had to intervene in the public interest and the proper administration of justice with 
the  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  Bill  in  order  to  create  a  climate  of  trust 
within the Police as the right arm of democracy and vox populi vox dei.  

109 

 
We have a responsibility not only through effective human resource management, but 
also to bring justice to the victims through the system of compensation and rehabilitation to 
clear their names.  

True it is that Police officers and the Commissioner of Police are accountable to the 
civil law under the Law of Torts under vicarious liabilities in areas as wrongful arrests, and 
false  and  malicious  allegations.    No  doubt,  many  suits  and  substantial  damages  have  been 
paid. This Bill makes provision for referring the case to competent authorities for remedial 
measures based on recommendations arrived at through independent investigation.  

We all know that redress through Court is an expensive venture and also a lengthy 
process, and access to Legal Aid funds is far more restricted in civil cases than in the criminal 
process. The provision of conciliation by the IPCC will foster to new heights the relationship 
between  the  public  and  the  Police  for  the  general  good,  with  an  added  forum  for  the 
possibility of restorative justice. The speed of service essential to avoid any form of tyranny 
requires that every Police officer operating in difficult and extreme circumstances with lesser 
efforts to deserve the public trust, not out of charity, but justice. However effective the checks 
and balances of the Government, however extensive the prevention of abuse of power, the 
Government  itself  will  be  less  than  trustworthy,  unless  individual  Police  officers  try  to  be 
worthy of the trust they bear. This Bill is timely and will improve the system in the national 
interest. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon Benydin! 

(6.22 p.m.) 

Mr T. Benydin (First Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Thank you, Mr Deputy 

Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, permit me,at the very outset, to thank and congratulate the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  bringing  before  this  august  Assembly  such  an  important  Bill 
which  meets  and  responds  to  the  sacrosanct  principle  and  philosophy  of  universal  human 
rights.  

This Bill is another milestone in that it is honouring and implementing an essential 
and vital component contained and reflected in the Government Programme 2015/2019 for 

 

110 

the  establishment  of  an  independent  Commission  to  restore  public  confidence  relevant  to 
complaints made against Police officers in the discharge of their duties.   

Hon. Ramful said that ‘Nothing will happen.’, but I think this Government will make 
things happen.  And also, I would like to be on the same line as hon. Ravi Rutnah. We know 
Shakespeare: “the evil that men do lives after them; the good is oft interred with their bones.”  
So, through this Bill, we want to do away with all sorts of malpractices and misconducts of 
Police officers.   

(Interruptions) 

Time is limited. I could have continued on the same line as hon. Ravi Rutnah, but I think it 
would be for another time.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  section  3  of  the  Constitution  of  Mauritius  guarantees 
fundamental rights and freedom of the individual, namely the right to life, liberty, security of 
the person and protection of the law.  An individual living in a democratic society, where the 
Rule of Law prevails, is both free and responsible.  His or her dignity is expressed in basic 
and  inalienable  rights  which  must  be  respected  by  all,  including  the  State  and  society.    In 
accordance  with  international  conventions  and  covenants,  human  beings  are  born  equal  in 
dignity and in rights.  As such, all acts of discrimination and inhuman treatment through the 
exercise of physical force, violence and any other form of injustice should, by all means, be 
rejected and fought against. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to spell out that the introduction of the IPCC 
does, in no way, put into question the work and efforts presently undertaken by the Mauritius 
Police Force to reinforce measures geared at maintaining law and order and, in particular, the 
various reforms being implemented to provide better service to the citizens.   

However,  due  to  abuses  and  unwarranted  action  and  tendencies  of  certain  Police 
officers to exceed the authority and powers conferred upon them while dealing with members 
of the public, the setting up of an Independent Commission has become an urgent necessity 
and has all its raison d’être.  This project also reinforces Government’s political will to make 
of Mauritius a country which places the defence and promotion of human rights at the helm 
and top of its priorities.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Police  Complaints  Division,  under  the  aegis  of  the 
Human Rights Commission, has not given the expected results, particularly the effectiveness 

 

111 

of  Police  to  investigate  and  prevent  misconduct  within  their  own  ranks  in  view  of  the 
perception and concept of party and judge relationship.   

In  various  democracies,  demands  for  independent  or  external  persons  in  the 
investigation  process  and  review  of  citizens’  complaints  against  Police  officers  are 
increasing.   

The  reasons  for  an  independent  mechanism  have  become  more  pronounced,  taking 
into account the habit of some Police officers to embarrass, humiliate and even harm citizens 
during  enquiry  or  detention  stages.  There  is  also  Police  tendency,  although  not  to  be 
generalised, to use stereotypes in carrying out their duties while recognising that we cannot 
blame the Police for all citizens’ behaviours or acts. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in an article written by Andrew Goldsmith from the Faculty 
of Law, Monash University, Victoria, Australia, it is highlighted that failure of International 
Complaint  Mechanisms  reflects  a  loss  of  public  confidence  in  the  way  the  Police  have 
responded to citizens’ complaints and to evidence of misconduct within their own ranks.  It 
further  mentions  that  there  is  lack  of  confidence  in  Police  self-regulation,  mainly  at  four 
stages of processing a complaint against the Police, namely – 

The making of a complaint by a citizen; 
The recording of the complaint by Police; 
The investigation of the complaint by Police, and  
The response by the Police. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is not my intention to cite lengthily from the analysis of Mr 
Goldsmith.  However, the following is very relevant for this debate, namely, the cost of non-
receptivity to complaints on the Police measured in terms of loss of public cooperation, trust 
and  confidence.    This  article  also  brings  into  light  that  internal  investigation  has  lacked 
commitment  and  provided  lip  service  to  the  need  for  a  proper  investigation  of  allegations 
made.  

The article also stressed on the reluctance of senior officers to investigate complaints 
against  their  subordinates  for  fear  of  the  prejudicial  effects  upon  staff  relations  and  force 
morale. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, views are also expressed that complaints need to be seen not 
merely  as  threats  to  existing  policies  and  procedures  or  to  individual  Police  officers,  but, 

 

112 

more importantly, as opportunities for re-examination of reforms with regard to policies and 
practices, particularly in terms of the implications for good community relations.   

Therefore,  the  new  mechanism  proposed,  that  is,  the  IPCC,  I  am  confident  will 
contribute  to  set  up  a  new  architecture  with  regard  to  citizens’  complaints  and  conduct  of 
Police responsibilities.  The more so that this Commission will have as Chairperson a Judge 
or a Magistrate with not less than ten years of experience. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the  IPCC which will function independently  of  the Police 
with  wider  powers  to  investigate  particularly  into  causes  of  death  of  a  person  in  Police 
custody,  brutality  or  as  a  result  of  other  allegations  made  against  Police  officers  will 
definitely serve as a useful instrument for the promotion of human rights.  Public confidence 
in  the  new  system  can  also  spare  complainants  to  have  recourse  to  long  and  complicated 
procedures before Courts of Laws which are both costly and time-consuming.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the establishment of the IPCC will usher a new mindset and 
attitude within the ranks of Police officers and will act as a deterrent in the use of physical 
force, harassment, discriminatory or of arbitrary forms of arrest.   

While referring to section 4 (e) on the Functions of the Commission, regarding other 
functions  that  it  will  perform,  I  would  like  to  suggest,  for  example,  the  initiation  of 
educational programmes to make the citizens more aware of their constitutional rights about 
Police policies. This could help to meet the objectives of the function mentioned at section 4 
(d)  of  the  Bill  which  is meant  to  promote  better  relations  and  comprehension  between  the 
public  and  the  Police.  Equally  important  is  the  need  for  information  relevant  to  Police 
practices to establish accountability with regard to cases filed in connection with brutality and 
Police misconducts.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the IPCC with the range of legal powers conferred to it by 

the Bill, will boost citizens’ morale and contribute to, inter alia, - 

• 
• 

• 

• 

reduce procedural barriers to filing complaints; 
increase opportunities by the Police to herald other reforms and interact more 
with the community and make them more responsive; 
promote  cooperative 
community crime problems; 
reaffirm  a  commitment  to  the  principles  of  equal  opportunity  and  equal 
protection of the law. 

treaties  and  Police  programmes 

to  solutions  of 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to conclude, let me quote from the American Administrative 

113 

Scholar, James Freedman. I quote – 

“The quality of an agency’s performance is usually a function of the degree of public 
support it enjoys for the achievement of its statutory responsibilities or the degree of 
public ambivalence towards its stated mission.” 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

(6.32 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River):  Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I have listened to nearly all the hon. Members who have intervened before me, and, to 
me,  an  Independent  Mechanism  to  investigate  into  the  misconduct  of  the  Police,  is  the 
hallmark of a mature democracy.  It is the proof that the Rule of Law is strongly embedded in 
the democratic culture of this country.   

Experiences in our country, in Mauritius, and also in other countries, have shown that 
the  Police  complaints  system  has  disclosed  how  these  systems  do  not  easily  offer  the 
expected solutions to cases of Police misconduct and Police abuse. 

In  the  UK,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir  -  I  won’t  repeat  all  the  details  about  the  UK 
system - a country which has supposedly one of the fairest Police system in the world, the 
Police complaints mechanism has been constantly subject to several reforms before becoming 
in the present state which it is now, not necessarily the ideal Police complaints mechanism. In 
fact, in the UK, it took 150 years, since the date the Police Metropolitan Force was founded 
up to 1977, for the establishment for the first time of a Police Complaints Board. As I said, 
even  up  to  now,  they  are  looking  into  ways  and  means  to  improve  this  Police  complaints 
system. 

It is no surprise, therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, that in Mauritius, we are still battling 
in  order  to  establish  the  perfect  model  which  should  provide  the  right  remedy  through 
complaints  made  against  Police  Officers  in  the  discharge  of  their  function  because,  in  a 
democratic society, the Police should be accountable, not only to the different authorities, but 
also to the civil population for breach of conduct and law. The Mauritian experience has also 
demonstrated  how  oversight  of  the  Police  is  a  complex  endeavour  and  fraught  with  many 
difficulties. 

114 

 
Indeed,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  present  Bill  constitutes,  as  we  all  know,  the 
fourth attempt to improve the Police complaints mechanism. I recall when I started to practise 
at the Bar years back, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the course of action resorted to by victims in 
cases  of  Police  brutality  in  those  days,  was  for  the  victims  to  make  a  declaration  in  the 
Occurrence Book of the Police and then the Police itself to inquire into the matter. Needless 
to say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, how most of these complaints were shelved and never found 
their way to our Courts of law! Then, in 1999, the Police Complaints Bureau was set up and 
this institution, in fact, did not differ from the previous mechanism in terms of its inadequacy 
and ineffectiveness. The system of enquiry on the Police by the Police clearly has given rise 
to the inherent bias since Police officers were enquiring on their own peers. With time, all 
over  the  world,  it  became  clear  that  in  view  of  this  unsatisfactory  state  of  affairs,  it  was 
necessary to set up a new mechanism, which should be independent from the Police in order 
to investigate impartially in cases of complaints made by the public against the Police. 

Then,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  came  the  amendment  to  the  Protection  of  Human 
Rights Act in 2012, where the Police Complaints Division was set up under the aegis of the 
Human Rights Commission, and even this new initiative, as we all know, did not perform to 
the satisfaction of one and all and did not contribute to improve public opinion on the cases 
of complaints against Police. The main reason for this has been highlighted by the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister - I do not want to quote extensively what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said - 
and also the reasons given by our friend, hon. Ramful, just now when we look at the number 
of successful cases which have been sent to Court and prosecuted and so on. The Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  rightly  said  that  the  cases  were  not  dealt  within  a  prompt  and  expeditious 
manner. The undue delays in these investigations give rise to the impression that there was 
reluctance to investigate and the connivance between the investigators and the Police officers 
to conceal the wrongdoings. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  do  we  need  then?  We  need  a  system  to  deal  with 
complaints against the Police because there have been too many cases of Police abuse which 
recurrently damage public confidence in the Police. Our case law, our judgements at all levels 
of our Judiciary are replete with cases of challenge, of alleged confessions by accused parties, 
commonly known as ‘voir dire’. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, most of us said and we know that all Police officers are not 
bullies and they do not resort to brutality in order to complete their investigation. But, this 
well-known  phenomenon  of  Police  abuse  has,  unfortunately,  been  used,  not  only  against 

 

115 

suspects, but also against witnesses, who in the course of enquiry, have not collaborated to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  investigators.  We  know  what  is  the  trick.  The  interrogators  seek  to 
manipulate the suspects into thinking that it is in his best interest to confess and this false 
evidence ploy is, in fact, the controversial tactic often used by the Police. I just mentioned the 
witnesses - not only suspects, but also witnesses - who have also been, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, victims of Police brutality. 

In  our  recent  past,  we  came  across  so  many  of  these  cases.  Mrs  Desmarais,  in  the 
famous Bernard Maigrot case, won her case before the National Human Rights Commission. 
She won a Writ of Habeas Corpus from a Supreme Court Judge and won a Supreme Court 
case for damages. Even Barrister Jean Claude Bibi, well-known to all of us, attacked at that 
time  by  the  Raddhoa  team,  subjected  to  verbal  violence  and  abuse.  The  late  Rajesh 
Ramlogun, who was just referred to civil servant, was called as a witness and subjected, as 
we all know, to so much brutality that he met his death in detention. The Judicial Enquiry 
found  that  there  was  foul  play  at  the  hands  of  the  MCIT  team.  Dr.  Ménager,  the  Medical 
Practitioner,  who  was  also  called  as  an  expert  witness,  was  kidnapped  and  tortured  by  a 
Police officer.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  stop  here.  I’ll  rather  come  to  the  Bill  proper.  The 
debate, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today, is whether this Bill is different or is it a rebranding, 
the qualification used by hon. Baloomoody. Is it a rebranding, a cut and paste of the previous 
Police Complaints Act of 2012? Is it the case? But, to me, this argument is meaningless, this 
debate  is  meaningless,  is  futile.  True  it  is  that  there  is  an  overwhelming  majority  of  the 
sections of the 2012 Act which have been reproduced. Let us be objective and honest! The 
majority  of  the  sections  of  the  old  law  are  being  reproduced  in  the  Bill  before  this  House 
today. The present Bill, in fact, introduced a few novel provisions to the old legislation. This 
is  how  matters  stand!  In  fact,  the  two  most  important  features  in  this  Bill,  are  the 
qualifications of the Chairman, the differences in the staffing of the IPCC and also there is a 
new provision in section 4 (d), the need to ‘promote better relations between the public and 
the Police’, which was not to be found in the previous Bill. This is the difference. But, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, the main question that should be asked today is: in what ways this new 
Bill will remedy the shortcomings and the flaws of the previous Police Complaints Division 
under  the  Human  Rights  Commission.  The  task  of  all  of  us,  today,  is  to  highlight  the 
shortcomings in the previous Bill for Government, today, to plug the loopholes in the present 

 

116 

Bill and to ensure that a new mechanism which will be set up, which will hold the Police 
accountable for their misconduct and build greater public confidence in the system. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, I am happy that, firstly, the scope of the investigation, the scope 
given to the Commission is the same as it was in the last previous Bill and it is as wide as it 
is. 

It is not only linked to Police brutality, in fact, it is as we can see in the Bill - 

 “investigate into any complaint made by any person or on his behalf against any act, 
conduct or omission of a police officer in the discharge of his functions (…)” 

This is good. Of course – 

“(…) other than a complaint of an act of corruption or a money laundering offence;” 

But, it is so wide and I am happy that this has not changed because we, at the Bar, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, you at the Bar also,  know how the Police officers unfortunately, some of them, 
feel so much powerful when you go even with your client or when this poor man sets his foot 
in a Police or CID office somewhere, when you penetrate into the citadel of Police power.  

Today, there is even a practice, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, - I hope you have not come 
across this practice - when the barrister comes with his client sometimes - I don’t say at all 
times, but sometimes – or some Police or CID officers, do you know what happens to this 
barrister? The Police officer comes to him and says: “Look, your client who has already been 
arrested does not want you to assist him. He does not need any lawyer. He has told me that he 
does  not  require  the  services  of  any  barrister  and  he  has  not  retained  the  services  of  any 
counsel. So, please, Sir,  you  can leave.”  I  have  heard that very often recently, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. So, this is why I said the law is sufficiently wide to cater for different types of 
Police abuse and not only Police brutality or Police violence. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a Police complaints system should answer… 

(Interruptions) 

Of course, you can go and make a declaration, you can go and report the matter to the Bar 
Council but, in the meantime, your client has already confessed and has already been lured. 
We all know what are the tricks of the game, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! 

(Interruptions) 

117 

 
A  Police  complaints  system,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  should  answer  some  basic 
criteria and have a few core purposes. These are the criteria which have to characterise the 
right Police complaints system –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

it should have an accountability mechanism and a transparency requirement; 

it  has  to  be  in  a  position  to  offer  protection  and  work  against  the  culture  of 
impunity; 

it has to be a tool in the protection of human  rights and provide  remedy  in the 
violation  of individual human rights; 

(iv) 

it has to address grievance of the complainant; 

(v) 

it has to demonstrate that it is responsive in the sense that such a mechanism is a 
measure of enhancing public trust and confidence in the Police.  

This is why I say perhaps today the debate is not to decide whether it is a cut and paste or 
whether it is a replica. The debate today with regard to this Bill should be for us to assess and 
evaluate whether the proper mechanism today will respond and meet the criteria I have just 
enunciated. 

I must say that there are some provisions in this Bill which are questionable to which I 
will  come,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  I  am  aware  that  those 
provisions which we are going to question today already existed in the previous law and have 
been reproduced in the present one. But that does not mean that they should not be looked 
into again because what we need is to draw the attention of Government so that the necessary 
amendments  or  corrections  be  made  for  the  sake  of  having  a  more  effective  piece  of 
legislation. 

I will spend some time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, more particularly, on section 4 (b) in 
connection  with  the  ‘Functions  of  the  Commission’  pertaining  to  the  investigation  in  the 
cause of death of a person in Police custody. But let me come to a few points I would like to 
make.  I  wonder  whether  the  Bill  should  not  have  made  provision  for  investigation  by  the 
Commission proprio motu, that is, on its own initiative. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we can well 
imagine a case when during an enquiry the evidence reveals that it is another Police officer 
who  has  also  been  involved  or  connected  in  any  misconduct  although  nobody  has  made  a 
complaint against him, but the investigation has revealed that this other Police officer is also 
involved in Police abuse or Police brutality. 

 
Therefore, as we know, Section 10 (1) reads as follows –  

118 

“The Commission may conduct an investigation on the basis of a complaint.” 

The question I would like to ask is: can any investigation be conducted against that Police 
officer in view of the fact that no complaint has been made against him as such? 

In regard to Section 10 (2) with the limitation period of one year, hon. Baloomoody 
has commented upon this, but I don’t think I agree with him because when we look at Section 
10 (2) about this limitation period of one year, it does not mean that the Commission cannot 
investigate into a complaint if the action has taken more than one year to be complained of. It 
has been mentioned in the course of this debate that the Commission may only conduct an 
investigation if the complaint has been made within one year of the alleged offence. I don’t 
think this is really the case. What the law provides, what this Bill provides is that – 

“the Commission shall not investigate into a complaint unless it is made within one 
year from the day on which the complainant first had notice of the matter alleged in 
the complaint.” 

I shall be clearer, what the law provides to my understanding, for example, in case a 
person is informed by a credible witness five years after, for example, his brother has died in 
Police custody, if after two or five years he is informed that it was due to Police brutality, 
according to me, he has the right to make the complaint to the Commission although one year 
has elapsed after the death of the victim. But since he has become aware of the alleged Police 
brutality  more  than  one  year  afterwards,  he  can  still  go  to  the  Commission  and  make  a 
complaint about the Police violence or brutality exercise upon his relative or brother. 

When we go down in Clause 10 (2) (b) we see that – 

 “The  Commission  may  conduct  an  investigation  into  a  complaint  made  after  the 
period” 

Of one year –  

“(…) if it considers that there are special circumstances which make it proper to do 
so.” 

Therefore, it is up to the complainant or somebody acting on his behalf to prove that there are 
special  circumstances  and  the  Commission  may  conduct  an  investigation  into  a  complaint 
although one year has elapsed after the alleged violence or abuse has been used by the Police. 

119 

 
With regard to Section 13, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in connection with the hearings, 
the hearings may be held in public as we can see in Section 13 of the Bill. But, it would be 
interesting to know how many hearings in public have taken place under the previous law. I 
think  for  the  sake  of  building  trust  and  confidence  in  the  population  and  give  the  right 
perception  of  impartiality  and  transparency,  the  Bill  should  have  provided  that  all  the 
hearings should have been held in public.  I think that would have been  a better safeguard 
with regard to the perception of partiality and transparency. 

In connection with the right of silence, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Section 13 (6) which 
has been lengthily commented before me, as we have been told and as we know, the right to 
remain silent is a right guaranteed by the Constitution, but I still think, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, that there is a difference, I agree, with the investigation.   

Hon. Ramful gave the example of POCA.  Even in the Commission of Enquiry Act, 
we will see that refusal to answer any question before the Commission of Enquiry, according 
to the Commission of Enquiry Act, will subject a witness to a heavy fine. Whatever be it, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  law  should  have  provided  that  the 
Commission may draw an adverse inference from the failure of the Police officers in refusing 
to  give  any  evidence  to  the  questions  which  have  been  put  to  them  by  the  Commission.  
Interestingly  enough,  I  have  gone  through  other  Independent  Complaints  Commission  in 
other countries and I have found in some legislation that this right of silence does not exist in 
some other countries.  Be that as it may, if we have chosen to maintain the right of silence in 
accordance with the provisions of our Constitution in the Bill, I think the Bill should have 
made  mention  of  the  fact  that  the  Commission  may  draw  any  adverse  inference  from  the 
failure of the Police officers to refuse to cooperate or to give any evidence to the questions 
put to them. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I also see in section 16(b) - Completion of investigation, that 
the Bill provides that the Commission may, on completion of the recommendation, refer the 
matter  to  the  DPP  with  a  recommendation  that  the  Police  officer  may  be  prosecuted.  The 
question is: What happens if the DPP does not respond favourably to the recommendation of 
the Commission? I think that the Bill should have made mention of the need, in such cases, 
for  the  DPP  to  make  public  why  the  DPP’s  Office  or  the  DPP  does  not  abide  by  the 
recommendation  of  the  IPCC.    The  Bill  should  also  have  provided  that  the  Commission 
makes  public  all  cases  it  has  referred  to  the  DPP  with  a  recommendation  for  prosecution.  

 

120 

This will enhance the transparency process.  Of course, the complainant should be equally 
informed of any decision taken by the Commission.   

I  repeat,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Bill  should  have  made  mention  of  the  need 
when  the  DPP  does  not  agree  with  the  recommendation,  the  DPP  should  give  explanation 
why  he  has  not  followed  the  recommendation  of  the  IPCC.    The  Bill  should  also  have 
provided  that  the  Commission  makes  public  all  cases  it  has  referred  to  the  DPP  with  a 
recommendation for prosecution for the sake of transparency. 

I will now come to the last amendment circulated with regard to the new section 17.  

This new amendment provides that – 

“(…)  the  Commission  may  designate  an  officer  to  swear  an  information  and  that 
officer may, (…) conduct …”  

Without prejudice to the powers of the DPP under the Constitution. 

 

“… the prosecution of an offence committed by a police officer.” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, provisions exist in other pieces of legislation.  For example, in the 
Mauritius  Revenue  Act,  in  the  POCA  where  specific  authorities  may  conduct  prosecution 
under delegated powers with the consent of the DPP.  The ICAC, for example, acts under 
delegated powers.  In the present clause, we are concerned with the provision which is made 
for the officer to do, in fact, two acts – 

(i) 

(ii) 

to swear the information, and  

to conduct the prosecution of an offence committed by the police officer. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  response  to  this  amendment  is  that  the  Bill  is  only 
authorising the designated officer to conduct an offence committed by the police officer to 
prosecute.    In  the  Bill,  with  regard  to  the  MRA,  I  see  that  the  MRA  Act  has  taken  the 
precaution of spelling out that this must be done with the consent or the authorisation of the 
DPP… 

(Interruptions) 

 So, the consent of the DPP was needed and I am happy to see that this has been taken care 
of. 

On a completely different note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is an important element 
which is missing in our legislation and which, according to me, should have been addressed.  

 

121 

It  is  the  concept  of  the  duty  to  report,  which  is  now  enshrined  in  different  pieces  of  our 
legislation.    This  concept  of  duty  to  report  is  a  corollary  to  the  concept  of  ‘Assistance  à 
personne en danger’.  A police officer or any other person, be it a member of the public, a 
fellow prisoner or even an attendant working at a police station must be imposed the duty to 
report  to  the  Commission  any  act  of  violence  which  has  been  exercised  upon  a  person  in 
custody, if he has willingly or unwilling been a witness to such act of violence.  I think that 
this would have afforded more transparency and protection to those in police custody. 

I finally come to cases of death in police custody.  Many cases have been mentioned 
before me and I do not want to go into all these cases, but I just wish, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, to highlight the case of Mr Iqbal Toofany.  In fact, this case is a test to the provisions 
with regard to the procedures of investigation of the Police Complaints Act of 2012.   

We recall how this case has provoked so much outcry in the population, the cruelty 

with which the police were suspected of having ill-treated the suspect.   

In  this  case,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  will  recall  the  numerous  items  of  even 
immense evidence value which were never brought before the Court: the video recording of 
Victoria  Hospital,  the  police  diary  book  entries  because  this  case  was  precisely  being 
investigated by officers of the police themselves. In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, we recall in 
this  case  how  the  casualty  card  of  the  victim  had  disappeared;  how  those  who  were 
responsible at the Victoria Hospital had confided que le dossier d’admission d’Iqbal Toofany 
was no more in their possession because they had given it to a police officer, and this file had 
disappeared.  There  were  so  many  outcries  when  the  families  of  the  victim  heard  that  the 
documents and the video of his admission had disappeared.  When we are debating such a 
Bill, the question that we have to ask ourselves is: Here is someone against whom the Chief 
Medical Officer detected 14 injuries all over his body. The provisional charge against him 
was one of torture by public officials.  When the parents and other well-wishers condemned 
the atrocities of the police, pressure mounted, the DPP launched a judicial enquiry into the 
death of Mr Toofany, pursuant to sections 110 and 111 of the DICA.  Mr Iqbal Toofany died 
in 2015 and we had a law which was passed in 2012. Yet, when we recall all this and the 
conditions in which he died, this Police Complaints Act was in force.   

Section 4 (b) was, in this Bill, the duty to - 

“Investigate into the  cause of death of  a person  who died whilst the person was in 
police custody or as a result of police action.” 

 

122 

When a judicial enquiry is ordered by the DPP, as it was done in the case of  Mr Toofany, 
when this enquiry is carried out, the Magistrate conducting the enquiry has to rely heavily on 
the Police officers  who  enquire into the matter,  who record statements from the suspected 
Police officer; who are responsible for producing the exhibits in Courts.  This is what perhaps 
explains  the  disturbing  features  in  this  case  which  I  have  just  referred  to.    And  yet,  this 
Commission, at that time, had the function to investigate in such cases.  By the 2012 Act, 
they have the power to investigate; they have the power to take all lawful measures which a 
Police officer has under the Police Act.  They have the power to record the statement.  The 
investigators could enter any Police premises, search any premises occupied by the Police, 
and inspect any document on those premises, power to take copies of any documents on those 
premises.   

In  fact,  the  widow  of  Mr  Toofany  made  a  complaint  to  the  Human  Rights 
Commission on 07 March 2015, well before the setting up of the judicial enquiry by the DPP.  
This  Toofany  case,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  can  only  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
Complaints Division of the Human Rights Commission failed in its duties according to the 
provisions  of  the  2012  Act.  We  will  never  know  on  how  many  occasions  the  Police 
Complaints Division, set up under the 2012 Act, failed to shoulder its responsibilities. And 
we  can  only  hope  that  this  new  Commission  which  we  are  setting  up  today,  differently 
constituted, presided by a Judge or a Magistrate of 10  years’ experience, will play its role 
fully and discharge its responsibilities properly in holding Police officers to account for their 
misconduct. 

The case of Mr Toofany also revealed the issue of the protection of witnesses and the 
need  to  bring  relevant  legislation  which  is  long  overdue.  The  independent  witness  who 
witnessed  the  injuries  inflicted  on  the  deceased,  refused  to  participate  in  an  identification 
parade for fear of reprisal. He preferred to swear an affidavit rather than give a statement to 
the Police. Government has announced, in its Programme, that it will legislate and present to 
the House, a Witness Protection Act. I appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to see to it that 
this is done so that witnesses may be protected to depone freely and fairly in all cases before 
Courts or before judicial enquiries. 

Having said this, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I just want, before I sit down, to say that a 
Police Complaints Mechanism cannot be the sole panacea, remedy for Police abuse. What do 
I mean? The setting up of the best Police Complaints System cannot, on its own, solve all the 
problems. It should be supported, bolstered by other measures. I have three measures in mind. 

 

123 

We have to review our law with regard to the confessions recorded by Accused. For example, 
in  India,  in  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  provides  that  in  certain  cases,  statements  or 
confessions made in the course of an investigation can be recorded only in the presence of a 
Magistrate. Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, we can reflect upon that possibility. In India, in cases of 
murder, if the Police depend only on confession, the accused can never be convicted. There 
must  be  extraneous  evidence  in  serious  offences.  We  have  to  review  our  law  about 
confession. We have to invest in technology. We urgently need a pace.  We need codes of 
practice as safeguards to ensure that Police officers’ conduct their enquiry in a fair manner. 
While such requirements relate to a wide range of Police investigating activities, we know 
that  the  application  in  the  developing  area  of  technology  usage  should  be  maximised,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  usage  of  advances  in  technology  is  assisting  all  modern  Police 
Forces today. Lord Quinton wrote, and I quote - 

“Criminality has been greatly strengthened by technical advances in recent years. The 
police need to be able to respond to this effectively.” 

Lastly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the recent DNA cases’ exonerations have shed light 
on the problem that people sometimes confess to crimes which they did not commit. In many 
countries today, recently a disturbing number of high-profile cases we know, have exonerated 
innocent people who had confessed and were convicted at trial, only later to be exonerated.  
Criminal research has suggested that false confessions and admissions are present in 15% to 
20% of all DNA exonerations.  In the world, the legal history is showing us, is rich in stories 
about  false  confessions,  untrue  confessions.    Since  1989,  when  Gary  Dotson  was  the  first 
wrongfully  convicted  individual  to  be  proved  innocent  through  the  new  science  of  DNA 
testing,  hundreds  and  perhaps  thousands  of  individuals  have  been  exonerated  by  post-
conviction DNA testing and release from prison and even from the death row, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir.   

We should, finally, I think, in Mauritius, reflect about the possibility of adopting the 
mandatory electronic recording of interrogation and consider other possibilities for the reform 
of interrogation practices which will safeguard the legal rights of suspects and the integrity of 
the process.   

So,  my  conclusion,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is,  let  us  give  a  chance  to  this 
Independent  Complaints  Commission.    Let  all  of  us  see  to  it  that  it  works  properly!    It 
delivers, unlike the previous Body which was set up in 2012, but the remedy is not only the 

 

124 

Police  Complaints  Mechanism.    We  have  to  accompany  this  system,  this  framework,  this 
mechanism by the other measures which I have just suggested when I  was concluding my 
speech. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank you for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume the seat! 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

(7.11 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Vice-Prime Minister Collendavelloo! 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Let me start by saying that I am sure that I 
share the opinion of the overwhelming majority in this House when I say that I have been 
extremely surprised, dismayed and disappointed to hear the stand of the MMM on this Bill.   

I single out the MMM because clearly the Opposition is not united because we have 
heard three voices today.  From the MMM, we have been clamouring for years; MMM, me 
and so many of my colleagues who had their political career in the MMM, so many of my 
friends of the MP… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! For years, the MMM has been clamouring for the setting up 
of  an  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission.    Today  that  a  Bill  comes  before  this 
House, with the object to establish precisely what the MMM has been asking for years, the 
first MMM Member to stand up, my very good and learned friend, hon. Baloomoody, stands 
up and says: “I am not going to vote for this Bill although it is establishing what we have 
been all asking to be done for years.” Why? Because it is a copy of the Police Complaints 
Act. Right! So, I did not know, I had forgotten what had been the stand of the MMM when 
the Police Complaints Act was passed. And then, my colleague, hon. Gayan, stood up and 
reminded all of us that the MMM had not only voted, but had applauded the Prime Minister 
of that time, Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, when he passed the Police Complaints Act. So, 
when  Dr.  Ramgoolam  passes  the  Act,  it  is  good.  When  Sir  Anerood  passes  a  similar 
legislation, it is bad. We can’t be very serious when we say that. 

(Interruptions) 

 

125 

Well, yes! But we can’t oppose everything just because we have to oppose. 

Yet,  why  are  we  debating  today?  Because  the  object  of  the  Bill  is  to  establish 
precisely an Independent Police Complaints Commission! So, are we for or are we against? 
Because  we  want  to  be  able  to  tell  the  people:  “We  do  not  agree  to  an  Independent 
Commission  investigating  Police  abuses.”  Because  everyone  agrees  that  there  are  Police 
abuses. Everyone agrees! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister would not have come with this Bill if 
he did not agree that there are Police abuses of all sorts of levels. I mean all those, not only 
Barristers,  everyone  in  the  country  knows  that  there  is  a  minority  of  rogue  Police  officers 
who are so incompetent that they have to fall foul of the law in order to pretend that they are 
carrying on their duty. So, we say the answer to this is to have that Independent Commission. 

In fact, my friend, hon. Baloomoody, did not tell us whether he was for the setting up 
of the Commission or against. Hon. Ganoo criticising the Bill, of course, but, at least, on the 
main  object,  he  had  no  problem  about  telling  us  what  his  stand  was.  I  shall  be  eagerly 
awaiting my good friend, hon. Uteem. But the impression I have is that the MMM realises 
that  it  is  in  a  tight  corner  on  this  Bill  because  of  this  object  to  set  up  that  Commission. 
Therefore, in the deprivation of arguments, we know now that hon. Uteem is going to fall 
back on a propaganda leaflet to support the stand of the MMM. But we don’t need a debate 
on propaganda leaflets. My good friend, hon. Rutnah, went into that debate. I don’t think it 
was necessary because everybody is in agreement on that side of the House. But if we need a 
propagandist to prop up our argument, it only  means that we, ourselves, are unable to put 
forward a serious argument. 

So, I appeal to hon. Uteem when he is going to stand up, let us see: do we agree to the 
setting up of the Commission? If, yes, then the issue arises, as hon. Ganoo has raised, with all 
the  other  sections  of  the  Bill.  Insofar  as  we  are  concerned,  we  consider  that  the  Police 
Complaints Act failed the nation not because of the substantive provisions, but because of its 
composition. The Human Rights Division was so overwhelmed with work, they could not do 
it and we do need a separate Independent Commission. That is the stand of Government. We 
might agree with it, we might not agree with it, but it is a step forward in the right direction. 

The points made by hon. Ramful and hon. Ganoo may be quite valid. Time will tell! 
Let me stop on that silly argument on self-incrimination, section 10(7) deals only with trials. 
We all know that you can’t force somebody to incriminate himself or else the whole enquiry 
will be vitiated at the time of trial. It is normal that we should tell a suspect: “Listen, you are 

 

126 

not bound to say  anything, but if  you want to say something, we will use it against  you!” 
From time immemorial, that is what we have had in our procedure. 

The point which I am making very briefly, therefore, Madam Speaker, is that we must 
all be for the setting up of that Independent Commission which is a step forward. With regard 
to the rest, of course, the debate is interesting and it is on that, that the debate can also be, but 
we cannot go against the object of the Bill. 

Before concluding, let me thank the Whips of the Opposition and of Government for 
having allowed me at the last minute to step in to make my very short speech. Five minutes, I 
promised. It was only because I had been interpellé by the speech made by hon. Baloomoody 
and I felt that I had to contribute to the debate in that course. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(7.22 p.m.) 

Mr.  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central): 
Madam Speaker, with power comes responsibility! With power comes accountability! With 
power comes sanction! 

A policeman is no ordinary citizen. He has very wide powers, constitutional powers: 
powers to interfere with the fundamental human rights of other individuals; power to interfere 
with the right of movement, the freedom of movement of other individuals; power to stop an 
individual, to search him, to search his vehicle; power to search his premises with or without 
warrant; power to effect arrests, and if need be, to use reasonable force to effect an arrest and 
if an accused is trying to escape, he can use reasonable force, including shooting the prisoner. 
He  has  the  power  to  seize  property  which  he  can  then  bring  and  use  as  evidence.  He  has 
power, more importantly, to detain a person and he has power in the evening to release that 
person on parole or the next morning he can object to bail sending the person to prison. 

There  is  consensus,  Madam  Speaker,  in  this  House,  that  we  need  a  mechanism  to 
prevent  abuse.    We  need  a  mechanism  to  investigate  abuse.    We  need  a  mechanism  to 
sanction  abuse.    There  is  consensus.    There  is  also  consensus  that  the  present  situation  is 
unsatisfactory.    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  as  far  back  as  last  year  in  March  2015, 
answering to a Parliamentary Question, said, and I quote – 

127 

 
“I must say, Madam Speaker, I am not happy at all with the situation myself.  I am not 
happy that whenever there is a complaint against the Police, the Police itself enquire 
into  it.  We  must  have  some  other  independent  institution  to  enquire  and  to  say 
whether there should be a prosecution or not.” 

As far back as last year! So, there is consensus. 

Where there is no consensus is that we, on this side of the House, do not believe that 
what is being proposed today in this Bill is going to make any fundamental change, is going 
to improve the situation, is going to prevent abuse, is going to better help investigating abuses 
and help sanction abuse.  This is our stand. 

The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  devoted  all  of  his  speech  attacking  the  MMM  and 
saying that he cannot understand how the MMM, which had stood all its life against Police 
brutality, against arbitrary arrests, can be against this Bill.  When did we say that we are not 
going to vote this Bill?  Let me quote… 

Let me quote verbatim what we said… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let  me  quote  verbatim  what  we  said.    The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  was  in  the  House, 
whether sleeping or not, I don’t know!  But that is what we said – 

“(…) on this side of the House, we, in the MMM, do not agree with that Bill.  It is not 
that we don’t agree with the contents of the Bill because the contents of the Bill are 
exactly  what  they  were  when  we  voted  the  Police  Complaints  Division  under  the 
Human Rights Act.  What we do not agree is that there is nothing new fundamentally 
in that Bill. It is mainly a desperate rebranding exercise (…)” 

This  is  what  we  said!  We  never  said  that  we  are  not  going  to  vote  this  Bill.  We  are  only 
saying that this is a missed opportunity. What we are doing is exactly what was in the Police 
Complaints Act.  I am very surprised to hear what the hon. Vice-Prime Minister said, because 
he is an experienced Senior Counsel. 

But when I listen to the Members of this House - and I listened to all of them - I can’t 
but believe that either they did not read the Bill or they did not understand the Bill, or worse, 
they did not even try to compare it to what was the existing situation and only paid lip service 

 

128 

that what we are doing now is going to create an independent investigating body. And I am 
going to refer to a few speeches made by the hon. Members. 

Hon. Mrs Boygah thought that we were setting up an independent Police Complaints 
Commission consisting of three divisions, each headed by a Deputy Chairman.  She said, and 
I quote – 

“What  is  appealing,  Madam  Speaker,  concerning  this  Commission,  is  that  it  will 
comprise  of  three  distinct  divisions,  each  headed  by  a  Deputy  Chairperson  with  its 
own staff. 

Each of these divisions will address one particular issue - 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Human Rights Division (…); 

Police Complaints Division (…), 

National Preventive Mechanism Division (…)” 

Where is this in this Bill?  This is what was voted in 2012!  Then, the hon. Member went on 
and said, and I quote – 

“Madam  Speaker,  as  matters  stand,  complaints  by  presumed  victims  of  Police 
violence are being dealt with by the Police Complaints Division of the Police Force.” 

Police Complaints Division of the Police Force! 

“Police inquiring upon the Police is for sure in an uncomfortable situation, giving rise 
to a non-confidence in the Police Complaints Division and a pronounced perception 
of cover-up in many cases.  It is a paradox that Police is being called to investigate 
upon Police and hence finds itself in a position of judge and party at the same time.” 

But, Madam Speaker, the Complaints Investigation Bureau of the Police has been abolished 
as far back as October 2013!  As far back as 2013, Police have stopped investigating on the 
Police!  But I can understand hon. Mrs Boygah.  She is not a lawyer. 

But same cannot be said of hon. Minister Gayan.  He is a Senior Counsel! He has far 

more experience than I have dealing with Police complaints. And, yet, he said, and I quote – 

“In fact, as a practicing barrister, I have seen cases of Police misconduct.  I know that 
it exists, but the big problem that we had in the past and we still have today, is that the 
Police, when they have a complaint made against them, they themselves investigate 

129 

 
and  because  of  the  familiarity  that  exists  between  Police  officers,  there  is  the 
perception that no fair, impartial enquiry can take place.” 

Hon. Minister Gayan saying, “in the past and we still have today”! So, even he, as a 
Senior  Counsel,  thinks  that  today  it  is  the  Police  investigating,  whereas  we  have  a  Police 
Complaints Division of the Human Rights voted in 2012 which came into operation in 2014.  
But where I am really disappointed with hon. Minister Gayan is that he does not give us a 
single  valid  reason  why  or  how  this  new  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  is 
going to fare better than the existing Police Complaints Division. 

He quoted section 5, ‘Powers of the Commission’. But this section, Madam Speaker, 
is identical to section 5 of the Police Complains Act. In fact, Madam Speaker, I have to say I 
went at great length to compare every clause in the two legislations: in the Police Complaints 
Act and the Independent Police Complaints Bill.  I am not going to take the time of the House 
to go through each of them, but I will just highlight a few - 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Section 4, ‘Functions of the Commission’, identical to section 4 of the Police 
Complaints Act; 
Section 5, ‘Powers of the Commission’, again identical; 
Meetings of Commission, identical; 
Investigations by Commission, identical; 
Making or continuing a complaint (…), identical; 
Hearings, identical; 
Record of complaint and investigation, identical; 
Powers of Investigator, identical; 
Use of evidence, identical; 
Completion of investigation, identical; 
Regulations, identical. 

So, all the major clauses that we have in this Bill are identical to clauses that exist under the 
Police Complaints Act. 

Hon. Lepoigneur stated, and I quote – 

“Madam Speaker, this Bill is to rectify the inadequacies of the former Government’s 
model.  Under  the  old  regime,  the  Police  Complaints  Act  2012  provided  for  the 

130 

 
setting-up  of  the  Police  Complaints  Division  within  the  National  Human  Rights 
Commission (…)” 

This is what he said – 

“It did not provide for an independent body.” 

And then he goes on to say – 

“But  this  Bill  proposes  a  full-fledged  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission 
presided over by a former Judge of the Supreme Court, and one of its striking features 
is that ‘No serving Police officer shall form part of the staff of the Commission.’” 

Breakthrough! Striking feature, ‘No serving Police officer shall form part of the staff of the 
Commission’.  Section 7 (2) of the Police Complaints Act reproduced identically the same 
thing, ‘No serving Police officer shall form part of the staff of the Division.’ Identical! Your 
new  Bill  is  not  making  any  difference.    His  colleague  from  the  same  party,  hon.  Abbas 
Mamode, stated, and I quote – 

“Madam Speaker, this is not rebranding.  Nous sommes en train de changer.  Cette loi 
sera une loi où il y aura une institution indépendante to prevent an eventual abuse of 
power, because there is eventual abuse of power.” 

Independent!  How is it going to be independent? 

If we look at section 3(2) of the Protection of Human Rights Act 1988, and I quote – 

“(…)  the  Commission  shall  not  in  the  exercise  of  its  function  be  subject  to  the 
direction or control of any other person or authority.” 

This  is  already  in  the  law.    The  law  already  says  that  the  Commission  is  not  going  to  be 
subject  to  the  direction  or  control  of  any  other  person  or  Authority.    So,  it  is  already 
independent.    And  then,  he  goes  on  to  say  that  ‘the  Commission  is  an  independent  body 
which will comprise of either a Judge, a Magistrate or law practionner to ensure the smooth 
running  of  the  activities.’    But,  again,  Madam  Speaker,  when  we  look  at  what  is  being 
proposed today in this Bill, as to the composition of this new independent Commission, the 
qualifications  are  identical  to  what  is  in  the  Police  Complaints  Act  in  the  Human  Rights 
Division.  The Chairperson has to be a Judge.  Does the hon. Member know that, today, the 
Police Complaints Division is headed by a former Judge, honourable D. Seetulsingh, that the 
Deputy Chairperson is Mrs Marie Lourdes Lam Hung,  a respected Barrister-at-Law of over 
30  years  standing  at  the  Bar?    Is  the  hon.  Member  suggesting  that  these  people  are  not 

 

131 

independent?  Or is he suggesting that to be independent we have to be appointed by this 
Government, by this Prime Minister?   

Madam  Speaker,  in  my  humble  opinion,  the  only  material  change  that  is  being 
 
brought by this Bill is the introduction of a New Clause 18 on confidentiality, ‘No member or 
officer shall disclose to any unauthorised person any matter which comes to his knowledge in 
the performance of his function’.  And section 18(2) makes it a criminal offence, leading to a 
fine  of  Rs50,000  and  a  term  of  imprisonment  not  exceeding  one  year.    So,  we  are 
criminalising any disclosure by members of the Commission of any matter that comes to his 
knowledge. 

 
Hon. Minister Jeewa-Daureeawoo, a respected Attorney-at-Law, had this to comment 
on the confidentiality provision: “This criminal sanction would undoubtedly be additional to 
any disciplinary action that might be taken against a member or officer concerned.  Such a 
stringent  approach  to  the  investigation  of  complaints  from  the  public  will  reflect  the 
seriousness,  and  if  I  may  say,  the  dedication  of  the  institution.  Madam  Speaker, 
accountability and transparency guarantee fairness and justice.” 

 
But, Madam Speaker, we are talking here about disclosure by members of this new 
Independent  Commission.    So,  this  clause,  effectively,  is  muzzling  the  Commission.    It  is 
telling the Commission: ‘You can’t speak to strangers, you can’t speak to the Press, you can’t 
give  interviews,  you  can’t  comment  on  the  investigation  going  on,  you  can’t say  anything 
about it.’  How can that be transparency?   

Hon. Ganoo just explained that, in fact, in his opinion, we should have made it clear 
 
in this Act that, this Commission must communicate, must tell the public how many cases it 
has been referring to the DPP, must tell the victims what has happened to all its enquiries.  
And here, today, we are going to muzzle the Commission and we are saying that it is going to 
operate in more transparency!  

 
 Madam  Speaker,  I  have  taken  the  time  of  the  House  to  go  at  length  through  the 
speeches  of  various  hon.  Members  from  the  majority  to  establish  that  they  did  not  fully 
appreciate that this Bill, before this House, will not make an iota of difference to the present 
mechanism of investigation in Police complaints.  The figures are damning.  According to the 
Annual Report of the National Human Rights Commission published in March 2015, out of 
529 complaints investigated in 2014 by the Police Complaints Division, only 6 cases have 

 

132 

been referred to the DPP. That was in 2014!  In May 2016, answering to a PQ, the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister stated the following - 

 

“I am informed by the Human Rights Commission that since March 2015 to 29 April 
2016, 693 complaints have been lodged.” 

Out of these 693 cases,  only one case has been  referred to the DPP!  So, clearly, Madam 
Speaker, this is not a satisfactory situation.  But have the hon. Members, on the other side of 
the House, analysed the reason why the Police Complaints Division is not performing?  Have 
they  taken  the  time  to  speak  to  Mr  Seetulsingh,  to  Mrs  Lam  Hung,  to  the  people  of  the 
existing Commission’s division to find out what is the problem?  Have they taken the time to 
read the Annual Report of the Human Rights Commission?  If they had taken the time to read 
the Report, they would have found, for example, at paragraph 3.23 of the Annual Report that 
the  powers  of  the  NHRC-PCD  are  too  restricted.    Although  considerable  time  is  spent  on 
processing  complaints  on  investigation  and  on  hearing  complainant  witnesses  and  Police 
officers, the PCD can only make representation to the DPP and to the DSC.  The time has 
come to consider endowing the National Human Rights Commission with certain disciplinary 
powers. 

 
Are we paying heed to the cry of the Police Complaints Division?  Are we giving it 
more  powers  under  this  legislation?    No,  Madam  Speaker!    Paragraph  3.26  of  the  Annual 
Report of the National Human Rights Commission recommends that the Disciplinary Orderly 
Room of the Police be replaced by a permanent unit within the Police Force, headed by a 
retired  Magistrate  or  experienced  Barrister  to  deal  expeditiously  with  disciplinary  cases 
before the Police Force.  Is this Bill giving effect to this recommendation, Madam Speaker?  
No!   

 

 
Paragraph  3.28  of  the  Annual  Report  recommends  that  certain  amendments  be 
brought to the Police Complaints Act to provide for counselling for offending Police officers 
and victims of Police brutality. Is this Bill giving effect to this recommendation?  No! 

 
Paragraph  3.30  of  the  Annual  Report  of  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission 
recommends  that  the  Police  should  not  arrest  a  person  on  the  mere  allegations  of  another 
person and that a purposeful enquiry should first be carried out to verify the allegation before 
any  arrest  is  made.  Again,  is  this  Bill  giving  effect  to  this  recommendation?   No,  Madam 
Speaker!  And yet, hon. Members from the other side of the House would like us to believe 
that not only taken on board any recommendation made by anyone, by the people who have 

 

133 

been dealing with these Police complaints, not taking heed to any of these recommendations - 
what we are proposing today, will solve the problem, will improve the problem?   

Hon. Baloomoody, in his intervention, highlighted one of the main reasons why, we, 
on  this  side  of  the  House,  think  that  the  Police  Complaints  Division  has  not  been  able  to 
deliver on its promise, and that is the time of one year to investigate and the time limit of two 
years to prosecute.   

We  know,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Complaints  Investigation 
Bureau  of  the  Police  Force  stopped  investigating  in  October  2013.    We  know  from  the 
Annual  Report  that  it  is  only  in  June  2014  that  the  subdivision  of  the  Human  Rights 
Commission was set up.  So, between October 2013 and June 2014, there was no institution 
in this country collecting information about Police complaints.  Nothing during that period of 
time!  And, today, we have the chance to correct this anomaly, we have the chance to give the 
power to this new Commission to investigate all these cases and we are not doing it!   And 
that is why, on this side of the House, we think it is a missed opportunity.   

 
Hon.  Minister  Gayan  and  hon.  Boissézon  stated  that  we  did  not  raise  that  issue  in 
2012, that in 2012 we fully supported it.  Yes, of course!  But, in 2012, we could not have 
anticipated then what would happen two years later!  We could not have anticipated that the 
then Government would take more than two years to set up the Division.   

We  supported  the  Police  Complaints  Act  in  2012  because  it  was  an  improvement 
compared to the Complaints  Investigation  Bureau of the Police. We were then replacing a 
system  where  the  Police  was  investigating  the  Police  by  a  system  where  an  Independent 
Commission, headed by a former Judge, was going to investigate into Police complaints. That 
is why we were all in favour. But now, three years later, we all agree that the system is not 
working.  But  are  we  improving  the  system?  Are  we  making  fundamental  change  to  the 
system?  This  is  where  we  disagree  because  when  we  look  at  everything  that  has  been 
mentioned before, the function, the power, the conduct of investigation, the hearing, they are 
identical. Nothing is changing as far as substantive provision is concerned. 

Hon. Baloomoody also argued that we need to revisit the Public Officers Protection 
Act  of  1957  because  there  is  a  two-year  time  bar.  You  cannot  bring  any  criminal  or  civil 
proceeding against a public officer, including a Police officer after two years of the alleged 
wrong.    And  he  replied,  hon.  Sinatambou,  who  is  a  lawyer,  a  barrister,  a  notary  public, 
argued, and I quote – 

134 

 
“One may be against the two-year time bar which is afforded to any public officer, not 
only to a Police officer but to any public officer. But this Bill is not the place to take 
it.  This  is  not  something  which  falls  within  the  purview  of  the  Independent  Police 
Complaints  Commission.  This  is  something  which  should  come,  if  at  all,  under  an 
amendment to the Public Officers’ Protection Act of 1957.” 

Madam  Speaker,  I  really  don’t  know  the  kind  of  advice  which  this  Government  is 
receiving  from  its  legal  advisers.    Parliament  is  sovereign.    In  a  few  weeks’  time,  we  are 
going to be called upon to vote the Finance Bill.  In that Finance Bill, we will be amending 
dozens  of  legislation,  if  not  more.    So,  what  was  the  legal  reason,  the  legal  impediment 
preventing  this  Bill  from  having  a  clause  saying  that  –  prosecution  of  Police  brutality,  of 
abuse of power will not be subject to the two-year limitation period of the Public Officers’ 
Protection  Act.  There  was  absolutely  no  legal  reason.  It  was  a  simple  drafting  procedure.  
And to add insult to injury, today, this morning, we have been circulated a First Reading of 
an amendment to the Public Officers’ Protection Act.  Today, First Reading!  Have we taken 
the opportunity to correct this, to allow victims of Police brutality to sue Police officers after 
two years?  No, we have not!  And yet, we are saying that this is going to revolutionise the 
system.  

Madam Speaker, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister presented the Bill, the only reason 

he gave, and I quote, is that – 

“This  has  created  a  perception  in  the  public  opinion  that  the  outcomes  of  cases  of 
Police complaints which are reported to the National Human Rights Commission are 
not dealt with as expeditiously as they should have been and that the outcomes of the 
complaints are not communicated to the complainants in a timely manner.” 

So,  the  only  reason  which  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  put  forward  is  an 
administrative one.  The existing mechanism does not work. There is delay at this level and, 
therefore, we are having a new Body.  That is the only thing.  But have we gone further and 
investigated why did the Human Rights Commission, the Police Complaints Division take so 
much time to investigate complaints?  There was a backlog of several hundreds of cases that 
were  forwarded  to  it.    Was  it  given  the  necessary  resource,  the  necessary  staff  and  the 
necessary  technical  assistance  to  carry  out  its  work?    And  will  this  new  Independent 
Commission that is being set up, be given the resources, the staff, the expertise which have 

 

135 

not been given to the previous Division?  If we don’t give them all the financial support, the 
logistics, the staffing, then there is bound to be a similar result.   

Madam Speaker, Police brutality, abuse of power by Police officers is not unique to 
Mauritius,  and  we  have  to  learn  from  experience  of  other  countries.    There  is  a  lot  of 
literature on the Internet as to how other countries have tried to prevent Police from abusing 
their powers.  Many studies have been carried out.  The old model of public accountability or 
review  has  failed  to  produce  adequate  Police  accountability,  primarily  because  of  the 
resilience  and  resistance  nature  of  occupational  Police  culture.    The  new  accountability 
moves away from the traditional punishment and deterrence towards compliance and modes 
of regulations aim at preventing harm and reducing risks through title of regulations, audits, 
surveillance and inspections. 

Central to this approach, Madam Speaker, is a change in the recruitment process and 
in  the  promotion  process  of  Police  officers.    New  recruits  should  be  asked  to  pass  a 
psychological test.  They must not be subjected to only physical test, but also, and probably 
in my opinion, more importantly, to psychological test; test that will enable us to establish the 
ability to cope with the stress, the pressure and exigencies of the profession.  

Promotion in the Police Force should not be based only on written examination. We 
know, in this House, because we have asked questions on this, each time there is a promotion 
exercise,  it  creates  more  frustration  than  anything  else.  In  the  Government  Programme,  at 
paragraph 133, the Government announced, and I quote – 

“To  promote  transparency  and  meritocracy,  an  independent  body  will  be  set  up  to 
conduct examinations within the Police.” 

This Body has not yet been set up and I urge the Government to come forward to this Body, 
because as far as I am concerned, I think prevention is better than deterrence and having the 
proper  mechanism  for  recruiting  and  promoting  Police  officers  will  help  create  a  Police 
which is more apt to serve the nation and prevent abuse. 

Madam Speaker, I would end by answering to my friend, hon. Gayan. 

(Interruptions) 

I have to end by that because answering to a PQ which I asked to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
I  was  told  that  there  have  been  976  provisional  charges  which  have  been  set  aside  since 
January 2015.  When hon. Baloomoody thought that this is an inacceptable state of affairs, 

 

136 

hon. Gayan stated that: “We need to state our agenda.” And said that this is an honourable 
thing to do; people of honour have to state their agenda.  And we have no difficulty, Madam 
Speaker,  to  disclose  our  agenda.    We  have  and  we  will  continue  to  denounce  all  cases  of 
injustices;  all  cases  of  politically  motivated  arrests.    Our  Leader,  our  Militants  have  been 
victims of Police abuse, especially in the 1970s. We have paid the price of our conviction.  
We  have  stood  against  the  Government  of  the  day  and  in  the  1970s  we  have  even  been 
imprisoned for doing so. So, we don’t have any lesson to take from anyone, Madam Speaker.  
But whenever the MMM has been in power, no one and I repeat, no one can in good faith 
state that the MMM used the Police to settle score with his opponents.  Quite the contrary… 

(Interruptions) 

Quite the contrary, when the Police arrested hon. Pravind Jugnauth in the most inhumane and 
humiliating manner at his residence, we did not hesitate to march … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Uteem: …to the Central CID.  We stayed there until he was released.   

(Interruptions) 

When hon. Sawmynaden was arrested because  he took a picture of the infamous lady, we 
immediately condemned the arbitrary arrest.  When hon. Bhadain felt that he was victim of 
Police conspiracy, he came running to the hon. Leader of the Opposition for support.  And 
just  like  we  stood  by  the  side  of  the  victims  of the  political  vendetta  then,  today  also,  we 
condemn with equal virulence, all cases of arbitrary arrests, all cases of politically motivated 
arrests and we will continue to do so, Madam Speaker,… 

…because this is our agenda. This is our pledge to our nation.   

(Interruptions) 

Thank you. 

(7.53 p.m.) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish,  first  of  all,  to  thank  all  the  hon. 
Members who have participated in the debate on this Bill. The quality of the interventions 
and the interests shown on the subject comfort my belief that it is the duty and responsibility 
of any Government to do its utmost to uphold human rights. 

 
However, citizens should also be aware of their civic responsibilities and should know 

137 

that any unlawful action which may jeopardise the social fabric will not be tolerated. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that coming up with this Bill is not at all a 
blame against the Police Force. On the contrary, the philosophy behind this Bill is to enhance 
the  already  existing  trust  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  population  has  in  our  Police 
Department. 

As Prime Minister of this country, I am very much aware of the difficult tasks that the 
Police  Officers  are  accomplishing,  round  the  clock,  to  track  criminals  and  other  types  of 
offenders, sometimes putting their own life at risk, with a view to protecting us. 

I would like to take this opportunity to convey my full support to our Police Force, in 
the performance of their noble duties, particularly, at a time where Police investigations are 
becoming  more  and  more  difficult  in  the  face  of  increasing  sophistication  of  criminal 
activities through the use of Information Technology. 

The  proposed  Police  Complaints  Commission  will  be  in  a  position  to  set  aside  the 
many superfluous and unjustified complaints that are made against Police Officers and will 
have the necessary latitude to make appropriate recommendations to the DPP, if ever there is 
evidence that false accusations have been made against a Police Officer. 

It is, in fact, very alarming that, out of the 1,741 complaints so far received by the 

Police Complaints Division, 1244, that is, 71% of them have been found to be unjustified. 

I  make  an  appeal  to  the  population  not  to  waste  the  time  of  the  Commission  by 

making frivolous complaints. 

However, we should, at the same time, not forget that the Police Department has a 
workforce of more than 14,000 officers and, therefore, cases of indiscipline and abuse which 
are, unfortunately, inherent in human nature, are inevitable. 

The very purpose of this Bill, therefore, is not only to shield our citizens from these 
abuses,  but  to  also  act  as  a  deterrent  for  the  very  few  officers  who,  by  their  irresponsible 
behaviour, may bring such a vital institution to disrepute.  

Madam Speaker, moreover, having an Independent Police Complaints Commission, 
separate from the National Human Rights Commission, is not a new concept. It already exists 
in several countries such as the UK, New Zealand and South Africa. 

138 

 
As in these countries, I expect that the operation of this new institution will be guided 
by the five principles which the European Court of Human Rights has developed for effective 
investigation, namely – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

independence of the investigators; 
gathering of adequate evidence; 
prompt and expeditious conduct of the investigations; 
transparency in decision making, and 
the safeguard of the legitimate interest of the complainant in the process.  

Madam, Speaker, I wish to respond to a few of the unwarranted criticisms which have 

been made by Members of the Opposition during the debate. 

Hon.  Baloomoody  and  hon.  Mohamed  have  voiced  out  the  opinion  that  this  Bill 

brings nothing new as compared to the existing Police Complaints Act. I beg to differ. 

I am of the view that this Bill will make a difference as, inter alia – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

it will enhance the status of the Police Complaints Division by converting it 
into a full-fledged Commission, completely independent; 

it will be a separate entity and will be a body corporate with its own staff, line 
budget and reporting obligations, and 

it makes a specific provision for the Commission to promote better relations 
between the public and the Police. 

Hon. Reza Uteem, I listened to him very carefully. His only objection to this Bill is 
that  many  clauses  of  the  previous  Bill  have  been  incorporated  in  this  Bill.  But  what  the 
previous Bill was aiming at and what this Bill is aiming at?  

We  have  seen  that  the  previous  Bill  has  not  been  effective,  and,  insofar  as  we  are 
concerned, we have come to the conclusion that, in fact, there has not been a real Independent 
Commission to do the work. And since we are aiming to have the same objective, the same 
result as the previous one, therefore, whatever we find was good in the previous legislation, 
we are not like the previous Prime Minister or Government that whatever had been done by 
the previous Government must be thrown away. We are not of that view. Whatever we think 
is correct that should be preserved in order to make this one effective, we are not ashamed to 
say: ‘Yes, we have preserved them.’ But, I am confident that this Independent Body is going 
to give results which we are contemplating. And, please, have patience! Let it work! If it does 

 

139 

not give a result, then you will blame us in due course. Don’t try to blame us now! If, with all 
these clauses in 2012, you were so happy and you voted for it very gladly, why today you 
come and say you are not going to vote this Bill? Why are you so unhappy? 

These  new  characteristics  will  further  consolidate  the  already  existing  mechanisms 
such as the ‘Community Policing’ and ‘Neighbourhood Watch’ already put in place by the 
Police for a better coordination between the community at large and the Police. 

Hon.  Baloomoody  mentioned  that  no  consultation  whatsoever  was  made  for  the 
drafting of this new Bill. Well, I wish to inform the House that wide consultations did take 
place between my Office and several stakeholders such as the State Law Office, the National 
Human Rights Commission, more particularly with the Police Complaints Division. I should 
also point out that the two amendments that are being brought in the Bill follow proposals 
made by the DPP’s Office. 

Yet, another question was raised by the same Member as to whether we should not 
amend the Public Officers’ Protection Act so as to remove the limit of 2 years within which 
civil and criminal actions should be initiated against Public Officers. 

I am under the impression that the hon. Member has not read the specific provision of 
the Act carefully. The time limit of two years provided for in the Act relates to any fact, act 
or omission against public officers in the execution of their duty. 

It is clear, therefore, that complaints, which will be made against Police Officers to 
the  IPCC,  will  not  fall  under  the  purview  of  the  limit  provided  in  the  Public  Officers’ 
Protection Act because officers, who infringe the rights of victims, cannot be said to be acting 
in the exercise of their duty. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Mohamed  came  up  with  the  supposedly  bright  idea  of 
amending the Constitution so as to give the Commission the power of arrest.  Since I am in 
this House, every time I listen to hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I get the feeling that he acts like a 
joker! 

(Interruptions) 

Every time I listen to him, I never get convinced of what he puts forward. Let me remind the 
hon. Member that the Protection of Human Rights Act 1998 was amended a first time in 2012 
to broaden its mandate and, again in 2013, so as to introduce a new Section 4 (a). Where was 

 

140 

he  then?  Why  did  he  not  raise  his  voice  that  the  Constitution  should  be  amended  and  the 
power which he is asking us, why we are not giving… 

Why did he not do that at that time? 

(Interruptions) 

As regards the issue of provisional charges, I wish to refer the House to paragraph 21 
of  the  Government  Programme  2012-2015  wherein  it  is  stated  that  Government  will 
introduce  a  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Bill  providing  for  codes  of  conduct  that  will 
regulate the conduct of Police and other investigators and address a number of issues relating 
to  criminal  enquiries,  including  victims’  rights.  I  guess  that  the  hon.  Members  who  have 
argued lengthily on the issue of provisional charges during this debate are either in a state of 
utter confusion, confounding between the  Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill 
and the present Bill which we are bringing in this House and which we are debating just now 
or they are just trying to mislead everyone. 

Madam Speaker, my Government does not intend to lose its time with the bluffs of 
the Opposition and we will continue to strive hard in the best interest of our citizens. This is 
why we were elected and we intend to fulfil our commitments with all the determination it 
requires. 

A few have argued that this Commission as well as the other human rights institution 
should be  given the power to punish for human rights violations.  I do  not share this view 
because –  

Firstly, we have already established mechanisms under our Constitution such as the 
Director of Public Prosecutions Office, the Disciplined Forces Service Commission and the 
Judiciary which are empowered by law to consider recommending and inflicting punishments 
regarding those who contravene the law. 

Secondly,  providing  the  powers  to  initiate  disciplinary  action  or  to  convict  a  new 

institution entails amending the Constitution which I am not prepared to do at this stage. 

Thirdly,  it  is  against  established  practice,  as  advocated  by  the  Paris  Principles,  to 
which  we  adhere,  for  human  rights  institutions  to  be  mandated  to  punish  human  rights 
violations.  

The  Paris  Principles  set  out  the  minimum  standards  required  by  national  human 
Rights  Institutions  to  be  considered  credible  and  to  operate  effectively.  These  principles 

 

141 

clearly indicate that the core roles of human rights institutions are to provide opinions, make 
recommendations  and  proposals  on  matters  concerning  the  promotion  and  protection  of 
human  rights.  They  can  also  seek  amicable  settlement  through  conciliation  or,  within  the 
limits prescribed by the law, through binding decisions, and where necessary, on the basis of 
confidentiality. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed Commission will have the necessary leeway to conduct 
investigations and make recommendations for appropriate actions as provided for in the Bill.  

For example, following the investigation stage, the Commission may decide to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

set aside the complaint where same is considered to be trivial or frivolous or 
not made in good faith; 

refer  the  matter  to  the  DPP,  with  a  recommendation  for  prosecution  for  a 
criminal offence; 

refer  the  matter  to  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  with  the 
recommendation that disciplinary proceedings be taken against the officer, or 

refer  the  matter  to  the  Attorney-General  with  the  recommendation  that  the 
complainant  be  paid  such  compensation  or  granted  any  such  relief  as  the 
Attorney General may deem appropriate. 

Insofar as confidentiality is concerned, Madam Speaker, it is the characteristic of all 
body  corporates  and  the  more  so  for  an  investigating  institution.  The  Commission  must 
ensure that there is no undue interference in the course of an investigation.  

Disciplinary  powers  cannot  be  conferred  to  the  IPCC  as  it  is  not  the  employer.  It 
requires  constitutional  amendments  to  review  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission 
and, as I said, at this stage, we don’t find it important to bring changes in the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, there has been some  concern expressed as to what happens if the 
Police  officer  refuses  to  give  a  statement  under  warning.  This  usually  happens  when 
statements are taken. The refusal to give a statement is the fundamental right of any citizen. 
We cannot compel anyone to give a statement. Just like we are not being able to compel the 
former Prime Minister to give any statement! He is keeping silence. It is his right. But then, 
the Commission can make use of the evidence given by the complainant and witnesses and 
other circumstantial evidences to make its recommendations. 

142 

 
Madam Speaker, I am convinced that an independent and effective Police complaints 
system will enhance public trust and confidence in the Police whilst ensuring that there is no 
impurity for misconduct and abuse of authority by Police officers. I am also happy that we 
are able to honour yet another commitment highlighted in the Government Programme 2015-
2019. We have confidence in what we are doing and I am almost certain that we will get the 
results that we want to get. 

With these remarks, I say thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION BILL 

(No. XIV of 2016) 

Clauses 1 to 15 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 16 (Completion of investigation) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

- 

 

 

The Prime Minister: I beg to move for the following amendment in clause 16 

(a)  in clause 16(4), by deleting the words “, Director of Public Prosecutions”; 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 16, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

New Clause 17 (Prosecution of offences) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

The Prime Minister: I move for the following amendments. 

“17.  Prosecution of offences 

 

143 

For  the  purposes  of  this  Act,  the  Commission  may  designate  an  officer  to 
swear an information and that officer may, with the consent of the Director of Public 
Prosecutions, conduct the prosecution of an offence committed by a police officer.” 

The Chairperson: The question is that new clause 17 be read a second time. 

Question put and agreed to. 

New Clause 17, as added, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 18 to 27, as renumbered, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 28 (Transitional provisions) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stands part of the Bill”. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, I move for amendment as circulated – 

 “ (c) 

in  the  newly  numbered  clause  28,  by  inserting,  after  subclause  (1),  the 
following  new  subclause,  the  existing  subclauses  (2)  and  (3)  being 
renumbered as subclauses (3) and (4) – 

 (2)  Any matter referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions by 
the Police Complaints Division immediately before the commencement of this 
Act  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  this  Act,  be  dealt  with  as  if  it  has  been 
referred to by the Commission.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 28 as renumbered, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 29, as renumbered, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The schedule was agreed to. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly.   

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill 

(No XIV of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

 

144 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Friday 29 July 2016 at 5.00 p.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker:  The House stands adjourned. 

At 8.19 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 29 July 2016 at 

5.00 p.m. 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

INFORMAL ECONOMY - SURVEY 

(No.  B/803)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Mauritian economy, he will state if consideration will be given for the taking of measures to 
formalise the informal economy as far as possible and, if so, indicate if a survey of the urban 
and rural economies, including the formal and informal home businesses, cottage industries, 
street vendors, natural therapists and other  categories of self-employed, together with such 
details  as  the  number  of  people  employed  therein,  will  be  carried  out,  in  line  with  the 
informal economy research reports and papers published by the ILO and the World Bank. 

 
Reply: I am informed that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

there is a legal obligation under the Business Registration Act 2002 for any person 
carrying out a business activity to seek registration and obtain a unique Business 
Registration Number (BRN); 
local authorities keep a record of some home based activities, street vendors and 
other categories of self-employed; 
in the course of their on-site inspections, inspectors of the local authorities usually 
request non-registered operators to register themselves in accordance with existing 
laws and regulations of the Councils, and 

 

(iv) 

145 

furthermore, the City Council of Port Louis and the Municipal Council of Quatre 
Bornes have recently taken steps to register street vendors when allocating spaces 
to them in the Municipal Food Court or mini markets. 

As regards the Survey, I am informed that Statistics Mauritius does collect data on the 
formal  and  informal  sectors  during  the  Census  of  Economic  Activities  (CEA)  which  is 
carried  out  every  5  years.    These  data  are  integrated  in  all  official  national  estimates  of 
employment and GDP.  

 At the latest Census conducted in 2013, Statistics Mauritius collected data from all 
formal and informal production units, excluding agriculture.  Based on this exercise, some 
statistics can be generated on the informal economy.  However, consideration will be given to 
carry out a specific survey on the informal economy. 
 

POWER STATIONS & INDUSTRIAL FACTORIES - RESIDENTIAL 

PERMITS - ISSUE 

(No.  B/804)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether he will state if consideration will be given 
for  the  setting  up  of  an  independent  inquiry  to  look  into  how  the  regional  administrations 
have  issued  residential  permits  over  several  decades  in  the  vicinity  of  power  stations  and 
industrial factories which produce noise and other forms of pollution whereas several other 
industries, including large printing presses, have been moved to dedicated industrial areas, 
indicating if measures will be taken to – 

(a) remedy the existing situations, and 
(b) carry out planning exercises for the future. 

Reply: The Municipal  and District Councils are empowered to grant permits for the 
development  of  land  in  virtue  of  the  Outline  Planning  Schemes  and  the  Development 
Management Map, wherein are referred the different zoning of any development permitted. A 
Local Authority shall, in dealing with an application, have regard to whether the proposed 
development  is,  in  any  way  likely  to  contravene  an  Outline  or  detailed  Scheme  being 
prepared in respect of the area concerned. 

The  House  may  wish  to  note  that  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  Act  of  1954 
provides for approved Outline Planning Schemes to be the main reference for determining 
permit applications and, therefore, the provisions of an approved Outline Planning Scheme 
have to be the key elements when considering appeals against permit refusals. 

146 

 
The House may also wish to note that, according to records available, the Municipal 
City Council of Port Louis was, for instance, issued with an Outline Planning Scheme as far 
back as the year 1971 and, as per that Scheme, industrial areas were contiguous to residential 
areas. For example, the site at Fort Victoria which is industrial is contiguous to a residential 
area and also the site at Saint Louis Power Station is industrial and the adjacent areas were 
residential. 

According to Section 7(3) of the Town and Country Planning Act, any person who 
intends to develop land should apply to the relevant Local Authority for a Building and Land 
Use Permit. All Building and Land Use Permits, as well as Outline Planning Permissions are 
issued  under  Section  117  of  the  Local  Government  Act  and  they  should  be  in  accordance 
with the following enactments and any guidelines issued hereunder –  

(a) the Building Control Act 2012, 
(b) the Town and Country Planning Act; 
(c) the Planning and Development Act, and  
(d) the Environment Protection Act. 
To this end, the Local Authorities make use of different planning tools, such as the 
Outline Planning Schemes and Planning Policy Guidance issued by the Planning Division of 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands and other instruments, such as environmental and sanitary 
guidelines, in assessing applications for Building and Land Use Permit and Outline Planning 
Permission.  These  documents  assist  planning  officers  and  decision  makers  at  both 
Government and Local Authorities’ level in ensuring proposals for development at the local 
or site level are in compliance with the policies and proposals derived at the national level. 

The Local Authorities, therefore, have always stood guided by the different planning 
tools which I have just mentioned and I do not envisage setting up an independent inquiry to 
look into the issue of land development permits over the last decades. 

Insofar as part (b) of the question is concerned, the House may wish to note that a 
National Development Strategy has been developed by the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
and  this  document,  covering  the  period  up  to  2020,  comprises  a  range  of  policies  for 
nationally  significant  developments  and  provides  guidance  for  developing  residential, 
tourism, a range of employment uses as well as major transport and infrastructural proposals. 

 

DBM – RESTRUCTURATION 

(No. B/806) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 

 

147 

Development Bank of Mauritius Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to – 

(a) the current amount of non-performing loans thereof; 
(b) the current financial situation thereof, and 
(c) where matters stand as to the proposed restructuring thereof. 
 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the DBM that as at 
31 December 2015, the bank had non-performing loans of Rs3.0 billion, of which provision 
of Rs1.83 billion had already been made in its accounts.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that a few years 
back up till the end of  2014, the financial situation of DBM  was extremely precarious, so 
much so that the very existence of DBM as a development finance institution was at stake. 
While  on  the  liabilities  side,  the  DBM  had  huge  fixed  deposits  which  had  matured  and 
depositors were not willing to renew their deposits, on the receivables side, funds were tied 
up in highly impaired loans.  DBM was then facing acute liquidity problems. 

However, following the implementation of policies and strategies of the new Board at 
DBM  in  2015,  the  financial  situation  of  the  bank  has  greatly  improved.  There  has  been 
focussed effort on collection of past dues, on debt reduction which has subsequently led to 
reduction  in  financial  charges,  and  on  cost  containment.  As  a  result,  the  bank’s  liabilities 
have  been  brought  down  by  an  amount  of  Rs2.26 billion  through  the  bank’s  own  effort. 
Moreover, the bank reached a break-even position for the 12 months ending 31 December 
2015. The Management Accounts for the 18 months period ending 30 June 2016 now show a 
profit of around Rs15 m. 

As regard to part (c) of the question, the DBM has adopted a number of restructuring 
initiatives, namely a consolidation of its industrial estates operations through renovation and 
maintenance  of  the  buildings  and  improved  rental  collection  as  well  as  a  Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme which has helped to right-size the organisation.  

INTEGRITY REPORTING BOARD - BOARD MEMBERS 

(No. B/807) Mr R. Uteem  (First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the Integrity Reporting Board, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the - 

(a)  composition  thereof,  indicating  the  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  of  the 

Board members thereof, including the fees payable thereto, and  

 
(b) where the meetings thereof are proposed to be held. 

148 

 

Reply: With regard to part (a), the Rt. hon. the Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, KG, 
PC, will be the Chairperson of the Integrity Reporting Board and he has been consulted on 
the appointment of the two other members of the Board.  This will be done in due course 
after terms and conditions are agreed. Once letters of appointment are issued in accordance 
with Section 7(1) of the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Act, this will be tabled 
before this House. 

With  regard  to  part  (b),  by  virtue  of  Section  7(2)  of  the  Good  Governance  and 
Integrity Reporting Act, the Board will meet “at such time and place as the Chairperson may 
determine”.   

 

SMEDA – BOARD MEMBERS 

(No.  B/808)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether, in regard to the Small 
and Medium Enterprise Development Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
therefrom,  information  as  to  the  composition  of the  Board  thereof,  indicating  the  date  and 
terms and conditions of appointment of each Board Member thereof. 

Reply:  The  Board  of  the  SMEDA  was  last  reconstituted  on  31  August  2015  for  a 
period of three years.  I am tabling the composition of the Board and the terms and conditions 
of its members. 

NHDC – SPORTS COMPETITION & GAMES 

(No. B/809) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the Jeux 
de  la  National  Housing  Development  Company  Ltd.  organised  under  the  aegis  of  his 
Ministry, he will – 

(a) state the objectives thereof, and  
(b) give a - 

(i)  breakdown  of  the  expenditure  incurred  in  relation  thereto,  indicating  the 

source of funding thereof, and  

(ii) list of the housing estates involved therein. 

 

Reply: In the context of its 25th Anniversary, the National Housing Development Co. 
Ltd (NHDC) is organizing various sports competitions and games for the residents of all the 

 

149 

NHDC housing estates across the island. The activities are being organized under the aegis of 
my Ministry and in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth and Sports. The regional heats 
were held on 10 and 17 July 2016 at Germain Commarmond Stadium in Bambous. The finals 
are scheduled for 07 August 2016. The venue will be finalised in due course. I am informed 
that 1,191 residents from 69 NHDC housing estates are participating in the activities. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, the main objectives of the “Jeux de la NHDC” are 

as follows - 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 

(f) 

to  reinforce  the  ties  and  promote  social  interaction  and  cohesion  among  the 
families living in the NHDC housing estates; 
to sensitize the families on the importance and benefits of sports; 
to promote the welfare, physical and mental well-being of the residents;  
to provide opportunities to discover young talents;  
to develop a sense of belonging among the residents of the NHDC housing estates, 
and 
to give the residents the opportunity to participate in a national competition and 
develop a sense of pride. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  NHDC  that  the 
expenditure  for  the  organization  of  the  activities  is  estimated  at  eight  hundred  and  nine 
thousand  rupees  to  be  financed  by  the  NHDC  and  through  sponsorship  from  the  private 
sector. 

I am hereby tabling the breakdown of the estimated expenditure and the list of the 69 

housing estates participating in the “Jeux de la NHDC”. 

 

PONT ROUGE, RIVIERE DU POSTE - REHABILITATION 

(No. B/810) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
footbridge, commonly known as Pont Rouge at Rivière du Poste and which is used by the 
pedestrians, he will state if consideration will be given for urgent rehabilitation works to be 
carried out thereat. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

TYACK – STADIUM - CONSTRUCTION 

150 

 
(No. B/811) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 
stadium in the region of Tyack for the District of Savanne, he will state where matters stand. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

PAILLES GUIBIES SEWERAGE PROJECT – PIPES LAYING  

(No. B/812) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Pailles Sewerage Project, he will state if he is aware that the inhabitants of Canal Dayot have 
raised concerns regarding the laying of sewerages pipes at the St Louis River and, if so, will 
he,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Waste  Water  Management  Authority, 
information as to if consideration will be given thereto and ensure that the said pipes will not 
cause obstructions to the evacuation of excess water thereat. 

Reply: In my reply to Parliamentary Question B/129 on 05 April 2016, I informed the 
House that the Wastewater Management Authority is currently implementing Phase 1 of the 
Pailles Guibies Sewerage Project, which consists of the construction of a pumping station and 
about 4 km of trunk sewers.  

After the implementation of Phase 2, the project will connect about 3066 households 

and resolve the recurrent sewerage problems in the region. 

The contract for Phase 1 was awarded on 23 September 2015 and works started on 05 

November 2015.   

I  am  informed  by  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  that  on  28  April  2016, 
inhabitants of Canal Dayot made representations and subsequently sent a letter on 06 June 
2016 to the WMA,  expressing their apprehensions that the pipe laying works along the river 
might  create  a  risk  of  flood  or  damage  their  houses.  They  also  requested  that  the  river 
upstream of Canal Dayot be deviated to the Grand River North West.  

Two meetings were held on 05 May 2016 and 09 June 2016, during which the WMA 
and the Consultant – Gibbs Ltd. for the project made presentations to the forces vives and 
inhabitants of Canal Dayot. On 27 June 2016, the WMA has also replied to the letter of the 
forces vives. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  that  the  pipeline 
under  construction  is  being  laid  outside  the  river,  along  the  river  banks  and  that  the 
Consultant has given assurance that all measures have been taken to ensure that there are no 
obstructions to the normal river flow and no risk of flooding.  

 

151 

 

CEB - CT POWER PROJECT 

(No. B/813) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the CT 
Power Project, he will state where matters stand following the decision of the court to grant 
the judicial review on 07 July 2016 in relation thereto. 

Reply: By a letter dated 15 July 2016, the Solicitor General has advised my Ministry 
that  his  Office  is  of  the  opinion  that  “there  are  possibilities  of  an  appeal  to  the  Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council”.  

My  Ministry  is  considering  that  advice  and  will  issue  the  appropriate  instructions 

shortly. 
 

POINTE AUX SABLES & ROSE HILL - BUS SERVICE 

(No. B/814) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  Pointe  aux 
Sables and the vicinity thereof, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National 
Transport Authority, information as to where matters stand as to the proposed coming into 
operation of a new bus route linking same to Rose Hill, indicating the timeframe set for the 
implementation thereof. 

Reply:  In  my  reply  to  PQ  B/858  at  the  sitting  of  the  National  Assembly  of  10 
November 2015, I informed the House that at present a bus service exists between Pointe aux 
Sables and Port Louis and is served by the Triolet Bus Service Ltd.  However, there is no 
direct bus service from Pointe aux Sables to Rose Hill.  Thus, passengers from Pointe aux 
Sables commuting to Rose Hill have to travel in two legs, namely from Pointe aux Sables to 
Grand River North West and from Grand River North West to Rose Hill. 

I further informed that on 22 July 2009, the Rose Hill Transport Ltd (now RHT Bus 
Service Ltd) applied for a road service licence to operate buses along a new bus route from 
Rose  Hill  (Place  Cardinal  Margéot)  to  Pointe  aux  Sables  via  Beau  Bassin,  Coromandel, 
Camp Benoit, La Tour Koenig and Pointe aux Sables (Cité Débarcadère) and back. 

On  24  March  2010,  the  Triolet  Bus  Service  Ltd  applied  as  well  for  a  road  service 
licence to operate buses along the same itinerary applied by the Rose Hill Transport Ltd as 
mentioned above and from Pointe aux Sables to Ebène Cybercity via Cité Débarcadère, La 

 

152 

Tour  Koenig,  Camp  Benoit,  Coromandel,  Rose  Hill  (Place  Cardinal  Margéot)  Rose  Hill 
Police Station, Sir Gaëtan Duval Ecole Hôtelière, Ebène and back. 

However, on 10 June 2011, both companies withdrew their applications by a joint 

letter and the Authority decided to set aside the applications. 

On 27 February 2015, the RHT Bus Services Ltd applied for an extension of route 
174B (Coromandel Industrial Zone – Ebène-Cybercity via Belle Etoile, Beau Bassin, Rose 
Hill (Place Cardinal Margéot) and back) up to Pointe aux Sables.   

On 10 April 2015, the Triolet Bus Service Ltd also applied for a road service licence 

to operate buses from Pointe aux Sables Terminus to Rose Hill/Ebène-Cybercity and back. 

The  hearing  was  delayed  as  consideration  was  being  given  to  a  bus  terminal  at 
Pointe  aux  Sables,  where  parking  for  buses  were  proving  to  be  difficult  due  to  lack  of 
adequate  parking  space.    However,  I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  identification  of  a 
suitable site for a bus terminal will take time, particularly  as it will involve acquisition of 
land. 

For that reason, the National Transport Authority is proceeding with the hearing of 
applications received from Rose Hill Transport Bus Service Ltd and Triolet Bus Service Ltd 
in the weeks to come.  Once the licence is issued, the implementation will not take time as 
both applicants are established bus companies with buses readily available from within their 
fleet  to  start  the  service  along  the  proposed  route  in  the  days  following  the  grant  of  the 
licence. 

GRNW - BUS SHELTER 

(No. B/815) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Bus Stop 
found at Grand River North West on the side of the road going to Port Louis, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  National  Transport  Authority,  information  as  to  if 
consideration will be given for the replacement of the old bus shelter thereat by a new one. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Transport  Authority  that  there  are  different 
kinds of bus shelters around the island made of concrete, corrugated iron sheets, aluminum or 
glass. 

153 

 
The  old  shelters  do  not  offer  extra  facilities  to  users  apart  from  a  roof  and  some 
seating  capacity,  whereas,  newer  ones  are  better  designed  and  are  more  aesthetic  offering 
additional facilities such as, lighting and passenger information system. 

A  protocol  has  been  devised  since  2015  for  the  provision  of  bus  shelters  on  main 
roads and motorways.  The aim of the protocol is to facilitate the construction of new bus 
shelter/s, free of charge, by interested promoters, as well as, to look into the - 

• 

renovation and maintenance of existing bus shelter/s, and 

•  demolition  and  replacement  of  any  bus  shelter  which  is  in  a  deplorable 
state  along  main  roads  and  motorways,  whilst  adhering  to  the  existing 
legal framework. 

On the other hand, the promoter has the exclusive right of commercial exploitation by 

way of advertisement. 

The modernisation of bus shelters all over the country is an ongoing process.  So far, 

there are 413 bus shelters, including 70 modern bus shelters. 

I wish to inform the House that Grand River North West (GRNW) has already been 
provided with two modern bus shelters when proceeding towards Beau Bassin.  In addition, 
the bus shelter in the direction of Port Louis has already been considered for replacement in 
the next list. 

LES CASERNES, CUREPIPE - HOUSING UNITS - SALE 

(No.  B/816)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the ex-CHA housing Estate 
found at  Les Casernes, in Curepipe, he will state if the housing units thereof have already 
been sold to the lessees thereof. 

Reply (Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands): I am informed by 

the Ministry of Housing and Lands that there is no NHDC Housing Estate at Les Casernes. 

In this regard, I am informed that all the 56 housing units at the Les Casernes Housing 

Estate have been sold. 

Further,  my  Ministry  is  in  presence  of  a  request  from  the  Municipal  Council  of 
Curepipe to extend the policy decision announced in the 2014 Budget Speech to give to those 
families having a housing unit on State land, the option to buy the land at a nominal price, to 

 

154 

those  families  having  a  housing  unit  on  Municipal  land.    The  matter  is  being  favourably 
considered. 

EAU COULÉE BRIDGE - WIDENING 

(No.  B/817)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
proposed widening of the Eau Coulée Bridge, at the level of the Ramdin Street, he will state 
where matters stand. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Road  Development  Authority  that  the  Eau  Coulée 
Bridge  at  the  level  of  Ramdin  Street  is  not  situated  along  a  classified  road  and  does  not, 
therefore, fall under its responsibility. 

I  am  further  informed  that,  since  January  2014,  the  National  Development  Unit 
(NDU) had a proposal to enlarge the existing bridge along Rampersad Ramdin Street and Lux 
Consult Ltd. was appointed to carry out a survey of that bridge.  The Consultant submitted 
the design report to the NDU in August 2015.  Clearances from the Water Resources Unit 
and the Forestry Department are still being awaited by the NDU to proceed with the project. 

I  am  also  informed  that  the  Municipal  Council  of  Curepipe  will  take  over  and 

maintain the bridge after completion of the project. 

The NDU will be requested to follow up on the matter. 

 

CITÉ ATLEE – ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION - EXPENDITURE 

(No. B/818) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  event  held  to 
celebrate the  anniversary  of Cité Atlee, in Curepipe, he will, for the benefit of the  House, 
obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Curepipe,  information  as  to  the  total  expenditure 
incurred in relation thereto – 

(a)  giving  a  breakdown  of  the  sum  paid  to  each  contractor  thereof  and/or  each 

participant thereto, and  

(b) indicating when approval to incur same was obtained. 

(Withdrawn) 

NATIONAL DRUG OBSERVATORY - REPORT 

(No. B/819) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National  Drug 

 

155 

Observatory,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  the 
where matters stand as to the works thereof, indicating if it has produced any report on the 
drugs situation in the country and, if so, give details thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

HOSPITALS – SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS – WAITING LIST 

(No. B/820) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  patients  whose 
names appear on the waiting list to undergo surgical interventions, he will state the number 
thereof, indicating the expected dates for the carrying out of the said surgical interventions. 

(Withdrawn) 

COROMANDEL – FOOTBALL PITCH - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/821)  Mr  J.  C.  Lepoigneur  (Fifth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite 
Rivière)  asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of a football pitch at Coromandel, he will state where matters stand, indicating 
the expected start and completion dates thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MAHEBOURG - NATIONAL HISTORY MUSEUM - UPGRADING 

(No. B/822) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the National History Museum of 
Mauritius,  in  Mahebourg,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius 
Museums Council, information as to – 

(a) the measures that are being taken to attract more visitors thereat, and  
(b) if consideration will be given for the uplifting of the yard thereof, with provision 

for – 
(i)  benches;  
(ii) lighting, and  
(iii)conversion of a part thereof into a children’s playground. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  Mauritius  Museums  Council  is  taking  the  following 

measures to attract more visitors to the National History Museum of Mahebourg - 

(a) Regular educational visits and inter-college competitions for students and  youth 
with the collaboration of the Ministry of Education and Human Resource and the 
Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports.    In  the  context  of  the  “Spécial  Vacances” 
programme by the Ministry of Youth and Sports, educational tours and visits are 
scheduled at the Museum on 02 and 03 August. 

156 

 
(b) The  opening  hours  of  the  Museum  is  being  extended.      The  National  History 
Museum  to  be  opened  on  6-day  basis  as  from  01  August  2016,  instead  of  the 
present 5-day basis.  

(c) The display arrangement in the Museum is being reviewed. 

(d) Community  outreach  programmes  are  being  organised  in  collaboration  with  the 
National  Heritage  Fund  and  NGOs  such  as  SOS  Patrimoine  to  further  promote 
visits and educational tours amongst members of the public. 

(e) A  Media  Campaign  is  being  worked  out  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of 

Tourism and External Communications and Tour Operators.   

As regards part (b) of the question, although the yard is equipped with some benches, 
lighting system and only one kiosk, I am not satisfied with the present infrastructural set up 
of the museum and the annual number of visitors, which is only around 55,000. 

In  view  of  the  poor  state  of  our  museums  and  the  poor  audience  attendance,  I 
approached the Management of “Musée du Louvre” Paris, which is the most visited museum 
in the world (9.3 m. visitors annually), last year, to assist us in upgrading our museums to 
international standard. 

In fact, two experts from “Musée du Louvre” were in Mauritius in February this year 
with the assistance of the French Government.  The experts made a study on the status of our 
Museums,  including  the  National  History  Museum  of  Mahebourg  and  they  have  recently 
submitted their recommendations which include, amongst others, ways and means to increase 
audience attendance.  The recommendations include short, medium and long-term measures. 
My Ministry is working on the implementation of the recommendations of the report.  
As  regards  the  children’s  playground,  the  proposal  of  the  hon.  Member  is  most 

welcome and will be considered by my Ministry. 
 

MAURITIUS MARITIME TRAINING ACADEMY - BASIC SAFETY 

COURSES 

(No. B/823) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 
Outer Islands whether, in regard to the Basic Safety Courses run by the Mauritius Maritime 

 

157 

Training  Academy,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  said  Academy, 
information as to the  – 

(a) various components thereof  
(b)  number of trainers thereof, indicating in each case, the qualifications held, and  
(c)  number of students having benefitted therefrom since the opening of the Academy to 

date. 

(Withdrawn) 

PUBLIC HOSPITALS – CAESARIAN SECTIONS - STUDY 

(No. B/824) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of  Life whether, in regard to Caesarian 
Sections, he will state - 

(a) the number thereof carried out in public hospitals, since October 2015 to date, indicating 

the number thereof which are related to primipara cases, and  

(b)  if a comparative study has been carried out to ascertain whether the number thereof is 

increasing or decreasing.  

(Withdrawn) 

MITD - PROFESSOR V. P. TORUL REPORT 

(No.  A/35)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development, she will 
table  the  Report  of  Professor  V.  P.  Torul  in  relation  thereto  which  was  submitted  to  her 
Ministry on or about July 2012. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

