No. 26 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY  12 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 26 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 12 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOUNDATION – SETTING UP 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Corporate Social 
Responsibility, he will state -  

(a)  

(b)  

the obligations of the companies in 2015 in respect thereof and, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Revenue Authority, information as to 
the amount of unspent money thereof available thereat as at to date, indicating 
if some companies are presently in arrears thereof;  

the  total  amount  of  money  thereof  granted  to  the  Non-Governmental 
Organisations in the years 2014 and 2015 respectively and to the Lovebridge 
Company Limited as at to date, and  

(c)  

how  and  when  the  proposed  National  Corporate  Social  Responsibility 
Foundation will be set up, indicating –  

(i)  

(ii)  

the proposed composition of the Board thereof;  

the  proposed  percentage  of  Corporate  Social  Responsibility 
money of the companies that will be remitted thereto;  

(iii)  

if the draft guidelines thereof are available, and  

(iv)   what  will  be  the  role  of  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  in 

relation thereto.  

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker,  the  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  (CSR)  system  was  introduced  in  the  Income 
Tax Act in 2009, whereby companies were required to devote 2% of their profits for carrying 
out CSR activities under approved programmes as per published guidelines.  In my Budget 
Speech of November 2010 at paragraph 333, I stated the following, and I quote - 

“To this end, we are reviewing the utilisation of CSR. Our aim is to focus on the most 
urgent problems so as to maximise the social benefits and ensure national coverage. 
We  will,  therefore,  use  50  per  cent  of  the  CSR  resources  to  focus  on  the  three 
National Programmes. Government will add to the CSR resources to implement these 
three programmes which are - 

 

8 

• 
• 
• 

Social Housing 
Welfare of Children from Vulnerable Groups 
Eradication of Absolute Poverty.” 

In July 2015 all CSR guidelines were removed and companies were allowed to use their CSR 
funds according to their own CSR framework.  

 
Madam Speaker, during the pre-budget consultations, numerous representations were 
received from civil society organisations concerning the operation of the CSR system. The 
main criticisms levelled were as follows - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

lack  of  focus  on  poverty  alleviation  and  assistance  to  vulnerable  groups 
(diversion from the original objectives); 
arbitrariness  and  lack  of  transparency  in  the  allocation  of  CSR  funds  by 
companies; 
difficulty in accessing funds by some deserving NGOs and other civil society 
organisations; 
in  the  absence  of  guidelines,  there  had  been  a  proliferation  of  all  types  of 
organisations and clubs just to benefit from the CSR funds, and 
lack of proper monitoring and evaluation of CSR programmes and activities. 

There have been many instances where the CSR funds were not directed to the support of 
vulnerable groups. After giving careful consideration of the representations received and after 
assessing the current system, I announced a new CSR Framework in the Budget 2016/17 with 
a view to ensuring greater transparency and better outcomes in the implementation of CSR 
programmes.  
 
law, the CSR obligations of companies in 2015 were as follows - 

Madam Speaker, concerning part (a) of the question, according to provisions in the 

• 

• 

every company shall in every year set up a CSR Fund equivalent to 2 per cent 
of  its  chargeable  income  of  the  preceding  year  to  implement  a  CSR 
Programme in accordance with its own CSR framework; 
‘CSR programme’ means a programme having as its objects the alleviation of 
poverty, the relief of sickness or disability, the advancement of education of 
vulnerable persons or the promotion of any other public object beneficial to 
the Mauritian community; 

 

9 

• 

• 

a  company  shall  submit  to  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  (MRA)  as  an 
annex to its return of income a statement showing the amount of CSR spent 
and the details of the CSR projects implemented by the company during the 
income year, and 
the unspent balance has to be remitted to the MRA. 

The unspent Corporate Social Responsibility money collected by MRA is transferred to the 
Consolidated Fund within one week of collection. Thus, MRA does not hold any such funds 
at  its  level.  The  unspent  CSR  money  collected  by  MRA  and  remitted  to  the  Consolidated 
Fund to date is as follows - 

• 
• 
• 

fiscal Year 2014 - Rs166.5 m.; 
from January 2015 to June 2015 – Rs55.8 m., and 
fiscal year 2015/16 – Rs147.5 m. 

Regarding the question of whether there are some companies which are in arrears, I 
am informed by the MRA that there are some companies which are in arrears and the detailed 
figures  are,  in  fact,  being  compiled.  Anyway,  MRA  has  all  the  statutory  powers  for 
enforcement and recovery of unpaid tax including CSR money. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  for  the  year  2014  under  the  previous  CSR 
guidelines, companies and Foundations with a CSR Fund of Rs500,000 and above, must seek 
prior  approval  of  their  Corporate  Programme/projects  from  the  CSR Committee,  including 
the NGOs involved. 

I  am  informed  that  in  2014,  out  of  a  total  amount  of  Rs336  m.  of  approved  CSR 
programmes,  an  amount  of  Rs124  m.  was  meant  for  NGOs.  It  must  be  stressed  that  these 
relate  only  to  big  companies  with  a  CSR  Fund  above  Rs500,000.  However,  there  is  no 
information available as regards projects and grants to NGOs by companies with CSR Fund 
of less than Rs500,000. 

Concerning  2015,  since  removal  of  the  guidelines,  the  CSR  Committee  has  no 
information with regard to funds made available to NGOs. However, the Income Tax Act was 
amended  to  provide  for  companies  to  submit  as  an  annex  to  its  return  of  income  tax  a 
statement showing the amount of CSR spent and the details of the CSR projects implemented 
by the company during the income year. 

 

10 

The  information  for  the  income  year  2015/16  will  be  available  only  after  all 

companies would have submitted their returns by 31 December this year. 

As has been explained in reply to PQ B/522 of 07 June 2016, a one-off amount of 
Rs100  m.  has  been  paid  as  seed  capital  to  Lovebridge  Ltd.  in  January  2016  from  the 
Consolidated Fund.  

In addition, Government is providing direct financial support to NGOs yearly from 

the Consolidated Fund as follows -  

• 
• 
• 
• 

Fiscal Year 2014 – Rs235 m. 
6 months budget (January 2015– June 2015) – Rs106.5 m. 
Fiscal Year 2015/16 – Rs245 m. 
Fiscal Year 2016/17 – Rs293 m. 

With regard to part (c) (i) of the question, the new National CSR Foundation will be 
under the aegis of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It will be 
managed  by  a  Board  of  Directors,  comprising  a  Chairperson,  members  from  the  private 
sector, public sector and civil society. It will be set up after the Finance Bill has been passed 
and it will be fully operational before January 2017.  

With regard to part (c) (ii) of the question, businesses will be required to contribute, 
through MRA, at least 50% of their CSR money to the new National CSR Foundation at the 
start of their next accounting year, for example, for companies with accounting period ending 
31 December 2016, the new CSR framework will be applicable as from 01 January 2017. The 
rate of contribution will be changed to at least 75% in the following year. 

With regard to part (c) (iii) of the question, the guidelines will include the six priority 

 
areas of intervention as stated in the Budget Speech and are as follows - 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

Poverty  Alleviation  –  targeting  families  in  the  Social  Register  of  Mauritius 
(SRM); 
Educational Support – targeting families in the SRM; 
Social Housing – targeting families in the SRM; 
Supporting persons with severe disabilities;  
Dealing  with  health  problems  resulting  from  substance  abuse  and  poor 
sanitation, and 
Family protection, that is, protection to victims of domestic violence.  

 

11 

The  detailed  guidelines  will  be  finalised  by  the  National  CSR  Foundation  after 
undertaking  consultations  with  stakeholders  concerned.  With  regard  to  part  (c)  (iv)  of  the 
question, the MRA will act as an agent for collection of the CSR money and its recovery on 
behalf of the National CSR Foundation.  

Any unspent balance of CSR money should be remitted at the time of submission of 
annual income tax return to MRA as per the current practice. The money  collected by the 
MRA will be channelled to the National CSR Foundation and no longer to the Consolidated 
Fund. 

There will be a possibility for a company or its foundation to continue using its CSR 
money on an existing or a new CSR Programme, provided it fits within the six priority areas, 
and is approved by the National CSR Foundation. 

Mr Bérenger:  Maybe, I missed that part of the reply from the hon. Prime Minister… 

If only that was true for the present!  

(Interruptions) 

 
On 29 September 2015, we were provided with the figure for total amount of CSR 
money collected from all companies.  I did not hear the hon. Minister give us a figure.  Is 
there any reason why?   

Mr Jugnauth:  The total amount of CSR, I have for calendar  year.  I can give for 
2014.  It is Rs842 m. and for 2015, it is Rs756 m.  Now, there are part of that money that 
forms part of the expenditure by companies and part of the money are collected by the MRA; 
those that are not spent on programmes and projects. 

Mr  Bérenger:    The  total  amount  of  money  collected  by  the  MRA  from  all  the 
companies under the CSR legislation had kept on increasing year after year.  Has the hon. 
Minister looked why in 2015 it has gone down as compared to 2014? 

Mr Jugnauth:  The amount that has been collected by the MRA was more in 2010 
and it was less afterwards, and slightly more and then less, and it has increased also.  From 
2014, I have figure for the calendar year, Rs166 m. and for 2015, Rs126 m. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, unspent! 

 

12 

Mr Bérenger:  No, I am asking about the total amount. The figure which the hon. 
Minister has just given means that less CSR money was collected by the MRA in 2015 as 
compared to 2014.  My question is whether you have looked into to have an explanation? 

Mr Jugnauth:  It has varied, Madam Speaker.  Well, of course, the difference, we 
have not looked into as to why at certain times there has been an increase and at other times 
there has been a decrease. I believe it is mainly due to the fact that there are certain years 
where more money has been used in allocating to certain programmes and more money has 
been used to allocate to certain NGOs.  That is why the amount which has been handed over 
to MRA has also varied. 

Mr Bérenger:   I think this is wrong.  The total amount of money collected by the 
MRA is before it is used for this or that purpose.  It collects all the money.  Well, never mind! 
On the second part of my question, I have heard that unspent CSR money is more or less 
automatically transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  Can I ask the hon. Minister - if he does 
not have the figure, he can tell us later - in 2014 and 2015, the total amount of unspent CSR 
funds that was transferred from the MRA to the Consolidated Fund? 

Mr Jugnauth:  For fiscal year 2014, it was Rs166.5 m., and then we had this six-
month period for the Budget January 2015 to June 2015, Rs55.8 m. and then for fiscal year  
01 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, Rs147.5 m. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I move on to the next question?  I take it from what I heard that 
Rs100 m. has been transferred to Lovebridge Co. Ltd. - paid from what I heard.  If that is 
confirmed,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  –  because  heavy  pressure  was  put  by  the  former 
Minister  of  Finance  on  all  companies  to  join  Lovebridge  and  to  pay  into  Lovebridge  - 
whether the Ministry has looked into the amount of money that the companies paying CSR 
money in general have indeed paid into Lovebridge? Because my information is that it is less 
than 5%. 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, Madam Speaker, I can recall that at one time when the question 
was put by an hon. Member and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had answered, it was, in fact, 
really very little money.  I can’t recall the amount, but it was very little money.  But what I 
have  been  informed  is  that,  in  fact,  there  is  commitment  from  a  list  of  a  number  of 
companies.  I know that the former Minister of Finance had tabled in the past, a list of those 
companies.  I have the list.  As to how much each one of them has, as at to date, contributed, I 
will need to find the information and to furnish to the House later on. 

 

13 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  move  on  to  the  National  Corporate  Social  Responsibility 
Foundation?  Can I take it that, in fact, that will be set up by way of an Act of Parliament and, 
if yes, whether the required legislation will be before the House before the end of the session 
or, at least, before the end of the year? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  I  have  stated  in  my  answer  that  we  are  going  to  include  it  in  the 
Finance Bill so that the required legislation will be amended and after which, therefore, the 
Foundation will be set up.   

Mr Bérenger: As far as the Foundation itself is concerned, of course, there will be a 
Chairperson and there will be a Board.  Can I know whether the Board thereof will be chaired 
by Government side, by public sector side or by the private sector side and whether the public 
sector side or the private sector side will have a majority on the Board? 

Mr Jugnauth: I am open to any suggestions, Madam Speaker, because I must say the 
whole  purpose  of  reviewing  this  CSR  framework  is  because  through  consultations  and 
through a number of written representations and also we have checked, we found out that a 
lot  of  money  was  being  channelled  to  objects  which  are  far  from  the  CSR  guidelines.  
Therefore, I have been in consultation with both the private sector and the NGOs – not all of 
them,  of  course,  but  with  some  and  very  serious  ones.    We  had  discussions  with  my 
colleague, the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment, and we are open. 
We will listen and see what is best in the interest of fighting poverty and whatever we have 
stated in the guidelines. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  congratulate  the  Minister  on  this  frame  of  mind  and  I  take  it  that 
NGOs will be fully consulted as he has just said before decisions are taken concerning the 
Chairperson and the composition of the Board, the majority. 

The key issue which I would like to raise, Madam Speaker, is to ask the following to 
the hon. Minister.  He made the Budget Speech, the choice of words are his. When we say 
that first year, at least 50% of CSR money will go to that Foundation and the second year, at 
least 75% - this can mean anything – can mean a 100%.  So, why this choice of word and 
what does the Minister have in mind at least 50%, but especially at least 75%, does it mean 
that we can have a situation where the whole of CSR money goes to the Foundation? 

Mr Jugnauth: Let me say that it is not the intention of Government to have the whole 
of the CSR to be managed by the Foundation, but, as I said, again because what we have seen 
when the guidelines were removed, the amount of money that has been spent, left, right and 

 

14 

centre I would say, I think it is appropriate to have – it is going to be 50% for the year and for 
the next financial year, as I have stated, 75%.  But we would wish that the companies also 
play their role.  They have, at least, the liberty of deciding on how they are going to spend 
this 25% that will remain. 

Let me also add why is it that we have required 50% and we are moving up to 75%?  
There  is  one  sector  in  order  to  be  able  to  provide  social  housing  for  the  very  poor, 
unfortunately, there are very few companies which are involved in that and I do understand 
also because it requires resources in order to be able to build houses.  That is why we need to 
pool  all  available  resources  in  order  to,  at  least,  alleviate  the  burden  of  the  very  poor  for 
social housing. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure the hon. Minister is aware of the dramatic situation that has 
developed since that statement that at least 50% first year will go to the Foundation to be set 
up  and  at  least  75%  the  dramatic  situation  that  has  arisen  is  that  a  lot  of  companies  are 
withholding all actions, are not contributing any more to NGOs and are pending because they 
don’t  know  what  is  going  to  happen  and  that  puts  NGOs  and  other  sectors  in  a  terrible 
situation.  So, is the hon. Minister prepared to ask the companies concerned that they should 
apply some form of moratoire, that is, in the meantime until the Foundation legislation comes 
up,  that  they  should  stick  to  the  status  quo  until  we  see  clearer  in  the  situation,  but  that 
everything  should  not  be  put  on  hold  and  put the  NGOs  and  the  others  in  a  very  difficult 
situation? 

Mr Jugnauth: Yes, indeed, Madam Speaker, I have taken note of that concern by the 
NGOs and a number of companies also.  I have been discussing with the private sector.  That 
is  why  yesterday,  we  publicised  on  the  website  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  and  we  have  also  given  information  to  the  media  so  that  they  can  at  least 
inform the public about the different steps that we are taking in order to establish this new 
system.  I can reassure the companies and the NGOs also, civil society, that as I have stated, 
for the accounting period which is going to end on 31 December 2016, the new framework 
will apply as from next year. Therefore, from now till the end of this year, they will still be 
able  to  operate  their  funds.    I  will  also  add  that  those  NGOs  –  because  I  have  had 
representations that what will happen also after that - which are, of course, bona fide, which 
are serious, will be able to accede funds afterwards from the Foundation also. 

 

15 

Mr Bérenger: My last question before I leave the floor to others because they have a 

great interest in that subject, rightly so.  Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

I apologise!  This is again wishful thinking for the present only.   

Before you had CSR guidelines and a CSR Committee set up by law to apply those 
guidelines, last year, the then Minister of Finance did away with all this, d’un trait de plume, 
but, in the meantime, the MRA had to collect money and abide by the law.  Therefore, is the 
hon.  Minister  aware  that  MRA  rightly  discussed  with  the  private  sector  and  came  to  an 
agreement  on  a  text  corporate  CSR  framework  to  act  as  guidelines  being  given  those 
guidelines had been thrown overboard?  Is that agreement between the MRA and the private 
sector on corporate CSR framework going also to be taken on board? 

Mr Jugnauth: I haven’t had a look at this document, but I believe it is the document 
which normally the MRA issues so that it facilitates the companies to put all the information 
whenever they are going to do their returns so that the MRA has all the facts and figures, 
whether they are complying with the law.  So, I believe this is the document. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, in his Budget Speech, the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development stated that the money endowed to the Foundation will be allocated to 
support civil society actions in six priority areas which are listed in his Budget Speech.  So, 
may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether  this 
Foundation will only allocate money to existing NGOs or would carry out projects on its own 
and whether this priority will be amended to at least include sports? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I thank the hon. Member for that question because let me say 
what is going to be the key roles and the functions of the National CSR Foundation. They 
will undertake programmes and projects for the benefit of the vulnerable groups. They will 
also allocate CSR funds in light with the specific guidelines that I have mentioned. They will 
be monitoring and evaluating the CSR programmes that are being proposed by the different 
companies  or  NGOs  and  they  will  also  serve  as  a  platform  for  coordination  and 
communication amongst all the stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a past Parliamentary Question that 
the  then  Finance  Minister  stated  to  the  House,  apart  from  having  transferred  Rs100  m.  in 

 

16 

Lovebridge, Lovebridge also recruited some 25 staff and also that Lovebridge would submit 
the  annual  progress  report  on  its  activities  and  programmes.  Therefore,  can  I  ask  the  hon. 
Finance Minister what has happened to these Rs100 m. which has been transferred from the 
Consolidated  Fund,  how  much  has  been  spent,  what  will  happen  to  the  staff  and  whether 
there are any report which has been prepared and tabled by the Lovebridge company? 

Mr Jugnauth: The information that I have is that 30 professional social workers have 
been recruited in May 2016. All these social workers have been trained on the Lovebridge 
methods during the months of June and July and surveys  also are being carried out in the 
different regions of the country. I understand that 200 eligible families have been identified, 
that is, around 1000 persons and that some 45  presentations in  companies and the  general 
public have been made to inform of the potential accompagnateurs on the project details. By 
March 2017, some 200 cellules will be in place and an accompagnement programme of the 
beneficiary families will be launched.  

Now, I must say that this is an ongoing programme. The Rs100 m. has been given as 
seed money, but there is the Lovebridge Board which has come up with all the guidelines and 
the ways of how it is going to move forward. It is a long-term process. So, it is not as if it is 
for one year, it is ongoing and they will be receiving money, as I have said, from the number 
of companies which have committed to give financing to this project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

Mr Lepoigneur: Madam Speaker, on the same line of hon. Uteem, I notice that, in 
the Budget Speech 2016, regarding the CSR Foundation, no mention was made in object for 
sports, education, scientific research and environment. May I suggest respectfully that these 
be included in the objects for the CSR Foundation when it is set up? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  for  these  objects,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  not  that  we  are  not 
taking care of these issues. They are going to be taken care of, but under different items. For 
example, we have the Loto Fund which we are going to set up to cater for sports activities 
and other activities. So, we want to be focused on the fight against poverty and that is why we 
believe that together with the private sector, in the years to come, I am convinced that we will 
be  able  to  do  a  lot  together.  For  the  other  objects  there  are  other  funds  that  have  been 
earmarked. 

Madam Speaker: Yes. Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

17 

Mr  Bérenger:  Thank  you.    To  a  final  question  to  the  hon.  Minister,  in  the  past 
matters relating to the CSR were lost somewhere in the Finance Bill and circulated at the last 
minute as amendments to section 50 of the Income Tax Act. If we want to do a good job, can 
I  make  the  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  that  the 
Finance  Bill  in  general,  but  especially  that  part,  should  be  circulated  as  early  as  possible, 
because  we  have  to  look  at  the  fine  print,  it  is  a  very  complicated  issue.  Therefore,  for 
everybody to have a chance before the Finance Bill is voted in a rush as usual that this be 
circulated early so that we have time to do our work also and take into consideration all the 
points that have been raised today. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Yes,  of  course,  I  believe  that  Cabinet  would  be  deciding  on  the 
Finance Bill pretty soon and that ample time will be given for all Members to look at the 
different provisions so that we have an interesting debate in the House.  

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MRS SAFIA ELMI DJIBRIL, VICE-PRESIDENT – PANAFRICAN PARLIAMENT – 

OFFICIAL VISIT 

Madam Speaker: Honorables membres, j’ai l’honneur de vous annoncer la présence 
parmi  nous  cet  après-midi  de  l’honorable  Safia  Elmi  Djibril, deuxième  Vice-présidente  du 
Parlement panafricain. 

Madame  la  Vice-présidente  est  en  visite  officielle  chez  nous  dans  le  cadre  d’une 
campagne auprès des pays membres du Parlement panafricain de la région de l’Afrique de 
l’Est  pour  la  ratification  du  protocole  à  l’acte  constitutif  de  l’Union  Africaine  relatif  au 
Parlement panafricain.  

En vos noms et en mon nom personnel, je souhaite à Madame la Vice-présidente un 

agréable et fructueux séjour à Maurice.    

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 

Question put and agreed to. 

18 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Deputy Prime Minister! 

(3.37 p.m.) 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Laissez-moi,  Madame  la  présidente,  souhaiter  la 

bienvenue à nos illustres invités du Parlement panafricain.  

Madam Speaker, when I had the occasion to comment on the Budget a few weeks ago 
I said that I thought - and I mean it - that the Budget is excellent dans la forme et dans le 
fond. I mean it, Madam Speaker because I like this Budget. I like it because it has been well 
drafted in clear language, the speech was well delivered; that is for la forme. As far as the 
fond is concerned, Madam Speaker, - and this is important - the Budget is comprehensive. It 
is coherent and to me, it is also innovative. 

Now, this Budget has had the rare privilege of being complimented by all sides of the 

House. Very rare, Madam Speaker! Very rare, I don’t know if it is a record! 

(Interruptions) 

It has been complimented by all sides of the House. And, it is all to the credit of our Minister 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  who  is  nowadays,  I  see,  being  accredited  as  the 
Prime Minister even the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. So, it is all agreement everywhere  I see, 
Madam Speaker. But… 

Sorry? 

No, not at all!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Not at all! 

19 

(Interruptions) 

I think, Madam Speaker, if there is one guy whose le coeur fer mal, it must be the Leader of 
the Opposition… 

(Interruptions) 

who has been sitting there for the last 12 years, Madam Speaker! That must really make le 
coeur fer mal whereas I have been here very comfortable, Madam Speaker. 

So, let us carry on.  

(Interruptions) 

So,  the  compliment  has  been  made,  Madam  Speaker,  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  himself,  which  is  proudly  accepted  by  the  whole  of  Government  because  the 
Budget,  after  all,  is  a  sum  total  of  the  policies  of  this  Government  for  the  next  year  and 
forward.  So,  when  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  himself,  finds  it  intéressant,  we  proudly 
accept that compliment! C’est un certificat de haute compétence que le Chef de l’opposition 
donne à l’ensemble du gouvernement et je lui dirai merci pour cela. 

Madam Speaker, why do I say it is important for the Budget to be comprehensive? 
Because Mauritius is a complex society, the Budget needs to be comprehensive, the Budget 
needs to be inclusive. In the Mauritian context and I will take also the global context to make 
my point, la nation arc-en-ciel means, Madam Speaker, that no one should be left out.  

We  know  that  during  the  Budget  Speech,  the  whole  nation  sits  in  front  of  the 
television  and  everybody  waits  to  see  whether  he  is  in  there  somewhere,  he  has  been 
mentioned  somewhere.  Madam  Speaker,  for  the  various  religions  in  Mauritius,  everybody 
watches to see if the Budget is biased, if the Budget is skewed, if the Budget has given more 
to this guy than to my lot etc.   

I must say and this is a compliment again to the Minister of Finance, Madam Speaker, 
that the Budget is very comprehensive and very exclusive.  Honestly, I can find no preference 
to  this  group  or  to  that  group.  Everybody  finds  himself  and  it  is  really  a  Budget  of  equal 
opportunities. Why it is  important, Madam Speaker, because we have the  greatest asset in 
Mauritius. I will take  you later as far as tourism is concerned. Our greatest asset is peace.  
The peace that we have, the external inter-communal relationship that we have is our greatest 
asset  in  Mauritius  in  this  trouble  time.  The  world  is  not  getting  any  safer.    The  world  is 

 

20 

getting more dangerous.  How pleasing it was when a few weeks back, us, Mauritians, when 
we looked at the new Global Peace Index coming and we find that only 10 countries in the 
world have been found to be free of conflict.  A little Mauritius, with so many religions, with 
so many communities is one of these 10 countries that have been filed – I do not know how 
many  countries  there  are  in  that  index.    One  country  in  ten  and  that  is  Mauritius,  Madam 
Speaker.  We all need to be proud of that.   

We need, Madam Speaker, to maintain that because as we move forward to become a 
regional  powerhouse,  peace  and  security  is  going  to  be  even  more  important,  Madam 
Speaker, than anything.  We have very friendly people, peace loving people and this is the 
point where I want to come to? Peace also depends, Madam Speaker, on the judicial system 
and on the police force. These are the people that need to uphold law and order and the rule 
of law. I, therefore maintain, Madam Speaker, that our future economic success, of course 
depends on projects. Of course, it depends on the right tax incentives, But to have sustainable 
economic development - I lay emphasis on ‘sustainable’ not a flash in the pound, can only 
happen when it is underpinned by quality institutions. The institutional setup of this country, 
of such quality can propel Mauritius to where we want to be, that is, a modern high income 
country.  A  first  world  country,  Madam  Speaker  does  not  exist  with  second  or  third  world 
institution. A first world country only exists with first world institutions and this is the same 
point, Madam Speaker, that I raised last year because I believed truly in this. 

As far as law and order is concerned, Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
during the year set up a Committee to brainstorm on law and order. I chaired it. There were 
many,  many  senior  Ministers.  It  was  important  that  we  looked  at  the  effectiveness  and 
efficiency of the police force in that context because he needs to crack down on crime and 
petty crimes. We all see how many serious crimes there are also, Madam Speaker. Crimes 
also affect the quality of life, but it affects also our economy and affects our ability to grow 
and this is why  I am talking about it here in the budget which is basically social, but also 
most importantly economic.  

If we want to become a regional centre or if we want to become a financial centre, a 
port city, ICT where we can talk about cybercrime, you name it, Madam Speaker, crime and 
law  and  order  is  an  issue.  Of  course  you  need  punishment  and  that  is  obvious.  But 
enforcement, Madam Speaker, is crucial. Before I start on this section, I’ll like to pay tribute 
to our police force because they are doing an excellent job in a very difficult context. Madam 
Speaker,  our  policeman  must  be  respected  on  the  streets.  The  public  must  respect  our 

 

21 

policemen. Madam Speaker, when we looked at the situation, we thought it was urgent that 
the police get better training in Mauritius. Let me take an example. When we compared what 
was happening in Germany, that is, the training that is given in Germany and what pertains 
here  in  Mauritius.  In  Germany,  Madam  Speaker,  before  a  police  constable  goes  on  active 
duty,  he  has  two  and  a  half  years  of  formal  training  and  in  Mauritius,  it  is  six  months. 
Obvious isn’t it that the German police officer when he goes on the first day of duty, he is not 
going to have the same ability as our own local bobby. It is not going to be possible.  

I am happy, Madam Speaker, and I did not want to miss that point that the Minister of 
Finance  included  in  the  budget  a  section  on  providing  better  training  to  the  police.  It  is 
important, Madam Speaker. We are far behind in my view in terms of the length and quality 
of training that we give to our police force as compared to what happens in other developed 
countries,  Madam  Speaker.  That  is,  therefore,  the  German  model.  But  apart  from  training 
when  we  travel,  we  see  policeman  in  Europe  everywhere.  The  equipment,  the  baton,  the 
taser, the guns, the radios, handcuffs and everything which they are equipped to do the work, 
but when we look at our own policeman, if you look at them, sometimes all they have is their 
own  uniforms  on  them. That  is  all they  have.  They  just  have  to  respect  their  uniform  and 
nothing else. Sometimes, when there is trouble what will happen, they just look away because 
they  have nothing to cope. They  do not  even have  a pepper spray  very often. So, Madam 
Speaker, again Rs115 m. has been put in the budget and I thank the hon. Minister of Finance 
for that because it is important that our policemen are respected in the streets like any worker 
whether  he  is  a  carpenter,  a  mason  or  a  an  accountant,  he  has  to  have  the  tools  and  the 
training to do the jobs otherwise he will not be able. You can have 50,000 policemen and 
they will not be able to do the job if they do not have the proper training and if anything 
happens,  they  will  just  look  the  other  way  because  that’s  all  they  have  been  given,  the 
equipment or the training to do.  

Madam Speaker, we look forward through this budget to a better trained and better 
equipped police force. Madam Speaker, law and order is important. Would you go today to a 
great tourist destination, Kenya, when you know the Boko Haram can shoot you at any time? 
Probably you wouldn’t go. If you have to choose between Johannesburg and Cape Town for 
holidays  where  will  you  go,  Madam  Speaker?  Cape  Town!  Would  you  go  to  Egypt?  You 
probably would not go these days. 

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

We will go and have a look, Prime Minister. We need a holiday. 

So, this is the importance of the institutions in economic development. I talked about 
that, but then we can also go to health. We had the Chikungunya crisis which has affected my 
industry very much in 2008. A country next to us had the plague some time ago. Would you 
go  there  to  do  anything,  business  or  work  or  tourism  if  there  is  a  plague?  So,  health 
institution, environment, Madam Speaker, I do not want to go too long into this. I am just 
saying, Madam Speaker, that we need to look closely at the quality of our institutions if we 
want  to  go  forward  and  have  a  5%  or  6%  growth  that  this  country  deserves  and  that  this 
country can achieve, Madam Speaker. 

Now, as far as my own industry is concerned, tourism, I just wanted to say that at the 
start of this new Government, we had good tourism rates and people were saying that it was a 
flash  in  the  pan.  It  must  be  some  coincidence  that  l’oiseau  de  bon  augure  that  this  has 
happened, but in fact, it is not. When you looked at the growth rate - I will take a few minutes 
to talk about the importance of numbers and also quality - and at the social growth in 2015, 
last year, there is 10.8% growth in the number of tourists.  

2016  up  to  date,  we,  again,  Madam  Speaker,  have  double-digit  growth.    Fantastic!  
When  you  compare  my  predecessor,  from  2011  to  2014  –  I  was  not  in  the  Ministry  of 
Tourism  –  the  growth  in  numbers,  Madam  Speaker,  on  average,  was  not  higher  than  2%.  
From 2011 to 2014, 2% on average and, from then on, Madam Speaker, there is a surge in 
tourism. And, of course, we have taken the commitment of the Prime Minister and the whole 
Government in terms of bringing greater prosperity, bringing greater development, seriously. 
Madam Speaker, the growth in tourism has, of course, contributed to the overall 3.4-3.5% 
growth rate of the economy over 2015.  In fact, if there had been no growth in tourism – it is 
good  that  I  say  that,  because  it  is  not  obvious  all  the  time  –  we  wouldn’t  have  even  3% 
growth.  So, it is important to say that we are contributing fully to the commitment of the 
Government for greater economic prosperity. 

What  is  also  important,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that,  when  we  arrived,  we  decided  to 
change the concept of tourism; one of ever greater number of hotel rooms, chasing too few 
tourists, to another paradigm where we would look at the product itself. Let us get the quality 
of  the  product  right  and  the  tourists  will  follow.  That  is  what  happened.    Now,  Madam 
Speaker, airlines are queuing up to come to Mauritius because everybody wants to come to 

 

23 

Mauritius, for whatever reason, but mainly because the product is an excellent one, offering 
great value for money. 

Obviously, we don’t look only at numbers coming.  We do prefer one million tourists 
staying eleven days or maybe 500,000 tourists staying 20 days.  In fact, it does not matter.  It 
is too short sighted to look only at arrivals.  There are many, many other parameters that need 
to be looked at like the room rates that are being charged by hotels; tourism spend; the length 
of  stay.    All  these  are  relevant  parameters  that  we  take  into  account,  and  we  felt  that  the 
product – when we came into this Government – was continually decreasing in quality, the 
room rates were falling and the quality of the tourists in Mauritius was falling.  We were not 
to  the  head  of  tourism  in  Mauritius.    That  is  why  we  announced  the  moratorium  in  hotel 
openings for two years, but with the very high number of tourists’ arrivals, Madam Speaker, 
six months early, we said, “Okay, no more need for moratorium because, in fact, we have 
reached  our  goal  of  equating  and  giving  equilibrium  to  supply  and  demand  in  the  tourism 
industry.” 

Now, we feel that, to fuel the growth in the future years, we need something like 600 
to 800 additional rooms annually.  But we need to bear in mind, Madam Speaker, the fact that 
Mauritians also have a legitimate right to enjoy the beaches.  It is one of the only three leisure 
activities that exist in Mauritius.  You go and sit on the beach and no one will charge you for 
it. So, it is free.  It is open to the public and it is greatly enjoyed by the public.  So, we do 
need to bear that in mind.  In next two years, we are not likely to have any substantial hotel 
openings, because it takes about two years for hotels to be built and opened.  We have had 
several  applications  and  we  have  looked  at  this  very  carefully,  with  always  in  mind  the 
quality of the product. 

There  was  one  hotel  application  near  the  airport.    He  wanted  to  build  a  three  star 
hotel.  He was insisting and said, “I want a three star hotel.”  I said, “No, forget it - I don’t 
think he was even a Mauritian -, you are not going to get that.” In the end, he changed his 
mind. He agreed with us, and he is building a four star hotel.  This is to our advantage.  We 
are getting a better product from the same investor, and we will continue, Madam Speaker, to 
encourage a quality hotel development in Mauritius. 

But what does it mean - the fact that the growth rates are increasing; probably, in the 
next two years, there is nothing much in the pipe line for hotels - for the rest of the para-hotel 
industry?  This is important to understand, because apart from hotels, there are 900 tourists’ 

 

24 

residences  in  Mauritius.    They  belong  to  every  one;  you  and  I,  les  Mauriciens  moyens,  la 
classe moyenne.  They own bungalows, they own apartments - and a few hon. Members here 
too probably.  So, Madam Speaker, over the next few years, in my mind, it could be, if we 
play it right, the golden age of democratisation also of the tourism industry, because we will 
try  our  best  to  fill  all  these  villas  and  apartments  that  belong  to  the  ordinary  Mauritians, 
where  the  ordinary  Mauritians  can  directly  benefit  also  from  the  hotel  industry.    But,  of 
course, we need to encourage them to be up to international norms.  We need to encourage 
them to support high quality, and I will ask MTPA and the Tourism Industry to fully support 
this sector, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, un autre défi que nous avons eu à relever a été la basse saison or 
what we used to call.  I try not to call it ‘la basse saison’ anymore because the hotel industry 
in Mauritius is not seasonal. The hotels are there all year, they are opened all year.  In some 
countries, the staff is fired during the low season.  In Mauritius, we keep the staff, we keep 
the rooms; everything is still open.  So, any additional tourists that you can get during the 
months of May to September, it is money in the bank for the hotels, money in the bank for 
the exchequer, money in the bank for everyone.  It is pure win-win situation. So, we have 
tried very hard to develop the low season, and I must say we have been successful in this. I 
have just been looking at the figures for May, June, and July of this  year – August is just 
starting.    We  brought  to  Mauritius  54,000  additional  tourists  compared  to  two  years  ago. 
54,000 additional tourists just in those three months!  That represents, if you multiply by the 
tourism spend, about Rs2.7 billion that has come to the Mauritian economy.  That would not 
have come, had we not decided to fully develop the low season, and we are winning the battle 
for  the  low  season.  We  have  a  campaign  called  Mauritius  365,  which  is  a  winter  season 
campaign internationally, and the aim is to bring additional people mainly in the low season 
because in the high season we are usually quite full anyway. 

Now, what are the threats to this sector? It is a very fragile sector.  Nous ne sommes 
jamais à l’abri des imprévus dans le tourisme.  We are never safe from calamities: natural, 
health, environmental, ecological;  you name it.   In fact,  I am very  grateful to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister for having set up a Ministry for disaster management, because we are never 
safe in tourism or generally from disasters these days. 

Safety and security will remain our main concern and probably the main threat to the 
tourism industry in Mauritius and around the world.   It is our main concern and our main 
threat.  You may remember, Madam Speaker, the Irish girl who was sadly killed in a hotel in 

 

25 

the north of the island.  That actually destroyed that hotel group completely.  It was called the 
Naiade Group. It even had to change its name.  Such was the impact, and in a way, we were 
fortunate that it was not from one of our main markets.   It was an  Irish girl from  Ireland, 
obviously,  and  the  effect  was  a  bit  limited  to  Ireland.    Had  it  been  from  France,  UK  or 
Germany, the effect could have been devastating. So, security is extremely important.  Safety 
is extremely important.  This is why, as far as safety is concerned this time in the lagoons, the 
lagoons of Pereybère and of Mon Choisy have now become virtually boat free, and people 
can use it safe from the threats of speedboats going up and down. 

Now, following the tragic accident at Grande Rivière Sud Est, we have been called 
upon to look again at the whole boat sector in Mauritius.  Il fallait mettre de l’ordre, Madame 
la présidente.  I think we were sitting on a bit of a time bomb, to tell you frankly. Over the 
years,  these  boats  had  been  licenced,  left,  right  and  centre,  and  sooner  or  later,  there  was 
going to be a problem. We had to look at all this.  It has taken a lot of time to look all this.  
We  brought  in  international  experts.  I  expect  that  there  will  be  some  resistance  to  that 
because  every  meaningful  change  brings  resistance.  I  know  there  will  be  resistance,  but 
Government is determined to have its way so that, in fact, we can minimise any accident or 
loss  of  life  at  sea  because  that  will  dramatically  affect  the  future  of  the  tourism  industry 
which employs directly and indirectly some 120,000 people.  So, the new boat regulations 
will  be  coming  into  effect  in  the  next  few  days.  We  have  had  wide  consultations  with  all 
stakeholders, we have talked to them.  Obviously, they will find it difficult to accept change. 
They are going to complain why we reduce the capacity. In fact, we are reducing the capacity 
because, according to international norms, this capacity has to be reduced, especially taking 
into account some of the very rough seas that we have around Mauritius, especially the East 
and North of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in addition to reducing the capacity of craft, we will be asking for 
life rafts for the bigger capacity boats. For the environment, there will be ecological toilets 
and so on and so forth, better training also for the skippers.  So, there will be some resistance, 
Madam Speaker, but you may have heard of the famous saying – 

"Change is hard at first, messy in the middle and gorgeous at the end."  

And we want to get to the gorgeous part, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, what is the future of the tourism industry? The future of the tourism 
industry,  as  we  have  it,  with  our  new  markets,  like  China,  India,  Middle  East,  Africa;  the 

 

26 

future of the tourism industry is not just hotels, but attractions also, Madam Speaker, because 
citizens from these countries may not want just to bathe in the sun all the year; also, there is 
not  a  lot  of  sun  during  winter.  So,  the  future  of  our  tourism  industry  will  be  based  on 
excellent hotels to move into many more attractions, many more places where tourists can 
spend their money, whether it is in duty free, whether it is in restaurants, we want to provide, 
Madam Speaker, what tourists love to do. We want to be able to provide that, especially as I 
mentioned for new markets. We have hopefully a great new aquarium that would come up in 
Port Louis. Hopefully, we can find somewhere to put a cable car and we would also promote 
new restaurants. We are talking of Shanghai Chefs so that they can come and help us upgrade 
these wonderful Chinese restaurants that we have, but we are still not of the sort of quality 
that  there  is  in  China  or  Hong  Kong.    There  is  money  in  the  Budget;  we  want  better 
museums; we want art galleries and we want more leisure parks. That is the future of our 
tourism industry and we will welcome any new investment in that sector because it is really 
going to be a win win for the country and, hopefully, for the investors also. 

Here, Madam Speaker, I would like, once again, to thank the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development  for  removing  the  strange  clause  that  was  allowing  local 
authorities to charge up to 10% of the turnover on certain attractions and entertainment in the 
regions. Can you imagine 10% of turnover usually goes to a 100% or more of profits! So, this 
was the level of taxation that could be imposed by certain local authority. That is now being 
removed and it is a good thing because what we want is for people, tourists, etc. to be able - 
not to invade, maybe not the right word – but to go to towns and villages, help to develop 
these economies. 

I’ll make an appeal to Village Councils, District Councils, local authorities, not just to 
contend themselves with picking up rubbish and fixing the lights, and even they don’t do that 
all the time, but they should promote business and activities in their area. If they have good 
restaurants, they should promote them, ask people to come and visit, ask people to come and 
dine, make some advertising, some promotion. This is the same for villages, etc. let us have 
so many places that have so many attractions. 

Last time, I was in Plaine Verte. When we go to any Asian place, Madam Speaker, we 
look for these souks. We would like to see whether we can get a bargain or buy a chain of 
gold or something. We like that. That is what the tourists want. They don’t always want just 
to go to the supermarket. So, let us try and see whether in Plaine Verte we can develop that, 
and  we  can!  I  would  like  to  talk  to  the  local  authority,  my  friend  the  Lord-maire  and 

 

27 

everybody else and the Minister of Local Government so that we can develop. I will see the 
MPs of the region. We can develop and give real economic value to some of the really exotic 
places that we have in Mauritius. That is also our aim. That is why I was so sad when we are 
talking about imposing this tax which now is going to be a thing of the past, Madam Speaker. 

Another area where we have been very successful is in cruise tourism. In 2014, there 
were hardly any cruise tourists coming to Mauritius. Hardly anyone came. When I talk about 
cruise tourism there are two types: the regional tourism, that is, the boat just stays in a region, 
it  goes  to  Seychelles,  Mauritius,  Madagascar,  Mayotte,  Comores,  etc  or,  of  course,  world 
tourism. 

So,  when  I  say  there  was  no  cruise  tourism,  I  meant  no  cruise  tourism,  just  world 
tourism. When I took over as president of the Ile Vanille, I had that on my agenda. So, let us 
develop  cruise  tourism  because  every  single  island  in  the  Indian  Ocean  will  by  definition 
benefit. Mauritius usually benefits much more because of our great air access; we also have a 
fantastic Port and a specific quay for cruise tourism. Mauritius is usually the homeport for 
these ships. So, we supply them also. 

We  are  talking  about  hundreds  of  millions  of  rupees  of  supply,  bunker,  foods  and 
everything else. You can imagine, 2,000 to 3,000 people staying two weeks on the boat, how 
much they eat, how much they consume, any source of supply out of Mauritius. So, this is 
fantastic. We are promoting that and we have been very, very  successful, even if  I say so 
myself.  I  think  this  year  something  like  16,000  people  will  be  joining  these  cruises  in  the 
region. 

As from early next year, we are going to have a cruise line coming, the Silverseas; 
smaller ships, high quality and at the end of next year we are going to have another cruise 
line called Fred Olsen coming. So, from the one cruise company called Costa Croisière which 
is here at the moment. End of next year – touch wood, Insha’ Allah - we are going to get, 
Madam Speaker, three cruise lines and that is going to be very good. I think, Madam Speaker, 
over the next few years, this is going to be a major item for Mauritius 

Madam  Speaker,  during  the  year  also,  we  have  gone  into  hotel  classification.  We 
wanted  to  increase  the  quality  of  the  hotels.  We  thought  we  would  be  having  lots  of 
problems, but we did it very well and we hardly had problems with the hotels. Three-quarters 
of the hotels in Mauritius already have their star rating now and most of them are happy. One 
or  two  have  appealed,      not  more.  There  are  25  remaining  and  that  will  be  for  the  next 

 

28 

two/three weeks and we are going to have all the hotels in Mauritius with a star rating. What 
is good about the star rating is that people will want to go up to a better rating. If you are a 4-
Star, you will want to be a 5-Star, and after that a 5-Star plus. So, if you want to have their 
rating going up, we say: “Well, if you do this than the other, you improve your service here, 
you improve your premises there, you will go up one step further.” The hotel classification, 
apart from giving a great idea to the tourists as far as what sort of establishment or service 
they can expect, it is also helping the hotel to upgrade themselves and this is exactly what we 
want, Madam Speaker. 

So, Madam Speaker, in a nutshell, I think we have been putting in practice what was 
promised in the Government Programme. At paragraph 199 of the Government Programme, 
and which I’ll just read very quickly, Madam Speaker, it says here – 

 

“Government will re-establish the reputation of Mauritius as an up market destination 
for the quality of its tourism product based on a brand promise of excellent service 
delivery. Demand and supply will be balanced in a bid to uphold the quality of our 
product offer at all times.” 

So,  I think, Madam Speaker, we have been  going along the line that we mentioned in the 
Government  Programme  and  we  are  going  along  that  line  and  doing  exactly  what  we 
promised and this is how it should be. 

To crown all this, Madam Speaker, what we have done - and we are very proud of this 
– for our little island, if you put on CNN, you might have a chance to see Mauritius advert, 
CNN Mauritius, ‘come to Mauritius during your holidays’. LCI, Eurosport and Sky. We have 
been  able  to  do  this  and  it  cost  us  about  Rs80  m.  from  savings  we  have  made,  Madam 
Speaker, from the budget of the MTPA. It has not come from additional funds. It has come 
internally  from  savings  and  Mauritius  has  not  been  on  these  channels  for  yonks,  10  years 
maybe or more. So, this is good and I am sure that we, Mauritians, wherever we are or our 
diaspora overseas, when they look at these programmes, they see little Mauritius on CNN, 
etc.,  they  must  be  very  proud  and  we  should  all  be  very  proud  that  our  island  is  on  these 
channels. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  needs  a  lot  of  effort  to  do  all  the  actions  that  we  are  doing. 
Regarding the shareholders, we are happy when the shareholders  get  a fair return on their 
investment. That is fine! But, we do it mainly, Madam Speaker, for the 120,000 directly and 
indirectly employed persons in the tourism industry. They are the people for whom we want 

 

29 

better conditions, better pay, better chances of promotion, greater respect and greater dignity. 
These are the people whom this Government works for because they are the people who need 
our help and our support. 

These  workers  are  the  people  who  make  our  tourism  industry  unique  in  the  world. 
You have happy employees, Madam Speaker; you have good hotels. Happy employees make 
good hotels. Unhappy employees - you can have the most beautiful hotel in the world, if you 
have  someone  who  does  not  want  to  serve  you,  he  takes  three  hours  to  bring  your  tea  or 
speaks to you in a rude way, you are not going to be happy in that hotel. You will want to 
leave as soon as possible. And so, Madam Speaker, we are grateful and thankful and we want 
to pay tribute today to the workers in our hotel industry. 

Very quickly regarding the airport, Madam Speaker, our only airport was voted first 
in Africa - not just sub-Saharan Africa but the whole of Africa - for, in fact, two categories; 
as  the  best  airport  and  that  is  important.  The  contract  of  Aéroports  de  Paris  was  renewed 
recently, I want to say that. Why, Madam Speaker? Because firstly, we think they have been 
doing  a reasonable job  and secondly, it is important  given the problems that airports have 
around the world in terms of security, etc.  It was important to give the right message to the 
international community that we have the best possible management here. These are times of 
trouble and we have to go the extra mile to prove that. 

Madam Speaker, recently, some months ago we had this silly incident on Air France 
when  someone  brought  some  sort  of  paper  bag  and  it  was  a  bomb  hoax.  For  that  little 
incident, we were nearly blacklisted by Air France because, at one point in time, they thought 
it was a real bomb. Had it been a real bomb, we would have had a real probability of Air 
France not coming to Mauritius. Air France does not come to Mauritius then maybe British 
Airways would not have come, maybe other airlines would not have come. Just think of the 
effect that it would have had on Mauritius! Just think of the effect that the incident at Sharm 
el-Sheikh had on Egypt’s tourism industry!  

So, we cannot take security lightly.  You will see, recently the Prime Minister put the 
SMF  armed,  etc.  with  the  machine  guns  at  the  airport.  There  is  probably  no  threat  at  the 
moment, but it is good that we are prepared to be ready at all times and to give the signal that 
we take security very importantly. And following that incident, although there was nothing, 
we have had, I think, three security orders: international Air France, la direction générale de 
l'aviation civile and another company which I forgot the name, came to Mauritius to look at 

 

30 

the security of our airport.  There are always one or two things that we can do. But, this is 
life. Things change, technology changes, threats change, but we need to be always on top of 
the world in terms of putting our capacity to meet the real challenges, Madam Speaker.  

So, we have done that. We take that very seriously. Passenger numbers continue to 
grow. The challenge now is to grow into a cargo hub, that is a more difficult challenge and 
not as easy as attracting tourists to Mauritius and we need to continue along that line. The 
good  news  is  that  we  have  talked  to  the  Chinese  recently  about  setting  up  an  Aviation 
Academy.  They  seem  very  interested  to  set  up  an  Aviation  Academy  that  would  train 
probably  not  pilots  at  the  beginning  but  Aiguilleur  du  ciel,  etc.  everything  to  do  with  the 
airline industry and hopefully that will come that we will have a regional aviation training 
academy in the near future in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, coming on to the port, I am quite pleased with the port performance 
I must say, something like 2947 ships called at Port Louis in 2015. It is quite a lot of ships 
and we had no major incidents, you will agree. The ships came and left quietly and have been 
dealt  with  correctly.  No  major  incidents  during  that  even  though  we  had  3000  ships!  We 
unloaded  and  loaded  hundreds  of  thousands  of  containers  in  the  port,  again  to  the  general 
satisfaction of everybody. 

But, what is pleasing, Madam Speaker, is we are going towards an era of happier - I 
should  not  speak  too  soon  -  but  happier  labour  relations  in  the  port  because  I  personally 
believe that everybody is entitled to aspire to good wages. This is human nature and the better 
the wages, the happier I am. Obviously, it has to be sustainable. But, if you are earning a lot 
of money you must provide the productivity, the effort and the discipline that go with that. 
The two, in my mind, go together. I earn quite a lot of money I work hard for it. This is what 
I believe should happen in my Ministry, in the ports and everywhere. We have to deliver on 
efficiency and we have to deliver on quality.  

And,  I  am  happier,  Madam  Speaker,  that  labour  relations  at  Cargo  Handling 
Corporation Ltd, particularly, are improving. I am happy to see that following the  letter of 
regret and excuses that Mr Edouard sent following the incident of last December that he is 
going to be reinstated, I think, within the next two weeks in a different department but, I think 
it  is  going  to  be  an  end  to  a  sad  story.  At  the  same  time,  Madam  Speaker,  of  course, 
everybody will draw the lessons that need to be drawn from this. And I think, as I mentioned, 

 

31 

hard work, good pay and one will not go without the other and that is important also to make 
that point, Madam Speaker. 

So, labour relations are better; hopefully, we can conclude the salary negotiations in a 
very good manner and productivity also has risen considerably, I must say, although we have 
lots of repairs and things happening at the port at the moment. Productivity in the last six 
months has averaged 20.6 moves per hour. It is peaked at 23 moves per hour and from about 
18 moves per hour about two years ago. So, we are improving, in fact, I will talk about DP 
World in a moment but when we talk about DP World, we are talking about 28 moves per 
hour at least. So, we still have some way to go to get to international norms. 

As far as DP World is concerned, Madam Speaker, you don’t see it so much in the 
papers,  we  are  still  in  contact  with  them.  We  are  still  talking  to  them.  There  are  some 
stumbling blocks and every week something happens. We’ll try to find a solution and we will 
see whether we can come to an agreement or whether we don’t come to an agreement. But, 
we are still talking and if we do come to an agreement, we will give it full publicity, there 
will be no cachiet, cachiet or something. What is done will be fully public.  

And, Madam Speaker, at the time when we are talking about the necessity to invest, it 
is  good  to  say  that  the  port,  be  it  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  and  the  Cargo  Handling 
Corporation Ltd. are fully contributing to the investment effort and the capital formation in 
Mauritius.  In  this  financial  year,  we  have  invested  or  we’ll  be  investing  Rs2  billion,  Rs4 
billion next year and another Rs2.5 billion the year after, that is to make of Mauritius in terms 
of quays, in terms of depth of the water for the biggest ships to come, etc., we will make it 
into a great port and buy new ship to shore cranes as well which will come and make of Port 
Louis a fantastic port, Madam Speaker. 

I think various departments in my Ministry, Madam Speaker, have worked very well 
during the year. I would like to thank all the colleagues that have worked together with us to 
make this happen.  I would not attribute that to myself, but  I would say, Madam Speaker, 
perhaps the only thing we can do in Mauritius is to pick the right people to do the right job.  
The right man, at the right moment, in the right place, Madam Speaker, that makes the whole 
difference in the world.  You would not believe how life can be easy for the Minister when 
we have the right Manager, the right Chairman looking after the right organisation. That is 
important,  Madam  Speaker,  because  I  believe  that  most  problems  –  not  really  business 
problems  and  not  even  financial  problems  –  are  people  problems.    Most  problems  can  be 

 

32 

solved through having the right people and only one thing will ensure that we have the right 
people and that is meritocracy.  I believe meritocracy, equal opportunities, Madam Speaker, 
will be the solution to most ills affecting this country or any other country.  

I have the occasion to say and I say it again, Madam Speaker, quite sincerely that I 
believe  this  Government  has  gone  a  long  way  in  promoting  meritocracy  and  equal 
opportunities.  I really think so although we will all agree that we still have room to go.  We 
always  have  room  to  improve,  but,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  done  a  lot  and  I  think  our 
economy, our society needs to go to the next level and we need to give further impetus to 
meritocracy. Again, there is a committee to look after this.   

Let me explain it this way, Madam Speaker. At primary school, we all compete.  We 
will compete another year or so for the CPE and then there will be less competition, but still 
competing for that end of Nine-Year Schooling exams or whatever. At secondary school, we 
compete again, this time we compete for the School Certificate and HSC and some others 
compete to become laureate, fantastic.  We all compete to get into Universities and to pass 
our exams.  So, from the moment we get into school, we are competing.  However, once we 
leave school, once we leave the University then the feeling in Mauritius is that we don’t need 
to compete.  I will go and see my MP every Wednesday and I will see whether he can help 
me  to  get  a  job.    So,  we  have  changed  completely  from  a  competition-based  system  to  a 
system where you have to go and comme si supplier.   

(Interruptions) 

Give me a job! C’est dégradant aussi pour la personne.  It is not good for the person to come 
and say I got a job because so and so help me to get a job.  What is the start to your career 
like  that?    We  wonder  why  people  then  get  demotivated.    I  got  a  promotion  because 
somebody likes me, I have a family in high place and he got me a promotion.  This is not the 
society  that  will  bring  us  to  high  income,  Madam  Speaker.    So,  we  need  to  change  that 
mentality and we need to get people to understand that we need to compete all through our 
lives.  We, politicians, we understand that we compete every four or five years.  That is how 
we do, but everybody needs to understand that.  We need to get out of this system where once 
we finish schooling or University, all we need to do now is look for un passe-droit and we 
will get to where we want.  That is, Madam Speaker, I think, something that we will come to 
and maybe we can sort out before the end of this mandate although I must say that perception 

 

33 

is worse than reality.  In fact, Madam Speaker, a lot of what is done, if not all that is done is, 
in fact, based on meritocracy and proper assessment of the person.   

Madam Speaker, when talking about employment and employment creation, I think 
we need to be careful. We have 43,500 people unemployed according to Statistics Mauritius. 
We also have, according to the Ministry of Labour, something like 38,000 live work permits, 
nearly 40,000 foreign workers and a little more than 40,000 unemployed. And of this 43,000 
unemployed, half do not have CPE or do not have SC.  So, they are really unskilled people, 
but  they  will  never  go  to  work  in  industries.    They  won’t  go  to  work  in  the  seafood  hub. 
They, probably, turn down most of the jobs that are available to them, of course, except as 
you know, jobs like éboueur, attendant and things like that in the public sector.  There is an 
imbalance that is important for us to correct, otherwise, I think, we will not be able to pursue 
our economic development.  There is an imbalance.  We cannot keep on importing labour 
whilst unemployment supposedly is high in Mauritius.  So, something must be done. It is not 
just mismatch because these 20,000 people don’t have any skills.  Most of them have CPE or 
SC.  All these 20,000 people don’t have. I think, Madam Speaker, il y a une disparité entre le 
salaire au bas de l’échelle du service public et du service privé.  We have to sort it out.  One 
has to go up somewhere.  We have to equate them otherwise we will not be able to get the 
right people to work in Mauritius. 

Let  us  look  at  the  construction  sector  to  give  you  an  example.    Construction  in 
Mauritius is at its lowest ebb at the moment, minus 5% and a negative growth in construction 
last  year.    How  many  foreigners  are  working  in  construction?  4,200  foreigners  work  in 
construction  whilst  construction  is  at  its  lowest  ebb  in  Mauritius.    So,  what  will  happen 
tomorrow when we say we take a lot of public money, we boost construction?  We just have 
to import more labour.  Where is the sense in that? There, we need to sort out why it is that 
Mauritians don’t want to work maybe in construction.  As far as I know, les Français work in 
construction.  The  English  work  in  construction.  Mauritians  do  not  want  to  work  in 
construction.   

There are some problems that we need to see.  The problem is not only with workers, 
I believe, Madam Speaker, the problem is also with the employers because when people want 
work, it is for good pay.  That is crucial why people do not work.  It is for good chance of 
promotion. They want, obviously, job security.  If you hire and fire, then you will not be able 
to recruit again. Madam Speaker, they need to be treated with dignity and respect.  That is 
also important that somewhere along the line we just open the floodgates.  In tourism, we 

 

34 

have closed the floodgates for foreigners.  By just opening the floodgates sometimes, what 
we  do,  we  also  encourage  bad  employers.  We  need  to  have  the  right  equilibrium  between 
Mauritian and foreign labour.  If you take BPO, Madam Speaker,- someone has just spoken 
about it - they want to move a subsidiary of their company to Madagascar because they need 
300 people to work in their call centre.  They have about 2,000 in Mauritius and they cannot 
get more people to work there.  Although it is very good work, people do not want to work 
there.  They will be moving to Madagascar.  So, Madam Speaker, we need to do something 
about  it.  It  is  important  that  we  find  a  solution  for  this  sort  of  funny  comportement  des 
employeurs et des travailleurs mauriciens. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  are  talking  about  boosting  the  economic  growth  and 
boosting employment, we need to boost employment in the sectors where Mauritians want to 
work otherwise we will not be able to achieve that.  We will just be boosting foreign workers. 
We need to be able to boost employment where Mauritians still want to work.  We need to 
have better career  guidance.  That is important when we look at the figures for the Youth 
Employment  Programme.    There  are  1,600  degree  holders  who  are  not  working  or  still 
waiting on that programme, with wide variety of qualifications and hardly anybody with IT 
according to the Youth  Employment Programme is unemployed.  Only  40 people!   If  you 
have a Management degree, then you have got a long waiting list, nearly 300 people wanting 
to work, have a management degree.  So, the ability of our career service and parents also to 
properly guide their children and the students, Madam Speaker, is extremely important. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  just  want  to  congratulate  the  Minister  of  Finance  for  one  more 
thing, that is, the Rs100 m. that is being provided for pavements in Mauritius.  I would also 
congratulate my colleague, hon. Bodha.  We cannot continue, in Mauritius, with so many cars 
every  year  with  hardly  any  pavements.    It  cannot  continue  like  this.    We  had  21,000 
additional vehicles registered last year. 21,000 additional vehicles were registered last year.  
21,000 additional vehicles!  No wonder there are so many accidents! You cannot drive in a 
crowd as if you have to avoid people along the road. I live in the north.  There are hardly any 
pavements anywhere. There are a few only at Petit Raffray.  We have to do something about 
it.  In  the  future,  we  cannot  avoid  some  sort  of  massive  Government’s  land  purchase 
programme because we will need to create pavements. We will not be able to continue like 
this, but I am very thankful that we have the Rs100 m. for the pavements. That is going to 
change the lives of many people. Maybe we don’t walk so much anymore, many of us here in 
this House, but people do use buses.  They do walk to the market, walk to work etc.  And 

 

35 

imagine the situation!  We are all used to it, that is why we don’t see it, but we should open 
our eyes, see what is happening and we will need to do something about that in the future.   

Just  before  finishing,  Madam  Speaker,  during  the  year  I  have  chaired  about  11 
committees.  The trickiest one is the Truth and Justice Commission committee.  That is the 
trickiest one because it has so many recommendations.  Most are valid, but some are very 
difficult to do.  So, we have decided, Madam Speaker, in the committee that we should give 
most of them back to the Ministries and each Ministry should own the recommendations and 
do something about.  It shouldn’t just be owned by the committee otherwise we wouldn’t get 
as much as we ought to. But still, I am happy we have had a number of things done. We have 
opened access to Le Morne. I thank the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun, my colleague, 
hon.  Baboo.    They  have  done  a  great  thing.  We  have  been  waiting  eight  years  for  that  to 
happen.  We have opened it. It is a beautiful site. Let us all go and visit that site. It is going to 
be un lieu de pélérinage et recueillements, Madam Speaker.  That side, Madam Speaker, is an 
icon for the dignity of the human being  and the dignity of the human  flesh.  That is very 
important, Madam Speaker, that we have been able to do that.  I think that is one of the strong 
points, le point fort, of our actions, at least as far as the committee concerned.   

We are doing more than that.  Yesterday, I got a copy of letter from my colleague hon. 
Soodhun.  He is giving me two arpents of land near the site and we are going to have an ex-
slave village.  It should come up very quickly because it is all in wood and thatch.  So, we 
will have that very soon, Madam Speaker. You will be able to see living testimony of how 
people  lived  before  and  that  will  come  up  very  quickly.  So,  Le  Morne,  which  has  this 
beautiful site, will be attracting hundreds of people to that site and already hundreds of people 
are  going.  Many  more  than  we  had  expected.    I  went  there  the  other  day  and  there  were 
hundreds of people.  I thought there would not be many people.  So, that is going to give also 
an economic boost to that region, and God knows, that region is an economic boost. It is a 
wonderful asset that we have. We will develop it, of course. It will be developed properly and 
it is going to be a major attraction for Mauritians and for tourists alike.  And, of course, it is 
completely free.  

Madam Speaker, in terms of international slavery museum, we have identified the site.  
There will be a land swap.  We have a beautiful building  and we will  go ahead with that 
slavery museum. It is never easy to create a museum. It is very specialised, but we have now 
the  facility  to  do  that  and  to  open  the  museum.  A  few  weeks  ago,  Benjamin  Moutou,  the 
famous historian published a book.  We commissioned a book on the economic contribution 

 

36 

of  slaves  in  Mauritius.  I  don’t  know  if  you  are  aware,  Madam  Speaker,  that  every  single 
building,  every  single  infrastructure  in  Mauritius  up  to  1845,  was  actually  built  by  slaves. 
Everybody else was a supervisor. The actual people who worked were slaves. So, we think 
that it is a good idea also. As a tribute to these slaves, Madam Speaker, to their lives and to 
their deaths that it should be indicated on every  public building when it has been built by 
slaves. I believe we shall attribute this house, this building was built by slave labour. That 
would  show  also,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  slaves  contributed  tremendously  to  the 
development of this country. 

They are masters and slaves and they still are, maybe!   

(Interruptions) 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the impact of Brexit.  The pound fell 13% against the rupee 
since Brexit; Euro 2½ percent less. What does that mean?  Let’s say you have a hotel.  You 
get 13% less tourists.  Probably, you will spend less also because you have to feed them.  But 
saying you get the same number of English tourists, but you get 13 % less money.  Which 
one would you prefer?  I will prefer they have 13% less tourists because I will spend less.  
The impact of the fall in the value of sterling on Mauritian economy for some sectors could 
be dramatic, Madam Speaker. We have to be careful. This is something that will hang over 
this economic prospect for some time to come and we have to deal with because it is better to 
have a reduction in quantity of goods and number of tourists.  It is a reduction in revenue 
because the costs are the same, unless you’re importing in pound sterling. So, that is a danger 
of Brexit and obviously, one is the revenue, secondly is the impact also on demand with the 
UK tourists, in fact, travelling less because it is more expensive. So, you have two sides.  

One good thing I forgot to mention is that from research that we have at the Ministry, 
the terrorism that has occurred, has not dampened international travel. Our source markets are 
still.  People are still travelling.  What are they not doing?  They are not going to strike prone 
areas.  They are going to areas which are safe and here Mauritius can, in fact, also benefit 
from that. People are avoiding Turkey. People are avoiding North Africa. People are avoiding 
places where there have been issues and hopefully we don’t want to profit from that, but that 
is a fact and one good thing, therefore, that has come out of this also, maybe positive thing, if 
we play our cards of security and safety right,  we will continue to be seen and the  Indian 
Ocean will continue to be seen as a haven of peace and security. 

 

37 

Madam  Speaker,  just  to  end,  I  would  like  to  say  that  once  again  I  would  like  to 
congratulate my colleague and friend, hon. Pravind Jugnauth for a beautiful Budget.  I would 
like to say that this Budget, in my opinion, will go a long way to make of Mauritius a better, 
more prosperous country and a fairer society. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.41 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.15 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 
Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir.  The  debates  are  nearly  over.  The  dust  has  now  more  or  less  settled  down. 
During the past two weeks, the country has been able to digest this Budget. It is in a better 
position to assess the good points, the weaknesses, and evaluates its impact on the country. 
The  good  factor  referred  to  still  prevails  in  some  quarters  although  part  of  it  has  already 
eroded, particularly due to the scandals which have come to light since the presentation of 
this Budget. As to those who had questioned its viability since Day one, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, lingering doubts still persist as to its pretention to usher the country into a new era of 
development. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
had a well-defined objective when presenting this Budget. After the painful experience with 
regard to the last Budget of this Government presented by the former Minister of Finance, the 
hon. Minister of Finance had, by all means, to obliterate from the memory of the population 
all these inaccurate forecasts and unrealistic projections contained therein. 

The  hon.  Minister  had  also  the  daunting  task  of  restoring  trust  in  his  peers,  in  his 
political  allies,  in  Government  and  the  country  at  large,  especially  after  the  numerous 
political crises that this Government had gone through since the beginning of the year. And, 
last,  the  hon.  Minister,  on  a  personal  level,  had  the  equally  formidable  challenge  of 
reasserting himself as the leader of the majority partner in Government and present himself as 
a Minister of Finance with a vision for the country, and also position himself, in the same 
breath, as the one to climb the podium for the gold medal. 

There  is  no  doubt,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  has 
succeeded  to  a  certain  extent  in  his  endeavour.    With  the  string  of  popular  measures 

 

38 

announced in the Budget, il a réussi son coup. Admittedly, the most conspicuous and positive 
impact of hon. Pravind Jugnauth’s Budget is that it triggered a feel good factor, which we 
have  not  seen  for  a  long  time,  certainly  during  the  last  five  Budgets.  The  last  one  was 
particularly  misleading,  as  I  just  said,  with  measures  and  the  forecast  that  seemed  utterly 
incredible so much so that the nation had lost faith in the whole budgetary exercise. It caused 
significant damage to the credibility of the Government and sent the wrong signals, and it is 
precisely because the previous Budget was so appalling that the 2016-2017 Budget gains in 
popularity and in appreciation.  Of course, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for having been so long 
in this House, I could see through the communication’s strategy of the hon. Minister who had 
engineered  an  aggressive  spin  doctoring  exercise  by  overplaying  the  difficult  and  harsh 
measures  that  the  Budget  was  going  to  propose.  This  was  also  what  triggered  the  ouf  de 
soulagement from the population. 

Having  said  this,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  would  be  unethical  on  my  part,  as  a 
Member of the House, to close my eyes on what I consider to be the failings and inherent 
contradictions contained in the Budget. Each one of us, every parliamentarian has a fiduciary 
duty to protect the interests of our taxpayers, of our constituents, and ensure that public funds 
are spent in the most efficient manner. I will, of course, refrain from embarking on the path of 
sheer demagogy during my speech, but I will speak, as we all should, without fear or favour. 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  a  Budget  is  not  only  an  exercise  to  provide  a  series  of 
measures which will make people feel good, but it has more importantly to propose strategies 
to  help  the  Government  implement  its  vision  and  its  programme,  because  the  aim  of  the 
Budget  is  to  transform  the  socioeconomic  landscape  by  developing  and  setting  up  new 
economic pillars and also revamping the existing ones. 

The question is whether the budgetary measures proposed by the hon. Minister will 
attain this target. In other words, how far this Budget will fuel our economic engine and set 
the foundations for the country to propel itself into what the hon. Minister called ‘A New Era 
of  Development’.  For  my  part,  having  gone  through  the  Budget  several  times  and  read  as 
much as I could what other commentators, analysts and economic gurus have commented on 
this Budget, I have lingering doubts. 

We  are  laying  stress  on  this  issue  because  we  feel  that  the  Minister  should  have 
addressed  the  structural  weaknesses  of  our  economic  foundation  and  the  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. In other words, the hon. Minister should have taken appropriate measures and 
proposed  deep  rooted  reforms  to  address  the  serious  imbalances  of  our  economy,  because 
fiscal  reforms  are  a  sine  qua  non  condition  to  revive  growth.  Mauritius  needs  structural 

 

39 

reforms  to  get  back  on  the  path  of  rapid  recovery.  Unfortunately,  this  Budget  does  not 
address this question. 

Let us take economic growth. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, even before the Budget - and 
this is by way of a preliminary remark - has passed the test of parliamentary approval, one 
project of great substance has been withdrawn. The impact of a single project on which the 
growth and employment forecast have been worked out, obviously, undermines the impact of 
the Budget. 

The Budget earmarked Rs2.7 billion for the project to be financed from a grant from 
the Government of India, to which Mauritius would contribute some Rs2 billion.  Since this 
project has been frozen, public investment will automatically fall and this augurs badly for 
the Budget and economic growth. Out of the Rs97 billion earmarked for capital investment 
for the next three years, the Heritage Project should, in theory, absorb at least Rs20 billion. 
My  estimate  is  indicative  and  conservative  as  this  project  was  conceived  more  or  less  in 
opacity. I will leave it to the imagination of hon. Members of this impact in the next three 
years in terms of growth, employment creation and the construction sector. 

This puts in question the forecast growth of 4.1 per cent not only for 2016 and 2017 
but  also  for  the  three  years  to  come  and  I  fear,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that,  once  again, 
Mauritius will be condemned to struggle in the middle income trap. To me, our growth rate is 
more likely to be below 4 per cent and I shall demonstrate why the forecast rate is unlikely to 
materialise  because  this Budget  which  so  many  consider  as  daring  is  still  short  of  what is 
required to achieve the  goals set. At the pace we are  growing it is questionable even if in 
2020 we will qualify to become a high income country.  

Let  us  look  at  the  per  capita  income,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Between  2014  and 
2015, per capita income fell from USD 10,200 to USD 9,134. Can we expect to reach USD 
13,000 by 2018, the goal set by Government to attain the high income country status? This 
Budget,  unfortunately,  does  not  create  sufficient  innovative  conditions  to  move  in  this 
direction. Meanwhile, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, many countries have been outpacing us.  

Let  us  look  at  Seychelles  next  door.  Instead  of  narrowing  the  gap  between  some 
similar  island  economies,  we  find  the  gap  growing  because  we  are  progressing  at  a  lower 
speed. Three decades ago Singapore or Ireland had their per capita income around three times 
that  of  Mauritius.  Today,  it  is  more  than  five  times.  Singapore  today  enjoys  a  per  capita 
income of USD 51,000 while Seychelles exceeds a per capita income of USD 15,000. These 
are revealing international data. 

 

40 

Even, in terms of savings, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the savings rate, in fact, truly took 
a descending trend as far back when Mr Sithanen was Minister of Finance, that is, more than 
a decade ago. Successive Ministers of Finance have been bringing little to reverse this trend. 
The gross national savings rate was a low 10.4 per cent and forecast to be 10.8 per cent of 
GDP, one of the lowest rates in the economic history of Mauritius.  

Little was done to stimulate the savings. This Budget does not provide any incentive 
to raise savings. Indeed, it totally ignores this variable. And, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, savings 
is a critical variable in the strategy to fuel growth and create quality jobs. It is savings that 
generally become investment and it is investment that acts as an injection to stimulate growth 
and growth creates jobs. Jobs are the surest vehicles to alleviate poverty and the section in the 
Budget  on  macroeconomics  stability  is  quite  misleading  as  it  talks  of  nothing  other  than 
deficit and revenue, and expenditure. 

Investment  is  in  the  same  predicament,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Investment  is 
forecast at 17.9 of GDP, a rate much below what is needed to take Mauritius to a sustained 
high growth sine qua non conditions to create jobs and alleviate poverty. With the Heritage 
City  excluded  from  the  development  scenario  even  this  investment  rate  is  doubtful.  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, this country, at least, requires an investment rate equivalent to 23 per 
cent  of  GDP,  not  17  per  cent.  We  are  more  than  6  per  cent  short.  This  country  needs 
investment because our people need jobs with a decent income. Unfortunately, again, nothing 
of this sort is done in the Budget. Even the mega project of Metro Express which will absorb 
nearly  Rs10  billion  is  unlikely  to  make  great  in  roads  in  this  Budget,  unlikely  to  have  a 
significant on-job creation and growth in this fiscal year. 

In  the  best  of  circumstances,  the  funds  received  from  India  will  leave  the  circular 
flow.  Assuming  the  project  starts  at  the  earliest  time  possible,  taking  administrative 
paperwork, project mobilisation, design more likely to be effected by foreign firms and paid 
in foreign exchange, I see very little impact on growth and job creation for Mauritians. I do 
not realistically see le premier coup de pioche announced before the next Budget as was the 
case with Heritage City. As we all know our implementation capacity is so dreadfully low. 

Even in terms of employment and job creation, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know 
that  unemployment  has  a  social  and  psychological  dimension.  It  bestows  dignity  to  the 
individual. It permits the individual to live decently. It helps the country to maintain law and 
order.  It  also  enables  the  country  to  earn  higher  tax  and  spend  less  on  social  support. 

 

41 

Successive  Governments  have  unsuccessfully  grappled  with  the  problems.  We  have  the 
potential  of  creating  a  climate  where  jobs  should,  in  practice,  be  chasing  workers.  Today 
people queue up, lobby at the doors of MPs to obtain a job. This is an unhealthy situation for 
a  country  aspiring  to  become  a  high  income  country,  the  dream  of  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and the Government. 

More  importantly,  this  Budget  sends  the  wrong  signal  because  the  jobs  the 
Government  is  proposing  to  create  are  temporary.  Actually  Statistics  Mauritius  estimated 
employment in 2016, the first quarter, at 528,200 compared to 545,600 in 2015 which means 
the labour force has contracted in the first quarter of 2016, very few or real productive jobs 
have  been  created.  Net  job  creation  is  just  a  little  over  1000  and,  according  to  Statistics 
Mauritius, between 2015 and 2016, unemployment fell from 46,300 to 45,000. 

Now, let us examine the Budget on proposals to relieve the unemployment scourge. 
While I have no doubt on the good intention of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development I fear he may have been ill advised. The Budget expects to move out 21,600 
unemployed  from  the  unemployment  register.  This  is  indeed  a  laudable  initiative.  But, 
assuming this figure is correct and this vision materialises, it will leave the unemployment 
figure at around 32,000 including new entrants to the labour market. Everyone will be happy 
as within a year by a stroke of the pen the hon. Minister will have brought the unemployment 
rate to 5.9 per cent. It will leave the impression that the Government has created jobs. But, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, deeper analysis will reveal that it is not the case and the Minister 
would have only built great expectations in the minds of the expectant youth.  

The Budget forecast is close to guesswork rather than a scientific approach. The first 
observation is that training was proposed to 5400, employment under YEP 2000, filling 7200 
vacancies  in  the  Civil  Service  collectively,  totalling  14,600.  The  Government  expects  to 
create 7000 jobs, but the Budget is vague on this figure.  It is not clear  in which sector or 
economic  activity  the  additional  jobs  will  be  created.  The  arithmetic  is  intelligent  but  the 
training, while pertinent, is recognisably a short-term palliative. A significant number in this 
category will be paid a meagre amount of Rs5000. The jobs proposed in the Civil Service 
reflect  poor  vision  and  a  complete  lack  of  understanding  how  the  labour  market  and  the 
economic transmission mechanism work. 

M.  le président, tristement les chiffres de Statistics Mauritius démontrent clairement 
que  les  principaux  indicateurs  économiques  se  sont  détériorés  l’année  dernière  par  rapport 

 

42 

aux deux années précédentes. La croissance réelle du PIB, l’investissement global a chuté, 
l’investissement privé est tombé, les exportations de biens ont connu une contraction. Je ne 
vais pas vous donner tous les pourcentages, tous les chiffres. Le secteur textile en particulier 
a  régressé.  Donc,  comme  nous  le  savons  tous  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances  nous  avait 
promis  une  croissance  économique  de  5.3%,  un  investissement  global  de  24.8%,  des 
exportations de biens, de services de 52.8% etc. Il n’a atteint aucun de ces objectifs puisqu’on 
a finalement eu une croissance de 3.4%, un investissement global de 18% et I will stop here. 
En  somme,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  it  has  been  une  veritable  contre-performance.  Le  déficit 
budgétaire  reste  toujours  au-dessus  de  3%  du  PIB  et,  d’après  le  budget  du  ministre  des 
Finances, ce déficit sera de l’ordre de 3.3% pour l’année 2016-2017 équivalent à un déficit de 
R 15 milliards. Mais quand nous ajoutons les R 3.6 milliards pris des fonds spéciaux, c’est-à-
dire  le  National  Resilience  Fund,  le  Build  Mauritius  Fund,  le  déficit  budgétaire  s’élèvera 
alors à 4.1% du PIB.  En vérité, M. le président, la croissance réelle de notre production est 
restée en dessus des 4% ces sept dernières années et la production industrielle n’a pas suivi 
avec une croissance qui n’est de 0.2%. 

 
And yet we find in the budget, the Minister has the task to improve the fiscal health of 
our economy and the budget mentions the need for strict fiscal discipline.  And I do not have 
to  dwell,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  on  other  factors  like  the  major  absorption  capacity,  the 
implementation  capacity  which  characterises  this  Government  and  which  has  also 
characterised all past Governments.  

 
Therefore,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  budget,  while  having  not  provided  the 
necessary remedies to the imbalances in our economy, fails to provide an impetus ou un vrai 
coup  d’accélérateur  à  la  machine  économique.    The  measures  to  revamp  and  introduce 
structural reforms to our traditional pillars are simply missing.  And it is not me who is saying 
that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. When we read what has been published in the papers recently 
by the experts, we will see that the comments go in the same direction as I am arguing.  Let 
us take, for example, in a newspaper a few days ago – 

 

« Baromètre économique de PluriConseil: des analystes restent sur leur faim. »   

Several questions were asked, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.   

“No drastic measures to make Mauritius a compelling investment jurisdiction.” 

The budget “lacks substance (…).” 

I am quoting – 

43 

“(…) as not enough is being done to address the structural challenges.” 

« La part belle au social. »   

 

 

 

This is what gives credibility to these comments.  For example – 

« La  quasi-totalité  des  sondés  pensent  que  le  budget  a  suffisamment  pris  en 
considération le côté social, notamment en ciblant la pauvreté absolue. En revanche, 
77%  trouvent  insuffisante  la  prise  en  compte  de  l’économie,  donc  “nothing  bold 
economically. »  

« État soucieux des finances publiques. » 

In fact, 70% of those who have been questioned are ‘soucieux des finances publiques.’  And 
interestingly,  in  terms  of  the  social  measures  that  have  been  taken,  the  overwhelming 
majority thinks that the budget has been positive on that score. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  therefore,  the  question  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  also  is 
where are the proposals for the structuring of the new pillars, for erecting the new pillars, the 
African Strategy, the Ocean Economy, the Knowledge Education Hub or even the Regional 
Hub for Health.  I will not dwell furthermore on this question because sufficiently has been 
said  before  me  on  these  new  pillars  which  we  were  expecting  to  come  up  since  this  new 
Government has come to power.  In Vision 2030, the Prime Minister has said 30,000 would 
have  been  created  in  the  coming  four  years  as  far  as  the  Ocean  Economy  is  concerned.  
Where are the measures to revamp and dynamise our manufacturing base?  Again, the Prime 
Minister said in his Vision 2030, I quote – 

 

“Few countries in the world can progress without a sustainable manufacturing base.  
Manufacturing today accounts for about 18% of our economy and we aim to increase 
its share significantly to 25% within the next three years.” 

In connection to our Africa Strategy again, the same document mentions the Africa 
Strategy  we  are  adopting  to  make  Mauritius  become  the  regional  platform  for  trade 
investment and services.  Unfortunately, yesterday we saw in ‘l’Express’ comments made on 
this issue of “Ouverture sur l’Afrique - On prend les mêmes et on recommence”.  We see the 
negative comments on this question of the Africa Strategy.  I quote -   

 « A l’instar de l’Africa Fund qui dans sa nouvelle forme, avec un budget de R 500 
million  n’a  financé  qu’un  seul  projet.    Alloué  initialement  dans  le  budget  2014  de 

 

44 

Xavier Luc Duval, ce fonds a été structuré pour privilégier les investissements dans 
les pays de la région. Or, les spécialistes ont peu d’espoir dans ce projet.» 

I’ll stop here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.   

Let me come to our financial services!  Here is an industry that has been, over the past 
few  year,  one  of  the  key  and  most  consistent  contributor  to  our  GDP  growth.    The  shock 
wave, triggered by the Indian DTA negotiations, have, unfortunately, cast a shadow on the 
future strength of this industry. 

Beyond the political failures of credits attributed to this GTA renegotiation, much has 
been said about where we ought to position Mauritius in the financial service world.  But one 
thing is clear, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  The Indian DTA issue has shown how vulnerable a 
pure tax centric jurisdiction can be to politically or Government induced alterations to our 
taxation  agreement.  And  we  note  that  the  budget  still  makes  of  tax  incentivizing  a  major 
proposition in its attempt to revamp the sector or counteract the ripple effects of a shock like 
the Indian DTA outcome.  

I think, we should seriously, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, be asking ourselves one simple 
question  before  we  spell  our  strategies  for  this  sector.    Sommes-nous  une  place  financière 
digne de ce nom? Ceci posé, on notera les multitudes d’interrogations qui en découlent. Do 
we know what it really takes to be such a place? Are we striving to improve towards being 
one, Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir?   I know the hon.  Minister responsible for this portfolio has 
made many efforts, but let me attempt a picture of where we stand. Do you know, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, that when the CEO and the Deputy CEO of AfrAsia Bank resigned, the CSSF in 
Luxemburg, that is, the regulatory authority and many in London, were already informed of 
the resignations even before the official communiqué was out.   

Similarly, in the BAI case, we have been boasting for over a year now, it does bring 
political satisfaction and gives Government les halons, but with the speed information travels, 
we keep regressing from being a serious financial place. 

Last  year,  we  introduced  the  PDS  with  the  restriction  of  20%  sales  dedicated  to 
Mauritians.  This year, we changed it and it is not the first time.  Do you remember we did so 
with capital gains tax, with the NRPT?  This yo-yoing is naïve and portrayed us as amateurs 
to  the  International  Finance  Committee  which  casts  an  element  of  uncertainty  of  our 
jurisdiction. 

 

45 

Similarly, Cabinet approves the Highlands City Project.  It is acclaimed in the Budget 
Speech and a week later, we discard it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Isn’t this amateurism at its 
peak?   

And  speaking  of  Heritage  City,  we  have  heard  so  much  about  the  Innovative 
Financing Scheme that has been designed for it with convertible debts and preference shares.  
My feedback on this in that this is the most basic and rudimentary financing structure and I 
feel  we  have  made  a  good  joke  ourselves  with  our  ambitions  to  become  a  sophisticated 
financial place. 

Now,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  being  a  financial  place  is  not  just  about  policy 
coherence  or  sense.    The  businessmen  coming  to  Mauritius  often  will  want  professional 
standards at all levels in its connectivity, he needs precision, he needs to be able to have any 
of the wines listed on the wine menu, he needs good restaurant in the city, most of all, he 
needs people to be responsive, quick and sharp.  The list is long.  But, what I mean to say is 
that it is up to policymakers to improve the mindset, not just within the industry but around it.  
The whole of Mauritius has to evolve.   

 
On a more business note, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a financial place offers investment 
solutions,  alternative  placements,  efficient  markets,  derivative  markets,  commodities, 
solutions for placement.  We need diversity in our financial products and our laws have to 
adapt to create a supporting jurisdiction.  I have doubts as to whether we have the appropriate 
framework to move up.  The FSC, the regulatory body seems to be more concerned about 
compliance which is, of course, a must, but cumbersome than it is for business development.  
I think we should revamp the FSC, make it independent, but accountable and certainly free 
from politics.  Let the FSC drive the industry with the industry and not against it, get it paired 
with  the  CCF,  for  example,  in  Luxembourg.    We  should  dare  introduce  new  financial 
offerings, riskiest if need be, but, at least, available for all those who can afford to risk it. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what I mean to say is that this important growth engine of 
 
our country needs to see a change in mindset if we are to succeed in our transition to a more 
sophisticated and mature jurisdiction.  Diversity is needed for there to be sufficient alternative 
investment solution and it all has to work under an independent FSC that is here to defend, 
promote, regulate and control operators.   

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will make a few comments on an issue which struck me 
when I listened to the hon. Minister’s speech. My comments on this issue are driven by the 

 

46 

analysis made by the World Bank, inclusive relentless growth with regard to the erosion of 
the middle-class in our country due to the unequal distribution of wealth.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the World Bank has made remarks with regard to the erosion 
 
of  the  middle-class  in  our  country  due  to  the  unequal  distribution  during  the  last  decade.  
Indeed, when commenting on the vulnerability of the middle-class and other income groups, 
from  2007  to  2012,  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  lower-middle  class  had  declined 
significantly from 30.5% to 24.9%.  In Mauritius, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as we all know, 
economic concentration has historic origins.  The large corporate sector, through a structured 
presence in most sectors with full vertical integrations, leaves little economic space for the 
SMMEs and the new entrants.   In fact, there is no level playing field for the competition.  
This fundamental issue in our country, this question of the concentration of the economy in 
the hands of a few is a global phenomenon which, as we saw recently, is causing widespread 
frustration even among the middle-class in Europe and was one of the underlying causes of 
Brexit.  But,  although the Budget includes positive measures in favour  of SMEs, the poor 
state of operators in the SME Sector may not enable them to overcome the hurdles to take full 
advantage of the measures.  It is imperative that the implementation process should cater for 
special  and  differential  treatment  for  the  micro  and  the  small  enterprises  and  vulnerable 
economic  operators.    Over  the  past  decades,  we  have  seen,  in  fact,  a  polarisation  of  the 
economy.  Around the large corporate sector through a structured presence in most economic 
sectors,  full  vertical  integration  within  the  conglomerates  leaves  little  economic  space 
through our SMMEs and the new entrants.  There is no level playing field for free and fair 
competition.   

 
As I said, this last World Bank Report had shown the emergence of this vulnerable 
segment  among  the  middle-class  which  is  slowly  sliding  back  into  poverty,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir.    Where  is  the  democratisation  of  our  economy?    The  Government  has  the 
challenge to take bold move to transform Mauritius into a high-income country with a vibrant 
middle-class  of  world-class  entrepreneurs  and  professionals.    Unfortunately,  we  have  seen 
many processes and measures without a clear underlying strategy and long-term objective. 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I repeat, there will be no democratisation of the economy if 
we do not embark on a massive initiative of targeted support and differential treatment for 
micro  and  small  enterprises.    Has  this  Budget  been  able  to  do  this?    Among  the  most 
vulnerable  people  of  the  small  holder  farmers,  this  Budget  has  extended  the  SME 
Development Certificate to individual entrepreneurs and cooperatives.  However, the smallest 

 

47 

farmers will be left to compete head on with the largest corporate farmer which already has a 
head start in terms of resources and economies of scale.  There is no sustainable solution for 
the  small  cane  farmers  who  are  still  struggling  for  survival  within  a  successful  industrie 
cannière.    If  the  burden  of  supporting  small  farmers  is  left  to  Government,  why  should 
Government support and perpetuate  a passeist system instead of challenging them towards 
new ventures where they earn better returns?  In the manufacturing sector, the same airfreight 
subsidies have been extended to all exporters.  The reality is that a few large exporters CMT, 
Ciel, Palmar, Esquelle, will benefit from the bulk of the subsidies.  Over the past decades, 
SMEs have not received the differential support needed to graduate to export which means 
they will derive little benefit from this measure. 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  is  a  failure  of  the  innovation  system  and  the 
technology, training and transfer systems in Mauritius and this is denying the SMMEs of the 
opportunity to adopt new technologies and to move into innovation driven growth.  There is a 
focus on real state and physical space through creation of SME industrial parks, rightly so, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  but  without  targeted  support  and  creation  of  economic  space  in 
terms  of  markets,  industrial  space  only  will  not  be  effective  to  lead  to  competitive  SMEs.  
And finally, the solution proposed for the small cow breeders is to make them dependent on 
industrial  processes  who  will  receive  Rs10  m.  to  provide  support  service  to  small  cow 
keepers.    This  will  not  address  the  real  issue,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker.    So,  the  Budget  has 
provided very generous incentive to established players and the large corporates, the PDS, for 
example, but at the other end of this spectrum, there have been some measures for vulnerable 
groups like the three-year suspension of treaties.  There is, however, no clear strategy for a 
long-term solution for sustainable livelihoods of the vulnerable classes.  The big losers in this 
Budget  could  be  the  middle-class  who  are  stagnating,  slowly  sliding  backwards  with  no 
strategy  and  measures  for  social  mobility  in  spite  of  statements  like  we  have  seen  in  the 
Budget, fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs or a class of entrepreneurs that is equal to 
the challenge and who can succeed in the most sophisticated of markets 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the last part of my intervention will be on poverty.  Poverty 

 
is on the rise, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no one can deny that.   

 
M. le président, il est un fait indéniable que la pauvreté a gagné du terrain dans notre 
pays.    Le  groupe  de  nos  concitoyens  qui  sont  considérés  comme  les  plus  vulnérables  a 
augmenté de 10.2% en 2007 à 12.7% en 2012.  Et pourtant, M. le président, ce pays a connu 
un  développement  et  une  croissance  soutenus  pendant  la  dernière  décennie.    Il  y  a  eu  des 

 

48 

augmentations des revenus par tête d’habitant.  L’investissement direct a augmenté, une nette 
amélioration dans notre secteur d’exportation.  Comment, donc, expliquer que la pauvreté est 
aussi difficile à combattre ?  Peut-être que la volonté politique n’y était pas ! 

 
Today,  it  is  very  laudable  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  focussed  so 
extensively on poverty alleviation.  But, there are still some room, some issues to be clarified 
on this chapter, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  The Budget Speech has provided for a scheme to 
help  6,400  families  registered  on  the  social  register  to  come  out  of  poverty.    But,  as  was 
pointed out in the PNQ raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition some two weeks’ ago, the 
Estimates made mention of 13,267 families who would be eligible to this new scheme.  This 
is  very  confusing.    The  House  should  know  clearly  how  many  will  benefit  from  the  new 
social assistance scheme proposed in the Budget, especially as we see from the Estimates that 
only Rs200 m. have been budgeted for this item.  The question I asked, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, is:  pourquoi faire les choses à moité?    

Statistics  Mauritius  reveals  in  its  2013  Poverty  Analysis  that  an  amount  of  Rs1.3 
billion  would  be  required  to  move  all  poor  people,  who  represent  about  122,000,  out  of 
poverty using a poverty line of Rs5,652 per adult equivalent. However, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, this is why to my mind the problem of poverty has not been sufficiently addressed in this 
Budget. As I said, Statistics Mauritius and the Marshall Plan also, I am given to understand, 
mentioned Rs1.3 billion needed to lift these people from income poverty, including relative 
poverty.  

I don’t see why the hon. Minister did not go the extra mile and dedicate Rs1.3 billion 
to lift our poor people out of the relative poverty trap in which they are. By the way, I would 
have been grateful to the hon. Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment if 
he would have laid the Marshall Plan on the Table of the Assembly to enable all Members of 
this House and the public at large to know what are the contents of the Marshall Plan. A few 
months ago, I asked the hon. Minister a question about this possibility of him making public 
the Marshall Plan and I once again appeal to him to do so. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to my mind, there are three planks on which should rest the 

fight against poverty. 

Firstly, the integrated community development approach, that is, the provision of the 
basic amenities and infrastructures for the poor, the absolute poor, that is, water, electricity, a 
housing unit and a quality education for their children. 

 

49 

Secondly,  empowerment  through  economic  activities  for  low-skilled  labour.  For 
example, we know the proverb: instead of giving a poor man a fish let’s give him a fishing 
rod. So, we have to empower these poor people. I have seen that in my constituency. When 
you go through Case Noyale, you will see all the squatters squatting, in fact, on the beach of 
the Pas Géométriques at Case Noyale with their small huts and houses like a Shanty Town. 
But,  you will see all of them, now, selling fruits, confits, fish and everything. All of them 
have become small economic operators, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. So, there is the possibility 
of empowering these poor people through economic activities which, of course, have to be 
determined and planned by the authorities. 

Besides integrated community development, besides empowerment, the third plank, 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  you  would  be  surprised,  is  social  transfer  through  pensions  and 
social protection. But this is, of course - I will come to that in a few minutes  - theory what I 
am  saying.  At  the  practical  level,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social 
Integration  should  wield  a  powerful  mechanism,  an  executive  arm,  une  vraie  machine  de 
guerre, to implement his pro-poor policies, a new dynamic, revamp, proactive, aggressive, 
NEF  or  CSR  Foundation,  by  whatever  name  we  call  it  and  whatever  mechanism  can  be 
thought about. This new mechanism, this new executive arm, this new tool, of course, should 
be supported by dedicated hard-working cadres, Mr Deputy Speaker. 

Some of the measures announced by the hon. Minister are related to the three planks I 
just mentioned. However, not all the issues have been addressed to tackle the problem in a 
comprehensive and holistic manner. Let me take the example of social housing. On Tuesday, 
I asked a PQ to the hon. Minister of Housing and Lands who gladly indicated to the House 
that currently, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there are 30,000 house seekers. Do you know out of 
these 30,000 house seekers, Mr Deputy Speaker, how many of them earn below Rs10,000? 
16,804! Presque 17,000 house seekers are earning a monthly family income between Rs6,200 
and  Rs10,000.  Now,  between  the  bracket  from  Rs10,000  to  Rs15,000,  do  you  know  how 
many  there  are,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  8,789!  Donc,  in  all,  il  y  a  environ  25,000  house 
seekers who are earning less than Rs15,000 today. This is a very dreadful figure, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. Therefore, how shall we find a solution to this problem? 

Again, when we go to the Budget speech, at paragraph 311 of the Budget Speech, the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development announced that the Government will 
construct  at  least  800  maisons  over  the  next  three  years  for  those  in  the  absolute  poverty 
category. Donc, I repeat 16,000 personnes earning moins de R 10,000. Dans le discours du 

 

50 

budget, the hon. Minister tells us he will build at least 800 maisons over the next three years. 
I do not doubt the good faith of either the Minister of Housing and Lands or the Minister of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development,  but  the  whole  question  is,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
when  will  we  once  for  all  settle  this  housing  problem,  especially  for  those  who  are  at  the 
bottom of the ladder? 

In the same breath, I endorse fully the decision announced in the Budget to allocate 
partly the money endowed to the CSR Foundation for social housing. This morning, on avait 
écouté  le  ministre  des  Finances  replying  to  a  PNQ  where  he  says  that  now  the  CSR 
Foundation will have as one of its priority areas, social housing.  The money which will be 
endowed to this Foundation can be used for social housing to support NGOs in this area of 
social housing.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is the supplementary I wanted to ask the hon. 
Minister  this  morning,  but  I  did  not  have  the  chance.  I  am  sceptical  on  how  NGOs  will 
embark in the construction of social housing themselves. Therefore, will the Foundation itself 
embark on social housing, contract out with the private contractors or the NHDC, how will 
this be done remains to be seen. 

I  take  this  opportunity,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  sir,  to  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  to 
consider  seriously  under  the  Chapter  of  Social  Housing  the  case  of  occupiers  of  asbestos 
houses in the CHA Estates all over the country. Several questions have been asked in this 
House, for ages now, to the previous Government, more particularly, to pull down all these 
houses occupied by destitute old couples. These are CHA, EDC houses built after Alix and 
Carol. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I am sure you don’t know about those days, but these houses 
were built for families in those days.  Today, these asbestos houses are mostly occupied by 
old couples and as we know, they constitute a risk hazard. The Minister should make of this 
issue a priority once the CSR Foundation becomes operational. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to social transfers, that is, the social protection 
and pensions, do you know that, again, both the World Bank in its report Inclusiveness of 
Growth  and  Statistics  Mauritius  highlighted  the  fact  that  in    Mauritius  nearly  75%  of  the 
poverty reduction has been associated with the social protection benefits. 75% of the poverty 
reduction is due to social protection benefits. Since 2012, Statistics Mauritius explained that 
the 2012 poverty rate of 9.4% would have been higher; it would have come to 19% if there 
were no social protection in our country, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. We realise how powerful 

 

51 

this tool of social transfers is. It was 9% in 2012, because the poverty analysis was between 
2004-2010. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we realise how powerful is this tool of social transfers, 9% in 
2012 because the poverty analysis was for 2010. This report clearly established that poverty 
rate which was at 9.5 per cent would have been higher, would have been 19 per cent if there 
were no social protection in our country. And, according to the same report, poor households 
are  more  reliant  on  transfers  than  other  income  households,  of  course.  A  poor  household 
derives 29 per cent of its income from transfers, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 29 per cent! This 
allows me to make the following comment. 

 I  think  that  not  enough  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  heterogeneity  of  the 
profile of those poor households. What do I mean, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? I explain myself. 
According  to  the  World  Bank  again,  31  per  cent  of  the  most  vulnerable  households  in 
Mauritius are headed by single women. This means that nearly a third of the poor households 
in our country are headed by single women. It is difficult for these women to be absorbed by 
the labour market and, at the same time, take care of their children. To my mind, a set of 
special allowances should have been given to the female heads of households who are single, 
of course, subject to well-defined requirements and criteria. 

Allow  me  to  say,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  same  breath,  therefore,  how 
powerful, how important a tool is our pension mechanism in reducing poverty in this country. 
This is why I appeal to the hon. Minister. The Pension Reform Committee has been set up, as 
we learned from the Budget itself, in the last pages of the Budget the hon. Minister suggested 
to set up the Pension Reform Committee, we should find ways and means to ensure that the 
poverty  reducing  objective  of  our  pension  mechanism  should  be  improved,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. 

In fact, the IMF Working Paper in 2015 talked about this. Of course, they suggested 
targeting. I am not suggesting targeting, but I am just appealing to the hon. Minister to look at 
all  the  ways  and  means  to  ensure  that  the  poverty  reducing  objective  of  our  pension 
mechanism be improved so that those who deserve a higher pension get the higher pension 
especially, as I have just given the case of poor single women heading a family. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wanted to say a few words on the CSR, but this afternoon 
we  have  had  sufficient  explanation  from  the  hon.  Minister  about  the  CSR,  the  operational 
framework,  the  foundation  and  so  on.  The  questions  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 

 

52 

have enlightened us sufficiently. But, suffice it to say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the National 
CSR  Foundation  should  be  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  coming  up  with  proactive 
innovative policies in their pro-poor policies. One example that comes to mind, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  is  the  very  much  popular  food  waste  laws  as  it  is  the  case  in  Europe. 
Supermarkets, grocery stores, restaurants, hotels, other suppliers doing business in the food 
industry  should  be  made  to  be  socially  responsible  and  one  way  of  doing  it  would  be  to 
introduce a food waste law like in France, in the UK.  

In Italy, ten days ago, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let us go on the Net and we will find it. 
Ten days ago this law was passed in Italy whereby it is illegal for businesses to throw away 
consumable food items which can be redistributed to those who do not even have a meal per 
day.  This  would  have  been  an  innovative  pro-poor  policy  and  in  a  constructive  way 
consolidating the concept of CSR in Mauritius. A month ago I put a Parliamentary Question 
to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  to  that  effect.  But,  of  course,  he 
underlined in his reply the difficulties of setting up this law. But, we should not stop here. We 
should try to emulate the other countries and find the solutions to this problem, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, because as I said, it is one pro-poor policy which is now very popular in many 
countries. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will stop on drugs. I just want to say and I will refrain from 
making any unjust criticism. But, the report which has been circulated by the hon. Minister 
this  week  from  the  National  Drug  Observatory  is  very  alarming,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
when we go through all the figures and the statistics in this report. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I 
will give two examples.  

In 2015 there were 515 admissions to the public health institutions including Brown 
Sequard Hospital etc. for drug related problems. 25 per cent were related to suspected new 
psychoactive substances, that is, synthetic drugs. But, what is more alarming in this figure is 
that 131, that is, 25 per cent related to suspected new psychoactive substance, 54 cannabis, 38 
opioid drugs, 11 multiple illicit drug use, 3 cocaine, but there is an unknown figure in the 
statistics  –  278  on  515  which  are  characterised  as  ‘unspecified  illicit  drug  use’!  That  is,  I 
suppose - I speak under the correction of hon. doctors in this House - even the doctors have 
not  been  able  to  determine  the  molecules  or  the  components  of  whatever  substances  have 
been found in the body of these people under treatment. They call it ‘unspecified illicit drug 
use’. I am not talking of synthétique which is 131 cas sur 515. 278 ‘unspecified illicit drug 

 

53 

use’! So, it is not cannabis, it is not other drugs, it is unspecified. They can’t even know what 
are the molecules in these drugs. 

In the first half of 2016, 435 admissions were recorded for drug related problems out 
of which 43 per cent were related to suspected new psychoactive substance, 31 cannabis, 63 
opioid, 10 multiple, 1 cocaine, but listen to that, 141 again ‘unspecified illicit drug use’! So, 
when we analyse figures for 2015 and 2016 more than 75 per cent, I would have thought, of 
those  admitted  to  our  public  health  institutions  have  been  admitted  because  under  the 
influence  of  either  new  psychoactive  substance  or  unspecified  illicit  drug  use,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir.  

Now,  the  percentage  is  overwhelming!  This  rise  is  alarming!  I  am,  therefore, 
convinced that complementary to the Government policy of repressing drug-trafficking, the 
approach to curb demand and limit the damages, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, of such drugs by 
young people should be reviewed. We cannot remain silent faced with this increase in drug 
consumption  or  treat  the  problem  associated  to  drug  consumption  as  taboo  anymore. 
Government has to take a lead to inform the population especially our young people about the 
dangers of drugs and how to avoid problematic drug consumption. We can see clearly, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, what is the trend today. 

But,  worst,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  among  patients  admitted  for  suspected  new 
psychoactive substance in public health institutions in the first half of 2016, 76 per cent were 
aged  between  15  and  29  years  old.  76  per  cent  of  those  admitted  in  our  public  health 
institutions suspected for new psychoactive substances were aged between 15 and 29 years 
old,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir!  The  age  distribution  of  these  drug  users  is  alarming  and 
shocking!  This  is  why,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  make  an  appeal  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, for years on we have been fighting against drug abuse - we have been in this House 
for  so  long  I  know  the  Prime  Minister’s  dedication  to  combat  this  scourge  which  is  drug 
abuse.  I  said  it  in  this  House  and  I  say  it  again  when  we  were  together,  at  one  time,  we 
amended  the  Constitution  to  prevent  drug  offenders  to  be  released  on  bail  and  this  was 
quashed in the Judicial Committee and so on. But, the motivation was here. The good faith 
was here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I know. 

But, today, things have changed.  There has been a paradigm shift.  We have perhaps 
to  relook  about  our  strategies.  I  am  not  talking  of  dépénalisation  ou  légalisation.  I  do  not 
want, of course, to enter into this debate, but I think we must be open minded, we must be 

 

54 

open to new strategies, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and try to find how we can put a stop to this 
fléau, which is doing so much damage, causing so much havoc. What we should know also is 
that  a  drug  addict,  it  is  not  his  own  problem.    His  family,  his  mother,  his  brother,  all  the 
people around him suffer so much; not only him. Perhaps he does not even know, since he is 
a toxicomane, what damage he is causing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

This is why, some time back, I addressed a PQ to the hon. Minister to inquire on the 
question of sensitisation of the young people in school with regard to the danger of synthetic 
drugs.  I  asked  him  whether  we  should  not  rope  in  the  NGOs  for  that  purpose.  The  hon. 
Minister gave me the answer: ‘But there are so many schools, thousands and thousands of 
students in our secondary institutions.’  This is why I appeal to him to review that possibility 
of allowing NGOs with a proven track record, of course, which have been militating in this 
field for years, which have experience, and even to choose those people who should go into 
the schools, to select them, and agree to that proposal, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I appeal to the 
hon.  Minister  to  review,  therefore,  this  question  of  allowing  the  NGOs  to  help  the  other 
authorities to sensitise young people in schools. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  have  stopped  here,  but  I  just  want  to  raise  two 
matters  concerning  my  constituency.  Very  quickly!  Firstly,  in  Rivière  Noire  -  this  is 
constituency matters, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir - this week, three Ministers of this Government 
went to Les Gorges de la Rivière Noire; and not the least.   We know what was the problem. I 
am sure you heard about it. Dans Les Gorges de la Rivière Noire, apparently authority was 
given to an Indian film company to shoot. We have seen photos in l’Express and on the net 
also about the damage that has been caused. The felling of trees, and even a JCB was there. 
Can you imagine a JCB in Les Gorges de la Rivière Noire cleaning up? I suppose, to make 
space, room for the beautiful actors and actresses to sing behind the trees or whatever, and 
nearby there was a river.  The inhabitants of the region, of course, sounded the alarm bell. 

The hon. Minister of Environment went there. He has assured the population of this 
locality and of the country that no damage has been done and everything was done under the 
control of the Ministry of Agro-industry. Hon. Seeruttun was also there. But I would appeal 
to the hon. Ministers concerned to see to it that this does not happen next time, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. We are talking so much of environment. We all know how much time, money, 
energy is being spent and so on. Of course, we are not against development. It is a good thing 
that Mauritius becomes a centre for the film industry, but I think, as usual, all developments 
in this country should be environmentally fool proof, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

55 

The second part that I wanted to raise - the hon. Deputy Prime Minister just talk about 
that - is Le Morne. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am sure you know me. I do not pick quarrels on 
everything. In fact, I was going to ask a PQ.  I have already left it with the Secretariat some 
10 days ago, but, unfortunately, we did not have PQ session this week. Le Morne Heritage 
Trust,  as  we  all  know,  est  une  grande  avancée  pour  tout  le  monde  dans  ce  pays.  It  is  an 
international heritage site now. In fact, when the law was passed in 2004, the MSM/MMM 
Government  passed  this  law;  Le  Morne  Heritage  Trust  Fund  Act.  I  will  request  the  new 
Members of this House to go and read the debates. The hon. Leader of the Opposition was 
the  Prime  Minister,  hon.  P. Jugnauth  what  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister.  I  went  through  the 
debates. They both intervened in the debate. But some one month ago, there was a ceremony 
there,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Firstly,  the  MPs  of  the  locality  were  not  invited.    Some 
mauvaises langues said that it was PMSD gamat. I will not say that. None of the three MPs 
was invited for this ceremony. This is not good for democracy. I checked with hon. Jhuboo 
and he assured me that he was not invited also. I think, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this is 
not good. 

This is a national issue - giving access to everybody to go and see this cathedral of Le 
Morne Mountain. On top of that, we have been told that all the guidelines, all the procedures 
and the security measures have not been respected. I would appeal to the Minister concerned 
not to politicise this sacred memory. In fact, this would be an immense tort si on continue à 
faire  cela.  Now,  I  understand  that  this  coming  Sunday,  there  will  be  another  function. 
Invitations  have  already  been  launched.  There  will  be  another  rassemblement  dimanche 
prochain.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  us  give  the  respect  that  it  deserves  to  Le  Morne 
Heritage, and we refrain from such types of enfantillage. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir I have finished. In one year, from now on, we will be in a 
position to assess the impact of this Budget on the country; how meaningful it has been; what 
has been the accomplishment of the proposals. One year from now on!  One year is a long 
time in politics - very, very long time. It is even difficult to predict what is going to happen in 
one year, from now on till the next Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and whether the hon. 
Minister of Finance will still be Minister of Finance or has graduated to some other function 
or  what  would  be  the  scenario  in  this  country  as  far  as  l’échiquier  politique  is  concerned. 
What I can hope is that little Mauritius goes on forging its ride, and I wish good luck to the 
country. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

56 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume the chair. 

At this stage Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Wong Yen Cheong! 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment,  Sustainannble  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach Management  (Mr 
A. Wong Yen Cheong): Madam Speaker, let me, at the very outset, congratulate the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  this  very  audacious  Budget  that  will 
usher a new era for sustainable development for the country.  The array of measures, fiscal 
incentives  and  proposals  reflects  the  philosophy  of  ‘l’Alliance  Lepep’.    Indeed,  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development has left no stone unturned to bring about the 
badly  needed  turnaround  on  both  the  economic  and  social  fronts.  In  fact,  this  is  not  just 
another  budget,  but  an  economic  plan  to  further  boost  up  the  economy  while,  at  the  same 
time, reinforcing our Welfare State of the country without forgeting the vulnerable groups of 
society.    And,  of  course,  the  measures  announced  go  along  with  the  vision  of  the  second 
economic miracle we pledge for.   

Madam Speaker, Amy Leigh Mercree said, and I quote -  

 “Commitment  mixed  with  drive  and  sprinkled  with  imagination  creates  sustained 
results.  Stay focused and you will make your mark!” 

This is what this Governmnet is doing.   

Madame la présidente, en 2014, ce gouvernement a pris un engagement vis-à-vis de la 
population et cet engagement nous l’honorons chaque jour à travers chacune de nos actions.  
L’équipe  gouvernementale,  Madame  la  présidente,  et  menée  de  mains  de  maître  par  les 
leaders politiques, tels que l’honorable Sir Anerood Jugnauth, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, 
l’honorable  Ivan  Collendavelloo  et  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  qui  regardent  dans  la  même 
direction et qui font preuve de respect mutuel. 

L’innovation  est  au  cœur  de  toutes  nos  actions.   Cela  apporte  déjà,  et  continuera  à 
apporter  des  développements  tangibles  et  durables  pour  le  bien  de  toute  la  nation,  n’en 
déplaise à ceux qui souhaitent de à tout prix voir échouer ce gouvernement. Ce gouvernement 
laissera  une  empreinte  indélébile  et  les  futures  générations  et  même  ceux  qui  refusent  de 
l’admettre aujourd’hui, se rendront à l’évidence que le gouvernement de ‘l’Alliance Lepep’ a 
propulsé l’île Maurice encore plus loin sur la voie du progrès et de la prospérité. 

 

57 

L’échec, Madame la présidente, ne fait pas partie de notre vocabulaire.  Et toutes les 
couches  de  la  population  en  sont  témoins.  Nous  sommes  bien  partis  pour  relever  les  défis 
économiques, sociaux, environnementaux, et j’en passe. Certes la voie de la réussite ne sera 
pas de tout repos, surtout avec ceux qui essayent et tenteront de nous mettre des bâtons dans 
les  roues.  Mais  avec  de  la  vision,  la  conviction,  la  volonté,  la  détermination  nous  y 
parviendrons. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  rightly  said:  “With  this  budget  we  are 
breaking with the past and traditional policies and approaches.”  It is also encouraging that it 
has not taken much time for many people, even from the Opposition side, to recognise that it 
is un budget intéressant.   

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has given 
an  attentive  ear  to  each  and  every  proposal  made  during  the  pre-budgetary  consultations.  
This budget not only provides concrete measures for the relance économique, but also lays a 
solid foundation for the eradication of absolute poverty through the Marshall Plan.  

Several  environmental  issues  that  are  closely  linked  with  poverty  will  also  be 
addressed.  The fight against absolute poverty and other audacious measures announced in 
the Budget give me great hope for our country and, in particular, for my Constituency, Grand 
River  North  West  and  Port  Louis  West.    For  decades  this  Constituency  lagged  behind  in 
terms  of  development.  Things  have  changed  since  this  Government  is  in  power.    Public 
infrastructure  and  roads  among  others  have  been  upgraded  in  various  regions.    New  and 
modern social houses have been built and  granted to vulnerable people and my  colleague, 
hon. Patrice Armance and I, make it a must to personally ensure that our constituents live in a 
healthy and safe environment.   

I am glad that with the new measures announced, Constituency No. 1 will follow the 
trend  of  development  and  progress.  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  together  with  audacious 
measures to improve quality of life; the most important legacy which a Government can offer 
to its citizens is education - education through various means. And I must point out that both 
Ministries  for  which  I  am  responsible,  go  along  with  this  philosophy.    For  example, 
Environment Education is a key ingredient in the building of a sustainable and responsible 
nation.    The  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management is actively engaged in environmental awareness and sensitisation programmes, 

 

58 

including  distribution  of 
environmental events such as Earth Day, World Environment Day and Clean up the World.  

resource  materials  and  commemoration  of 

international 

To support our initiatives towards promoting sustainable lifestyle, we will double our 
efforts  to  inculcate  a  sense  of  environmental  stewardship  and  literacy  at  all  levels  of  our 
society.  In the same vein, training and capacity building are intrinsically linked with reforms 
in the Civil Service.   

Government has taken the commitment to bring transformational change in the Civil 
Service in order to render it more responsible and provide an expedient service to boost the 
economy.    In  this  respect,  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  is 
sparing  no  effort  to  step  up  training  and  capacity  building  in  the  Civil  Service.    It  is 
noteworthy that the Civil Service College was a long awaited project since 20 years back.  On 
my assumption as Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, I have personally 
ensured that the project be revived.  

I  am  pleased  to  state  that  we  have  successfully  set  up  the  Civil Service  College  in 
Mauritius and rendered it operational since 16 November 2015 to cater for the human capital 
development across all sectors and grades of officers in the service, parastatal bodies, local 
authorities and State-owned enterprises.  The College is running 33 courses which focus on 
customer care, leadership, and change management among others. Since November 2015 to 
date,  2,167  officers  have  been  trained.    It  is  also  envisaged,  henceforth,  to  train 
Parliamentarians and ultimately to develop the college as a regional centre of excellence. 

I note with appreciation that my colleague, hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development has acceded to my request to increase the provision for training and capacity 
building in my Ministry’s budget from Rs5 m. to Rs20 m.  This will enable the College to 
dispense more courses following training needs of Ministries, Departments and ensure that 
the public officers have the relevant skills, values and above all to inculcate the right mindset.  
To fulfil this requirement, the College will ensure that systematic training need assessments 
are carried out so as to map the training gaps and skill competencies mismatch.   

Madam  Speaker,  the  setting  up  of  the  E-Learning  System  (ELS)  constitutes 
technological  breakthrough  that  will  have  a  significant  impact  on  both  personal  and 
organisational development in the public sector.  The ELS which will make use of web-based 
technologies will complement the traditional face-to-face training.  It is presently managed by 
Civil Service College and it is foreseen that a larger number of public officers in all grades, 

 

59 

some 90,000, including those from parastatal bodies and local authorities would benefit from 
the new learning and ultimately foster a new learning culture in the Civil Service. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  note  with  immense  pleasure  the  attention  given  by  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  to  re-engineer  and  transform  the  public 
sector  institution  through,  inter  alia,  a  modernisation  capacity  building  process  and  the 
merger  of  different  institutions.    I  would  like  to  assure  the  House  that  my  Ministry  will 
provide all support. 

My Ministry has a key role to play in accelerating reform in the Civil Service.  I am 
indeed very much grateful that my Ministry has given the necessary means and resource to be 
able to both consolidate ongoing initiatives and embark on new ones. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  House  will  concur  with  me  that  ICT  in  now  integral  to  an 
organisation.  I am pleased to note that this Budget has not only highlighted the importance of 
modernising the Civil Service but also provide the means to accelerate  process.  This will 
undoubtedly  help  towards  streamlining  business  processes,  reduce  delays  and  improve 
customer  satisfactions.    In  this  regard,  my  Ministry  will  fully  participate  in  fathering  the 
digital  economy  by  providing  the  necessary  support  to  Ministries/Departments  to  facilitate 
the delivery of E-Service for the benefits of their customers. 

The Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms will also collaborate with 
the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation with a view to ensuring that all 
public officers be given a government.mu.org email account on the basis of a reasonable time 
frame. I have no doubt all these measures will create an e-culture and cause a paradigm shift 
in the civil service. 

Madam Speaker, my good friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed was talking about trial and 
error. I beg to differ and without going into much detail, I would like to point concerning the 
public service. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to point out some major reform initiatives, which 
are on the way, we already started. These are the Performance Management System (PMS) is 
instrumental for the successful implementation of the Government’s plan to modernise the 
public sector, improve the delivery and quality services and trigger the change in the mindset 
and  determination  of  public  officers  so  as  to  assist  in  delivering  the  economic  agenda  of  
Government to achieve the Second Economic Miracle and Vision 2030. 

In line with Government agenda to reinforce the concept of accountability in the civil 
service, we have also successfully introduced another bold initiative, namely the Executive 

 

60 

Performance Management Review which is a reporting system or organisational performance 
for  Supervising  Officers  in  charge  of  Ministries/Departments  based  on  their  specific  key 
performance indicators. 

In the light of this major breakthrough, the Performance Management System is now 
covering  all  public  officers  from  top  to  bottom.  PMS  is  expected  to  become  a  major 
instrument for transforming the public service into an acting driving force for spearheading 
national reforms and instilling a performance culture where public officers actually deliver 
and are rewarded for their performance according to a concept, I will say: earn as you work. 

The HRMIS which is a priority project of my Ministry and a valuable tool to assist in 
a  strategic  human  resource  planning  and  management  has  reached  a  crucial  stage  in  its 
implementation. In fact, the HR and payroll modules have reached the user acceptance test 
phase and the system is expected to be fully utilised in about 40 Ministries/Departments by 
June 2017. The implementation of HRMIS will, in itself, constitute a major transformation in 
processing  the  monthly  payroll  of  public  officers  through  the  elimination  of  several  time-
consuming manual activities. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  coming  into  operation  of  the  HRMIS  will  no  doubt  run  the 
simpler the Management of Human Resources in the complex of environment in the Civil 
Service. In effect, this strategic tool will in the near future bring tangible benefits by reducing 
considerably  the  process  time  of  all  HR  related  activities.  Productivity  at  work  will 
considerably increase and Ministries/Departments will be able to focus more on its strategic 
HR through judicious use of the human resources. 

In addition, the electronic attendance system which is gradually replacing the manual 
attendance register is being upgraded to provide for, inter alia, a seamless interface with the 
HRMIS and to run the control of attendance at work more effective. 

There are other reform initiatives, Madam Speaker. Government’s strategy for Public 
Service  Reform  is  that  services  must  be  responsive  to  the  needs  and  aspirations  of  their 
customers. This undoubtedly requires a bad understanding of what makes customers satisfy 
and how this can be measured. In this perspective, my Ministry will ensure that the quality 
culture instilled across the civil service is reinforced through the continued implementation of 
the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Counter service and customer care; 

ISO Certification, and 

 

61 

(iii) 

Public Service Excellence Award to give due recognition for excellence. 

It is, indeed, a matter of pride that for the first time, industry of the Civil Service of 
Mauritius, a Customer Satisfaction Survey has been successfully carried out by my Ministry 
in  collaboration  with  Statistics  to  measure  how  far  people  are  satisfied  with  the  level  of 
service delivery. The survey which initially covered all the Civil Status Officers across the 
island will be extended to other sectors as well as the result published for public knowledge 
in due course.  

Mystery shopping is being carried out in 10 selected organisations to ensure delivery 
of  quality  services  to  customers.  My  Ministry  is  investing  in  capacity  building  to  train  a 
dedicated  team  of  officers  to  enable  mystery  shopping  to  be  carried  out  on  an  ongoing 
process at any time of the year and in any organisation. 

On the other hand, the number of ISO Certification Projects which cover divisions, 
sections  of  Ministries/Departments  are  on  the  increase.  My  Ministry  is  now  providing 
training to some 150 facilitators across the Civil Service to enable the already ISO Certified 
Organisation. 

Madam  Speaker,  Civil  Service  Reforms,  another  unprecedented  initiative  worth 
highlighting  relates  to  the  formulation  of  a  Civil  Service  Reform  Strategy  incorporating  a 
human resource strategy as well as a capacity building strategy. 

My  Ministry  has,  in  fact,  received  technical  assistance  from  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat since April 2016 with a view to enabling Government to undertake strategic Civil 
Service reform using a holistic approach. In this endeavour, the Consultant has carried out 
wide  consultations  with  various  stakeholders,  including  public  officers  of  different  grades, 
administrative, technical and operative at different levels, representative of the private sector, 
the civil society and those of trade unions of the Civil Service. 

The reform strategy will cover the three main pillars of people process and technology 
and  will  be  complemented  by  an  action  plan,  the  reform  strategy  along  with  their 
accompanying implementation matrix are expected to be ready by end  2017. I am confident 
that this Reform Strategy will chalk the way forward for the next 10 years in line with Vision 
2030. 

Madam Speaker, we are conscious of the problem of employment prevailing in the 
country  for  the  past  years  and  we  are  committed  to  reduce  unemployment,  in  particular, 
among our youth. 

 

62 

In Budget 2015-2016, funds were provided for the filling of 7,446 promotional and 
entry vacant posts in the Civil Service. I am proud to announce that around 5,000 of these 
vacancies - Oh, my God, nothing has been done! Somebody said that – have been filled as at 
June  2016.  For  the  Budget  2016-2017,  I  am  grateful  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development for providing funds for the recruitment of 7,200 new entrants in the 
Civil Service. 

Madam Speaker, since my taking office in the Ministry, I have given much attention 
to our more valuable assets which while harnessing public officers to provide an effective 
service delivery to our citizens. We must also promote the welfare and ensure that they have 
a  work  life  balance  at  the  same  time.  With  this  concern  at  heart,  we  have  introduced  the 
following new schemes – 

(i) 

(ii) 

The flexible working arrangement, and 

The Government Medical Insurance Scheme. 

The Flexible Work Arrangement Scheme is meant to be implemented across the civil 
service  for  officers  working  on  a  five-day  week  basis  with  a  view  to  improving  overall 
efficiency in the Civil Service for longer hours of office operation and reduce lateness and 
extended service to our customers. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to explain this because a lot of people do not understand 
why  public  officers  can  come  at  the  time  they  want.  But,  in  fact,  it  is  the  time  that  we 
implement. There are three slots. The first slot starts one hour earlier than the usual time and 
then the usual time and then one hour later than the normal time. Thus, we have given the 
Civil Service a much longer day. We have earned two more hours of office opening in the 
public service and this is at no cost at all. So, this is something that is really good. If we have 
to calculate how much costs 8 hours per day, these are billions and two hours more have cost 
nothing to this Government.  So, this is something that is really good. If we have to calculate 
how much cost 8 hours a day, these are billions and 2 hours more has cost nothing to this 
Government. 

 Moreover, it provides more flexibility to officers to attend and leave office at times 
which  are  more  convenient  to  them,  thus  enabling  them  to  attend  to  their  own  family 
commitments,  enhancing  the  work  life  balance  of  public  officers  and  ultimately  reducing 
stress. I have always believed that when people are happy they have a better performance at 
work. Moreover, the Scheme has been introduced on a pilot basis in my Ministry as from 01 

 

63 

October 2015 and extended to seven of the Ministries/Departments as from January 2016. It 
will gradually be replicated across the Civil Service. 

The  Medical  Insurance  Scheme  is  being  spearheaded  by  my  Ministry  as  from  this 
year. It would consist of a Basic Plan where its premium would be on a cost sharing basis, 
that is, the 50% Government contribution to be matched by 50% employee’s contribution. 
The Scheme will be optional, and enable public officers to have access to a wider array of 
medical facilities. Consultations have been held with all stakeholders including trade unions 
and the scheme would be implemented by January 2017.  

Madam Speaker, the successful implementation of the Scheme will result in a healthy 
workforce in the Civil Service, reduce pressure in our public hospitals and contribute in the 
development of a medical hub. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  new  era  of  development,  the  human  capital  would  play  a 
significant  role  and  consequently  safety  and  health  would  remain  a  key  element.  Safety, 
health and welfare issues are important factors of life in any business, be it public or private. 
While compliance with legislation is a major factor, the development of an effective safety 
and health culture would be beneficial by encouraging safer working practices through the 
Occupational Safety and Health Management System. My Ministry will continuously support 
the creation of the necessary conditions to render the work environment conducive to inspire 
and improve the morale of public officers. 

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to inform that since my assumption as Minister of Civil 
Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  I  have  always  ensured  that  public  officers  work  in  a 
healthy  environment.  A  gymnasium  is  operational  in  my  Ministry  for  the  benefit  of  my 
officers.  In addition to the provision of sports and gym facilities, I have a dream to put in 
place a public service food court in order to promote healthy eating habits and healthy/bio 
food as well as to reinforce social networking relationships in a desired work/life balance. I 
am convinced that healthy officers can better perform and this will positively impact on the 
whole service.  

Madam Speaker, let me now come to another Ministry for which I am responsible, 
namely  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management. And, I am thankful to hon. Raj Dayal who has spoken a lot on it recently in his 
speech.  

 

64 

Sustainable  development  is  at  the  core  of  this  Budget  and  it  is  also  the  engine  of 
growth, innovation and  productivity to pave the way for  a  greener Mauritius. This Budget 
has, in fact, put in place the required enablers to accelerate our shift to a more sustainable 
society.  

This  Budget  has  brought  a  new  outlook  on  environmental  sustainability  through  a 
plethora of measures to promote sustainable practices in sectors such as agriculture, energy, 
water, blue economy, tourism, land use planning, transport, amongst others. 

The  creation  of  an  agri-business  park  on  a  demonstration  basis  will  showcase  the 
potential  for  symbiosis  between  planters  and  breeders  in  terms  of  waste  management  and 
resource use. Furthermore, the provision made for an exclusive and modern bio-farming zone 
as  well  as  levy  on  pesticides  and  agro-chemicals  will  accelerate  our  efforts  towards 
sustainable  agriculture,  safer  food  and  conservation  of  ecosystem  services.  Investment  in 
sophisticated laboratory  equipment for the testing of fruits and vegetables will support our 
efforts towards eco-labelling. With regard to energy efficiency, I am particularly pleased to 
note  the  economic  instruments  proposed  to  promote  sustainable  consumption.  For  the 
renewable  energy  sector,  there  are  exciting  provisions  to  accommodate  the  production  of 
electricity from local renewable sources. What is more interesting to note is the potential for 
the creation of green jobs in this particular sector. 

Madam Speaker, while talking about environment we should not forget that our ocean 
and our lagoons are also of prime importance. Our actions towards the preservation of our 
biodiversity should be in line with the measures ratified during the COP 21. In so doing, we 
can win on every front.  

I firmly believe that appropriate measures are necessary regarding navigation, nautical 
activities and even artisanal fishing in our lagoons. It is of utmost importance to do what is 
right  instead  of  having  recourse  to  traditional  measures  and  actions  which  may  have 
destructive effects. We should not also succumb to lobbies which may often have negative 
consequences for Government and the population.  

Let  us  not  forget  that  the  climate  change  is  already  happening  and  I  would  like  to 
congratulate hon. Pravind Jugnauth for the measures announced in the Budget and which are 
in line with the protection of environment. 

Madam Speaker, we all know that our lagoons are dying and when I talked to the hon. 
Prem and he always said that we have to change the habits of people fishing. I had the idea 

 

65 

when I was recently in a meeting in Nairobi where we were asking to protect the elephants 
and  the  wildlife  because  there  are  lots  of  poachers  who  kill  the  elephants  and  the  natives. 
From one elephant they get about $50 only. They have been taught how to let the animal live 
and with the lifespan of the elephant that person, instead of earning $50, could earn with his 
family $50,000. It is because they have tourism, the tourists come and visit the elephants over 
the span of life that make them earn more money. 

I had the same thought here when I said all the fishes in our lagoons don’t deserve to 
be taken by fishermen because the tourists want to put some snorkels and be safe like rightly 
said by our Leader of PMSD, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval. We need these tourists. They want to 
come and swim and see. He wants to remove more motorised activities in the lagoons and 
this will promote for a nicer and cleaner lagoon, and maybe we can save our beaches. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  highlight  the  main  achievements  of  my  Ministry  that 
support  the  vision  of  Government.  Enhancing  resilience,  green  economy  and  sustainable 
development:  adaptation  to  and  mitigation  of  climate  change  remain  our  priority.  The 
Ministry  of  Environment  is  already  engaged  in  various  activities  to  adapt  to  the  adverse 
impacts of climate change and mitigate greenhouse gas emission, including – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Development  of  a  Mauritius  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contributions 
(INDCs)  submitted  in  the  context  of  COP  21.  The  House  will  note  that 
Mauritius was among the first countries to sign and ratify the Paris Agreement 
on climate change; 

Development  of  a  Guideline  for  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Strategy  on 
Costal Setback with the collaboration of the Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA); 

(iii)  Development  and 

implementation  of 

the  Climate  Change  Charter 

in 

collaboration with local authorities. 

Furthermore,  I  am  delighted  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  has  recently 
secured  a  grant  of  USD  1.6  million  under  the  Global  Environment  Facility  for  the 
implementation  of  our  nationally  appropriate  mitigation  actions  for  a  Low  Carbon  Island 
Development Strategy in the wind power sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  coastal  zone,  which  is  of  a  vital  importance  to  the  socio-
economic  development  of  Mauritius,  is  subject  to  degradation  as  a  result  of  land  and  sea-
based activities and climate change.  

 

66 

A continuous coastal rehabilitation programme is being undertaken at priority eroded 
sites  based  on  the  recommendation  made  under  different  expert  studies.  Works  have  been 
undertaken at critical eroded sites, namely Grand’ Baie, Pointe aux Sables, Poudre d’Or, Cap 
Malheureux, Quatre Soeurs, Grande Rivière Sud Est, Bain Bœuf, Baie du Cap, La Prairie, La 
Preneuse,  Le  Morne,  Grand  Sable,  Grand  Port  and  Roches  Noires.  To  further  support  our 
national effort, a grant of $9 m. from the Adaptation Fund has enabled my Ministry together 
with  relevant  stakeholders  to  improve  coastal  ecosystem  services  and  implement  an  early 
warning system for storm surges for the coastal zone. 

With  regard  to  preparedness  to  disasters,  a  dedicated  refuge  centre  is  being 
constructed at Quatre Soeurs. We think this initiative major coastal protection works will be 
undertaken at Mon Choisy and Rivière des Galets. My Ministry, Madam Speaker, is already 
focusing on the greening of the economy and promoting a sustainable production. We have 
already  embarked  on  an  ambitious  capacity  building  programme  under  the  Switch  Africa 
Green Project in partnership with the UNDP and UNOPS. Green practices and responsible 
behaviours in the agriculture, manufacturing and tourism sector are being encouraged. 

In  addition,  a  policy  reviewed  exercise  carried  out  very  recently  has  enabled  us 
identify significant potential to further green these sectors and create a plethora of green jobs. 
By  embracing  cleaner  production  technique,  industrial  symbiosis  and  waste  minimisation, 
SMEs can aim at increasing productivity and maximising profits. As Mauritius is drawing 
industrially and economically new emerging waste streams such as electrical and electronic 
waste,  construction  and  demolition  waste  and  industrial  waste  including  hazardous  waste 
have become matters of serious concern at the current rate of Municipal waste generation, the 
Mare Chicose Landfill is expected to reach saturation by end 2018. Against this backdrop, 
my Ministry has taken the following main initiatives - 

• 

• 
• 

• 

construction of an interim hazardous waste storage  facility  at  La Chaumière 
where some 100 tons of hazardous waste will be stored temporarily by June 
2017; 
awaiting eventual shipping to licensed treatment facilities abroad;  
an  e-waste  management  system  is  expected  to  become  operational  by  April 
2017. This will be a public/private partnership initiative, and   
financial  support  from  l’Agence  Française  de  Développement  has  already 
been  secured  for  development  of  a  new  strategy  and  Action  Plan  for  solid 
waste management and resource recovery system for Mauritius.   

 

67 

Madam Speaker, another milestone towards sustainable consumption is the banning 
of plastics bags and as from 01 January 2016, we have witnessed a change in the mindset of 
both consumers and producers. Local manufactures have also diversified their activities by 
producing bio-degradable plastic bags and more eco-friendly bags. The provisions made in 
this  Budget  to  encourage  waste  minimisation  and  promote  resource  efficiency  are  indeed 
highly commendable.  We will, in fact, sustain this scheme on solar water heater, rain water 
harvesting and composting.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  line  with  the  2016/2017  Budget  towards  streamlining  the 
licencing mechanism, my Ministry is setting up an EIA e-licencing platform.  This platform 
will enable more efficient parameting procedure and considerably decrease paper use. Proper 
enforcement  of  environmental  legislation  and  monitoring  of  environmental  parameters  are 
critical to ensure a healthy environment for our fellow citizens. To better cope with emerging 
challenges  and  improve  environmental  and  public  health,  my  Ministry  will  review  the 
Environment  Protection  Act  for  better  protection  of  the  environment,  strengthen  the  air 
quality monitoring through a network of fixation and review a number of standards including 
drinking water and effluent discharge.   

Madam  Speaker,  we  will  continue  with  the  embellishment  and  upgrading  of  our 
physical  environment  as  it  is  a  key  element  towards  improving  the  quality  of  life  of  our 
citizens and market Mauritius as a green tourist destination. We will also upgrade our public 
beaches through provision of amenities and by ensuring safety and security of public beaches.  
For  example,  we  are  setting  up  some  towers  where  we  will  have  lifesavers  and  these 
lifesavers  are  usually  from  volunteers  such  as  Wildlife  Saving  Society  and  the  Surf  Life 
Saving Society, which are offering their services, but we have to help them.   

We all know that climate change is causing frequent and extreme weather events with 
dramatic  consequences.    We  have  no  choice  than  to  be  better  prepared  to  save  lives  and 
properties.  In  this  context,  a  comprehensive  National  Disaster  Scheme  2015  has  been 
prepared to enable stakeholders to better understand and assume their respective roles before, 
during  and  after  disasters.    Furthermore,  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and 
Management  Act  which  has  already  been  promulgated  provides  for  the  prevention  and 
reduction  of  the  risk  of  disasters,  mitigation  of  the  adverse  impact  of  disasters,  disasters 
preparedness,  effective  response  to  disasters  and  management  of  post  disaster  activities 
including  recovery  and  rehabilitation.    Some  40  simulation  exercises  have  so  far  been 
conducted  to  enhance  the  preparedness  of  agencies  and  local  communities  against  natural 

 

68 

disasters such as flooding, tsunami and landslides among others.  Moreover, a national Multi-
Hazard Early Warning and Emergency Alert System is being implemented to provide alert in 
a timely and reliable manner. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that  Mauritius  will  have  the 
privilege  to  host  the  6th  session  of  the  Africa  Regional  Platform  and  the  5th  High  Level 
Meeting  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  the  team  implementing  Sendai  Framework  in 
Africa.    In  collaboration  with  UNISDR  Regional  Office  for  Africa  and  the  African  Union 
from 22 to 25 November 2016, we are expecting some 600 delegates including 50 Ministers 
from the African Continent.  Mauritius would benefit both in terms of capacity building and 
visibility at regional and international levels. 

Before  concluding,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  not  my  habit  to  reply,  but  I  have  today, 
unfortunately,  to  reply.    There  are  a  few  issues,  like  I  have  just  heard  hon.  Ganoo  talking 
about the Gorges de Rivière Noire and about the damages that are being caused. I have to 
say, unfortunately, I have been there together with hon. Baboo and hon. Seeruttun.  We did 
not want to leave Port Louis and go all the way in the mud because it was rainy and then to 
come here to make some false declarations. I have seen with my eyes and I witnessed it. 

(Interruptions) 

You did!   I cannot understand.  Maybe we can  go together again because all  I have seen, 
there is nothing. The trees are not being cut. There is a plan - I will tell you just now – called 
PAN.  I made a mistake with the press when I said it was POL.  It is not POL it is PAN. This 
programme is cutting all the invasive bushes, trees that are damaging our native forests.  This 
plan has been going on since 7 years.  Of course, you take a picture of a tree that has been 
cut, it can make a lot of damage, but you have to go and see.  I would be the first one to alert 
and say no to it.  These are pictures.  We know what we can do with pictures. We can go 
together. I invite you.  It is not my habit to do that.  It was clean and we are promoting a film 
industry.   

(Interruptions) 

When you have a community that use a track, it is a very bad habit that they all believe that it 
is  their  track  and  nobody  else  should  come  on  that  track.    There  is  nothing  wrong. 
Concerning JCB, it was not a JCB.  It was an elevator. 

(Interruptions) 

 

69 

A crane!  There was absolutely no activity. Press were there, the gentlemen were there! 

Madam Speaker:  Do not refer to the Press! 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:    It  is  a  fact.  I  don’t  want  to  say  any  bad  word  in  this 
Assembly. I never did and I don’t want to start. But I can assure the House, everything was 
nice and clean there and they were doing it in respect. Concerning the Morne also, I don’t 
understand why they said: “It is only Tamtam PMSD”, or whatever it was called.  Gamat!   

(Interruptions) 

I know, I am sorry hon. Xavier.  It is not the habit of PMSD to reply to these, but I have to 
tell it.  There was a big orange.  It was not the sun, it was hon. Toussaint with his orange 
shirt.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please, you can’t do this, hon. Abbas Mamode! 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:    There  was  the  Vice-President  of  the  Republic  who  was 

together there.  Hon. Roopun, hon. Boissézon. 

(Interruptions) 

You can lift up your hands those who were there! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please, don’t do this hon. Wong Yen Cheong! Continue, without 

involving others! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: My apologies, Madam Speaker.  Everything was respected. 
Concerning a track when people go to visit; what kind of safety can we offer?  Have we ever 
seen anywhere at Gorges de la Rivière Noire; what kind of more safety than just cleaning a 
track when people go at their own pace and at their own risk. What shall we do?  Shall we put 
handrails  and  make  a  degradation  of  the  environment?    No,  it  should  be  left  as  natural  as 
possible.   

Okay, I will stop here,  hon. Xavier Duval.  We always listen! 

(Interruptions) 

 

70 

Madame  la  présidente  j’ai  toujours  eu  de  l’admiration  pour  ce  gouvernement. 
Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  saisir  cette  occasion  et  dire  ces  quelques  lignes  que  je 
viens d’écrire pour souligner que contrairement aux spéculations, ‘l’Alliance Lepep’ est plus 
unie  que  jamais.  Non  seulement  par  la  confiance,  la  collaboration  qui  existe  entre  les 
partenaires qui sont le MSM, le PMSD et le ML mais aussi parce que nous avons un leader 
en  l’honorable  Sir  Anerrod  Jugnauth  qui  donne  la  motivation  nécessaire  et  qui  inspire  le 
gouvernement tout entier afin que nous puissions honorer l’engagement pris en 2014. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, ce serait une omission de ma part si je ne reconnaissais pas la 
confiance que l’honorable Premier ministre place en nous, et en particulier la confiance qu’il 
a dans le PMSD et en moi-même, en me confiant la responsabilité de diriger un deuxième 
ministère.  Je  voudrais  remercier  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  pour  cette  confiance  et  je  peux  lui 
assurer que je ferai de mon mieux pour honorer cette confiance et que je serai à la hauteur de 
cette responsabilité qui m’a été confiée. 

Comme je le disais plus tôt, certains répandent des rumeurs de soi-disant tension entre 
les partenaires de ‘l’Alliance Lepep’, mais je dois préciser que le PMSD n’est pas un adepte 
de la culture de fuir devant ses responsabilités, ni de répondre, ni d’écouter parce que vous 
venez d’entendre mon leader qui m’a dit de ne pas parler, de ne pas répondre.   

(Interruptions) 

Nous tenons nos engagements en tant que partenaire d’une alliance. L’année dernière dans 
cette même auguste assemblée lors des débats budgétaires, j’avais souligné qu’il doit y avoir 
une confiance mutuelle entre les partenaires. Et j’avais insisté que le PMSD a toujours été 
loyal  tout  en  honorant  les  engagements  pris  vis-à-vis  de  la  population.  Je  peux  assurer  la 
Chambre et la population que nous, au PMSD, nous n’allons pas déroger à ce principe. De 
plus, au PMSD, nous avons un leader qui opère plus comme un entrepreneur.  Résultat lor 
résultat, ce n’est pas un slogan creux! Nous avons réussi dans tout ce que nous entreprenons 
car au PMSD nous ne prêtons aucune attention aux rumeurs, aux spéculations, aux palabres et 
aux  machinations  des  agents  déstabilisateurs  qui  ne  veulent  rien  d’autre  que  l’échec  de  ce 
gouvernement.   

Nous  restons  concentrés  sur  nos  objectifs  et  nos  engagements  pris  envers  nos 
partenaires. Contrairement à ce qui est publié dans la presse, débités par les oiseaux mauvais 
augure…  

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

71 

Mr Wong Yen Choeng : Le respect mutuel existe  bel et bien entre chaque partenaire 
de l’alliance. Nous n’hésitons jamais à unir nos efforts afin de nous entraider pour le bien de 
l’alliance  du  pays.  Je  citerai  comme  exemple,  l’honorable  Showkutally  Soodhun,  qui  n’a 
jamais  hésité  à  tendre  la  main  à  tous  les  membres  des  partis  de  notre  alliance 
gouvernementale. 

(Interruptions) 

J’ai  toujours  eu  de  l’admiration  pour  l’autre  leader  de  l’alliance,  le  vice-premier  ministre, 
l’honorable Ivan Collendavelloo.  

(Interruptions) 

Je n’oublierai jamais ce que Sir Gaëtan Duval, de qui j’étais très proche, avait souhaité, que 
ce soit son ami Ivan Collendavelloo qui lise son oraison funèbre.  Il me l’avait confié. De 
plus je ne connais pas beaucoup de députés qui pour laver leur honneur, avait démissionné de 
l’Assemblée nationale.  Bravo!  

Alors qu’un massacre de 60-0 s’annonçait en notre défaveur… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Baloomoody ! 

Mr Wong Yen Choeng : Je peux vous assurer qu’aucun membre de ce gouvernement 
n’a pris part aux élections pour prendre le pouvoir parce qu’un massacre de 60-0 s’annonçait 
contre nous. Nous étions là pour défendre notre pays parce que nous n’étions pas d’accord 
avec la deuxième République et tout ce qui s’ensuivait. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, interruptions please! Hon. Quirin, I just drew your attention! 

No interruptions ! 

Order ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Please, continue! 

 

72 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Choeng:  Nous  sommes  là  aujourd’hui  et  ce,  grâce  à  deux  agents 
exceptionnels  qui  ont  abattu  un  travail  énorme  en  termes  de  communication  pour  que 
‘l’Alliance  Lepep’  prenne  les  commandes  du  gouvernement.  Malheureusement,  l’un  deux 
était  assis  de  l’autre  côté  de  la  Chambre  et  l’autre  attend  l’issue  de  son  procès  pour  une 
affaire  de  coffre  si  je  ne  m’abuse.  Alors  ces  deux  agents  nous  ont  vraiment  permis  de 
communiquer,  ont  tout  fait  pour  que  nous  remportions  ces  élections  et  former  le 
gouvernement.  Je  ne  pourrais  jamais  les  remercier  suffisamment  de  m’avoir  permis  de 
m’asseoir de ce côté de la Chambre. 

(Interruptions) 

Et de diriger aujourd’hui deux ministères. 

(Interruptions) 

Des  palabres  il  y  en  a,  et  il  y  en  aura!  Je  peux  rencontrer  des  gens  de  l’autre  côté  de  la 
Chambre  qui  sont  mes  amis  et  je  ne  le  nierai  jamais,  Madame  la  présidente.  Je  pourrai 
toujours  dialoguer  et  ce  n’est  pas  pour  cela  que  nous  sommes  en  train  de  ‘casser’  le 
gouvernement  parce  que  j’ai  le  droit  de  parler  à  tous  les  membres  de  cette  Chambre  et 
j’espère que j’aurai toujours le droit de le faire. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude by stating some ten key strategies enunciated 
by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. Chart a clear path for the future 
of our country.  Through this Budget, Government has clearly expressed its firm intention to 
play  its  role  fully  as  a  facilitator  to  achieve  sustainable  development.  It  is  now  up  to  all 
stakeholders to assume the responsibilities.  We need to ensure that our efforts are integrated 
and our actions are harmonised. It is only then that we will ensure a legacy for our future 
generation.  

Madame  la  présidente,  je  pensais  à  cela  tout  à  l’heure,  permettez-moi  de  citer  une 
parole de Jésus-Christ, quoi que je n’ai pas l’envie de faire la messe ici.  Dans son sermon sur 
la montagne… 

(Interruptions) 

Il disait ‘Pourquoi vois-tu la paille qui est dans l'œil de ton frère, et n'aperçois-tu pas la poutre 
qui  est  dans  ton  œil?  Hypocrite,  ôte  premièrement  la  poutre  de  ton  œil,  et  alors  tu  verras 
comment ôter la paille qui est dans l'œil de ton voisin.” 

 

73 

(Interruptions) 

There are two small things on which I want to conclude. First, it is because I talked to the 
hon. Attorney General, and it is concerning the certificat de moralité. 

Madame la présidente,  malheureusement, nous savons qu’à Maurice le  certificat de 
moralité est servi par certaines personnes d’une façon abusive, parce que souvent quelqu’un 
qui a petit délit est condamné à vie carrément, et je crois que l’Attorney General, à qui on a 
parlé, va faire le nécessaire. 

Pour terminer sur une bonne note, Madame la présidente, ce matin j’ai eu une bonne 
nouvelle, et je tiens à l’annoncer. J’ai pu négocier avec Air Mauritius pour que tous les public 
servants  aient  15%  de  rebate  at  the  lowest  seasonal  cost  et  ainsi  que  les  membres  de  la 
famille. 

(Interruptions) 

A bord d’Air Mauritius. Alors, pour étendre cette joie, je dirai que cela s’applique à tous les 
membres du Parlement et ainsi qu’aux membres de l’opposition et à leurs familles. 

Je terminerai sur cette note en disant merci beaucoup. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Collendavelloo! 

(7.11 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): It is late in the day, but the night is still young. So, let us start and try and 
make the night, I don’t know about sweet, but I know about short. 

Madame  la  présidente,  l’an  dernier,  en  avril,  j’étais  debout  de  ce  même  côté,  et 
j’écoutais le discours du budget de l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo, et par la suite, quelques 
jours après, je pris moi-même la parole. Nous étions en période de transition ; pour nombre 
d’entre  nous,  une  transition  personnelle,  professionnelle,  qui  s’abattait  sur  nous,  alors  que, 
franchement, nous ne nous attendions pas. Mais, pour le pays, une transition extraordinaire, 
car le budget Lutchmeenaraidoo préparait le pays pour l’année qui allait suivre. 

Aujourd’hui, la transition cède le pas à la certitude, car tous les mouvements qu’on a 
pu connaître, aujourd’hui s’estompent devant une certitude : l’unanimité inédite de toutes les 
forces politiques, à part l’honorable Mohamed, autour du budget. 

(Interruptions) 

 

74 

Madam Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Le  développement  annoncé  par  l’honorable  ministre  des 
Finances,  Pravind  Jugnauth,  est  extraordinaire.  D’abord,  ce  souci  du  sustainable 
development, tel que préconisé par le Premier ministre dans sa Vision 2030. Rendons-nous 
compte ! Contrairement à ce que certains commentateurs ont pu dire. C’est le droit fil de la 
politique  édicté  par  l’Alliance  Lepep  depuis  les  élections.  Développement  en  préservant 
l’environnement.  Oui,  le  développement,  pas  seulement  durable,  mais  le  développement 
renouvelable et renouvelé. Mais surtout, contrairement à ce que nous avons connu pendant 10 
ans,  où  nous  avions  une  philosophie  économique  édictée  par  le  Très-Haut  Navinchandra 
Ramgoolam :  Empower  the  rich,  so  that  the  crumbs  get  to  the  poor!  C’était  ça  cette 
philosophie ! Et c’est cela qui a mené la population à vouloir effectuer la transition. 

Aujourd’hui, c’est la protection des classes sociales. C’est là le désir de protéger ceux 
qui sont au bas de l’échelle, ceux qui vivent dans ce pays, en se demandant : ‘Mais comment 
ça se fait qu’il y ait le sentiment que nous vivons dans deux pays ?’ Et c’est ce que s’efforce à 
combler l’honorable ministre des Finances. Et c’est ceci que j’ai suivi comme philosophie au 
niveau  de  mon  ministère,  au  niveau  de  mon  action  politique  depuis  que  j’ai  la  charge  du 
ministère de l’Energie et des Utilités publiques. 

Au tout début de mon mandat, j’étais confronté par le problème CT Power. CT Power 
voulait dire 100 mégawatts de puissance en moins pour le pays. Il fallait faire quelque chose. 
Je fis appel à deux personnes. Un que j’ai nommé comme président du comité de direction de 
la CEB, M. Naidoo. Je ne le connaissais pas avant. Je le connaissais d’à peine quelques mois, 
mais  qui  m’avait  frappé  par  un  esprit  d’intelligence  très  pointu,  une  connaissance  du 
business ; il était le conseiller personnel du président de la République de Madagascar, ainsi 
que  du  président  de  la  Tanzanie.  C’est  quelqu’un  comme  ça  que  je  veux.  Et  en  deuxième 
temps, en faisant appel à Gérard Hebrard. 

Laissez-moi  dire  un  mot  sur  deux  personnes  qui  ne  s’attendent  pas  à  ce  que  je  les 
nomme  aujourd’hui.  C’est  M.  Naroo  et  M.  Tanoo.  Dès  ma  prise  en  fonction,  j’ai  eu  des 
entretiens avec eux, et ils ont tout de suite compris qu’il fallait absolument m’aider dans cette 
tâche et que, eux, ils n’avaient plus leur place au CEB. Je leur rends un hommage public, 
aujourd’hui, car ils m’ont facilité la tâche. Sans eux, s’ils avaient voulu faire obstacle et que 
j’avais à utiliser la loi, je n’aurais pas fait cette transition d’une façon aussi facile que cela. M. 
Naroo n’est pas mon ami, mais je tiens à dire les faits tels qu’ils sont. 

 

75 

Après CT Power, le Leader de l’opposition a exprimé avec justesse, avec raison, son 
accord  avec  moi  qu’il  y  avait  un  problème :  l’insuffisance  de  la  puissance  électrique  pour 
assurer l’électricité à la nation, en cours de blackout. C’est ainsi que dès décembre, je disais à 
la  presse :  « La  situation  est  inconfortable »,  et  à  cette  Chambre  “there  is  no  room  for 
optimism, but we are not in doomsday scenario. ” C’était un challenge, un défi que j’ai pris. 
Je  ne  suis  pas  ingénieur.  Jamais  je  n’ai  fait  ces  choses,  mais  j’ai  rassemblé  mes  équipes 
techniques, et on a travaillé. 

Ces réunions étaient dures parce qu’elles étaient des réunions faites dans la discrétion, 
sans publicité tapageuse, sans tam-tam, sans pouvoir dire ce qui se passait, mais à rassurer le 
Premier ministre sur l’action ministérielle que je menais.  Et c’est ainsi que, petit à petit, nous 
avons échafaudé un programme pour nous assurer de la pérennité de l’électricité.  Le Leader 
de l’Opposition en fit un cheval de bataille ; au départ, d’une façon très compatissante envers 
moi, en se disant presque dans quel pétrin tu t’es foutu.  Le 1er avril 2015, nous voyons dans 
le Hansard – 

 

“I  believe  the  risk  is  very  real  that  we  have  not  a  general  blackout,  but  rolling 
blackouts, cuts here and there all over the place.  As from the end of the year, the 
CEB is being, according to me, over-optimistic (…).” 

Et il me cite, à juste raison, pour venir dire : «  mais vous aussi, vous êtes en accord avec 
moi ; ce qui est vrai. » 

Un peu plus loin, il dit – 

 

“I think we can agree to disagree on our assessment of how serious, and how big the 
risk of rolling blackouts; (…)” 

 La différence était dans la mesure et non pas dans le fond.  C’est un peu comme les drogues 
synthétiques : sont-elles alarmantes ou sérieuses ?  On se bat dans la syntaxe et c’est ce qui se 
passait  entre le Leader de l’Opposition et moi.  Et le Leader de l’Opposition citant,  toujours 
à juste raison - nous sommes en avril - ce qui se passe en Afrique du Sud le 1er avril.  Quinze 
jours plus tard, le 14 avril 2015, il dit – 

 

« Le troisième danger qui nous menace, d’après moi, Madam Speaker, - discours du 
budget – et celui d’une crise dans la fourniture d’électricité avec des rolling blackouts 
comme actuellement en Afrique du Sud ou au Ghana. (…)  Madam Speaker… » 

C’est lui qui dit cela. 

 

 

76 

« …  le  risque  de  rolling  blackouts  –  entendez-moi  –  à  partir  de  fin  2015  est 
malheureusement bien réel. » 

The  seat  was  uncomfortable  when  you  hear  that  sort  of  language  from  somebody  like  the 
Leader of the Opposition and when you are in charge of that very Ministry.  My nightmare of 
a country in the dark was not serial at all, because, after all, the Leader of the Opposition is 
not  somebody  who  speaks  lightly.    And  this  went  on  in  a  very  nice  manner  between  the 
Leader of the Opposition and me, but then, a change occurred in June, and that is important to 
note.  In June, the whole tone, the whole political tone changes.  Because on 14 June, because 
of the legislative defeat, finally, the Leader of the Opposition knew what he was tracing.  It 
was clear; the writings were on the wall.  60-0 was gone!  On the contrary, the threat of 60-0 
was on the other side!  But for the Municipal elections, there was room for optimism.  They 
did a better campaign during the Municipal elections than during the legislative.  Because, 
first  of  all,  they  were  free  to  conduct  that  campaign;  the  MMM  was  free  to  conduct  its 
campaign as it wanted,  and the MMM knows how to campaign.  But  I  also know how to 
campaign! 

(Interruptions) 

So, we had good campaigners on both sides!  That was a tough campaign!  We predicted the 
victory at the Municipal elections, but could we have thought that our young dynamic team of 
Ward I, Stanley, would win haut la main?  Could we have thought that the MMM would not 
have been able to rescue such a candidate as Mr Toussaint… 

(Interruptions) 

I mean,  I  felt very sorry for him; he is such a nice man and he has done so much for the 
Municipality.  Again, it is good that we render him homage.  But, could we have predicted 
that?  I don’t know about the other towns.  I know for Beau Bassin/Rose Hill where I was 
conducting the campaign and I remember the day of the elections and of the results of the 14th 
of June when we came with 120-0.  Now, that was a killing blow!    As from that time, the 
tone changed between the MMM and us.  And between the Leader of the Opposition and me, 
I regret to say that, because I have been working with him for 35 years.  Then, the attacks 
became personal: ‘You don’t know what  you are doing! To pas comprend narien!  Li pas 
comprend narien! Narien!’ All sorts of accusations! Diminishing me in my personality and 
that I would never be able to do what I am saying that I was doing.  It was necessary for the 
Leader of the Opposition to say that because it was necessary to enhance the morale of the 

 

77 

troops, and then a campaign started.  C’était le spectre du blackout! Le blackout était devenu 
fictif  arrivé  en  juin.    Je  venais  à  la  Chambre,  je  venais  démontrer  qu’il  n’y  avait  plus  de 
possibilité de rolling blackouts de par les stratégies que j’avais dirigées – mes techniciens à 
pourvoir  pour  empêcher  cela.    C’était  clair ;  tout  le  monde  me  donnait  raison,  mais  la 
campagne,    elle,  allait  en  s’accentuant.    Jusqu’au  moment  en  novembre,  où,  l’apogée,  le 
paroxysme du journal ‘L’Express’ : risque de blackout ! 

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Lundi le 09 novembre, la veille de Divali, on tire un article 
 
comme ça !  On traumatise toute une population en disant :  «  Blackout ! Le CEB, dos au 
mur ! » Quel dos au mur?  On avait la situation en main et ils le savaient.  De mauvaise foi !  
On traumatise une population, on vient dire blackout la veille de Divali !  A la maison, je 
recevais toutes sortes de questions : Ki demin pa pou gagn kouran ?  Ki, pou mett la limière 
pou narien là ?  Dans la rue au Ward I, on me posait des questions, on ne me croyait pas 
parce que ‘L’Express’ avait dit : Blackout !  Le lendemain, quel blackout ?  La lumière est 
partout !  Hein !  Divali Night ! 

(Interruptions) 

Un travail en silence, mais un silence courageux que j’ai maintenu envers et contre tous et 
même en dépit de l’incompréhension de certains de mes collègues. 

Eclairé de la lumière! 

(Interruptions) 

St.  Louis, qu’est-ce que je n’ai pas fait pour qu’aujourd’hui St.  Louis commence  à 
être érigé ? Quatre state-of-the-art diesel engines 15 mégawatts. Vous savez qu’est-ce qu’on 
n’a pas fait pour m’empêcher de faire ça. Jusqu’en Cour Suprême, ils sont allés. Jusqu’au 
dernier  bout  pour  ensuite  retirer  le  procès.  Entre-temps  j’ai  perdu  tant  de  temps.  Avoir  à 
expliquer au Premier ministre … 

Oui. 

(Interruptions) 

… pourquoi j’ai tardé sur St. Louis. Ce n’est pas facile à expliquer au Premier ministre une 
affaire comme ça. 

 

78 

(Interruptions) 

Comment le Leader de l’Opposition l’appelle ?  Le futur Premier ministre! 

Oui, aujourd’hui même! 

(Interruptions) 

Finalement,  après  la  Cour  suprême,  les  appels  d’offres  sont  lâchés,  le  contrat  est 
donné.    Encore  une  fois  challenge !  On  continue  jusqu’à  la  fin  et  à  la  fin  on  retire  le 
challenge. 

(Interruptions) 

Non, je ne dis pas malhonnêteté parce que nous sommes avocats, nous savons que cela se fait 
très souvent quand on regarde le dossier adverse, au moins on réalise qu’on n’a pas a leg to 
stand on. 

C’est  un  contrat  pour  R  4.2  milliards  financé  par  la  Banque  Africaine  de 
Développement qui avait objecté au premier contrat de l’ancien régime parce que la Banque 
Africaine  de  Développement  -  à  ma  prise  de  fonction  je  vois  ça  -  avait  dit  qu’il  y  avait 
quelque chose de suspect. C’est ainsi, par exemple, que l’honorable Jahangeer va lui aussi 
rentrer dans cette sauce de suspicion. Mais aujourd’hui nous savons que 4x15 même si cela 
fait 60, au fait ça fait 47 mégawatts de puissance garantie. 

Les combined cycle gas turbines, 70 à 80 mégawatts vers 2018 à Fort Georges. Et là 
puisque  je  suis  dans  le  mood  de  remerciement  à  tout  le  monde,  laissez-moi  dire  un  mot 
spécial pour le Deputy Prime Minister, hon. X. L. Duval. J’avais d’énormes problèmes pour 
pouvoir  allouer  le  terrain  de  Fort  Georges  à  CEB.  Pourquoi ?  Le  plan  initial  c’était  de  le 
mettre à Les Salines. 

Oui, les Grandes Salines. 

(Interruptions) 

Et se pose le problème de Ramsar Committtee. J’ai le choix. Soit je me bats mais je 
perds du temps, soit je vais en retraite et je cherche du secours. Je vais pleurer chez mon ami, 
sur son épaule, mais je n’ai pas pleuré longtemps et très, très vite, nous avons pu débloquer la 
situation et nous avons eu ce terrain de Fort Georges où… 

Je me suis plaint. 

(Interruptions) 

 

79 

Aujourd’hui, nous avons déjà shortlist neuf contracteurs et la première phase sera de 
R  1.6  milliards  et  la  deuxième  phase  sera  de  R  4  milliards.  Je  n’oublie  pas,  M.  Sunta,  le 
Directeur  Général,  qui  m’a  également  donné  un  sacré  coup  de  main  pour  que  je  puisse 
débloquer cette situation. Sinon je ne sais pas quelle aurait été ma position aujourd’hui.  

Le tank farm, je comprends l’inquiétude de mon confrère l’honorable Baloomoody, 
celui  de  mon  collègue  ministre,  l’honorable  Alain  Wong  et  les  autres  députés  de  la 
circonscription  No.1,  mon  collègue  l’honorable  Armance,  mon  ami  l’honorable  Mme 
Danielle Selvon, il y a tellement de députés dans cette circonscription que vous oubliez. 

Cinq députés! 

(Interruptions) 

Alors nous devons choisir. Nous avons abandonné les turbines dans cet endroit mais 
nous avons eu toutes les clearances pour le tank farm. Trois réservoirs de 6500 m³ chacun au 
coût de R 540 millions avec - je le dis pour mes collègues députés et ministre de numéro 1 – 
toutes les garanties contre l’incendie, l’environnement et tout ce que vous voulez. Nous avons 
payé  les  plus  grands  experts  juste  pour  nous  assurer  qu’il  n’y  avait  aucun  risque,  ni  de 
pollution  -évidemment  pas  dans  la  construction  -  mais  c’est  normal  qu’il  y  ait  un  peu  de 
trouble de voisinage. C’est donc le tank farm.  

Autres mesures Alteo. Très intéressant, Alteo. Le contrat arrive en expiration. Nous 
sommes  en  négociation  pour  avoir  une  nouvelle  technologie  et  pour  nous  assurer 
qu’entrecoupe,  il  y  74  mégawatts  mais  sur  le  charbon  et  pendant  la  coupe,  66  mégawatts 
uniquement sur la bagasse. Et là, mon collègue l’honorable Seeruttun est à Rodrigues, il a 
beaucoup d’ennuis en ce moment, mais que je rassure tout le monde, un des points cruciaux 
de cet accord sera le prix de la bagasse aux planteurs. Les planteurs ont beaucoup souffert. Il 
est temps que les planteurs puissent recevoir même s’ils ne recevront pas tous leur dus mais 
au moins qu’ils reçoivent assez pour pouvoir ne pas abandonner la culture de leurs ancêtres. 
Encore une fois, je ne sais pas si je réussirai, mais croyais-moi j’essayerai. Mais à quoi ça sert 
à  faire  cela  si  vous  ne  pouvez  pas  emmener  l’électricité  jusqu’à  chez  vous,  Madame  la 
présidente. C’est ça le point.  

Nous  avons  été  habitués  à  un  réseau  électrique  qui  prend  de  l’électricité,  du 
generating stations qui fait à partir de l’huile, donc qui produit de l’électricité jour et nuit, qui 
rende sur un réseau, qui est stable et qui vous emmène 66,000 voltes, qui descend à 22,000 
pour finalement atterrir chez vous à 220 ou 240. Toute notre vie nous avons été habitués à 

 

80 

cela.  Maintenant,  nous  entrons  dans  le  renouvelable.  Qu’est-ce  qu’arrive  avec  le 
renouvelable? C’est que le soir on n’a pas encore inventé un soleil. Le soleil brille pour tout 
le monde, mais il ne brille que 12 heures au maximum. Et c’est pour cela que 4,3 milliards de 
roupies sont mis de côté pour pouvoir augmenter la capacité du réseau, - mon ami l’honorable 
Mahomed le comprendra facilement, mon ami l’honorable Jahangeer également - pour faire 
que ce réseau puisse s’équilibrer. Nous pensons que cela pourra se faire très, très vite -  je ne 
vais pas entrer dans les détails techniques - mais, en plus, quand on produit l’électricité par le 
solaire, normalement on n’est pas la maison parce que le jour on est au bureau et moi dans 
ma maison c’est en train de produire de l’électricité qu’est-ce que je vais faire avec cela. Il 
faut stocker et où le stocke-t-on ? Dans des batteries. Je pensais que c’était très compliqué 
mais  quand  on  m’a  expliqué  j’ai  vu  que  ce  n’est  pas  trop  compliqué  de  devenir  ingénieur 
dans ce pays. Nous avons fait une provision pour 380… 

(Interruptions) 

Non, nous avons trois ingénieurs dans cette Assemblée. Vous vous rendez compte combien 
cela fait si vous mettez les trois ensemble. 380 millions de roupies, nous allons installer pour 
opérer 18 MW de batteries pour stocker et cela nous permettra de connecter jusqu’à 160 MW 
d’énergie renouvelable de toutes les sources: hydro, solaire, le vent, les vagues, la saleté  - 
enfin la saleté il n’y a pas besoin de batterie parce que cela est tout le temps comme ça. Mais 
là aussi cela ne suffit pas parce que à quoi cela vous sert d’avoir des machines, d’avoir un 
réseau, d’avoir de l’énergie renouvelable si, en même temps, vous êtes en train de produire de 
l’électricité  avec  de  l’huile  lourde.  En  d’autres  termes,  vous  faites  tout  cela  pour  nettoyer 
votre environnement mais de ce côté-là, vous polluez. Alors dès que j’ai pris ma fonction, j’ai 
été conseillé et nous le poursuivons jusqu’à l’heure d’explorer le gaz naturel liquéfié. Alors le 
gaz  naturel  cela  remplace.  Ce  n’est  pas  une  énergie  renouvelable  mais  souvenez-vous  du 
débat entre le Leader de l’opposition et moi lorsque le projet de loi de MARENA est entré à 
la Chambre mais j’ai donné cette responsabilité à MARENA et je vois que le docteur Sudhoo 
fait un travail extraordinaire. Malheureusement, la vie n’est pas facile pour moi depuis deux 
ans. Alors que tout allait très bien pour avoir du LNG dans 18 mois du Mozambique patraque 
le Mozambique passe par une crise économique et ils ont retardé leur programme de LNG et 
nous devons nous tourner vers d’autres pays que nous allons explorer maintenant - le Quatar 
je ne sais pas quoi. Nous allons voir comment faire face à cette situation, je vais lire cela en 
anglais  puisque  c’est  quelqu’un  qui  a  préparé  cette  phrase  pour  moi.  The  procurement 
exercise for a comprehensive study on the implementation of LNG has been launched. The 

 

81 

study  will  be  completed  in  about  14  months.  The  new  Fort  George  plant  -  c’est  cela  le 
combined cycle dont je parlais - will be able to adapt to LNG.  

Le  LNG,  il  faut  faire  attention  il  y  a  un  problème  que  l’honorable  Uteem  et 
l’honorable  Mahomed  ont  soulevé :  est-ce  que  c’est  commercially  viable.  Si  c’est  pour 
alimenter les generating stations pour faire de l’électricité, la réponse est non. Cela ne vaut 
pas  la  peine  oublions  depuis  maintenant  continuons  avec  l’huile  lourde.  Mais,  par  contre, 
j’écoutais les chiffres ce matin. 2900 bateaux, mon ami Xavier Duval disait, s’arrêtent dans 
Port Louis par an. Mais savez-vous qu’il y a 33 000 qui passent à côté de Maurice. Et ces 
33 000 bateaux - vous savez ce qui est en train de se passer? Ils sont en train de se convertir 
au LNG. Pourquoi? Parce qu’ils obtiennent des crédits carbone et avec COP21, cela devient 
economically viable de rouler avec le gaz. Singapour est déjà en avance. Singapour a déjà mis 
ses infrastructures mais nous, nous commençons ;  nous sommes deuxièmes. Notre chance 
c’est quoi? C’est que nous avions appris dans Ardill quand on était petit - the Star and Key of 
the Indian Ocean. Pourquoi? Vous vous rappelez des pirates qui étaient obligés de s’arrêter à 
Maurice pour refaire la profession au XVIIIe siècle mais c’est exactement ce qui va se passer 
avec les bateaux qui roulent au LNG parce que de Singapour à Maurice il ne leur restera plus 
de  LNG  et  les  33000  bateaux  -  disons  10 000  -  auront  à  s’arrêter  à  Maurice  pour  le 
bunkering. Donc dans vos négociations avec DP World, il faut prendre compte de cela, c’est 
une aubaine pour Maurice mais pas juste les bateaux, les camions et les bus aussi peuvent 
rouler au LNG. A New Delhi, dans les maisons aujourd’hui c’est le LNG qui vient alimenter 
les  maisons  si  tant  et  si  bien  que  ni  l’Australie  ni  l’Inde  ne  peuvent  être  une  source 
d’approvisionnement pour le LNG. Voilà où nous sommes arrivés. Nous sommes arrivés très 
loin dans le LNG et bien sûr je ne ferai rien tant que je n’aurais pas eu une étude de faisabilité 
devant moi.  

Deuxièmement  si  je  n’ai  pas  passé  par  MARENA  j’attire  l’attention  que  dans 
MARENA  il  y  a  deux  députés  qui  siègent,  un  de  l’opposition  et  un  du  gouvernement  et 
Madame la présidente, je vous remercie d’avoir exercé un choix judicieux sur la sélection des 
deux députés qui font ce travail sans le sou je crois et qui le font dedicated mais surtout qui 
mettent à contribution leur expérience d’une bonne manière non partisane parce que tout le 
monde est conscient que nous parlons de l’avenir du pays. Laissez-moi parler des énergies 
renouvelables.  Government 
responsible  and 
environmentally  sustainable  policy  regarding  energy  production.  Ce  sont  là  les  paroles  du 
Premier  ministre  dans  son  ‘Vision  2030’.  Il  y  a  MARENA  un  chiffre  que  je  jette  nous 

remains  committed 

to  adapting  a 

 

82 

sommes arrivés aujourd’hui à 20.3% de production d’énergie renouvelable dans notre pays. 
Formidable!  Dans  le  silence  sans  tam-tam  mais  avec  courage  regardez  où  nous  sommes 
arrivés  et  nous  avons  une  vision  de  35%;  en  2030  j’ai  aucun  doute  qu’on  va  largement 
dépasser ce chiffre et mon rêve - il est permis quand même de rêver - c’est qu’un jour dans 
trois ans par une soirée d’hiver où il ne fera pas trop froid l’île Maurice soit assurée à 100 % 
par les énergies renouvelables. Ce sera formidable. Je dis un petit mot sur l’énergie solaire 
dans les grands centres, c’est-à-dire, les moyens comme Bagatelle, Super U etc.  

Je  vais  dire  un  petit  mot  sur  l’énergie  solaire  dans  les  centres  moyens  comme  Bagatelle, 
Super U etc.  Il y a un litige entre le CEB et eux. Le CEB, et  je m’aligne sur cette position, 
pense qu’ils ont à contribuer à un contractual standby capacity charge.  Auparavant, tout le 
monde avait à contribuer à cela.  J’ai enlevé ça pour la classe moyenne.  Cela fait R 200,000 
pour Super U et vous allez me dire que c’est une fortune !  Pour Bagatelle, je crois que c’est 
R 157,000.  C’est un débat !  The Utility Regulatory Authority, MARENA s’en occupe.   Le 
URA va s’en occuper bientôt.  

Concernant Waste to Energy, nos déchets, nous en avons beaucoup. J’espère que nous 
arriverons à nous entendre avec mon ami, l’honorable Wong Yen Cheong. A qui appartient 
les déchets de l’île Maurice ? Un débat stérile parce que cela appartient à la nation et nous 
allons voir quoi faire.   

L’honorable Jahangeer a parlé de smart grid.  Nous allons faire un smart grid comme 
je l’ai dit, mais surtout nous allons investir pour que nos câbles soient souterrains pour qu’on 
ait  plus  ces  histoires  de  chauve-souris,  de  cyclone,  de  la  pluie,  du  vent  etc.  qui  viennent 
couper le courant déjà. Ça va coûter de l’argent. Je dois aller très vite parce qu’il y a deux ou 
trois choses que je dois dire.  

Concernant l’efficacité énergétique, il ne sert à rien d’avoir fait tout cela, des stations 
électriques,  un  bon  réseau,  le  smart  grid,  des  compteurs  électroniques  si  nous  gaspillons 
l’énergie. A quoi ça sert ?  Alors, c’est là que le Energy Efficiency Office qui avait été établi 
sous l’ancien régime mais que j’ai revigoré maintenant avec monsieur Kendal Tang, comme 
Chairman, va venir donner une impulsion à l’énergie. On forme des auditeurs de l’énergie, 42 
en  ce  moment  et  nous  avons  déjà  audité  10  bâtiments  publics  et  privés  avec  des  conseils 
comment  économiser  l’électricité.  A  la  CWA,  on  arrivera  à  économiser  15%  et 
probablement, au niveau de la nation, 10% de notre énergie. Mais ce n’est pas tout.  Avec 
quel  argent  vous  allez  acheter  votre  panneau  solaire ?    Ça  coûte  entre  R  250,000  et  R 

 

83 

400,000.  Si vous voulez avoir vos propres batteries de stockage, ajoutez 20% à 30%.  C’est 
de  l’argent !  Alors,  qu’est-ce  que  nous  avons  fait ?  Nous  avons  la  SBM  Eco-loan,  des 
emprunts avec des meilleurs taux d’intérêt et des bonnes conditions, l’exemption de l’income 
tax, l’exemption du land conversion tax pour les propriétaires et pour les locataires.  

Une  mesure  importante,  no  VAT  on  photovoltaic  Inverters  and  batteries.    Ça  fait 
beaucoup d’argent. Nous allons amender the Electricity Act and the CEB Act afin d’alléger 
les  procédures.  Nous  aurons  8-year  income  tax  holiday  pour  ceux  qui  commencent    leurs 
entreprises avec green energy, pour ceux qui existent et qui sont enregistrés avec le SMEDA 
et d’autres conditions trop longues pour parler là, quatre ans de tax holiday.  La bio-mass, y 
compris les feuilles des cannes car encore une fois il faut penser aux petits planteurs quand on 
fait ce programme d’énergie. Trop long pour parler de ce qu’on va faire des petits planteurs 
mais nous avons un programme qu’on commence à Rose Belle pour cela.  Mais ce n’est pas 
seulement  pour  les  riches.  Pour  ceux  qui  sont  moins  riches,  le  CEB,  avec  mon  soutien 
personnel, nous allons mettre un projet où il y aura 10,000 foyers qui auront un kilowatt de 
solar PV.  Un kit qu’on va mettre sur leur maison.  Le CEB va payer 80% pour ces maisons.  
Ce sont les low-income households social tariffs et en plus, quand ils acceptent, ils doivent 
payer 20%. Mais quand ils acceptent cela, ils auront 50 kilowatts d’électricité gratuite.   

(Interruptions) 

On leur donne le kit et quand le soir, ils ont besoin d’électricité, 50 kilowatts d’électricité 
gratuites. Le CEB va faire plus que ça.   

Le fibre net project va être mis sur pied pour servir notre réseau informatique afin de 
pouvoir investir dans le fibre net.  Nous en parlerons plus tard. Pour cela, je dois vous dire 
que  je  propose  d’amender  le  Central  Electricity  Board  Act  afin  de  permettre  le  CEB  de 
former une compagnie subsidiaire pour implémenter ce projet.  Ce sera dans le Finance Bill.  
Je préfère l’annoncer depuis maintenant parce que ce sera présenté au Cabinet bientôt.  

Les lumières sur l’autoroute.  Assez !  On en a marre ! On ne peut plus laisser ça dans 
la main des Local Authorities.  Je n’arrête pas de remercier des gens. Mon collègue Bodha et 
moi, à sa suggestion, on a donné tout cela au CEB pour R 30 millions.  Le plan est déjà mis 
en route, le travail a déjà commencé, nous avons mis un target date, le 30 septembre pour 
tout finir sur l’autoroute.  Seulement entre vous et moi, c’est un secret, ne le dites à personne.   

(Interruptions) 

 

84 

Je mets la cravache pour qu’on puisse tout terminer le 8 septembre pour que les pèlerins du 
Père Laval puissent avoir de la lumière sur les routes.   

Je ne promets rien, mais  j’espère qu’on pourra le faire.  

(Interruptions) 

Le Parti Travailliste a tout gelé alors que le gouvernement MSM/MMM de l’an 2000, 
contrairement à ce que les syndicalistes disent, avait commencé avec un programme du IFC, 
gelé  par  le  Premier  ministre  et  en  2010  il  retourne  à  ses  habitudes  Travailliste,  bien 
entrenched.  Il va chercher une équipe de Singapour pour venir comme conseiller. Ces gens 
sont payés R 1 milliard de l’État. 

(Interruptions) 

R 1 milliard a été payé !  Dites-moi, est-ce que quelqu’un voit un résultat quelque part de 
cela !  Ensuite, quand ils ont fini d’avoir un milliard, les singapouriens disent : maintenant, si 
vous voulez qu’on aille détecter les fuites, il faut nous payer encore R 25 millions.  Là, le Dr. 
Rashid Beebeejaun n’en pouvait plus, il a dit au Premier ministre : sorry, I am fed up.  Il a 
coupé et les singapouriens sont repartis.  Quand j’ai pris mes fonctions, ils étaient en train de 
faire leurs valises.  

(Interruptions) 

Là  c’est  le  débat  le  plus  sérieux  de  ma  vie  parce  que  les  projets  vont  coûter  beaucoup 
d’argent.  

Le record après la Wastewater c’est la CWA. Nous allons faire le maximum. Nous 
avons mis en place de nouvelles structures. Mais, pour faire tout ça il faut deux choses: il faut 
de l’argent et il faut de la technologie. Mais nous n’avons ni l’un ni l’autre! On peut fabriquer 
l’argent  mais  pour  la  technologie,  il  faudra  faire  importer  les  Singapouriens  encore!  Nous 
avons plusieurs options, soit je suis content de ma position de ministre et je ne fais rien. Je dis 
carry on, essayons de faire pour le mieux. Soit nous faisons pour le mieux mais vous savez ce 
que ça veut dire? Ça veut dire que nous aurons à attendre 10 ans pour remplacer 1600 km de 
tuyaux et à un coût faramineux avec des contracteurs qui continuent à fouiller avec la JCB 
etc. Ou alors, we take the bull by the horns. 

I am ready to risk my reputation on this. We tender and we get the best team to come 
and they invest their money and they bring their technology and we negotiate terms. This is 
why I have asked to form part of the team with DP World so that I learn a bit how you are 

 

85 

doing it so that we want to get the best of all worlds here; new technology, foreign direct 
investment.  But,  of  course,  you  have  got  to  pay  them.  We  will  need  profits,  but  with  the 
system of KPIs. The more they perform, the more they get money. If they don’t perform, they 
pay a penalty. This is the Algerian system and it works. 

We  have  got  the  best  advice  from  the  World  Bank  and  I  am  going  to  come  to  the 
nation after having discussed with the Prime Minister and my colleagues to get the best deal 
and have an open public, transparent debate. Can I say a word on my learned friend, my hon. 
colleague, Mr Uteem who found that there had been under spending?  

I  quite  appreciate  on  looking  at  the  figures  in  the  Budget  he  would  say  what  is 
happening. My hon. colleague, Mr Bashir Jahangeer gave him the reply and told him: “listen, 
you have a contract for Rs300 m. but you can’t expect to spend Rs300 m. in one year because 
you have got to tender. You have got to go to the CPB. You have got to look at the contracts, 
the engineers – the engineers take the longer time that you can imagine! Then you start the 
work  and  you  can’t  pay  the  contractor  the  full  amount.  You  have  got  to  pay  him  ‘tigine 
tigine’.  And,  I  will  make  sure  that  Dr.  Ismael  supervises  this  personally  because  he  is 
accountable to me to make sure that money is well spent and that we don’t have these cost 
overruns. Cost overruns, when we come to Wastewater we will see.  

So, I cannot agree with what my good friend, hon. Uteem said. Not a cent on Rivière 
des Anguilles? No, not true! We have started a procurement process. Under the old regime 
the Agence française de développement had pulled out of this project. I have gone to great 
length and when I was in Paris I went upstairs and finally we got the money from Agence 
française de développement.  

La  Ferme  Dam,  we  need  upgrading,  but  people  have  built  houses  down  there.  We 
can’t  upgrade  because  we  can’t  do  works.  With  my  friend,  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
Soodhun whom I thank a lot, we have been able to compulsorily acquire the land. There is 
the problem of squatters. Let me reassure my friend, hon. Ganoo, I have dealt with Médine 
and I have told them: “What is two arpents of land for you? Give it to these poor people. 
They are people who work for you in any case! Let’s have a nice housing structure with good 
renewable  energy  and  give  us  the  cadres.”  They  will  give  us  the  quantity  surveyors,  the 
architects, the engineers etc. and we will build the houses after tender. 

I will not go on on all the projects because I have already submitted the list of projects 
for the CWA in the House. We are in a period of transition at the CWA with Dr. Ismael and 

 

86 

Mr François Desmarais. After all this talk that they say, I put my people or whatever, and we 
have a project management office. We are recruiting a Chief Operations Officer. We want to 
deliver and we have to deliver! 

Let me say a word for the desalination plant which hon. Jahangeer mentioned. That is 
not  on.  That  is  okay  for  Rodrigues  because  there  is  no  reservoir  and  the  topography  is 
different. For Mauritius we cannot have desalination plant. Since 2005 this debate has been 
finished. Mr Jean-Mée Desveaux had dealt with that issue a long time and we can’t. We have 
a population of 1.2 million we have 2000 meter cube of rainfall and we compare with Israel 
which  with  a  population  of  6.7  million  receives  an  annual  rainfall  of  300  millilitres.  Of 
course, Israel will want to desalinate water. They have no choice. But, we have the choice. 
Our  problem  is  not  water,  Madam  Speaker.  We  have  plenty  of  water.  Our  problem  is 
gaspillage by the CWA, mismanagement. This is the problem and this is where  I come to 
human resources.  

The CEB has recruited 375 employees, productive employees, engineers, accountants, 
shift foremen, technicians. We are now training about 60 technicians. To do what? Because 
we  need  them  for  renewable  energy,  they  have  to  be  trained.  Let  me  say  a  word  about 
Bagatelle  Dam  which  I  had  forgotten.  Bagatelle  Dam  there  is  a  huge  cost  overrun  and,  at 
least, the contractor has done a good job, but he is claiming a lot of money. We will see what 
our legal advisers have to say about it. We are going to start mediation proceedings and we 
shall see.  

The water treatment plant, again, we have been dragged before the Supreme Court. 
One year we have lost by legal proceedings and the contractor to whom the CPB awarded the 
contract,  I  think  he  got  a  shock  himself  when  he  received  his  letter  of  award.  So,  we  are 
paying. I have directed CWA to hire a firm of consultants for Rs400 m. just to supervise the 
work of the contractor so that we don’t get cost overruns later. This is what we are doing. We 
have engineers, safety and health officers and all this. 

I  heard  hon.  Mohamed  saying:  “I  have  the  document  here  that  clearly  shows  the 
salary  scale,  the  notice,  the  reference  of  the  notice.”    He  did  not  produce  the  document, 
which, according to him, showed that we had done internal advertisement, but have recruited, 
externally, only people from Stanley. First of all, as if people from Stanley or Trèfles cannot 
work in CEB. We know what is the talk, because we know what he says outside. I am not 
going to go further on him because it is going to waste my saliva. I would have expected him 

 

87 

to put the document on the Table and prove what I am doing at the CEB! No! He does his 
fracas and takes his bicycle and runs away! 

In  this  internal  advertisement  for  Administrative  Assistants,  all  four  of  them  were 
from internal, and then we had nine from the Ministry of Labour. You know the innuendo!  It 
is as if I have people whom I protect and I give jobs! Ministry of Labour, on job cards; these 
are the people who are recruited. Trainee technicians, 33 from internal, 51 from Ministry of 
Labour; Senior Audit Executive, one internal, and I asked Mr Hebrard: ‘Why do you take one 
external’? He said, ‘I have finished with the internal candidate who was there’, and he goes 
on and on like this. When you have exhausted internal candidates, then you go for external or 
you take from Ministry of Labour. 

For the sewage sector, Madam Speaker, I will do what I did for CWA. I will beg your 
permission to put in a list of projects for the Wastewater Management Authority. The purpose 
of this is to assist, and I see my friend, hon. Rughoobur, has seen the click in it. Instead of 
asking me the question: ‘What are  you doing in Pereybere?’ In this,  you have the answer.  
But  from  that  answer,  you  have  material  to  ask  questions  on  what  is  happening  to  the 
contract. If like hon. Rughoobur, you do your work properly, then you will see everything. It 
takes you five minutes for your constituency. It is all set down here. Then, you have material 
to go round in your constituency, either to blame me or to congratulate me, but, at least, you 
have the facts before you. All the projects are here. 

One word for the Roche Bois pumping station.  Long ago, it used to be in the hands of 
the private sector. It was taken away, and supposedly, employees of Wastewater can manage 
that. Catastrophe! It has cost us a lot of money and a lot of you know what. 

We have another issue with the Ministry of Environment because we are getting raw 

leachate from Mare Chicose, and that, from 2003.  We shall have to find a solution for this. 

Let me end, Madam Speaker, but not conclude, with the social measures. All that I 
have said, there is one issue. I have been lucky because as soon as I took the Ministry, the 
price of oil shot down. It is not my doing. Rainfall has not stopped falling. We touch wood. 
So, we have been able to give 60,000  consumers a 31% reduction on their electricity bill. 
52,000 water customers, 6m3 free of charge. I have heard the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
telling  me:  ‘You  should  give  it  to  everybody.’  Not  on  my  life!  I  will  never  do  this!  Why 
should I give Mahen Jhugroo 6m3 of water? 

(Interruptions) 

 

88 

And he is not asking for it!  10,000 people do not pay wastewater fees any more. 

Now, let me announce what I have told CEB to do. There was a question from one of 
my colleagues - I think it was hon. Mahomed - on people who have their electricity supply 
disconnected. I looked at the figures, and I must confess that I was shocked. For years and 
years, people have been disconnected. So, I have told the CEB: ‘Let us meet and let us do 
something about it.’  Because there are genuine hardship cases, which I know, which all of us 
know, from our constituencies. So, we are writing off the debts to about Rs30 m. for some 
12,000 customers in hardship situation and who are presently on the disconnection list for 
non-payment. But this is a one-off amnesty. We are not going to let that go on and on, but we 
think we should do something.  CEB has got the money. This is not going to starve CEB. So, 
I have issued that directive, they are working on it, and I hope that it is going to give results. 

Then, I have been surprised to learn that people who invest in small businesses, when 
they  need  to  connect  electricity,  they  have  to  pay  a  huge  sum  of  money  to  have  a  new 
transformer or to have a new pole or something of the sort. We are working on it, but I am in 
a  position  to  announce  that  all  capital  contributions  applicable  to  economically  viable 
projects, in particular those involving job creation or food production and which require the 
extension of electric network to their sites, will be entitled to join a new scheme. 

What  is  that  new  scheme?  Small  and  medium  enterprises  as  well  as  private 
individuals requesting a load not exceeding 15 kVA, will benefit from a payment facility in 
respect of the applicable capital investment, subject to a maximum of Rs250,000 per project, 
payable in five yearly instalments without interest. That is Lepep!  The first instalment will 
be payable upfront prior to the execution of the work, but alternatively, if you do not want to 
join the scheme, then you will pay only half of the investment, but upfront, of course. So, you 
have the choice to do what you want to do. 

I am going now to finish, but I would like first of all to address a few words to hon. 
Quirin, through you, Madam Speaker. I was taken aback by the bitterness of his tone, telling 
us: we started the Plaza, etc., it is our project, you are just doing what we had to do! It is a 
reality, since 2005, the only maire who did something for the Plaza was Mr Varen Andee, he 
repaired the roof. Then during the MMM tenure, it is a fact, nothing was done. There was a 
project, yes, but it is easy to build a castle in the air if you don’t work to do it. Pas un clou, 
Madam Speaker, n’a été mis le Plaza. Quand le maire Ken Fong fut nommé en juin…. 

(Interruptions) 

 

89 

Aujourd’hui,  passez  devant  le  Plaza  et  demandez  à  l’honorable  Quirin  ce  qu’il  voit !  
L’honorable Quirin a terminé en parlant de la complainte, justifiée, de M. Bruno Julie, qui, 
après  une  carrière  magnifique  dans  la  boxe  se  retrouve  sans  emploi.    J’ai  cherché,  j’ai 
demandé et on me dit qu’il y a un problème pour qu’il devienne entraineur ; il a le premier 
certificat, il n’a pas le deuxième certificat, etc. ; bien compliqué et j’ai abandonné.  Mais on 
ne peut pas faire de la politique – et je ne connaissais pas mes amis faisant de la politique sur 
le malheur des gens !   

(Interruptions) 

Mais on rit ! Continuez de rire, hon. Quirin !  Parce que ce que je vais vous dire là, ce que 
vous avez annoncé, vous avez défoncé une porte ouverte et vous le savez !  Parce que quand 
le Chairman  du CEB a lu cet article, il m’a contacté.  Il m’a dit : ouvre ton journal et regarde 
ça un coup !  Bruno Julie !  On ne peut pas le laisser comme ça.  Aujourd’hui, Bruno Julie est 
employé à la CEB ! 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Et c’est moi qui ai pris la responsabilité ! 

(Interruptions) 

Ne me dites pas que l’honorable Quirin, hier, ne le savait pas, qu’il n’était pas au courant !  
Mais s’il n’était pas au courant, je lui donne le bénéfice du doute.  Seulement il a cessé de 
rire !  Mais la boxe à Plaisance, vous vous rendez compte le Plaisance Boxing Gym !  Moi, je 
me souviens, j’étais enseignant au St. Andrews.  Le Père André Avrillon, qui était curé de la 
Paroisse de Ste Anne, il venait… 

(Interruptions) 

Monsieur Nagloo était entrainé par le regretté Farid Matar qui était un entraineur de boxe.  Ils 
avaient une petite gym et tout le monde y allait.  Les boxeurs, je me suis rappelé de leur nom. 
Gupta Gopaul, aujourd’hui si on  le voit, jamais on le croira.  Il y avait Jean-Claude Nagloo, 
Giovanni  Frontin,  Georges  Marison,  Jean-claude  Dumont,  Joel  Balisson,  Mario  Mungur, 
L’Eveillé et, bien sûr, Bruno Julie.  Bien sûr, tous des boxeurs de Plaisance !  L’honorable 
Quirin cause… 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

90 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Quirin, I am addressing myself to you! You had time to speak! Please allow the Vice-
Prime Minister to speak now. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Mais  laissez-moi  finir!    Sous  le  MMM,  c’était  l’élite  qui 

 
bénéficiait. 

(Interruptions) 

Oui, j’étais dans le MMM! Ah, oui !  Je partage cette responsabilité sans aucun problème.  Je 
partage, parce que j’ai été parti prenant.  Je n’ai aucun problème là-dessus.  Mais quand – 
comment  on  appelle  ça,  la  rupture ?  Mais  quand  le  maire  Ken    Fong  prend  le  pouvoir,  il 
m’appelle et on discute, et on fait un plan.  On dit que maintenant on va privilégier les petites 
équipes de football, les petits boxeurs.  Toutes les semaines je vais dans les tournois, je vais à 
des distributions de prix.  Ces jeunes-là .. 

(Interruptions) 

Et  on  me  dit  que  conseillers  municipaux  de  ‘l’alliance  Lepep’  sont  sur  le  terrain,  ils 
travaillent.    Je  leur  ai  demandé :  ‘synthétique’ ?    Ils  me  disent,  oui,  mais  ce  n’est  pas 
alarmant.  Et toujours, on arrive : est-ce que c’est alarmant ou bien est-ce  que c’est sérieux 
ou bien ce n’est pas grave ?  Vous allez me bouquiner un peu.  Les ‘barons de la drogue’ 
avaient payé M. Hoffmann, un grand chercheur … 

(Interruptions) 

…en  Amérique,  pour  inventer  la  drogue  synthétique  en  parallèle.  En  Israel,  le  Hebrew 
University faisait cette drogue synthétique pour des besoins militaires. Et voilà, où nous nous 
sommes rendus dans le nord.  Légalement, on ne pourra rien faire parce que vous changez un 
petit peu la composition chimique et vous êtes en dehors de la loi.  Et donc, nous avons un 
programme de sport et je termine avec l’honorable Koonjoo.  J’ai été très sensible à ce qu’il a 
dit.  Vous savez, on ne choisit pas la famille de sa naissance.  Nous avons parmi nous dans 
cette  Chambre  des  membres  qui  sont  nés  dans  la  pauvreté  mais  qui  sont  sortis  de  cette 
pauvreté.    Nous  avons  également  des  membres  dans  cette  Chambre  qui  sont  nés  dans  la 
richesse.  Ce n’est pas un péché d’être né dans une famille riche.  Moi, je suis né dans une 
famille de petit fonctionnaire et je n’ai aucun problème là-dessus.  Mais c’est ce que vous 

 

91 

faites pendant votre vie qui compte, quelle est la lutte que vous adoptez.  Il y a des gens qui 
se servent de cette richesse pour venir débiter n’importe quoi.  Alors voir premier débit !  On 
ne peut pas être plus méchant que ça.  On me rappelle que l’honorable Quirin était conseiller 
municipal en 2003/2004 lorsque le conseil municipal décidait de fermer le Plaza. 

(Interruptions) 

Je suis député de la même circonscription en 2016 ; alors, on décide de re-ouvrir la 
salle de Plaza. L’honorable Mohamed vient dire que, ah, le CEB fait des advertisements, ils 
disent  que  c’est  interne,  mais,  au  fait,  tout  le  monde  comprend  que  ce  sont  des  external 
candidates.    J’ai  donné  les  statistiques.    I  have  the  document  here,  that  clearly  shows  the 
salary scale, the notice, the reference of the notice.  Relisez les documents!  Dites-nous de 
quel job il s’agit pour que je puisse répondre aujourd’hui.  Je suis allé regarder  tous les jobs.     
Tout cela c’est du nonsense !  Et il parle de M. Fakim et de M. Kureemun !  Il dit : those two 
people  have  been  suspended  from  the  CEB.    Why  those  two?    Who  is  in  charge  of  the 
Disciplinary  Committee  to  listen  to  them?    Someone  from  Collendavelloo  Chambers,  Mr 
Colunday!  Is this rupture?   

Je comprends quand on entend ça ; mes amis auraient pu avoir des doutes sur ce qui 
se passe sur le CEB.  Vous allez prendre les renseignements.  Oui, M. Kureemun faisait face 
à un comité disciplinaire.  Evidemment, le CEB a passé par le Conseiller légal du CEB pour 
identifier celui qui serait le Chairman et ils ont décidé que ce serait Me André Robert et c’est 
Me  André  Robert  qui  fait  le  Disciplinary  Proceeding.    Où  est-ce  qu’il  est  allé  chercher 
Colunday ? 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: Et laissez-moi vous annoncer une chose !  Le jour où il pérore 
dans cette Chambre, M. Kureemun avait déjà, le même jour, demandé sa mise à la retraite.  
Alors, qu’est-ce qu’on raconte ?  M. Fakim, Colunday, Disciplinary Committee to listen to 
them!    Encore  une  fois,  le  General  Manager  est  allé  chercher  conseil  avec  Me  Sookia,  le 
legal adviser du CEB et Me Sookia a dit : Écoutez, pour quelqu’un d’aussi haut placé, il faut 
trois personnes.  Et il a suggéré un juge de la Cour Suprême, sitting Judge of the Supreme 
Court,  pas  M.  Colunday,  pour  siéger  sur  le  comité,  assisté  du  Chairman  du  Wastewater 
Management Authority, Monsieur – je dis bien son prénom parce qu’on sait quelle palabre il 
fane.  M. Suleiman Hansrod et M. Neerunjun, ancien Directeur au ministère du travail.  Et 

 

92 

qu’est-ce qu’on veut essayer de faire croire ?  Que j’ai un genre de problème avec M. Fakim !  
C’est un ami d’école avec moi et que j’ai fait tout pour mettre mes personnes pour le mettre 
dehors !    Mais  il  va  se  défendre  devant  un  juge  de  la  Cour  Suprême,  assisté  de  deux 
assesseurs.  S’il gagne son case, il gagne son case, s’il perd son case, il peut toujours aller en 
Cour.  Donc, quelle palabre on fane. Et Collendavelloo Chambers n’existe plus depuis avant 
les  élections,  depuis 
la  campagne  électorale,  mais  on  continue :  ‘Collendavelloo! 
Collendavelloo!’   

La dernière fois qu’on m’a questionné sur les honoraires, j’ai eu l’élegance de dire 
que si on ne me donnait pas la permission, je n’allais pas disclose les honoraires de certaines 
personnes que l’honorable Mohamed connait très bien et je vais continuer à le faire. Je vois 
que ‘l’Express’ a publié ça aujourd’hui.  Ça ne vient pas de nous.  Je ne sais pas d’où il sort 
cette information.  Ce n’est pas correct de venir dévoiler les honoraires des gens qui ont fait 
leur travail et qui ont réclamé des honoraires qui ne sont pas excessifs.  Quand c’est excessif, 
ça c’est une autre chose.  Et le comité disciplinaire de M. Fakim aura lieu, il sera défendu, il 
aura ses avocats, ils vont présenter, et le plus choquant, ce même honorable Mohamed, avant-
hier, il se met debout, il parle de l’Equal Opportunities Committee, il dit : je ne vais pas vous 
donner le nom parce que je suis un gentleman,  je vais vous dire juste pour les oreilles du 
Premier ministre, vous savez comme je suis, moi !   

Cinéma sans payer!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah!  It is becoming worse! 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Et ensuite, il vient donner le nom  et je dis: tiens, Mohamed est 
devenu  un  gentleman,  il  a  changé  depuis  le  temps.    Je  suis  autorisé  à  vous  dire  que 
Collendavelloo  Chambers  n’existe  pas,  mais  que  l’Étude  d’avocats  est  prise  en  charge  par 
l’honorable Baloomoody, député de l’Opposition.  Je suis autorisé également à vous dire que 
M.  Colunday,  avocat,  son  père  était  MMM,  il  est  mort ;  lui,  dans  les  dernières  élections, 
législatives et municipales, il a travaillé pour le MMM dans ma circonscription contre moi.  
Je suis autorisé à vous dire tout cela parce que j’ai demandé si je pouvais dire tout cela à la 
Chambre pour que ces palabres cessent un peu. 

Et en dernier, Christelle Sohun, Collendavelloo Chambers happens to be a member of 
the IRP !  Il n’a pas été dans les Chambres depuis quatre ans.  Ça aussi je suis autorisé à le 

 

93 

dire.    Bien  sûr,  elle  a  commencé  ses  premières  armes  comme  nous,  tant  avocats  dans  le 
Cabinet !  Mais alors !  Elle n’a plus le droit de travailler ?  Juste un tel, un tel, un tel!  Taleur 
mo donne noms qui réclament par millions pour une affaire qui dure une demi-journée ! 

(Interruptions) 

On ne peut pas parce que ce sont des confrères à moi ! 

(Interruptions) 

Par décence, je ne vais pas le faire.  Voilà le genre de bassesse, mais seulement laissez-moi 
vous le dire. 

(Interruptions) 

Parce qu’en toute justice, je dois accepter que ni les autres membres du parti Travailliste, les 
autres députés je veux dire, ni les députés du MMM, ici présents, ni les membres du MP ne 
sont partie-prenantes de cette scandaleuse façon d’agir au parlement.  Malheureusement, le 
terme ‘mensonge’ est unparliamentary.  Donc, je viendrai dire la contrevérité. 

La fausseté !   

(Interruptions) 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai  suffisament  abusé  du  temps  de  la  Chambre.    J’ai  voulu 
mettre en place les contours du travail du ministère et j’ai voulu annoncer l’avenir tout en 
revenant sur ce qui a été fait pendant les 20 mois.  Pourquoi je l’ai fait ?  Parce que je ne 
travaille pas à coup de conférence de presse.  Chacun a son style de travail, mais à l’occasion 
des débats budgétaires, je suis obligé de conclure maintenant sur une note. 

L’accueil  que  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  m’a  réservé  alors  qu’il  préparait  le 
budget, et je me souviens très bien que lorsqu’il a fallu que je lui annonce les plans pour la 
CWA, il a tout laisser tomber pour me recevoir.  Je lui dis : ce n’est pas grave, je reviendrai 
demain, c’était au téléphone, il me dit : non, tout le monde attend et je te reçois, on a parlé 
avec son équipe sur le budget.  Pourquoi ?  Parce qu’il y avait un point en litige.  Ça na pas 
été difficile de le convaincre, il a compris tout de suite la justesse de l’argument.  C’est pour 
cela  qu’en  reprenant  ma  place,  je  dis,  pas  seulement  bravo,  comme  j’avais  dit  au 
commencement, mais merci Pravind. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Uteem rose and seconded. 

94 

 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House to 

Tuesday 16 August 2016 at 10.00 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTERS RAISED 

(8.39 p.m.) 

MAURITIUS SHIPPING CORPORATION LTD - WORKFORCE 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): 
Madam Speaker, I would like to raise an issue that has to do with a notification from the part 
of the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd to reduce its workforce at its passenger terminal as 
per Section 16 of the Act from 16 persons to zero. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

Mr Mahomed: Now, people have come to me today with a letter dated 04 of August 
2016 from the Ag. Manager of the Corporation addressed to the Permanent Secretary of the 
Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  with  copy  to  the 
Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands, I believe this is the parent Ministry of the MSCL. The letter is a 
formal  notification  of  reduction  of  workforce  under  section  39(b)  of  the  Employment 
Relations Act. Only yesterday you will recall how heated the debate was concerning a figure 
of 60 jobs that were created in the seafood sector. The hon. Minister Koonjoo vehemently 
contested  these  figures  which,  according  to  him,  were  low  figures!  Now,  the  list  of  16 
persons who are now on the brink of losing their jobs have their names and dates of entry 
attached with this letter which I am going to table just now. 

 

95 

The list comprises of  four terminal  attendants,  five security  guards, one  gatekeeper 
and  six  luggage  porters  who  were  employed  on  permanent  and  pensionable  basis  as  from 
March 2008. The people are bewildered. They have expressed their strong perception to me 
of the belief that because of the  year, that is, 2008, when they were employed the  Labour 
Party  was in power. They  feel that they are being victimised because of that  - association 
with the Labour Party. 

The  MSCL  is  in  the  papers  today.  It  must  be  said  that,  at  one  point  in  time,  Mr 
Kailash Trilochun chaired a meeting to discuss the restructuring of the MSCL. From the letter 
we  also  learnt  that,  as  per  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  Master  Plan,  there  will  be  a  new 
passenger terminal and thus the MPA has recently decided to take over the operations of the 
passenger terminal from the MSCL with effect from end of April 2016. 

On  hearing  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  hon.  Duval,  today  mentioning  that  the 
shipping  sector  is  booming;  he  said  that  we  have  reached  an  all-time  high  figure  of  2900 
ships. At the same time, he further stated we are enjoying happier labour relations in the port. 
So this prompts me to rise and make a humble plea to the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations,  Employment  and  Training  not  to,  therefore,  give  his  green  light  to  the  said 
notification  of  reduction  of  workforce  at  the  level  of  the  MSCL,  the  more  so  on  a 
humanitarian ground. 

I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  the  letter  and  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his  positive 

consideration. 

Thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  (Mr  S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I have been made aware of this situation just now so I shall 
come with a statement to the House on Tuesday. Let me take full stock of the facts first.  

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(8.43 p.m.)  

1) 

HAWKERS - DECAEN & IMMIGRATION SQUARE SITES – 
GARBAGE COLLECTION 

2) 

DR. HASSEN SAKIR STREET – SEWER WATER 

 

96 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Tonight I am raising an issue which concerns the hon. 
Minister of Local Government. In fact, it is the two sites that have been made available for 
the hawkers of Decaen and Immigration Square. As we are all aware, the sites there are not 
covered, there is no tent and each time that there is heavy rainfall they can’t work. But, the 
problem they are having - this morning I met some of them - is the Municipality of Port Louis 
is not removing the garbage that is left everyday there. They told me that they are working in 
very unhygienic conditions especially the toilets and bathrooms there cannot be used. So, I 
would kindly ask the hon. Minister to look into the matter with the Municipality of Port Louis 
so that needful can be done.  

Also, a quick reminder to the hon. Vice- Prime Minister of Energy and Public Utilities 
the  matter  that  I  raised  since  one  week  about  Dr. Hassen  Sakir  street  whereby  there  was 
sewage water which was flowing in the canal in front of the residential area has not been 
attended to yet after a week. So, if he could kindly do so. Thank you.  

The Minister of Local Government (Mr Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, I am a 
bit surprised that the Municipal Council of Port Louis is, not kind of, taking care of that but,  
I will definitely talk to them tomorrow and make sure that the necessary is done. 

The  Vice  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): May I answer? 

Madam Speaker: Yes! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Hon. Ameer Meea, first of all, I apologise for the late reaction on 
my part. I was preparing my speech. But, I have had time to look into it and I have obtained a 
correspondence from the Wastewater Management Authority which I am at liberty to hand 
over to you just after to tell you that there have been site visits and inspections on 05 August 
2016, on 08 August 2016, 10 August 2016 and 12 August 2016. 

There  is  a  problem  and  the  problem  is  grazed  deposit  and  stalactites  type 
protuberances which were noted at the top of the sewer pipe. They could not clean it because 
of  something.  Now,  they  have  seen  clear  and  odourless  water  found  running  in  the  storm 
water drain and the decision is: interventions scheduled for 13 and 14 August for clearing 
stalactites protuberances deposits using root cutter or something, mounted on high-pressure 
jetting hose. CCTV sewer camera inspection will then continue to ascertain status of pipe and 
identify what remedial actions are required. 

 

97 

Again, I apologise for having been two days late. I am sorry, it is an urgent matter, 

and I should have looked at it before but mieux vaut tard que jamais.  

At 8.50 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 16 August 2016 at 

10.00 a.m. 

 

