No. 03 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD)  

 

FIRST  SESSION  

 

TUESDAY 12 APRI L 2016  

 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTE NTS  

 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 

 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

KCMG, QC  

Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister 

for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

SC 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

 

International Trade 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Empowerment 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

 

 

4 

Institutional Reforms  

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 

Cheong, MSK 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Disaster and Beach Management 

Training 

 

5 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 

RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 03 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 12 April 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

  The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.   

Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Firearms  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  IV  of 

2016). 

(In Original) 

B.    Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport ‒ 

(a)   

(b)  

The  Road  Traffic  (Construction  and  Use  of  Vehicles)  (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 43 of 2016)  

The  Road  Traffic  (Control  of  Contract  Car  and  Contract  Bus  Operations) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 44 of 2016) 

C.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

(a)   

(b)  

(c)   

The Pharmaceutical  Product  (Fees) Regulations 2016. (Government  Notice 

No. 47 of 2016)  

The  Medical  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 48 of 2016) 

The Dental Council (Medical Institutions) (Amendment) Regulations 2016. 

(Government Notice No. 49 of 2016) 

D.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

(a)   

(b)  

The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No.78 of 2016) 

The  Municipal  Council  of  Beau  Bassin-Rose  Hill  (Council  Yard) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 79 of 2016) 

Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation ‒ 

The  National  Identity  Card  (Extension  of  Validity  Period)  (Amendment  No.  2) 

E.   

 

 

8 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 46 of 2016) 

F.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   

(b)  

(c)   

(d)  

(e)   

(f)   

(g)  

The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Imports)  (Amendment  No.  2) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No.45 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  5)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 80 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  6)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 81 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  7)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 82 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  8)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 83 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  9)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 84 of 2016) 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-

Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  10)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No.85 of  2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

G.    Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training ‒ 

(a)  The  Attorneys’  and  Notaries’  Workers  (Remuneration)  (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 50 of 2016) 

(b)  The  Baking  Industry  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 51 of 2016) 

 

 

 

9 

(c)  The  Blockmaking,  Construction,  Stone  Crushing  and  Related  Industries 

(Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 

Notice No. 52 of 2016) 

(d)  The Catering and Tourism Industries (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 53 of 2016) 

(e)  The Cinema Employees (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 54 of 2016) 

(f)  The  Cleaning  Enterprises  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 55 of 2016) 

(g)  The Distributive Trades (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 56 of 2016) 

(h)  The  Domestic  Workers  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 57 of 2016) 

(i)  The  Electrical,  Engineering  and  Mechanical  Workshops  (Remuneration) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 58 of 2016) 

(j)  The Export Enterprises (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 59 of 2016) 

(k)  The Factory Employees (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 60 of 2016) 

(l)  The  Field-crop 

and  Orchard  Workers 

(Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 61 of 2016) 

(m)  The Light Metal and Wooden Furniture Workshops (Remuneration Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 62 of 2016) 

(n)  The Livestock Workers (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 63 of 2016) 

(o)  The  Newspapers  and  Periodicals  Employees  (Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 64 of 2016) 

(p)  The  Nursing  Homes  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 65 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

(q)  The  Office  Attendants  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 66 of 2016) 

(r)  The Pre-Primary School  Employees (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 67 of 2016) 

(s)  The  Printing  Industry  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 68 of 2016) 

(t)  The  Private  Secondary  School  Employees  (Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 69 of 2016) 

(u)  The  Public  Transport 

(Buses)  Workers 

(Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 70 of 2016) 

(v)  The  Road  Haulage  Industry  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 71 of 2016) 

(w)  The  Salt-Manufacturing  Industry  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment) 

Regulations 2016 (Government Notice No. 72 of 2016) 

(x)  The  Sugar  Industry  (Agricultural  Workers)  (Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 73 of 2016). 

(y)  The  Sugar  Industry  (Non-Agricultural  Workers)  (Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 74 of 2016) 

(z)  The  Tailoring  Trade  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 75 of 2016) 

(aa)  The  Tea 

Industry  Workers 

(Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 76 of 2016) 

(ab)  The  Travel  Agents  and  Tour  Operators  Workers  Remuneration 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 77 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

YIHAI PAILLES GARDEN SMART CITY PROJECT 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit  whether, in  regard to 

the Yihai Pailles Garden Smart City Project, he will –  

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State Investment Corporation (SIC), 

information as to –  

(i) 

the changes that have occurred in the composition of the Board and in the 

top management of the SIC since December 2014 and who represented the 

Board  thereof  during  the  discussions  held  with  the  Yihai  International 

Investment Management Ltd.;  

(ii) 

the value of the 97 acres and property involved therein; 

(iii)  who took the decision for the SIC to be a minority shareholder therein, and  

(iv) 

if  copies  of  the  Letter  of  Comfort  issued  by  the  Board  of  Investment,  the 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  and  the  Shareholders  Agreement  will  be 

made public, and  

(b) 

state  if  Cabinet  has  referred  same  to  the  Independent  Commission  against 

Corruption. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the process of selling the Domaine Les Pailles 

(DLP)  properties  dates  as  far  back  as  2012.  In  fact,  in  that  context,  State  Investment 

Corporation (SIC) appointed KPMG as Transaction Adviser.  

KPMG launched an Expression of Interest on 11 April 2012 to dispose of 78 Arpents of 

land including the five restaurants in an extent of 9  Arpents owned by Domaine Les Pailles 

and  69  Arpents  Guibies  Properties  Ltd.,  both  subsidiaries  of  the  SIC.  Consequently,  Yihai 

International Investment Management Ltd (Yihai), represented by Mr Li Hai from China was 

selected  as  the  preferred  bidder.  The  offered  price  was  Rs486  m.  for  acquisition  of  the  78 

Arpents. 

I am informed that the sale transaction did not materialise as Yihai refused to employ 

the existing 160 staff of Domaine Les Pailles. 

 

 

12 

In  June  2013,  SIC  launched  a  Request  for  Proposals  for  rental  of  the  restaurants  at 

Domaine  Les  Pailles.  Given  that  the  offers  received  were  not  commercially  attractive,  this 

also did not materialise. 

In October 2013, SIC management restarted negotiations with Yihai on its offer made 

in  2012.    Yihai  then  accepted  to  maintain  the  employment  of  the  160  staff  for  a  minimum 

period of two years against a reduction of Rs45 m. in the sale price bringing the net offer to 

Rs441 m.  

In  March  2014,  a  MoU  between  SIC  and  Yihai  was  signed  and  a  5%  deposit 

amounting to Rs22 m. was paid by Yihai to SIC.  

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  the  Board  of  SIC  was  reconstituted  in 

February 2015, as follows - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mr Ayub Nakhuda, Chairperson; 

Miss How Cheey Lan How Fok Cheung, the then Permanent Secretary of the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development; 

Mr Visvanaden Soondram,  Lead Analyst, Ministry of  Finance and Economic 

Development;  

Mr  Premode  Neerunjun,  Deputy  Permanent  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Finance 

and Economic Development, and 

Mrs Banoomatee Veerasamy, Acting Managing Director 

In April 2015, two new Directors were appointed on the Board, namely – 

Mr Vidianand Lutchmeeparsad, Permanent Secretary, in replacement of Miss 

How  Cheey  Lan  How  Fok  Cheung  who  has  been  posted  to  the  Ministry  of 

Health and Quality of Life. 

Mr  Kritananda  Naghee  Reddy,  Acting  Principal  State  Counsel,  Attorney 

General’s Office. 

Following  the  resignation  of  Mr  Iqbal  Mallam  Hassam  on  18  December  2014,  Mrs 

Banoomatee  Veerasamy  was  assigned  duties  as  Acting  Managing  Director  as  from  26 

December 2014. 

The  current  Chairperson  and  the  Acting  Managing  Director  represented  the  Board 

during the discussions with Yihai International Group as from March 2015. 

 

 

13 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that the value of 78 Arpents was 

Rs486  m.  I  must  add  that  after  the  survey  exercise  carried  out  by  a  Land  Surveyor  in  May 

2014, it was found that the actual land area to be disposed was, in fact, 96 Arpents instead of 

78 Arpents, that is, larger by 18 Arpents. 

In October 2014, the additional land was valued by a Chartered Valuation Surveyor at 

Rs55.74  m.    An  offer  was  made  in  November  2014  to  Yihai  to  acquire  the  surplus  of  18 

Arpents for an additional sum of Rs55.74 m.  However, Yihai considered the additional plot 

of land to be marginal and made a counter offer of Rs1.86 m., that is, Rs100,000 per Arpent.  

The sale did not materialise. 

Regarding part (a) (iii) of the question, it must be pointed out that at the beginning, the 

decision was for an outright sale. Subsequently, in January 2015, the new Board decided not 

to proceed with the sale and the signature of the deed of sale. 

Yihai  Investment  Group,  subsequently  made  representations  and  in  March  2015, 

following consultations with Yihai, the Board took the decision to enter into a Joint Venture 

whereby SIC will bring the total land area as equity contribution with  Yihai contributing in 

form of cash and building materials. 

There was no issue of majority or minority shareholding.  The whole matter is presently 

being investigated by ICAC. 

From  the  outset,  the  shareholding  was  fixed  at  30%  for  the  SIC  and  70%  for  Yihai.  

This  shareholding  percentage  has  been  included  in  the  Shareholders  Agreement  signed 

between SIC and Yihai. 

The company has been incorporated on 15 September 2015  with  a notional  capital of 

Rs100,000  with  a  proposed  contribution  of  Rs70,000  from  Yihai  and  Rs30,000  from  SIC.  

The SIC land has not yet been transferred nor the cash from Yihai. 

In the course of the implementation of the project, Yihai will bring an additional equity in 

the  form  of  cash,  equipment  and  building  materials.    This  will  result  in  Yihai  shareholding 

reaching 70% as per the Shareholders Agreement. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (iv)  of  the  question,  I  understand  that  ICAC  has  already  taken 

possession  of  these  documents  and  when  ICAC  completes  its  investigation,  I  personally  do 

not have any issue in making the documents public. 

 

 

14 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, the reply is in the affirmative.  The 

case was referred to ICAC on 02 March 2016. 

Mr  Bérenger:  On  the  first  part  of  the  question,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has 

confirmed that Mrs Veerasamy, that is, the former Minister of Finance’s sister, was appointed 

Acting  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  member  of  the  Board  only  a  few  days  after  the  last 

general  elections.  Will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  I  am  right  when  I  say 

that,  although  advertisement  for  that  post  of  Chief  Executive  was  called  for  in  December 

2014, interviews were carried out, but to this date, that lady, the former Minister’s sister, is 

still Acting Chief Executive and no Chief Executive has been recruited? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, she is still acting. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I take it that ICAC will be looking into that also? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I hope so! 

Mr Bérenger:  I think  I  heard the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister say that  the Acting Chief 

Executive and somebody else I missed, took part in the discussions with Yihai. Can I ask the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he would be agreeable to place in the Library copies of the 

Minutes of discussions when the issue was discussed between Yihai and SIC? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I hope there are Minutes of Proceedings. If somebody is 

there, he can tell me. Normally, there should be, but whether I should produce that, because 

there is an inquiry going on by ICAC, I think there are certain information, according to law, 

I am not allowed to disclose at this juncture. Well, a note says after inquiry of ICAC, yes, it 

will be done. 

Mr Bérenger: Good, thank you! I don’t know how long the inquiry will take, but we 

will be waiting for a copy of those Minutes of Proceedings. Madam Speaker, if I can move to 

the next question. Is it 98 or 97 acres exactly? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, arpents, acres… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Well, anyway, can I know whether the Centre de Conférence and the 

Casino buildings are included in the property? 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

15 

Mr  Bérenger:  Whether  the  buildings,  the  Centre  de  Conférence  and  the  Casino  of 

Pailles are involved in the project. 

The Prime Minister: Well, the answer is no. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Good!  Can  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  has 

put  himself  the  question  and  asked  why  since  general  elections,  no  re-evaluation  of  those 

assets, surely that land, has been carried out by the new Government? 

The Prime Minister: Well, it has not been done. I don’t know why. But, if need be, I 

can have it done. 

Mr Bérenger: Very Good! Will you agree with me that, in fact, there has been gross 

under  valuation?  I  hope  ICAC  is  looking  into  that  carefully.  There  has  been  gross  under 

valuation of the value of that property being acquired and, therefore, there is an urgent need 

to review the whole thing. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that this is where 

the problem starts? On the one hand, there is under evaluation of the assets, of the property 

concerned  which  belongs  to  SIC  and,  probably,  there  will  be  massive  over  valuation  of  the 

building material and so on that the Chinese partner is supposed to bring in and the design is 

for,  therefore,  SIC.  And  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  told  us  it’s  in  the  Shareholders 

Agreement that SIC, as a result, would be a minority shareholder with only 30%. 

The Prime Minister: Well, I, myself - we were discussing to get the answers through 

the PNQ -  expressed doubts whether the value that will be put in the future on building, etc., 

that is going to be brought in by Yihai, whether we can have proper supervision and we can 

evaluate these things to make sure that there is no over valuation by the other party. In fact, 

they may bring in much less than 70% and still be the majority shareholder. My attention is 

being drawn to the fact that the valuation was done under the previous Government. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but the valuation was done on behalf of SIC by Government and they have been acting 

on that. Well, as I said, I feel it is needed that we should have another valuation. I am ready 

and willing to do it. 

Mr Bérenger: But, in the meantime, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he 

will  agree  to  give  the  guarantee  to  the  country  -  because  we  are  talking  about  patrimoine 

national,  property  of  the  people  of  the  country  -  that,  whatever  happens,  whether  SIC  re-

 

 

16 

evaluates the property that they bring in and so on or bring in cash also, in no circumstances, 

will the SIC has less than 51% of the shareholding? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  can’t  give  any  guarantee  as  to  that  because  they  have 

already signed an agreement which may be binding between the parties. So, it is difficult for 

me to pronounce on that. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Betamax  and  so  on,  we  had  plenty  of  agreements  which  have  been 

reviewed. So, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister telling me that this agreement between SIC and 

Yihai  is  even  more  solid  than  the  Betamax  or  whatever  other  agreement  that  cannot  be 

reviewed? 

The Prime Minister: We will look into the matter after inquiry. 

Mr  Bérenger:  On  the  issue  of  who  decided  exactly,  whether  it  is  through  the 

Shareholders Agreement, whether it is through over evaluation on one side, under evaluation 

and so on, but, finally, the decision was taken that the SIC would be a minority shareholder 

that  has  been  included  in  the  shareholding  agreement,  as  we  have  just  heard.  Finally,  who 

decided? Was it the Board or was it the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

who decided on that specific point? 

The Prime Minister: From the information that I have been given, it’s the Board that 

decided. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, if it’s the Board, what were the directives, if any, from the then 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development to his representatives on that Board. 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  should  ask  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development. He may be knowing. I am not aware. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  you  are  the  Prime  Minister  and  now  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development.    You  have  to  reply  to  the  questions.  I  heard  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister say: yes, there is an inquiry by ICAC ongoing. Just to clarify things, is the  inquiry 

by ICAC on both legs, that is, the famous Rs44 m. euro loan and this Domaine Les Pailles-

Yihai Project? 

The Prime  Minister: Well, the matter has been  referred to  ICAC to have a  general 

inquiry.  That is all I can say for the time being. 

Mr Bérenger: Good! Can I know whether - as things stand with the inquiry going on 

by ICAC - this project stands frozen or has it been abandoned as it stands now? 

 

 

17 

The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose for the time being it is frozen. 

Mr Bérenger: For the time being it is frozen? 

The Prime Minister: Yes. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  hope  it  is  a  long  time!  Can  I  know  whether  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister  has  communicated  to  ICAC  or  whether  anybody  has  communicated  to  ICAC, 

including any of his Ministers, information to the effect that there has been transfer of money 

in that case?  Two sums are mentioned, supposedly 3 million US dollars and another one, 1 

million  US  dollars.  In  the  case  of  the  3  million  US  dollars,  it  is  supposed  to  have  been 

transferred to a bank in Hong Kong and, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister knows, the accusation 

from his former Minister of Finance against the present Minister for Financial Affairs is that 

he  has  been  spreading  that  information  around.  Therefore,  has  the  Minister  for  Financial 

Services been questioned or is going to be questioned by ICAC on that score? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  must  say  that  there  were  rumours  around  and  that  is 

why I insisted that the matter should be referred for inquiry by ICAC. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm to the House whether when the 

negotiations  started,  at  one  time  it  was  agreed  between  both  parties  that  the  Shareholders 

Agreement would be 55 per cent in favour of State Investment Corporation and 45 per cent in 

favour of the other partner, the Yihai Company? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware of this.  I can only say what information 

has been passed on to me and I have just said it is 30:70 per cent. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  just 

informed the House that the shareholding structure would be 30:70  per cent and that the 70 

per cent of Yihai would represent cash, building materials and equipment. But has there been 

a  value,  a  sum  representing  this  70  per  cent  that  has  been  agreed  in  the  Shareholders 

Agreement? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  since  they  signed  the  agreement,  I  suppose  they  must 

have had some materials to justify what they have been doing. Apparently, the other side is to 

bring in Rs1.2 billion. Well, this is on paper. I don’t know whether, as a matter of fact, this is 

going to materialise. 

 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

18 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioned that 

a  deposit  of  Rs22  m.  was  made  in  this  transaction.  May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister who was the public notary involved and what happened to that Rs22 m.? 

The Prime Minister: It is notary Maigrot.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  Famous! 

Mr Uteem: What happened to the money? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: The money is in the bank. 

Madam Speaker: Your question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

whether he has inquired, since he has taken over the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  firstly,  to  have  this  lady  replaced  at  the  State  Investment 

Corporation  as  acting  Director,  and  also  inquired  whether  there  have  been  meetings  in 

Singapore or elsewhere between officers of the State Investment Corporation, the Ministry of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  the  local  representatives  of  Yihai  to  that  effect, 

where everything was concocted? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  am  waiting  for  the  result  of  the  inquiry  before  I  take 

action. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  note  with  pleasure  that  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime  Minister  has  been  very  transparent,  and  I  thank  him  for  that.  Would  he  consider  the 

possibility,  after  having  referred  the  matter  to  ICAC,  of  referring  the  matter  also  to  the 

Financial Intelligence Unit in light of what information the hon. Leader of the Opposition has 

given concerning the alleged transfer of funds to an account in Hong Kong and also referring 

the matter to the Central CID - since clearly it is a matter of truth and lies, we have to know 

 

 

19 

which  is  which  -  following  the  very  serious  averments  in  an  affidavit  made  by  the  former 

hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development against the sitting Minister of Financial 

Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  somewhere,  some  place?  Maybe  the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister could consider the Financial Intelligence Unit as well as the CID to 

complete the investigation. 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  have  already  referred  it  to  the  FIU.  The  FIU  is  inquiring. 

But  I  don’t  see  the  necessity,  when  ICAC  is  inquiring,  at  the  same  time  for  the  CID  to 

inquire. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I have a last question. We have heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say 

that  ICAC,  at  the  request  of  Cabinet,  is  carrying  out  a  double-barrelled  inquiry  into  both 

issues,  the  so-called  euro  loan  of  Rs44  m.  taken  by  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development  with  the  State  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  this  Yihai.  Therefore,  it  is 

confirmed that ICAC is inquiring, at the request of Cabinet, on both issues. Being given that 

situation, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has always taken the stand that once ICAC comes in, 

the  Minister  concerned  should  step  down,  and  if  he  is  cleared,  he  resumes  his  place  in 

Government, as has taken place in the past. Am I right in saying that with this as background 

and  with  the  fact  that  ICAC  is  carrying  out  this  double-barrelled  inquiry  -  very  serious 

inquiry - that last week, he had decided to ask the former Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development to step down, but was prevented from doing that? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  neither  asked  nor  did  prevent.  Madam  Speaker,  I  want  to 

make one thing very clear. The Members of the Opposition have been campaigning outside 

that the Police is doing injustice by simply on an accusation, on allegation, arresting people, 

bringing provisional and bailout. They consider it most improper and unjust. Because of that, 

in  the  two  cases  of  hon.  Dayal  and  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  I  asked  the  Commissioner  of 

Police not to take upon himself a decision to bring anyone of them before the Court of law 

and  have  a  provisional.  I  asked  him  to  have  the  inquiry  completed,  not  to  take  decision  by 

him, but refer it to the DPP. Let the DPP decide whether there is a case and, if there is a case, 

under  what  section  of  the  law  and  what  offence.  This  is  exactly  what  has  been  done  in  the 

case of hon. Dayal. But why did I ask hon. Dayal to step down? I am sorry, I am not trying to 

cause any prejudice, but insofar as I am concerned, as a Barrister, having read the transcript 

of the registration, I have come to the conclusion that if this is admissible in Court, then there 

 

 

20 

is  strong  evidence  against  the  suspect.    That  is  why,  in  his  case,  I  asked  him  to  step  down.  

But,  in  the  case  of  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  there  are  legal  implications.    I  did  not 

want, at this stage, to ask him to step down.  I am waiting for the inquiry.  Let the matter be 

sent to the DPP.  Let the DPP decide, if there is a case. In that case, I will certainly ask the 

Minister to step down.  So, this is my stand.  This is how I look at things. 

Madam Speaker:  The Table has been advised that PQ B/144 regarding the SIC has 

been withdrawn.  The Table has  also  been advised that PQ  B/184  in  regard to  the  Heritage 

City Project will now be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. 

 

SBM HOLDINGS - MR J. K.  - DIRECTOR   

(No.  B/137)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 

regard to Mr J. K., member of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius, he will, for 

the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to if it is aware 

that  the  latter  is  also  a  Director  and  Consultant  of  the  State  Bank  of  Mauritius  and,  if  so, 

indicate if this amounts to a conflict of interest and, if so, indicate the actions, if any, that will 

be taken in relation thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that Mr J. K. is not 

a member of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius. The issue of conflict of interest 

therefore does not arise. 

Dr. Sorefan: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that Mr J. K., is a consultant to the 

BoM without any tendering process as a Private Bank Stress Testing Officer there, paid to the 

tune of about Rs110,000 monthly and as Director of SBM and also Consultant contract to the 

tune of Rs80,000 monthly … 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me, Hon. Dr. Sorefan, are you asking a question or are you 

providing information? 

Dr.  Sorefan:  I  am  asking  whether  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  I  said  in  the 

beginning - is aware! 

The Prime Minister: Well,  I  am  not  aware  whether there is  a Consultant.   I do not 

have anything in my file. 

 

 

21 

Mr Bérenger: If I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister correctly, Mr J. K., who was, I 

understand,  number  two  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  for  a  number  of  years  -  I  am  not 

commenting negatively on his performance;  the past is the past -  is now both a Director and 

Consultant of the State Bank of Mauritius.  Did I hear that correctly?  If that is true, I mean, 

as number two … 

(Interruptions) 

State Bank, I am asking!  I believe that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that 

people who have been at the head of the Bank of Mauritius ont un devoir de reserve, as they 

have  been  in  presence  of  privileged  information  and  so  on.  I  do  not  think  it  is  in  order  for 

them to take any job with any private bank.  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have just answered.  In my answer, I said that Mr J. K. 

is not a member of the Board of Directors.  So, he cannot be a Director. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Khadaroo is not a Director of SBM Bank Mauritius Ltd.  He is instead a Director of SBM 

Holdings Ltd and SBM Bank Holdings Ltd.  He is also not a Consultant of the Bank of SBM 

Holdings.    However,  the  State  Bank  has  leased  an  exchange  rate  forecasting  software 

developed by Dr. Khadaroo for exclusive use by the bank for a period of three years after a 

successful trial period of three months. A monthly fee of Rs80,000 is paid to him. 

Dr. Sorefan: As he is a Consultant in the BoM as a Stress Test Officer, he is getting 

all data from private banks.  Is that not a conflict of interest?  Because he is getting all data 

from private banks, stress test and, at the same time, he is involved with the SBM.  Is that not 

a pure conflict of interest? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not know whether he is getting all data.  From what I 

have been told, there is no conflict of interest.  I understand Dr. Khadaroo provides training 

courses  on  econometric  modelling  to  staff  of  BoM  on  part-time  and  contractual  basis  for  a 

period of two years against a fee of Rs50,000 monthly.  He started delivering the courses in 

January 2016. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister … 

Madam Speaker:  Next question! 

 

22 

 

Dr. Sorefan: I got another question. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, I said. 

Dr. Sorefan: It is very important, please. 

Madam Speaker:  I have already said next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

STANDARD FOR AUTOMATIC EXCHANGE OF FINANCIAL ACCOUNT 

INFORMATION – MAURITIUS SIGNATORY 

(No.  B/138)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit  whether, in 

regard  to  the  Common  Reporting  Standard,  commonly  referred  to  as  the  Standard  for 

Automatic  Exchange  of  Financial  Account  Information,  he  will  state  if  Mauritius  is  a 

signatory thereof and, if so, indicate where matters stand as to the implementation thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  has  committed  to  implement  the 

standard  for  automatic  exchange  of  information  embedded  in  the  Common  Reporting 

Standards  (CRS)  developed  by 

the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 

Development (OECD).  This forms part of our continuous collaboration to fight international 

tax evasion. 

In  that  connection,  Mauritius  has  signed  a  Multilateral  Competent  Authority 

Agreement on 29 October 2014, to implement the CRS. 

Initially,  Mauritius  had  undertaken  to  effect  the  first  exchange  of  information  on 

automatic  basis  in  accordance  with  the  CRS  as  from  30 September  2017.    However, 

following  strong  representations  made  by  stakeholders  of  the  financial  services  sector,  the 

first exchange has been postponed to 30 September 2018. 

The  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  is  currently  developing  guidance  notes  to  assist 

financial operators in the implementation of the CRS. 

Dr. Sorefan: We heard from the Leader of the Opposition that there may be transfer 

of money to Hong Kong.  May I know whether this should not be implemented straightaway 

 

 

23 

so  that  we  can  get  information  from  banks  abroad  to  inform  the  MRA  what  sum  has  been 

credited in the account, to know about people who are evading tax in Mauritius? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  there  have  been  representations  from  the  stakeholders.  

Sometimes  when  we  do  not  listen  to  stakeholders,  then  we  are  blamed  that  we  have  been 

doing things too hurriedly without consultations.  In this case, we have listened – I do not, but 

people who are responsible – to the representations of stakeholders and they found it justified 

to postpone it.  Well, maybe what is being suggested can be done on a case to case basis. 

Dr. Sorefan:  I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say on a case to case basis.  But if 

we are for transparency and good governance, does not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister think that 

it should be done, because of Panama Papers and a lot of other things that are coming, for the 

good name of Mauritius, that we do implement this as quickly as possible? 

The Prime Minister: I have already answered that. 

MBC - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/139) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the 

House, obtain therefrom, information as to the number of employees – 

(a) 

presently in post thereat, indicating the number thereof who are employed;  

(i) 

on freelance basis;  

(ii) 

on contract basis and;  

(iii) 

on the permanent establishment thereof, and  

(b) 

recruited since July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each case the mode 

of recruitment.  

The Prime Minister: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Officer in 

Charge of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation that a total of 709 employees are currently 

serving at the Corporation of whom - 

131 are employed on a freelance basis; 

22 are employed on a contract basis, and 

- 

- 

 

 

- 

556 are on the permanent and pensionable establishment. 

24 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  information  is  being 

compiled  and  will  be  placed  in  the  Library.    However,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  the 

Report of the Public Sector Efficiency Bureau on Human Resource Management at the MBC 

has highlighted the following findings, among others - 

(i) 

there  was  no  clear  and  defined  recruitment  and  promotion  procedures  at  the 

MBC.    These  were  undertaken  at  the  whims  and  caprices  of  the  executive 

management team; 

(ii) 

some  134  employees  had  been  granted  salary  increments  more  than  that 

prescribed by the Pay Research Bureau; 

(iii) 

contract officers had been paid cash in lieu of annual leave though there was 

no record of attendance; 

(iv) 

the personal files of employees were not complete; 

(v) 

some  300  persons  had  been  recruited  under  both  freelance  and  contractual 

basis and there was no evidence that there had been a proper advertisement; 

(vi) 

there was no indication of the number of approved position for each grade at 

the MBC; 

(vii)  Security Officers had been recruited though such posts did not exist; 

(viii)  schemes of service had been tailored to accommodate employees who did not 

possess the required qualifications; 

(ix) 

a substantial number of contractual employees and those serving as freelance 

had been offered permanent employment over a very short lapse of time; 

(x) 

employees  who  had  been  previously  dismissed  were  re-employed  and 

subsequently offered employment on permanent and pensionable basis; 

(xi) 

there are instances where employees who joined as Helper had been promoted 

to the grade of Producer/Senior Producer; 

(xii) 

some  253  employees  out  of  412  (i.e.  around  60%)  on  the  permanent  and 

pensionable establishment had been promoted over the period March 2013 to 

April 2014. Promotions had been granted without proper assessment, and 

 

 

25 

(xiii) 

the MBC could be the only organisation in  the Public Sector which employs 

Office Attendants whose duties do not include cleaning of offices.  

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, after having listened to the 13 shortcomings, will the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister ask the MBC management to refer this case to the ICAC for further 

inquiries? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will look into this. 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister once again  for 

his straightforward answers.  Since it is very clear from the report that he has referred to - the 

Public Sector Efficiency Bureau on Human Resource Management  - that  there were certain 

issues that are clearly problematic, what has been done ever since December 2014 to date, in 

order to redress issues?  Could he table, may be, any document that might exist to show that 

there has been restructuring going in line with his policies? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have already given instructions that we should look into 

the matter and restructure the whole thing, and it will be done shortly. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister telling us - and we thank the Rt. hon. 

Prime  Minister  firstly  for  having  given  those  instructions.    That’s  very  important  -  that  the 

same  instructions  were  never  given  when  hon.  Bhadain  was  in  charge  of  the  MBC  for  one 

and a half years almost? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

consider asking the MBC to have a forensic auditing to see if the MBC needs so many staff, 

as mentioned by him? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will consider that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

TROU-AUX-CERFS - METEOROLOGICAL RADAR SYSTEM (NEW) - 

INSTALLATION 

(No.  B/140)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 

 

 

26 

Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  project  for  the  installation  of  the  new 

Meteorological Radar System at Trou-aux-Cerfs, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 

from the Mauritius Meteorological Services, information as to – 

 (a)  where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, and  

(b) 

if  the  advice  of  the  United  Nations  and/or  any  other  organization  has  been 

sought  as to  the  appropriateness  thereof  for Mauritius and, if so, indicate the 

outcome thereof and, if not, why not. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, the House 

will  recall  that,  in  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/881  on  17  November  2015,  I 

informed the House that the Agreement signed between the Japan International Cooperation 

Agency (JICA) and the Government of the Republic of Mauritius in July 2015 provided for a 

Non-refundable  Grant  of  one  billion  three  hundred  and  forty  million  Japanese  Yen  (around 

Rs387 m.) for the acquisition of a new Radar System. 

 

I  am  informed  by  the  Director,  Mauritius  Meteorological  Services,  that  the 

Consortium  of  Japan  Weather  Association  and  International  Meteorological  Consultant  Inc 

has been selected by the JICA as Consultant for the project. 

 

The civil works are due to start by August this year, and the project is expected to be 

completed by March 2018. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Director, 

Mauritius Meteorological Services, that following the flash flood of 26 March 2008, the then 

Government sought the expertise of the World Meteorological Organization, an entity under 

the  umbrella  of  the  United  Nations,  to  assess  the  capacity  of  the  Mauritius  Meteorological 

Services in regard to flash flood forecasting and to make recommendations, as appropriate. 

One  of  the  main  recommendations  contained  in  the  Report  of  the  Experts  of  the 

World  Meteorological  Organization  submitted  in  November  2008  was  the  installation  of  a 

new weather radar system in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in February 2009, the assistance of the United Nations Development 

Programme  was  sought  to  carry  out  a  feasibility  study  for  the  provision  of  a  new  radar 

system.  This request for assistance did not materialize. 

 

 

27 

 

Subsequently,  a  request  was  made  to  the  JICA  for  the  financing  both  the  feasibility 

study and the procurement of a new radar system.  This request was positively considered by 

the Japanese authorities. 

In parallel, the French authorities were approached in January 2011 to advise on the 

specifications for the procurement of a new radar system, as well as on the suitability of the 

present  location  of  the  Trou-aux-Cerfs  site  to  accommodate  the  new  system.    The 

recommendations  of  the  French  expert  formed  the  basis  of  discussions  with  the  JICA  to 

finalise the project for the provision of a new radar system. 

Madam Speaker, in the light of the facts I have just highlighted, the issue raised by the 

hon. Member in part (b) of the Parliamentary Question does not arise. 

 

I also wish to point out that the JICA is committed to expediting the implementation 

of the project targeting the installation of the new radar system at Trou-aux-Cerfs by March 

2018, as indicated earlier. 

Mr Ameer Meea: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just informed the House that, in fact, 

there is a grant  from Japan to the tune of Rs387 m.  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

what  would  be  the  total  cost  of  this  radar  system?    Because  in  the  2015-2016  Budget  and 

2016-2017 Budget, a sum of Rs270 m. has been budgeted for the same issue.  

The Prime Minister: Budgetary provision for Radar project - 

(i) 

the  project  value  for  the  implementation  for  the  new  radar  system  is 

Rs532,570,000 comprising grant element from Japan Rs387 m.;  

(ii) 

expenditure to  be incurred by Government  of Mauritius  Rs145,570,000, total 

Rs532,570,000. 

Provision has been made as follows in the budget - 

2015/2016 Budget - Rs270 m. 

2016/2017 Budget - Rs250 m. 

Total - Rs520 m. 

So far, an amount of Rs12,552,539 has been spent on this project. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea!  

 

 

 

 

28 

POLICE - PROMOTION EXERCISE  

(No.  B/141)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 

Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  competitive  examinations  for  the  promotion 

exercises for the grade of Police Sergeants and Inspectors of Police, respectively, he will, for 

the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  if 

consideration will be given for a review of the mode thereof for enhanced transparency in the 

promotion exercises, including if consideration will be given for the - 

(a) publication of the results thereof, and  

(b) conduct thereof by the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, Section 91 of the Constitution empowers the 

Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  to  make  appointments  and  promotions  in  the 

Mauritius  Police  Force.    Competitive  examinations  for  promotion  to  the  ranks  of  Police 

Sergeants  and  Inspectors  are  conducted  by  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  in 

accordance with the Disciplined Forces Service Commission Regulations 1997 and Standing 

Order 16 of the Mauritius Police Force. 

 The competitive examinations comprise written tests on the following subjects - 

 (a) 

Laws, Court Procedure and Evidence; 

 (b) 

Police Administration and Orders, and 

 (c) 

Police Duties and Procedures. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that 

results  of  competitive  examinations  conducted  by 

the  Disciplined  Forces  Service 

Commission  are  normally  forwarded  by  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  to  the 

Commissioner of Police for publication in the Police Routine Orders. 

 The hon. Member will appreciate that neither the Commissioner of Police nor myself, 

can intervene with the Disciplined Forces Service Commission in this matter. 

 As  for  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  the  reply  to 

Parliamentary  Question  B/804  on  08  November  2011  wherein  the  then  Prime  Minister  had 

informed  that  in  1996,  the  then  Police  Service  Commission  had  approached  the  Mauritius 

 

 

29 

Examinations Syndicate for the latter to carry out promotional examinations on behalf of the 

Commission.  However, the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate had declined the proposal in 

view of the complexity and technicalities of the subjects on which the Police Officers have to 

be  tested.    The  then  Prime  Minister  further  mentioned  in  his  reply  that  the  Mauritius 

Examinations  Syndicate  had  thereafter  expressed  its  preparedness  to  discuss  anew  the 

possibility  of  conducting  examinations  for  promotion  in  the  Mauritius  Police  Force.  

However, it would appear that there has been no follow up on this issue. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to highlight that in the Government Programme 2015-2019, it 

has  been  announced  that  an  independent  body  would  be  set  up  to  conduct  examinations 

within the Police with  a view to  promoting transparency  and meritocracy.  This  proposal  is 

currently under consideration. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  There  have  been  enormous 

frustration  and  grievances  since  the  result  has  been  published,  and  I  must  say  that  this  has 

always been the case whatever Government was in place; it is not just the case presently. So, 

in view that this Government is promoting good governance and transparency, may I ask the 

Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  this  present  exercise,  where  there  have  been  des  cas 

flagrants  of  injustice,  be  frozen  until  there  has  been  the  set-up  of  this  new  body,  so  that 

justice can prevail to everyone? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  whatever  changes  will  be  brought,  there  will  always  be 

some people who will not be satisfied; there will always be grumblings. I have not been given 

any  good  reason  or  example  to  show  that  there  has  been  any  misdeed  in  this  examination 

procedure. Therefore, I don’t see any reason why it should be freezed. The exam results are 

there  and  people  will  be  taken,  promoted,  according  to  the  number  of  vacancies  that  exist, 

and  those  who  are  on  top,  one  after  the  other,  would  be  selected.  This,  I  have  been  given 

assurance. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  realises  that 

there is a huge and dangerous credibility gap around that issue. Now, can I ask the Rt. hon. 

Prime  Minister  whether  there  have  been  arrests,  detentions,  charges  against  Police  Officers 

around that issue these last few days? 

The Prime Minister: Not so far that I am aware of. 

 

 

I don’t know. 

30 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Since,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  hon. 

Ameer Meea, there is  a  great  deal  of discontent  within the Police Force that  there has been 

some wrongdoing somewhere and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister rightly maybe says - maybe he 

are right, maybe he is wrong - that there will always be complaints, but in order to ensure that 

those  complaints  are  not  justified,  could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  setting  up  an 

independent body immediately, an ad hoc body right now to look at those papers and re-mark 

all those papers for those who believe that there might have been a wrongdoing somewhere 

and have suffered from same? In the name of transparency, because even for Bar exams, the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister would know, even in United Kingdom and even in Mauritius papers 

are  reviewed  and,  in  this  particular  instance,  such  methodology  should  exist.  So,  an  ad  hoc 

committee in order to address this issue! 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  think  an  ad  hoc  committee  can  redress  such  issues. 

Well, if there is anyone who thinks or believes that injustice has been done to him, he has got 

other recourse. 

 Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just informed the House that he is not 

aware  of  any  maldonne  or  grievances.  May  I  inform  the  House  that  in  the  present  exercise 

there  have  been  two  cases,  one  PS,  who  I  will  not  mention  the  name,  one  Police  Sergeant 

who has collapsed twice during the examination and attended by SAMU and taken away, yet 

when  the  results  were  out,  he  passed  the  exam,  and  another  Police  Sergeant  who  left  the 

examination only 30 minutes after the exam had started, and to the astonishment of everyone 

who  has  sat  for  this  exam,  he  also  has  been  successful,  and  this  is  resulting  in  much 

frustration among those who have that for this exam, with BSC holders in it.  May I ask the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister to investigate in this matter and that urgent action be taken so as to 

relieve these Police Officers who sat for this examination? 

The Prime Minister: I think they should all have collapsed and they would all have 

passed. 

 

 

31 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Mahomed! You have a question on this? 

No! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that 

there are examiners at the DFSC who actually are giving private tuitions to Police Sergeants 

to take these exams, and if this is the case, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see to it that this 

practice is stopped? 

The Prime Minister: I will ask the Commissioner of Police to look into this. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

PRISONS - DETAINEES - EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/142)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  detainees  and  the  prisoners,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 

obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police  and  the  Commissioner  of  Prisons,  respectively, 

information as to the present total number thereof, indicating - 

(a) the daily average subsistence cost to Government per head thereof, and  

(b)  if,  with  a  view  to  controlling  expenditure,  consideration  will  be  given  for 

alternative  measures  to  be  taken  to  deal  therewith,  including  the  creation  of 

halfway houses. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Acting Commissioner of 

Prisons that as at 07 April 2016, there were 2,276 detainees in our prison institutions, out of 

whom 1,364 were undergoing sentence and 912 were on remand. 

On the other hand, I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that as at 07 

April 2016, there were 117 detainees in Police cells/detention centres. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, according to Statistics Mauritius, 

the daily average subsistence cost to Government is around Rs700 per detainee. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Master and 

Registrar of the Supreme Court that the provisions of the Community Service Order Act and 

the  Probation  of  Offenders  Act  are  being  applied  by  our  Courts  as  an  alternative  to 

 

 

32 

imprisonment.  For instance, in 2015, in 562 cases, the accused were sentenced to community 

service and 341 Probation Orders were issued. 

Madam Speaker, another way to bring down prison population is by decreasing the rate 

of  recidivism.    In  that  regard,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Prison  Department  is 

stepping  up  its  efforts  to  curb  recidivism.    Indeed,  pre-release  programmes  are  currently 

being  run  by  the  Prisons  Service  with  the  collaboration  of  Governmental  and  Non-

Governmental  Organisations,  religious  bodies  and  private  enterprises  to  facilitate  the  re-

integration of detainees into the society upon release. 

Moreover, 

rehabilitation  programmes  comprising  educational,  vocational  and 

employment skills are being imparted to detainees in order to empower them to earn a decent 

living upon their release after completion of their sentence. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  a  view  to  reducing  the  costs  of  subsistence,  the  Prisons 

Department  is  harnessing  avenues  to  become  self-sufficient  in  areas  of  primary  produce, 

supply of milk, eggs, and chicken/meat requirements for the prison population. 

The  Mauritius  Prison  Service  is  gearing  all  its  efforts  towards  off-setting  the 

subsistence costs by 30% through revenue generated by workshop based activities associated 

with producing/manufacturing of artisanal products, rattan wares, furniture, shoes, garments, 

production and sale of breads and stationeries. 

Madam Speaker, concerning the creation of half-way houses, Government will consider 

the establishment thereof as a long term reform in the Prisons Service.  Consideration will be 

given  in  the  Vision  2030  blueprint  for  the  setting  up  of  half-way  homes  under  the 

responsibility  of  the  Prisons  Department  coupled  with  the  implementation  of  new 

rehabilitative pathways in collaboration of NGOs and the private sector.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  there  is  any  –  at  the 

Prime Minister’s Office, Attorney General’s Office  – exercise being carried out to see what 

minor offences which, at this point in time, send people straight to prison, can be reviewed so 

that for minor offences, especially  young people, are not sent straightaway to Beau Bassin? 

Because  we  know  that  Beau  Bassin  c’est  une  usine  à  criminels.    Somebody  comes  in  on  a 

minor charge, especially the  young ones,  and when they come out,  they are hard criminals. 

So,  are  we  reviewing  the  minor  offences  that  could  be  punished  differently  from  sending, 

especially youngsters, to prison? 

 

 

33 

The Prime Minister: Well, for minor offences - I don’t know what the hon. Leader of 

the  Opposition  means  by  ‘minor  offences’  -  normally,  for  example,  young  persons  are  not 

even  tried  in  open  Court.    They  are  tried  in  Chambers  and  most  of  the  time,  from  my  own 

experience,  I  know  if  they  are  found  guilty,  they  are  put  on  probation.    Now,  these  people 

comprise of people up to the age of – if I remember rightly – 18 years.  Now, for very minor 

offences, normally there is a… 

(Interruptions) 

…financial punishment. A fine is imposed. And then, if we still call it ‘minor’, but a bit more 

serious, community services are given. I don’t know what else we can do.  Should we release 

them  all?    But  one  thing  I  find  is  that  in  many  cases  where  people  are  complaining,  for 

example, the number of crimes that is increasing in this country, we are told that we should 

make  more  severe  laws,  but  the  severe  laws  must  be  applied  by  those  who  deliver  justice, 

where Courts have to be severe in order to make it act as a deterrent. I think it is their duty to 

be  as  severe  as  possible.  For  example,  I  have  seen  in  certain  cases,  for  the  same  sort  of 

offence,  one  Court  gives  a  fine;  another  Court  gives  three  months’  imprisonment;  another 

Court gives one year.  I can’t understand that. I think we all have a responsibility.  It is true 

that  there  is  independence  of  the  Judiciary,  but  they  are  living  in  this  country,  they  are 

citizens of this country, they should know what is happening, and they must act in such a way 

as to help to improve the situation.   

Madam Speaker:  The Table has been advised that PQ B/145 addressed to the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister has been withdrawn.  Time is over!  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – PASSENGER TERMINAL - REPAIR 

WORKS  

(No. B/153) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  whether,  in 

regard  to  the  new  passenger  terminal  of  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International 

Airport, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from Airport Terminal Operations Ltd., 

information as to if, by now, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

repair works with regard to the handrails thereat have been completed;  

performance certificate with regard to the main contract therefor has been 

issued, and 

(c) 

retention money has been refunded, if any. 

 

 

34 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I 

am informed by Airport Terminal Operations Ltd. (ATOL) that all outstanding repair works 

have  been  attended  to  except  for  the  replacement  of  the  remaining  four,  out  of  the  13 

defective glass panes.   

The outstanding works being minor, ATOL has, upon recommendation of the Engineer 

responsible for the Administration of the Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) 

Contract  and  Technical  Adviser  to  ATOL,  issued  the  Performance  Certificate  and  refunded 

the Retention Money on 15 December 2015.  

However,  as  a  measure  of  security  for  ATOL,  50%  of  the  Payment  Certificate, 

amounting to some USD383,000, inclusive of VAT, has been retained by ATOL and will be 

released when all outstanding works are completed.   

Further, the contractor has provided ATOL with a new security Bond of USD300,000 

valid for a period of two years to cater for remedial works that may be required. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  our  airport  has  gained  international 

recognition for its new infrastructure and enhanced services to boost passenger experience.   

It has for two consecutive years (2014 and 2015) been awarded the Best Airport of the 

African Continent. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you.  Is the hon. Deputy Prime Minister aware that the length of 

the handrails that were supplied were of 1.5 km and the supplier put only ordinary zinc paint 

handrails when the contract  mentioned stainless  steel?  That  is  a huge sum  pocketed by the 

contractor by furnishing stainless steel. Who is responsible to certify that the work was done 

as per the contract? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  if  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a 

specific question about the handrails, zinc, etc., I will reply to it, but I can’t, just on a question 

like this, reply on specific matters. 

Dr. Sorefan:  The handrails are mentioned in the question! 

(Interruptions) 

 

 

35 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:    I  replied,  Madam  Speaker,  that  all  outstanding  works 

have  been  attended  to  with  the  satisfaction  of  ATOL,  the  Engineer,  etc.    Now,  if  the  hon. 

Member has a specific question about the zinc paint, he can ask and I will reply. 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Deputy Prime Minister look into it? What I am saying is 

that the handrail is not as per contract. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Will the hon. Member ask a specific question, Madam? 

Madam Speaker: So, if the hon. Member asks a specific question, next time he will 

get the reply. Next Question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS ACT – REVIEW 

(No.  B/154)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training whether, in regard to 

the parastatal bodies, he will state if consideration will be given for proposed amendments to 

be  introduced  to  the  Employment  Rights  Act  with  a  view  to  legislate  against  the  current 

alleged practice of employing people on contract over long periods of time and depriving the 

latter of the benefits which normally accrue to the employees of the permanent establishment 

thereof and, if so, indicate when and if not, why not. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Employment  Rights  Act  is  only  applicable  to 

workers of parastatal bodies which are not governed by the Pay Research Bureau. 

As  I  informed  the  House  last  week  in  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/128,  my 

Ministry  has  already  embarked  on  a  major  review  of  the  Employment  Rights  Act  and  the 

Employment Relations Act in line with the decision of the Government to better protect the 

fundamental  rights  of  the  workers.  In  this  context,  I  have  set  up  a  Technical  Committee 

chaired by the Permanent Secretary of my Ministry and comprising of the Director of Labour 

and  Industrial  Relations  and  other  senior  officials  of  my  Ministry.  The  workers’  and  the 

employers’  organisations  have  already  submitted  their  representations  to  the  Technical 

Committee. 

Madam Speaker, I beg leave to file a list of the persons forming part of the Technical 

Committee. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  this  context,  the  Technical 

Committee  is  also  considering  the  issue  of  workers  on  a  long-term  contract  in  parastatal 

bodies whose rights have to be safeguarded. 

 

 

36 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Technical  Committee  is  presently  working  on  proposed 

amendments to be brought to the two legislations and in line with the process adopted in 2008 

and 2013, the Committee will make its recommendations thereon to a Ministerial Committee. 

Subject to the Cabinet’s approval, the Bill will be introduced in the National Assembly by the 

end of this year. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam.  I  am  glad  that  the  hon.  Minister  is  really 

considering it. The hon. Minister of Public Utilities said at the last session that people in the 

CWA are working 10 years, 18 years on contract. This is creating a lot of problems because 

they can’t get loan, etc. It is really creating an insecure family. I am thankful to the Minister, 

but, please, have it very urgently to this House. Thank you. 

Mr Callichurn: Surely do. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

SCHOOLS – TEXTBOOKS 

(No. B/155) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  primary  and  secondary  schools,  she  will  state  the 

procedures followed before the – 

(a) 

(b) 

textbooks are recommended as curriculum materials therefor, and 

change in the edition of the said textbooks occur. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that 

textbooks  for  both  primary  and  lower  secondary  sectors  are  developed  in  line  with  the 

National Curriculum Framework. A new Curriculum Framework for grades 1 to 6, developed 

by the MIE, has been officially launched in December last year. 

The  textbooks  for  the  primary  sector  are  developed  by  the  Mauritius  Institute  of 

Education  by  a  panel  consisting  of  MIE  Academic  staff,  Educators  and  the  Primary 

Inspectorate.  The  textbooks  undergo  a  process  of  validation  carried  out  by  a  pool  of 

Educators including Union representatives, followed by vetting by Inspectors of the Primary 

Inspectorate Division and final proofreading by the MIE.  

 

 

37 

All the pre-press works, including illustrations and layout, are effected at the level of 

the MIE  and the MGI  for Asian languages, while the printing and distribution of textbooks 

are usually undertaken by my Ministry. 

As  regards  the  secondary  sector,  textbooks  are  selected  by  the  respective  secondary 

schools  based  on  the  National  Curriculum  Framework  2009  and  in  accordance  with  a 

Circular on prescription of textbooks, issued at regular intervals, for the guidance of schools. 

I am tabling a copy of this circular. 

Requests for new textbooks that a school wishes to recommend for use are approved 

by  a  High  Level  Advisory  Committee  at  the  Ministry.  This  approval  is  based  on  the 

recommendations of the subject vetting panels. Schools normally finalise a list of prescribed 

textbooks and communicate same to the Bookshop Owners Union around the month of July. 

As  regards  the  upper  secondary  sector,  a  list  of  prescribed  and  recommended 

textbooks is provided by the Cambridge  International Examinations and a selection is made 

by the Textbook Committees at the level of respective schools. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, in the secondary sector, the 

abovementioned  circular  on  prescription  of  textbooks  is  issued  to  schools  and  stresses  the 

unnecessary replacement of a textbook by its latest edition in order not to have parents incur 

undue expenses.  

As far as the primary school textbooks are concerned, they are revised in line with the 

new National Curriculum Framework whenever applicable. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister has herself been in 

the education sector. There have been over the years - she will agree - complaints regarding 

the quality of the textbooks. May I request the hon. Minister to look into the possibility of, as 

was the case with the NCCRD earlier, developing curriculum, looking at the whole issue of 

textbooks?  May  I  request  her  to,  please,  see  to  it  that  not  only  the  MIE,  but  also  an 

appropriate institution like the NCCRD with people with experience in the primary as well as 

secondary sectors to sit and look into this whole issue of complaints that we have had during 

the recent  years and also to look into this whole issue of curriculum  as well at primary and 

secondary levels? 

 

 

38 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, the NCCRD was previously manned by 

people  coming  from  the  MIE  and  the  Educators.  It’s  true  that  now  the  curriculum 

development is done by the MIE with the help of Educators and officers of the Inspectorate 

Division. We can always improve on that. The National Curriculum Framework has already 

been  launched  last  year,  in  December,  for  Standards  I  to  VI.  The  work  is  being  done 

presently with the help of the Educators of the secondary sector and the MIE. We can always 

look into means of improving on the set-up. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr  Ramful:  There  have  been  complaints  recently  about  delays  in  obtaining  the 

textbooks, especially at primary level. May I ask the hon. Minister to look into the matter so 

that this does not repeat for next year? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  last  year,  with  the  new  curriculum 

framework, there was a lot of stress on the people doing the printing, but we are looking into 

the matter and we are trying to make sure that there is no further delay in the priority of the 

textbooks. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Coming  to  part  (b)  of  my  question,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon. 

Minister  rightly  pointed  out  the  undue  expenses  incurred  by  parents.  I  have  already  tabled 

copy  of  two  books  of  physics  today.  In  that  same  one  year,  they  have  got  the  original  and 

another edition. A new edition was published only because there were two specimen papers 

included  in  it.  So,  we  can  imagine  the  cost  to  the  parents.  So,  I  would  request  the  hon. 

Minister to look into this whole issue of new edition because it appears that there is a sort of a 

mafia around. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I was made aware of this situation and 

the Ministry sends circular letters every year to the schools asking the Rectors to make sure 

that such practices do not recur. But, as far as the textbooks are concerned, we will have to 

make sure that the school libraries have the latest editions.  In case there are one or two pages 

extra, students can get copies of these done at the level of the school itself. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Mrs Selvon! 

Mrs  Selvon:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  state  if  and  when 

the National History will be properly and fully taught in all educational institutions? 

 

 

39 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, the question put by the hon. Member is 

not related to the question, but I will still say that in the new Curriculum Development that is 

being developed for grades VII to IX, we are laying emphasis  on the issue of History to be 

included in the curriculum. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

NATIONAL FORM III ASSESSMENT - ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATION 

(No. B/156) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research  whether, 

in  regard 

to 

the  2016  National  Form 

III  Examinations  on 

Entrepreneurship,  she  will  state  if  the  curriculum  materials  and  syllabus  therefor  are  ready 

and, if so, if copy thereof will be tabled. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  currently,  students  of  Form  III  are 

assessed on a national basis in 7 subjects under the National Form III Assessment. 

For year 2016, the Ministry has decided to include Entrepreneurship Education in the 

National Form III Assessment. 

Madam  Speaker, curriculum materials  have already been developed by the MIE and 

textbooks for Forms I to III have been produced equally and are available. A teacher’s guide 

has  been  provided  for  the  Educators.  Examination  syllabus  for  Entrepreneurship  Education 

illustrating  learning  objectives  and  outcomes  as  well  as  details  of  examination  modalities 

have been prepared by the MES. In this context, a handbook has been distributed to schools 

and is available for consultation on the Ministry’s website. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  Entrepreneurship  Education  textbooks  as  well  as 

Teacher’s  Guide  for  Forms  I  to  III  and  the  examination  syllabus  for  Entrepreneurship 

Education. The latter is equally available on the website of my Ministry  under the National 

Assessment Form III Handbooks for Schools Rubric.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There were, according to information, 

quite some delays in the development of this curriculum for the Entrepreneurship Education 

subject. I would just request the hon. Minister - because the subject is examinable in Form III 

National Exams - to please ensure that there is un encadrement for the students, so that they 

don’t get unjustly penalised at the end of the year.  

 

 

40 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  subject  was  introduced  three  years 

back on a pilot basis and since last year it has been run in all schools at Form I and Form II 

levels.  So,  we  don’t  think  we  are  going  to  have  any  problem.  There  is  no  delay,  the 

curriculum material is available, all students in schools do have the books, and I am tabling 

copies  of  the  books,  the  Teacher’s  Guide  and  the  syllabus  on  the  Table  of  the  National 

Assembly. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question hon. Rughoobur! 

CAP MALHEUREUX – NHDC COMPLEX – UPGRADING WORKS 

(No. B/157) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

National  Housing  Development  Company  complex  at  Cap  Malheureux,  he  will,  for  the 

benefit of the House, obtain from the Company, information as to the value and breakdown 

of the – 

(a) 

upgrading works carried out thereat over the past five years, and  

(b) 

remedial works expected to be carried out thereat during the current financial 

year, indicating if the scope of work thereof has been finalised. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC) that 

the  construction  of  the  housing  estate  at  Cap  Malheureux  was  completed  in  1997  and  the 

housing complex comprises 128 apartment-type residential units. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the NHDC has carried out 

upgrading works in respect of the meter cabins and water reticulation network located thereat. 

The restoration of the meter cabins was undertaken in 2010 at the cost of one million rupees. 

The  rehabilitation  of  the  water  reticulation  network  was  completed  in  2014  at  the  cost  of 

Rs4.8 m. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  no  remedial  works  would  be  undertaken  during 

the  current  financial  year.  However,  the  NHDC  has  floated  a  tender  on  04  April  2016  for 

consultancy  services  for  waterproofing,  painting,  repairs  to  cracks  and  associated  works  at 

Cap Malheureux Housing Estate. The closing date for the submission of bids is 05 May 2016 

and it is expected that the contract for consultancy would be awarded by mid-June 2016. The 

Consultant will be responsible for the survey and preparation of detailed scope of works and 

 

 

41 

supervision  thereof.    The  rehabilitation  works  will  be  undertaken  during  the  next  financial 

year. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  thank  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  for  this  answer.    For  the 

upgrading works that are going to be undertaken, I would just suggest that there is also - as I 

mentioned  in  my  question  of  last  year  -  the  drain  works  that  have  to  be  completed.  So,  I 

would suggest that the hon. Minister takes up the matter with the NHDC shortly. 

Mr Soodhun: For sure, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

NEF - SCHOOL MATERIALS 

(No. B/158) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked the Minister of Social  Integration and Economic Empowerment  whether, in  regard to 

the  academic  year  2016,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  National 

Empowerment  Fund,  information  as  to  the  name  of  the  supplier  of  the  school  materials 

therefor, indicating the – 

(a) 

contract value thereof, and  

(b) 

procurement method used therefor. 

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Empowerment 

Foundation  that  the  contract  for  the  procurement  and  supply  of  school  materials  to  some 

24,200 children of pre-primary, primary, secondary, pre-vocational schools for the academic 

year 2016 in Mauritius was awarded to Triolet Noble Cooperative Society for a total amount 

of Rs41,457,600.  

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Open  Advertised 

Bidding Method of procurement was used for that purpose by the Foundation.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  have  one  supplementary  question,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know 

from  the  hon.  Minister  how  the  cost  has  evolved  over  the  years  and  whether  there  is  any 

appropriate mechanism in place for quality control? 

Mr  Roopun:    Madam  Speaker,  insofar  as  the  quality  of  the  products  distributed  is 

concerned,  I  must  say  that  for  the  last  exercise  we  enlisted  the  support  of  the  Mauritius 

 

 

42 

Standards  Bureau  both  at  the  level  of  the  selection  process  and  also  during  distribution. 

Samples were collected to ensure that quality as  per sample was being distributed, and also 

during distribution, samples were collected to check the quality. 

Insofar as the amount spent is concerned, I must say that, for example, in 2010, it cost 

about  Rs22  m.    But,  year  after  year,  the  amount  increased  substantially  and  for  the  last 

exercise in 2014, for academic year 2015, it reached Rs70 m. It more than tripled. But, then, 

we went on with a Social Register and now it is about Rs41 m., as I intimated.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN - WATER PIPES - REPLACEMENT 

(No. B/159) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

the project for the replacement of the old water pipes under the Build Mauritius Fund, he will, 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority,  a  list  of  the  regions 

identified  in  Constituency  No.  12,  Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien  therefor,  indicating  the 

time frame set for the implementation thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  CWA  that  three  pipe  replacement 

projects  under  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  will  be  implemented  in  the  regions  of  Mahebourg 

and Plaine Magnien, namely – 

(i) 

 the  renewal  of  12  km  of  pipeline  from,  of  course,  Riche  en  Eau,  Grand  Bel 

Air  to  Ville  Noire.  Works  are  expected  to  start  in  November  2016  and  to  be 

completed by June 2018; 

(ii) 

replacement  of  some  13  km  of  pipeline  in  the  village  of  Plaine  Magnien. 

Works are expected to start in September 2016, and 

(iii) 

the replacement of some 10 km of pipeline in Rose Belle, Ballisson and Beau 

Vallon as from February 2017. CWA will appoint a consultant for the detailed 

design and supervision of the works. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Due  to  the  irregular  water  supply  in  the  southern  region,  as  just 

mentioned by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, would he consider giving urgent consideration to 

remedy the situation by sending lorries to replenish water, if possible, everywhere? 

 

 

43 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, that is a general system which is put in place. Of course, it 

is not a very advantageous system, but if there are any particular problems, CWA does send 

tankers as and when necessary. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister, 

under this  Build Mauritius Fund  for this specific project  of replacement  of old  water pipes, 

what is the budget available as a whole for that project and whether there has been a general 

survey  for  the  replacement  of  pipes  around  the  island?  I  am  asking  for  Rose-Hill  region 

where people are facing a lot of hardship these days. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan, the question relates to Constituency No. 12.  I 

would advise you to come with a substantive question on the Build Mauritius Fund. 

Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  will  limit  myself  to  this  question  about 

Constituency No.12.  Reference is made to the amount from the Build Mauritius Fund.  May 

I know how much money from that Fund is being used and whether there is any money from 

any source other than Build Mauritius Fund that is being used to replace pipes? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  hon.  Uteem,  I  will  say  the  same  thing;  that  this  question 

relates to Constituency No.12.  If your question relates only to Constituency No.12, there is 

no  problem,  but  if  it  is  of  a  general  nature  concerning  the  Fund,  then  better  come  with  a 

substantive question. Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister reply? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, I have the figures with me. Now, first of all, what we’ve got 

to  be cleared is  that there is  a grant  from  Government to  the CWA and this grant  is  for the 

implementation  of  Pipe  Replacement  Project,  including  the  three  that  I  have  mentioned.  

Now, this is funded from the Build Mauritius Fund.  The amount for these three projects in 

Constituency No. 12 is as follows – 

(i) 

Rs120 m. during the period November 2016 to June 2018 (if you want to have 

further  details,  the  preparation  of  bid  documents  are  in  progress,  design 

preparation  of  bid  document  and  supervision  being  undertaken  in-house  by 

CWA); 

 

 

44 

(ii) 

Plaine  Magnien  Phase  I  -  the  second  project  that  I  have  mentioned  -  the 

estimated  project  value  is  Rs120  m.  implementation  during  the  period 

September 2016 to January 2018, and  

(iii) 

Plaine Magnien again, that is, Rose Belle/Balisson/Beau Vallon, 10 kms, and 

cost is estimated at Rs130 m. 

So, we will just add up and it comes at about Rs360-Rs370 m. 

Madam Speaker: No further question! The Table has been advised that the following 

PQs have been withdrawn: PQ B/172 and PQ B/188.  I suspend the sitting for one and a half 

hours. 

At 1.05 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM - DELEGATION 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, before proceeding with the business of the House, 

I am pleased to announce the presence in our midst this afternoon of a delegation comprising 

of five Speakers from the SADC countries accompanied by the Secretary General of SADC 

Parliamentary Forum, Dr. Chiviya.   

On behalf of hon. Members and in my own personal name, I extend a warm welcome 

to the delegation and wish them a pleasant stay in Mauritius. 

BLUE BAY PUBLIC BEACH – AMENITIES - UPGRADING 

(No. B/160) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment, 

Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management    whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Blue Bay public beach, he will state if consideration will be given for – 

(a) 

an increase in the parking capacity therefor;  

(b) 

the installation of an adequate lighting system thereat, and  

(c) 

the  embellishment  and  rehabilitation  thereof,  including  the  planting  of  trees 

thereat. 

 

 

45 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Beach  Authority 

has already initiated action for the provision of 52 additional parking spaces (42 for cars and 

10 for buses) at Blue Bay public beach. It is expected that a contract will be awarded for the 

works by the end of this month. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, provision is being made for the installation of 

additional stand-alone solar lighting systems during the next financial year. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  Beach  Authority  has  already  taken  the 

following measures – 

(i) 

works have already started for the upgrading of amenities such as toilet blocks 

which  also  includes  the  construction  of  additional  block  to  cater  for  the 

disabled and are expected to be completed by the end of April 2016; 

(ii) 

bids have already been launched on 21 March 2016 for the following works – 

(a) 

construction of French trains and soakaway to cater for surface 

water run-off following heavy rainfall and to prevent erosion of 

the public beach, and 

(b) 

creation  of  a  trading  zone  through  demolition  of  existing 

abandoned buildings. 

(iii) 

planting of trees by the end of this financial year. 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Would  the  hon.  Minister  consider  rehabilitating  and  upgrading  the 

public beach of Blue Bay like that of La Cuvette and Bain Boeuf? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  In  fact,  hon.  Dayal  has  already  started  something  on  the 

beach everywhere and we are just carrying on to do the upgrading there. 

Mr Jhugroo:   Would the hon. Minister  consider upgrading the public toilet of Blue 

Bay with a regular and adequate water supply during the renovation? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  It is already on the way for the upgrading of all the systems 

pertaining to the beaches. 

RDA - LEGAL ADVISERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/161)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Road 

Development Authority, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information 

 

 

46 

as to the legal advisers whose services are presently being retained thereat, indicating in each 

case the – 

(a) 

date of appointment thereof, and  

(b) 

fees  payable  thereto,  indicating  the  amount  thereof  claimed  and  paid  as  at  to 

date. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Road  Development  Authority 

(RDA)  that  a  panel  of  several  legal  advisers  offered  their  services  to  the  RDA  for  different 

assignments since December 2014. 

 I am further informed that Mr Subhash Lallah, the former Legal Adviser of the RDA 

was  paid  a  total  amount  of  Rs931,500  as  legal  fees  (including  Attorney  fees)  for  services 

rendered  from  December  2014  to  end  September  2015.  Another  amount  of  Rs460,000  has 

been paid to him for the period October 2015 to date for legal services provided to the RDA 

in respect of pending litigations. 

I am further informed by the RDA that in April 2015, following the setting up of an 

Investigative Committee in the context of the embankment failure of the Terre Rouge-Verdun 

Link  Road,  the  RDA  retained  the  services  of  Mr  Ravin  Chetty  as  Chairperson  against  the 

payment of legal fees amounting to Rs115,000. The Investigative Committee established that 

there was professional neglect pursuant to which a Disciplinary Committee was set up.  

Consequently,  in  August  2015,  Mr  Avinash  Sunassee,  Counsel,  was  appointed  as 

Chairperson of the Disciplinary Committee against the payment of Rs57,500 in relation to the 

disciplinary  proceedings  instituted  against  Messrs  Nubheebuccus  and  Mr  Jugoo,  ex-

Divisional  Manager  and  ex-Senior  Manager  of  the  RDA  respectively.  This  led  to  the 

dismissal  of  both  officers.    Mr  Lallah  represented  the  RDA  and  was  paid  an  amount  of 

Rs115,000. He was assisted in the case by Mr Trilochun against the payment of Rs57,500. 

I  am  further  informed  that,  in  December  2015,  the  RDA  invited  bids  from  five 

Chambers  for  the  provision  of  legal  services.  However,  the  only  bid  received  was  from 

Trilochun Chambers and, consequently, the Board of the RDA, at the meeting of 29 January 

2016, approved the appointment of Trilochun Chambers as Legal Advisers for a monthly fee 

of Rs40,000 (including Attorney fees) for a period of three years, as from February 2016. 

 

 

47 

Madam Speaker, the rates of the present Legal Adviser are practically the same as the 

former  Legal  Adviser  of  RDA,  that  is,  Mr  Lallah.  As  to  date,  Trilochun  Chambers  has 

assisted the RDA in the following cases -  

  Bheenick against the State of Mauritius; 

  Nabeebaccus against RDA, and 

 

Independent Review Panel case. 

But no claim has been put so far and no payment has been effected to Trilochun Chambers 

till date. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  it  is  a  coincidence 

that Trilochun Chambers or Trilochun is a relative of the Minister? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  there  were  five  Chambers  which  were  requested  to 

present their bids and the Board decided.  The retainer fee is Rs40,000 for a counsel and for 

an Attorney per month. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has not replied that Mr Trilochun is his brother-in-

law.    It  is  known.  It  is  a  fact.    Is  it  not  surprising  that  Mr  Trilochun  is  not  only  the  legal 

adviser  of  RDA,  but  also  the  legal  adviser  in  other  parastatals  where  the  hon.  Minister  is 

responsible. This is causing a lot of anger within the legal profession and within Members of 

Parliament - I won’t give names - even on Government side. So, he is having ... 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha:  I have already replied to  this question, Madam Speaker.  I would  like to 

ask  the  hon.  Member  what  are  the  other  parastatal  bodies  that  fall  under  the  aegis  of  my 

Ministry where he has been asked to offer his services. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  the  names  of  Subhas 

Chandra Lallah and Ravin Chetty who are Senior Counsels of a number of years at the Bar. 

So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  years  standing  at  the  Bar  has  Mr 

Trilochun? 

Mr Bodha: I think he was called to the Bar in England in the year 2000; a few years 

later. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has asked me a question concerning other parastatal 

bodies. Il ne perd rien pour attendre. Quelques questions parlementaires vont être déposées 

au bureau du Clerk dans les jours à venir. 

 

 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

48 

RING ROAD - REHABILITATION WORKS 

(No.  B/162)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Port 

Louis  Ring Road, he will, for the benefit of the  House, obtain from  the  Road Development 

Authority, information as to where matters stand as to the rehabilitation works being carried 

out thereat, indicating the –  

(a) 

cost thereof and the amount thereof paid as at to date;  

(b) 

names of the consultants therefor, indicating the fees payable thereto  and the 

fees paid as at to date; 

(c) 

name of the contractor thereof and;  

(d) 

expected -  

(i) 

completion date thereof, and  

(ii) 

date of coming into operation thereof. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Ring  Road 

Phase  1  was  practically  completed  on  31  January  2013.    However,  during  a  pre-final  visit 

effected from 20 to 24 January 2014, that is, within the Defects Liability Period of one year, 

the Consultant, Arab Consulting Engineers (ACE) from Egypt, notified the contractor, Joint 

Venture Rehm-Grinaker-Colas, of defects noted during the preceding one-year period. 

Madam  Speaker,  of  particular  concern  were  cracks  and  settlement  observed  over  a 

stretch of about 75m of road in a high fill zone supported by a reinforced earth retaining wall. 

Later,  around  end  of  February,  beginning  of  March  2014,  that  stretch  of  the  road  collapsed 

completely following the sliding movement of the retaining wall. 

Madam Speaker, the part of the road that collapsed is on a ‘design and build’ basis by 

the  contractor,  Joint  Venture  Rehm-Grinaker-Colas.    As  the  collapse  occurred  during  the 

Defects  Liability Period, in  line with  the conditions  of the contract,  the  contractor is  totally 

responsible for the remedial works.  However, the contractor refused to accept full liability in 

the  beginning,  but  afterwards  decided  to  honour  its  obligations  and  to  carry  out  the  repair 

works  as  per  the  conditions  of  the  contract.    The  clearing  and  temporary  works  started  as 

from April 2014. 

 

 

49 

Consequently,  the  contractor  appointed  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd  from  South  Africa  to  do  the 

forensic investigations and testing. 

I  am  informed  by  the  RDA  that  the  rehabilitation  works,  which  started  in  October 

2014,  are  ongoing,  and  that  the  overall  progress  of  works  is  around  50%.      The  following 

works have been completed so far - 

  all the piling works at the collapsed zone; 

  all the precast reinforced concrete panels have been casted; 

  370 reinforced concrete panels have also been erected on site, and 

  24  out  of  128  ground  steel  anchors  have  been  installed  and  awaiting  pre-

stressing. 

Additionally, the testing and checking of the reinforced earth panels at other locations 

are ongoing. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the RDA that 

the cost of the above remedial works is around Rs281m.  It is to be noted that the RDA has 

not released the performance bond of the contractor to the tune of Rs115 m. and it also has in 

its  custody  an  amount  of  Rs42  m.  representing  retention  money.    The  cost  of  the  remedial 

works will be met from that sum, which is a total of Rs158 m. 

However, I should like to inform the House that no disbursement has been made to 

the contractor for the remedial works so far. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the repair works undertaken by the contractor 

are  being  supervised  by  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd  on  behalf  of  the  contractor  and  Arab  Consulting 

Engineers (ACE) on behalf of RDA.  ARQ is being paid by the contractor and ACE is being 

paid  by  RDA  from  the  abovementioned  sum,  representing  the  total  amount  of  the 

performance bond and the retention money presently in the custody of RDA.  The fees paid 

to  ACE  till  date  for  the  supervision  of  rehabilitation  works  are  USD  352,000  and  MUR  1 

million. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, the contractor for the Ring Road 

Phase 1 project is Joint Venture Rehm-Grinaker-Colas. 

As  regards  part  (d)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  RDA  that  the  expected 

completion  date  of  the  project  is  at  August  2016.    The  project  was  delayed  due  to  the 

following reasons - 

(i) 

it is the first time that such works are being carried out in Mauritius; 

 

 

50 

(ii) 

because  of  the  complexity  of  the  site  as  regards  to  site  geology  and  rock 

structure; 

(iii) 

problems in drilling and fixing procedures for anchors; 

(iv) 

procurement of new casing of bigger diameter to avoid the pull out of tendons 

together with the casing, and 

(v) 

bad climatic conditions. 

 I am also informed that the road is already operational up to the Swami Vivekananda 

International Conference Centre. The rehabilitated segment of the road is not used by traffic.  

It will be required only when Phase 2 of the Ring Road project is completed. 

Mr Bhagwan: With regard to the leg which is not operational, can I know from the 

hon. Minister whether the RDA has some supervision?   It  is now used, everybody knows  - 

and  complaints  have  been  received  from  the  inhabitants  of  Les  Guibies  -  as  a  racetrack  for 

racing cars. Can the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, responsible of 

RDA, let us know what action the RDA has taken to have, at least, a sort of control over that 

part? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  the  RDA  is  doing  what  it  can  as  regards  that  segment,  but  also 

supervising the works. Now that the hon. Member has mentioned the issue of racing,  I will 

certainly ask the RDA and the police to see into the matter. 

Mr Bhagwan:   Following the recent heavy  rains,  a survey has been effected by the 

RDA with  the consultant following representations made by the inhabitants of  Les Guibies, 

because it is lower down and there have been some problems of water leakages. Can the hon. 

Minister inform the House whether site visits have been made, any report has been prepared, 

and whether the inhabitants have been informed? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  an  engineer,  who  is  a  site  engineer,  onsite 

where  the  works  are  being  done.  I  have  not  visited  the  site  for  long,  and  I  am  planning,  in 

fact, to have a site visit to see how the works are going on.  It will be an opportunity to talk to 

the inhabitants of the locality, to  see whether there are any problems  which are linked with 

the rehabilitation works. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Since  we  have  been  given  a  date  for  the  completion  of  the  works,  I 

take  it  that  we  are  talking  about  the  remedial  works.  As  the  hon.  Minister  pointed  out,  all 

these remedial works will end up at the foot of the mountain.  Can we know, on the horizon, 

what do we see, when we can expect the tunnel or tunnels - because I heard him say that there 

would be two tunnels - to go on and on the other side of the mountain as well? 

 

 

51 

Mr  Bodha:  The  Decongestion  Programme  is  being  finalised.  We  have  an  inter-

ministerial committee meeting on Thursday, and Cabinet will be apprised of the programme 

very soon. We expect works to start at the end of this year. 

Mr Bhagwan: We all know what happened at the RDA during past years concerning 

the quality of control by the engineers themselves.  There are cases in Court and so on. Can 

the hon. Minister inform the House and give assurance to the population, the taxpayers, that 

the RDA has actually sufficient qualified engineers to supervise these ongoing rehabilitation 

works and not relying 100% on consultants? We all know the reputation of some consultants, 

and we know what happened during the first Phase. Can the hon. Minister reassure the House 

whether  the  RDA  has  sufficient  qualified  engineers  and  whether  he  is  in  the  process  of 

recruiting new engineers? 

Mr Bodha: The comment of the hon. Member is right. We cannot be at the mercy of 

consultants, the more so when we choose the lowest bidder, which I think was the case in this 

project. In fact, the RDA has a problem of capacity building.  We have sent six engineers to 

China for a period of five months, in fact, to work onsite on a number of projects regarding 

tunnels and bridges in view of the Decongestion Programme implementation. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last question on this! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  that  only  50%  of  the  work  has  been 

done  up-to-date  in  two  years’  time,  from  2014  to  2016.  That  means  another  two  years  to 

finish the other 50% and, as per the question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, when work 

will  start  for  the  tunnel,  I  see  that  it  would  take  another  four  years,  and  you  have  already 

signed an agreement, G2G (Government to Government) with South Korea. So, it will take a 

long time the way things are. I think the hon. Minister should… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make a statement, please! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Will  the  hon.  Minister  see  to  it  that  the  contractor,  although  the  hon. 

Minister  has  mentioned  all  the  climatic  situation,  that  they  really  finish  the  work  in  a  time 

delay - don’t give them the freehand to finish it   - so that we can start with the tunnel? 

Mr Bodha: In fact, the date which was given to me was April and then it was May. 

Now, the date being given to me is August. I understand that it is a very complex site and the 

works that we are doing with the fixing of the casings, tendons because this is a rare case of 

rehabilitation works, but I also want things to be done as fast as we can.  And as regards the 

 

 

52 

decongestion,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  come  very  soon  with  a  proper  project  with  the 

detailed design. 

Mr  Bérenger:  From  what  I  understood,  we  are  in  trouble  because  we  chose  the 

cheapest  consultant.  Is  that  the  case?  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  is  really  the 

case or whether was not the problem that the funding agency shortlisted the consultants? 

Mr Bodha: Well, it could have been. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

ÉBENE CYBER CITY PARKING SPACE PROJECT 

(No.  B/163)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 

Ebène  Cyber  City,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Business  Parks  of 

Mauritius Limited, information as to - 

(a) 

the number of presently unoccupied plots, indicating in each case, the - 

(i) 

names of the lessee/s thereof, and  

(ii) 

project submitted for implementation thereat, indicating the timeframe 

thereof;  

(b) 

where  matters  stand  as  to  the  Parking  Space  Project  therefor,  indicating  the 

expected  date  of  coming  into  operation  thereof  and  number  of  parking  slots, 

and  

(c) 

if any traffic plan is being prepared for implementation thereat.  

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Business Parks of Mauritius 

Limited that there are presently no unoccupied plots at Ebene Cyber City. All 78 plots of land 

in the Cyber City at Ebene, amounting to a total surface area of 112.3 acres have been leased 

prior  to  the  coming  into  office  of  this  Government.  However,  plots  leased  to  the  following 

State-owned Enterprises, namely Mauritius Post Ltd., Mauritius Telecom Ltd. and State Bank 

of Mauritius Ltd. have not yet been developed. Moreover, a plot of land leased to the Indian 

High Commission has also not yet been developed. 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that the Business Parks of Mauritius Limited has 

received six project proposals respectively from - 

(i) 

BR Capital Ltd.,  

 

 

(ii) 

Ibiza Investment New Indigo Development, 

53 

(iii)  Kingsgate Holdings Ltd.,  

(iv)  Nex Ltd., 

(v) 

Centreview Ltd., and  

(vi)  B & S Park for the construction of office blocks during 2016 and 2017.  

With regard to parts (b) and (c) of the question, I am informed that the Business Parks 

of  Mauritius  Limited  launched  an  invitation  to  potential  bidders  in  December  2012  and  an 

award was made in June 2013 to a joint venture. A lease agreement was signed on 01 August 

2014 and, following advice received  from  Mr  Dheerendra  Dabee, the Solicitor General,  the 

Business Parks of Mauritius  Limited is  considering  assigning the lease to a special purpose 

vehicle.  

I am further informed that the promoter for the car park project has obtained a Traffic 

Impact  Assessment  clearance,  including  a  Traffic  Plan  from  the  Traffic  Management  and 

Road  Safety  Unit.  I  cannot  indicate  the  date  of  coming  into  operation  of  the  parking  space 

project.  All  I  can  say  at  this  stage  is  that  if  the  project  goes  ahead,  it  would  accommodate 

more than 800 car parks. Thank you. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, since, this is the third Parliamentary Question that I 

am asking on this issue of Ebène Cyber City.  For those who reside there, those who know 

the  region,  the  situation  is  very  bad  to  worst.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has 

discussed the matter with  the BPML, not  only  concerning traffic, parking, security problem 

of those working there, thousands of workers, hawkers - there have been some minor works 

which have been carried out - but can the hon. Minister, at least, let us know whether he has 

discussed  or  he  is  planning  to  discuss  with  the  BPML  ways  and  means  until  this  parking 

project  will  be  operational?  What  are  the  concrete  actions  which  the  BPML  intends  to  take 

just to relieve the workers working there of the problems they are encountering? 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, as you will appreciate, I have only been Minister 

of Technology, Communication and  Innovation since mid-March and, although  I have been 

there three weeks only, I would like to remind the House that the first lease at the Cyber City 

was granted as far back as 2003 at a time when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was Prime 

Minister and the hon. Member was Minister of Environment.  

(Interruptions) 

 

 

54 

So,  my  point  is  that  if  the  problem  has  lasted  13  years  and  has  been  just  growing,  I 

think the new Minister can be given some more time, but I can reassure the hon. Member that 

I have already called the Chief Executive Officer of BPML. 

 I beg your pardon? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Sorry! Address the Chair, please! 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to reassure the House 

that  I  have  already  met  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Business  Parks  of  Mauritius  Ltd., 

especially with  regard to  this car park space. But  I would like also  to  share with  the House 

that,  as  a  normal  citizen  of  this  country,  when  I  look  at  the  site  where  the  parking  space  is 

planned, I, myself, have doubts whether it should be there, but if that is the wish of the Board 

and  of  the  company,  we  will  have  to  proceed  accordingly.  But,  as  I  say,  I  think  I  could  be 

given some more time. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Since  the  hon.  Minister  has  reminded  me  that  we  were  in 

Government… 

Madam  Speaker:  Can  you  give  me  one  minute,  hon.  Bhagwan?  Hon. Jhugroo,  and 

then I will come back to you. 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can we know whether every plot is of the 

same size, the area of a plot, the amount paid as rent for each plot and whether all lessees are 

paying the rent? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Well,  I  certainly  have  the  total  surface  area  of  the  Cyber  City, 

which is, as I said earlier, 112.3 acres. What I can also tell the House is that the plots are not 

all  of  the  same  surface  area.  Those  78  plots,  I  understand,  are  being  serviced  more  or  less 

regularly  by  the  lessees,  but  I  don’t  have  the  specific  details  as  to  any  of  the  defaulters,  if 

there are any. If the hon. Member can come with a substantive question, I will be very happy 

to reply. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, first! 

 

 

55 

Mr Bérenger: Since the hon. Minister has told us that he has recently met the Chief 

Executive  of  Business  Parks  of  Mauritius,  can  we  have  the  name  and  qualification  of  the 

person concerned and an up-to-date list of Board Members of the Business Parks of Mauritius 

be circulated? 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes, I don’t have the details now, but I will certainly circulate it. As 

a matter of fact,  I do believe that this is public information because it is a limited company 

and, therefore,… 

(Interruptions) 

It should be up-to-date. It should be at the Registrar of Companies like any other company. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Like  any  other  company,  whenever  there  is  any  change  in  the 

directorship it would be communicated at the Registrar of Companies.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, you had a question? 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Since  the  hon.  Minister  has  reminded  me  that  I  was  in  Government 

from 2000 to 2005 with the MSM and MMM Government, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was 

also the Prime Minister and other colleagues there.  So, may I then remind the hon. Minister 

that he was Minister under the Labour Government responsible for IT until he was kicked out 

by Dr. Ramgoolam. Can he inform the House what did he do when he was Minister instead 

of reminding us what we have done, and today we have the Cyber City? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, do you want to reply? 

Mr Sinatambou: I think I should, in front of so many accusations.  

(Interruptions) 

Maybe  I  will  have  to  remind  the  then  Minister  that  I  was  elected  the  best  IT  Minister  of 

Africa! 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Instead of having this back and forth 

little  exercise  of  him  trying  to  say  that  it  is  not  his  fault,  could  the  hon.  Minister  look  into 

something which is very, very important - maybe not banal for him, but I am sure, maybe, he 

 

 

56 

will recognise that it is important?  Every single pavement that exists within the Cyber City 

can no longer be used by pedestrians because each and every place where there should be a 

pavement, cars are being parked upon those spaces, therefore forcing people to walk on the 

roads.  Hence, a serious traffic hazard!  Could the hon. Minister look into that possibility of, 

at least, having those pavements freed up for pedestrians to be able to move around the Cyber 

City without them being run over by cars? 

Mr Sinatambou:  I certainly share the hon. Member’s concern, Madam Speaker. All I 

have been saying is: “for 13 years nothing has been done, give me 13 weeks, at least!” 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

SUGAR – PRICE  

(No.  B/164)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  sugar,  he  will 

state the – 

(a) 

actual price thereof on the European market;  

(b) 

price paid to the Mauritian producers thereof, and  

(c) 

increase granted in the price thereof to the small planters thereof, if any. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 

by the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate that the price of sugar prevailing in the European market as 

last published on the official website of the EU Commission in January 2016, was 429 Euros 

per ton for white refined sugar produced by the EU Member States.  

I  am  further  advised  that  the  average  CIF  price  obtained  by  the  Mauritius  Sugar 

Syndicate for our sugar exported to the EU for Crop 2015 is 459 Euros for refined white and 

712 Euros for Special Sugars.  The average price per ton of sugar exported by the MSS, that 

is the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate, is, therefore, 515 Euros. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  ex-Syndicate  price  payable  to  Mauritian 

producers,  including  the  small  planters,  for  Crop  2015  is  estimated  at  Rs13,000  per  ton  of 

 

 

57 

sugar. As at to date, the crop advance is Rs12,150 per ton for small planters and Rs12,000 for 

the corporate sector.  

The ex-Syndicate price paid to the producers is arrived at by deducting all the expenses 

incurred by the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate  from  the total  revenue which,  inter alia, include 

the following – 

 (i) 

freight rate; 

(ii) 

storage fees; 

(iii) 

consumables; 

(iv) 

refining service fee; 

(v) 

manufacturing Premium payable for production of Special Sugars 

(vi) 

global cess, and  

(vii) 

administrative expenses of the MSS. 

I would like to inform the House that the price per ton of sugar accrued for Crop 2014 

was Rs12,694 compared to Rs17,573 in 2012 and Rs15,030 in 2013. 

The main reason for the drop in price in 2014 was that the market had already reacted 

to the announcement of the EU regarding the abolition of sugar production quotas as from 

2017. This has had a major impact in the reduction of the price of sugar in the EU market. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  for  Crop  2014  this  Government  had,  through  the  Sugar 

Insurance Fund, come to the rescue of the sugar industry by waiving the insurance premium 

for Crop 2014 and granting a special assistance of Rs2,000 per ton of sugar to the planters as 

recommended in an actuarial report.  Conscious of the vulnerability of the small planters, that 

is, those producing up to 60 tons of sugar, provision was made for an additional assistance of 

Rs1,400 per ton of sugar accruing to them. For Crop 2015, Government had already decided 

to provide an assistance of Rs2,000 per ton of sugar to all planters. 

The  revenue  stream  from  sugar  production  comprises  a  number  of  components  and 

these include -  

(i) 

molasses; 

(ii) 

Bagasse Transfer Price Fund; 

(iii)  Distiller/Bottler’s fee, and 

 

 

(iv) 

fair-trade. 

58 

In 2015, Government took a major decision to set up a Sugarcane Sustainability Fund 

to  provide for an  additional compensation to  the  planters for the bagasse  that they produce. 

For Crop 2015, the planters have already benefited from a sum of Rs1,100 per ton of sugar 

for  the  first  60  tons.    For  all  production  above  60  tons,  the  planters  have  benefited  from 

Rs300 per ton of sugar, over and above, Rs125 for the Bagasse Transfer Price Fund. 

Therefore,  Government  is  trying to  do everything humanly  possible to  keep the small 

planters viable. The viability price of the small planters stands at around Rs16,000 per ton of 

sugar. With all the revenue streams and assistance provided, the estimated revenue of sugar 

would arrive at around Rs19,000 for Fairtrade planters and Rs17,200 for other planters. 

My  Ministry  will  bring  necessary  amendments  to  the  Sugar  Industry  Efficiency  Act 

shortly  to,  among  others,  set  up  the  Sugarcane  Sustainability  Fund  and  increase  the 

Distiller/Bottler’s Fee by Rs20 per litre.  

Mr Bérenger:  I am given to understand that some time back - not that far back – the 

Sugar  Syndicate  was  marketing,  selling  all  the  sugar  produced  in  Mauritius,  whereas  now 

certain  producers  make  their  own  arrangements,  to  their  advantage,  in  UK  and  elsewhere. 

Can  I  know  whether  this  is  the  case,  how  does  that  stand  under  the  law,  and  how  are  the 

planters and other people concerned informed? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Madam  Speaker,  as  at  to  date,  the  Mauritius  Sugar  Syndicate  is  the 

sole institution responsible for the selling of our sugar overseas. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  my  question  pertains  to  land  under  sugarcane 

cultivation. Would the hon. Minister be able to indicate to the House, since ever he assumed 

office in December 2014, what kind of trend are we experimenting insofar as the cultivation 

is concerned? Is it on the rise, is it on the decline or is it stable? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, in a previous PQ, I did inform the House that over the 

last five years, we have seen constant decline in the surface area under sugarcane cultivation, 

but our aim is to stop that trend and to, at least, ensure that we have 50,000 hectares of land 

under  sugarcane  to  keep  on  producing  at  least  400,000  tons  of  sugar  and  also  have  enough 

bagasse for our energy production plant. 

Mr Bhagwan: From the figures given by the hon. Minister, we have the EU prices for 

Crop  2015  which  have  gone  up  by  some  60  Euros,  that  is,  Rs2,400  per  ton.    Why  then  the 

 

 

59 

price for Crop 2015 in comparison with Crop 2014 has moved only by Rs300?  Can the hon. 

Minister,  at  least,  inform  the  House  whether  according  to  him,  the  Sugar  Syndicate  has 

properly done its work and, according to me, has failed in its mission to secure the best price? 

The  Sugar  Syndicate  has  not  done  its  best  to  secure  the  best  price.    I  would  like  to  know 

whether  the  hon.  Minister  has  enquired  into  that.    I  would  say  the  small  planters  are  all 

suffering. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  currently  the  Sugar  Syndicate  has  a  contract 

agreement with two main suppliers in Europe: Cristalco in France and British Sugars in the 

UK.  I am informed that they had a forward contract already in place last year for Crop 2015, 

and at the time that they agreed on the price, it was  based on the market price.  Since then, 

there  has  been  evolution  in  the  price  because  overall,  the  sugar  market,  there  has  been  a 

decline in the supply and this has put pressure on the price to go up.  Unfortunately, it is true 

that, at the time that the agreement was made, the price was at the lower level and given that 

they had already made an agreement to secure the supply at that given price, they have in a 

way been penalised. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister say if he has discussed the matter with the sugar 

syndicate going deeply into how they have managed to come to such a situation? 

Mr Seeruttun: Again, Madam Speaker, I had asked the question how come that they 

did not foresee that there would be some kind of increase in the price, but then again, they are 

the experts, they are the ones who have agreed upon the price and they felt that it was the best 

price they could get at that time, but these are things that happen, unfortunately. 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

NATIONAL PROPERTY FUND LIMITED – ASSETS & LIABILITIES 

(No.  B/165)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the National Property Fund Limited, he will, for 

the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, the – 

(a) 

staff  list  thereof,  indicating  the  respective  post  occupied  and  the  respective 

salary, allowances and other benefits drawn; 

(b) 

composition  of  the  Board  thereof,  indicating  the  respective  allowances  and 

other benefits drawn by each member thereof, and 

 

 

60 

(c) 

value of the assets and liabilities thereof, as at to date. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): With 

your permission, I am going to answer this particular Parliamentary Question. 

I  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  the  reply  to  PQ  B/967  of  24  November  2015,  where  the 

substantive  Minister  stated  that  the  National  Property  Fund  Limited  is  a  company 

incorporated under the Companies Act and in accordance with section 210 (1) of the said Act, 

the  National  Property  Fund  Limited  has  to  submit  its  audited  financial  statements  to  the 

Registrar  of  Companies  not  later  than  six  months  after  the  Balance  Sheet  date.  The  hon. 

Member can have access to the information requested with the Registrar of Companies at the 

time the National Property Fund Limited will file its accounts. 

Mr Ameer Meea: We all know that the accounts of a private company are filed with 

the Registrar, but this is filed once a year for the Balance Sheet date. My question was about 

as at to date. Fair enough! I don’t think the hon. Minister will have the answer as he is not the 

substantive Minister. But can I ask him, in relation to parts (a) and (b) of the question, we do 

not have any answer? 

Mr  Soodhun:  I  think  that  all  these  information  my  hon.  friend  can  have  them,  as  I 

mentioned,  at  the  Registrar  of  Companies.  Every  information  will  be  submitted  before  31 

December 2016. 

 

 

 

 

61 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  the  question  is  specific.  I  asked  about  the 

respective salary, allowances and benefits drawn. This is not found in the published accounts. 

Anyway, if the hon. Minister does not have the answer, can I ask him whether all these costs, 

all these allowances, benefits,  etc, are being financed from  public funds  or from  the sale of 

assets of BAI? 

Mr Soodhun: I think that all the information, the complete financial statement which 

my hon. friend is  looking for, he will definitely  have them before 31 December 2016.  I  am 

sure that he will have the satisfaction before 31 December. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Our  good  friend,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  has  said  that  he 

knows those issues by heart. Can I just ask him to please reconsider his position?  Because it 

is clear that the law does not in any way consist of filing of staff names, positions occupied, 

respective salaries and allowances. This is quite obvious and trite law. So, in the light of this, 

could he reconsider the possibility of tabling it? If he does not have it here, undertake to table 

this in the course of the day or even during the week because this is information that is not 

and never will be available at the Registrar of Companies. It is unheard-of. Please! 

Mr Soodhun:  I will advise my hon. friend, if he does not  get  all information by 31 

December 2016, he can come again with a Parliamentary Question, and I am sure that we will 

give him. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  don’t  know  if  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  following  what’s 

happening. This  National  Property  Fund has been set  up to siphon money  from  all over the 

place in the BAI saga affair and now when this has taken place, it is treated as a simple any 

other company so that  we won’t have any  information now  although it is  directly  linked to 

the BAI saga and to the people who are waiting to be paid outside. 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, I am governed by the Companies Act 

and according to the Act, we have to submit it to the Registrar of Companies. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Taking  up  from  where  the  hon.  Leader  of 

the  Opposition  has  stopped,  one  of  the  questions  in  this  PQ  was  about  the  assets  and 

liabilities as at to date and the reason we would like and are insisting on an answer is because, 

by the end of June, in two months’ time, this same company has to fork out billions of rupees 

 

 

62 

-  not  millions  -  to  pay  Super  Cash  Back  Gold.  So,  we  want  to  know  as  at  today,  does  this 

company have the money or are they taking these people for a ride? 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I mentioned all this will be submitted to the Registrar 

of Companies and they will have it; it will be open. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order! I do not know how to phrase it, whether it should 

be a point of order, but  what  I am  trying to  get  at  here is  maybe if  you,  Madam  Speaker,  I 

know you cannot have any control on the answers given by the hon. Minister, but if the hon. 

Minister  is  grossly  misguided  by  people  sending  him  little  papers  or  people  sitting  next  to 

him and telling him that staff and salary and positions are filed at the Registrar of Companies, 

I  plead  to  you,  Madam  Speaker,  if  you  could  please  redirect  him  and  put  him  on  the  right 

track because this is unheard-of, this not in the law. 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member has well stated that I don’t have any control on 

the reply of Ministers. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t have any control, I can’t advise him. It’s up to him to reply or not. The hon. Member 

has asked his question. That’s fair! If the Minister wants, he can reply. If he doesn’t want, I 

can’t force him to reply. Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

AGALEGA ISLAND – AIRPORT & JETTY – CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/166)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands whether, in regard to the Agalega Island, he will state – 

(a) 

where matters stand as to the proposed construction of a new airport and jetty 

facilities thereat, as announced in the last budget speech, and 

(b) 

if  he  will  accede  to  the  request  of  the  hon.  Member  for  his  Ministry  to 

organize  a  visit  thereto  of  the  elected  members  of  the  National  Assembly  of 

the constituency of which it is part thereof. 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 

Callichurn): Madam Speaker, with regard to the proposed construction of a new airport and 

jetty  facilities  at  Agalega  Island,  a  team  of  three  experts  carried  out  a  preliminary  visit  to 

 

 

63 

Agalega Island and submitted their Initial Assessment Report to the Joint Project Monitoring 

Committee  chaired  by  the  substantive  Minister  which  recommended  the  appointment  of  a 

consultant for detailed site investigations and preparation of a Draft Report Project. 

The  Joint  Project  Managing  Committee  (JPMC)  met  on  29  February  2016  and  the 

way  ahead  presented  by  the  Implementing  Agency  was  to  carry  out  detailed  site 

investigations, preparation of DPR and the implementation of plan was ratified by the JPMC 

during that meeting. 

The  JPMC  further  directed  the  Implementing  Agency  to  formulate  Terms  of 

Reference for appointment of a consultant for detailed site and investigation and preparation 

of Detailed Project Report.  

The Draft Terms of Reference was formulated in accordance with the directives of the 

JPMC and vetted by the Implementing Agency on 16 February 2016.  

The modalities of appointment  of the  consultant who would be undertaking detailed 

site  investigations  and  formulation  of  the  DPR  is  underway  and  this  activity  is  expected  to 

commence as early as possible. 

The  Ministry,  in  collaboration  with  the  Outer  Island  Development  Corporation 

(OICD),  is  closely  monitoring  and  steering  each  stage  of  progress  to  ensure  timely  and 

successful completion of the project.  This project will ensure safe and all-round connectivity 

between mainland Mauritius and Agaléga and will also improve the facilities provided to the 

people of Agaléga many fold.  It  would also  present  new opportunities for further economic 

and social development of Agaléga Island and the Republic of Mauritius. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I very much appreciate and warmly welcome the 

proposal of the hon. Member to visit Agaléga.  

However, I wish to inform all hon. Members of this House that Agaléga Island, being 

part of the Republic of Mauritius, any Mauritian citizen is free to travel to Agaléga, subject to 

the availability of passenger seats on board of M/S Mauritius Trochetia travelling to and from 

Agaléga. 

The House may also wish to note that currently, the Dornier flies to Agaléga in case 

of  emergencies,  in  view  of  the  current  state  of  the  airstrip.  The  Dornier  can  take  only  two 

persons on the Mauritius-Agaléga leg and three to four persons on the Agaléga-Mauritius leg. 

 

 

64 

The recommendable means to go to Agaléga for the time being is by ship. A voyage of M/S 

Mauritius Trochetia to Agaléga is tentatively scheduled for 28 May 2016. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer  Meea: Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  I  know the hon. Minister is  not  the 

substantive Minister for Agaléga and outer islands, but the development of Agaléga will go 

directly  through  the  upgrade  of  its  airstrip  and  its  jetty  and  this  has  been  very  long  on  the 

cards. Since ten years, we have been debating this in the House. May I ask the hon. Minister 

to convey to his colleague who is not here to really speed up matters and see to it that at least 

the tenders are launched so that these people can be relieved? Because if there is no jetty, no 

airstrip, there will be no development in Agaléga. 

Mr Callichurn:  I do understand the concern of  the hon. Member.  I  will surely pass 

on the message.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  know  the  jetty  well  because  as 

Government Engineer I have been there twice to repair the jetty following tidal waves. Hon. 

Jhugroo  was  the  Chairman  of  the  OIDC,  but  in  those  days,  the  Development  Works 

Corporation  could  intervene  rapidly  so  that  goods  could  be  unloaded  so  as  to  feed  the 

population  of  Agaléga.  I  know  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the  substantive  Minister,  but  what 

kind of arrangement is available right now should there be a damage to the jetty so that vital 

services could be provided to the population there? 

Mr Callichurn:  For the jetty,  I don’t have the information  the hon. Member sought 

for at the moment, but I will pass on the message. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  -  I  know  he  is  not  the  substantive  Minister  - 

confirm to the House whether there has been any consultancy done with regard to the jetty or 

any port development that had taken place years back, I think in year 2003? 

Madam Speaker: He is not the substantive Minister! 

Mr Callichurn: I am not aware. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

 

65 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  In  the  answer  that  the  hon.  Minister  just  gave  in  relation  to 

Members of Parliament visiting Agaléga, I just have to tell the hon. Minister that this has not 

been  the  practice  during  the  last  mandate.  As  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware,  because  Agaléga 

forms  part  of  Constituency  No.3.,  I  have  made  an  official  request  last  time,  and  the  then 

Prime Minister acceded to my request, and I did visit Agaléga by Dornier together with hon. 

Mohamed. I don’t see why now this is so different! So, I would ask my hon. friend to convey 

the  message  to  the  substantive  Minister  to  make  an  effort  so  that  we,  as  Members  of 

Parliament,  go  and  visit  our  constituents  there.  I  mean  really  to  make  an  effort  instead  of 

making efforts elsewhere like the rearing of Barbara, where we have seen what has happened 

recently. 

(Interruptions) 

So, can the hon. Minister convey the right message to the substantive Minister? Thank you. 

Mr Callichurn: From the little I know, if a request is made to that effect, it will be 

acceded to. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

SUGAR SECTOR - EU ACCOMPANYING MEASURES 

(No.  B/167)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the restructuring 

of  the  sugar  sector,  he  will  state  the  amount  of  funds  obtained  by  the  Government  of 

Mauritius  from  the  European  Development  Fund  in  the  wake  of  the  EU  Accompanying 

Measures  for  Sugar  Protocol  countries  as  at  to  date,  indicating  how  the  funds  have  been 

applied, indicating - 

(a) 

the amount thereof that has benefitted the small planters, and 

(b) 

if a study has been carried out by his Ministry to determine the efficiency of 

the application thereof and, if so, indicate the findings thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Multi-Annual  Adaptation 

Strategy Action Plan for the sugar cluster for the period 2006-2015 was supported under the 

Accompanying  Measures  for  Sugar  Protocol  Countries  and  aimed  at  empowering  the  sugar 

cane  industry  to  face  the  challenges  caused  by  the  EU  Sugar  Reform  of  2005  whereby  the 

price of sugar exported to EU market would be reduced by 36%. 

 

 

66 

Funds  to  the  tune  of  approximately  230  million  Euros  have  been  obtained  from  the 

European  Commission  as  General  Budget  Support  as  at  date  to  finance  the  reform 

programme. 

The EU Support to the Government’s 10-year Economic Reform Programme is based 

on a combination of Accompanying Measures for Sugar Protocol (AMSP) plus EDF funds. 

It is understood that the total amount allocated under these two programmes come to 

some 278 million Euros for Mauritius, out of a total of 1.25 billion Euros earmarked by the 

EU for the Sugar Protocol countries. 

A  Sugar  Reform  Trust  (SRT)  was  accordingly  set  up  to  disburse  to  the  corporate 

sector, an amount of 94 million Euros agreed between the then Government and the corporate 

sector,  to  enable  the  latter  to  meet  the  costs  associated  with  the  Voluntary  Retirement 

Scheme,  Early  Retirement  Scheme  and  Blueprint,  that  is,  closure  of  factories.  Since  all  the 

funds have already been disbursed to the corporate sector, the Sugar Reform Trust (SRT) has 

been winded up in 2013. 

Provisions  have  also  been  made  in  successive  Government  Budgets  for  the 

implementation of the Field Operations Regrouping and Irrigation Project, commonly known 

as  FORIP,  to  improve  the  competitiveness  of  small  holders  of  land  under  sugar  cane 

cultivation, through effective regrouping, de-rocking and planting of small planters’ field and 

the implementation of the irrigation projects.  

The aim of FORIP was to cover 12000 hectares of land during the period 2006 to 2015. 

The objective of FORIP was two-fold, i.e. - 

(i) 

increase productivity by 20 to 25 %, and 

(ii) 

reducing expenditure by 20 %. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, the total funds disbursed under the FORIP amount 

to Rs3.2 billion. 

As at date, a total of 9,700 hectares have been covered and the total number of planters 

who have benefitted from the project is 9,935. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I have been receiving numerous representations from 

planters  regarding  the  way  the  FORIP  was  implemented.  I  have  requested  the  MCIA  since 

last  year  to  compile  facts  and  figures  regarding  all  projects  undertaken  on  small  planters’ 

sugar  cane  fields  under  the  FORIP  to  ascertain  whether  funds  have  been  well  spent.  If  the 

 

 

67 

need is felt, I shall request the MCIA to appoint an independent firm to carry out a complete 

and  comprehensive  assessment  to  determine  if  the  project  has  been  implemented  in  a  cost-

efficient manner and if the desired results have been achieved.  

 

I would like to inform the House that I had a meeting with the EU Commissioner for 

Agriculture and Development, Mr Phil Hogan, in Brussels in May last year in the margin of 

the Joint Meeting of the ACP/EU.  I made a plea to him for an in-house study to be carried 

out  in  ACP  Sugar  Producing  Countries  to  assess  the  social  and  economic  impact  of  the 

abolition of the internal quota of sugar on the EU Market to be effective as from 2017.  I am 

pleased  to  inform  the  House  that  the  request  has  been  accepted  and  a  consultant  was  in 

Mauritius  last  month  to  conduct  the  study.    We  expect  that  positive  recommendations  will 

come out of this exercise for the betterment of all stakeholders in the sugar cane industry. 

Mr Sesungkur: Can I know from the hon. Minister the vehicle which was set up for 

the actual disbursement of the fund which was received from EU, under whose responsibility 

was that vehicle? Was it under the responsibility of his Ministry or the private sector? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  All  the  funds  received  from  the  EU  were  transferred  to  the  General 

Budget Support Fund, that is, the Government Fund.  From there on, it was disbursed to the 

corporate sector, like I said, for the support of the VRS and ERS scheme.  With regard to the 

FORIP  scheme,  provision  was  made  in  the  Budget  every  year  to  cater  for  that  expenditure 

and was transferred to the MCIA which was responsible to implement that scheme. 

Mr Mahomed: As far as I know, every time the European Union delegation provides 

fund to the Government, especially as general Budget support.  They come with clear targets 

and objectives.  Following that, the European Union usually sends a consultant and this is a 

normal practice to see whether funds have been judiciously used.  So, may I know from the 

hon. Minister whether he is aware of those past reports and what are his feelings about that? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  are  key  performance 

indicators  that  are  set,  and  once  they  are  reached,  funds  are  disbursed.  I  am  sure  there  are 

experts who would come and assess whether those objectives are met.  As far as I know, in 

this  particular  case,  there  were  two  indicators  that  were  not  met  with  regard  to  the  ethanol 

framework  which  was  supposed  to  be  implemented.    It  was  never  implemented  and  with 

regard to the CT Power Project, we did not receive the whole amount earmarked for because 

these  two  indicators  were  not  met,  that  is,  the  whole  amount  that  was  earmarked  to  be 

disbursed under that particular accompanying measure. 

 

 

68 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, nous avons été témoins de la mort certaine des petits 

planteurs.  Over the years, we have witnessed the reduction in number and the problems that 

they  have  been  encountering.    I  know  they  have  written  to  the  Prime  Minister  with  the 

alliance of the small planters showing their dissatisfaction of the things which are happening 

and problems  which  can be solved.  Can the hon. Minister inform  the House and the small 

planters whether he is agreeable to meet them – or if he has met them – at least, prepare un 

schéma de travail so that they can be given some light for the coming years, the way they are 

being deprived of their rights and their problems?  So, can the hon. Minister, at least, inform 

the House? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I must inform the House that I have already met the 

alliance of small planters on two occasions. I intend to  meet  them again,  in  the near future, 

because I am coming with some amendments to the SIE Act.  I am going to apprise them of 

those amendments shortly. 

Madam Speaker:  One last question hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Mention has been made – I do not know whether it is by the Minister 

himself – of an Action Plan in one of these press conferences.  Can the hon. Minister inform 

the  House  whether  there  is  such  an  Action  Plan,  if  yes,  can  we  have  copies  of  this  Action 

Plan, at least, to be briefed? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I must inform the House that we had a report by a 

consultant, Landell Mills, and following that, I apprised Cabinet of that report. A High Level 

Committee was set up to look into the implementation of the recommendations of that report. 

Following the recommendations of that Committee, we have already started to implement the 

recommendations. 

BRITAM KENYA & APOLLO HOSPITAL - SALE 

(No.  B/168)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms whether, in regard to Britam Kenya, the Apollo Hospital and to the other assets of 

BAI  Co.  (Mtius),  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Financial  Services 

Commission, information as to where matters stand as to the proposed sale thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Financial Services Commission (FSC) that in relation 

to  Britam  Kenya  and  Apollo  Bramwell,  the  transactions  are  subject  to  a  Non-Disclosure 

 

 

69 

Agreement between the concerned parties and no further information can be provided prior to 

the finalisation of these transactions. 

With  regard  to  the  other  assets  of  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.,  these  comprise  mainly 

immovable properties for which the disposal process is underway. 

Mr  Uteem:    I  know  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is  not  the  substantive  Minister.  

Two  weeks  ago,  Tuesday  29  March,  the  substantive  Minister,  answering  to  a  PQ,  stated  in 

respect to Britam Kenya -  

“They came to Mauritius and they said to us that they are willing to buy those shares 

themselves, this has been done. The MoU has been signed. The money is going to hit 

the bank account this week (…).” 

So, at least, on that part, can I know from hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the shareholders 

who were supposed to buy Britam Kenya have put the money in the bank account and how 

much money have they put in the bank account or is that also confidential? 

Mr Soodhun:  Madam Speaker, I am not aware of it.  As the matter is being subject 

of a non-disclosure agreement, I shall transmit the matter to the substantive Minister and ask 

him to come with a statement to the House. 

Mr Uteem:    In the same PQ, the hon. substantive Minister stated that, in  regard to 

BA Exchange, and I quote – 

“(…)  we  are  waiting  for  a  green  light  from  the  Central  Bank  for  the  money  to  be 

credited tomorrow”. 

Tomorrow, meaning on 30 March 2016. 

Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  he  has  any  information  as 

regards  BA Exchange,  whether the Central  Bank has given its clearance and money has hit 

the account as was told to us by the hon. Minister Bhadain? 

Mr Soodhun:  I am going to stick to what I have said.  Concerning the BA Exchange, 

the approval of the Bank of Mauritius is being awaited to effect the transfer sale since there 

will be a change of the shareholder and BA Exchange is a licence of the Central Bank. 

SME DEVELOPMENT SCHEME CERTIFICATE - APPLICATIONS 

(No.  B/169)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &Port  Louis) 

asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Co-operatives whether, in regard to the Small 

 

 

70 

and  Medium  Enterprise  Development  Scheme  Certificate,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain from the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority, information 

as to the number of applications received therefor since January 2015 to date, indicating the – 

(a) 

number thereof issued as at to date, and  

(b) 

quantum of the financing provided to the holders thereof as at to date. 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  Seeruttun):    Madam 

Speaker, with your permission I am going to answer this question. I am informed that Mybiz, 

the  one-stop  shop  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise,  which  manages  and  administers  SME 

Development  Scheme,  has  received  as  at  date  a  number  of  63  applications  since  its 

introduction on 12 February this year. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  20  applications  have  been  approved.  In  the 

first instance, a letter of intent for an SME Development Scheme Certificate in respect of the 

approved project has been issued to each applicant. Once the applicant has given proof that 

the  required  financing  has  been  secured,  an  SME  Development  Scheme  Certificate  will  be 

issued. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that some Rs74 m. have already 

been earmarked  for the financing of those 20 projects  through loans with  maturity up to  10 

years and a moratorium of up to two years on principal repayment. 

Mr Uteem:  If I heard correctly the hon. Minister, only Rs74 m. have been committed 

whereas this Government had committed Rs2 billion to help Small and Medium Enterprises. 

May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  has  information  as  to  why  has  SMEDA,  has  the 

SME  sector  been  so  badly  hit  and  why  the  target  has  been  completely  missed  by  this 

Government? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  Rs74  m.,  I  have  just  mentioned 

that it is with regard to the 20 projects that have been approved by the Mybiz, and that is the 

cost that is going to be involved for implementing those 20 projects. As and when the project 

proposals  will  come  along,  funds  will  be  made  available  once  they  qualify  as  per  the 

conditions laid out under that particular scheme. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  a  sum  of  Rs74  m.  has  been 

earmarked for these SMEs’ projects. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether a single cent 

has been disbursed to date? 

 

 

71 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Seeruttun: As I said, Madam Speaker, as at to date, there were 63 applications, 

of which 20 have received a letter of intent. Once they receive that letter of intent, they have 

to go to the MauBank, where they have to secure the funding as per the conditions laid out. 

Once the conditions are fulfilled, the bank is going to … 

(Interruptions) 

It is a question of following the process put in place.   I believe, Madam Speaker, that once 

the projects are approved, funds will be made available. Like I said, it is only on 12 February, 

this year, that this process of application has been put in place.  So far, 20 have already been 

processed and a letter of intent sent to them.  They have six months, as per the conditions laid 

out,  to  come  up  with  a  letter  securing  the  fund  for  them  to  have  a  certificate  and  they  can 

proceed with their project. 

Mr  Ganoo:  In  the  last  Budget  presented  by  the  previous  Minister  of  Finance,  there 

were  25  paragraphs  regarding  the  SME  sector.  In  fact,  the  main  problem  why  not  a  single 

cent has been disbursed so far is that because the booster loan which used to be provided for 

by the DBM no more exists with the MauBank, in the sense that loans are only granted with 

the  usual  restrictions  granted  by  a  normal  commercial  bank,  that  is,  these  SMEs  have  to 

provide the securities, and this is why, in fact, no loan has been disbursed so far, in spite of 

the announcement made by the previous Minister in his Budget Speech. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I must say that, at this stage, I am not in a position to 

reply to that question, being not the substantive Minister.  But I am sure that if we give the 

chance for that scheme to work, probably we will see the results in a few months’ time. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, last question! 

Mr  Uteem:  I  fully  understand  my  friend;  he  is  not  the  substantive  Minister.    It  is 

unfortunate  that  there  are  so  many  substantive  Ministers  not  present  today.  Would  the  hon. 

Minister talk to  his colleague and ask him to  inquire whether the real  reason why there has 

not  been  so  many  approved  projects  is  that  the  guidelines  for  SME  Development  Scheme 

Certificate is so restrictive that there is only a very insignificant amount of entrepreneurs who 

are able to fulfil these criteria, and this is why, even out of the 70 projects, only 20 have been 

approved? Can he, with the view of boosting the SME sector, review the eligibility criteria, 

so that more SMEs are eligible for the grants? 

 

 

72 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I’ll definitely pass on that message to my colleague 

responsible  for  that  Ministry,  but  from  the  information  that  I  have  here,  there  is  a  list  of 

different sectors that are concerned with that particular scheme. So, it is not very restrictive, I 

must say. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

CEB - GAS TURBINES 

(No.  B/170)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard 

to 

the  Prequalification  Exercise  for 

the  Design,  Supply,  Installation  and 

Commissioning of 2 Gas Turbines Each Rated 35-40 MW (Site Conditions) at Fort George, 

he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as 

to if it has obtained the Environment Impact Assessment Licence applied therefor. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the CEB… 

No, this is friendly fire! 

(Interruptions) 

I am informed by the CEB that it is in the process of recruiting a consultant shortly. 

One of the tasks of the consultant will be to carry out Environment  Impact Assessment and 

Risk Assessment studies. The EIA license for the moment is not granted. 

Mr Jahangeer: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, by specifying 35 to 

40  MW  in  the  tender,  aware  that,  below  35,  only  Japanese,  Korean,  Indian  and  Chinese 

companies can participate? Above 40, the same companies can.  But between 35 and 40, only 

two  companies,  namely  Siemens  and  GE-Alstom  can,  and  high  level  officials  of  both 

companies have visited CEB before the issuance of the tender. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Some ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Some of the companies are qualified and others are not qualified. 

I don’t know about these technical matters. We are dealing with two matters.  First of all, the 

EIA... 

 

 

73 

(Interruptions) 

Please!  First  of  all,  the  EIA  is  for  the  consultancy.  This  is  the  question  I  am  asked.  With 

regard to the pre-qualification, the Central Procurement Board has launched an invitation for 

pre-qualification.    It  is  anticipating  too  much  to  say  that  only  two  or  four  or  five  can  be 

selected. This is the same sort of question that comes every time from this hon. Member and 

every time he is being proved wrong. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comment, please! 

Mr Jahangeer: One of the mandatory conditions in the tender for pre-qualification is, 

and I quote – 

“The bidder should have experience in similar tropical island ...” 

 And only one has this! It’s GE-Alstom, which has constructed Nicolay Power Station. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, you are not replying? No reply! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, is this a question?  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: This is no joking matter! For years, there has been a mafia.  Not all the 

staff of the CEB is concerned, but there are some tailor-made specifications. For years, that 

has  been  going  on.    It  is  no  joke  and  it  is  no  use  saying  that  it  is  the  Central  Procurement 

Board, because it is people in the CEB; not all of them! But there is a mafia, for years, that 

has been preparing specifications with specific producers in mind, and not just in that case, in 

a lot of cases!  And then, of course, when it is passed on to the Central Procurement Board, 

they don’t do the technical work, and what has to happen, happens. It is a very serious matter.  

Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  concerned  whether  he  will  look  into  that  in  that  case?  He  has 

other advisers apparently from Reunion Island, from rice fields, God knows from where! Can 

I  ask  him  whether  he  will  countercheck  if  this  is  not  a  case  where  the  specifications  have 

been tailor-made with one or two producers in mind? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  last  time  I  heard  that  sort  of  wachi  wala 

was when we were talking of Burmeister. We heard of specifications being tailored. So, what 

I did was very  simple. I  referred the matter not only to  advisers, but also  asked the African 

 

 

74 

Development Bank to tell us whether that wachi wala was right.  I was told clearly that this 

was just ‘why, why, why’, without any substance, and the African Development Bank agreed 

with the specifications given by CEB. What can I do? I can’t do much! If there is something 

wrong in the specifications, people will complain, and there are channels for this. It is easy! 

They tried to go to the Supreme Court.  They got an injunction, and then they withdrew their 

case. There is one company - the hon. Member knows that company very well – IMM.  IMM 

were to challenge on the same grounds, and when they came before the IRP, they withdrew 

their challenge, but made us waste a lot of time. These people have got only one aim in mind: 

to block the progress.  What is the basic of all?  It’s that they started by shouting ‘black out is 

coming, black out is coming!’ And now, they want to delay the works in order ... 

... to try and create black out! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: They have been proved to be wrong, wrong, wrong, and I have 

been proved to be right, right, right! 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  not  if  someone  says  right,  right,  right  three 

times that it means it is right. I mean, that’s the last time I checked. One thing which the hon. 

Vice-Prime  Minister  has  made  reference  to  is  about  wachi  wala  and  ‘why,  why.’  I  did  not 

really understand what he meant by that, but then again ... 

(Interruptions) 

The Vice-Prime Minister also talked about the African Development Bank. Now, is he ready 

to table any document from the African Development Bank that comes and says exactly what 

he has said in this august Assembly, that they are saying that all questions put and all issues 

raised in this august Assembly about specifications, as raised by the hon. Bashir Jahangeer, is 

totally wrong and the Vice-Prime Minister is ‘right, right, right’? Does he have, at least, the 

courage to come and table that document? 

 

 

75 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  The  hon.  Member  should  have  listened  when  I  answered  the 

PNQ, and I tabled - you listen! - the email before the Assembly but, of course, all you know 

is ‘Yap! Yap! Yap!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  please!  Listen  to  the  reply!  You  have 

asked your question, allow the Vice-Prime Minister to reply! 

Hon. Bhagwan, you had a question? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Leader of the Opposition was talking of mafia.  May I refresh 

the  memory  of  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  about  what  happened.  There  was  a  Select 

Committee  concerning  the  gas  turbine  at  Nicolay  and  one  Minister  had  to  resign.  It  is  the 

same mafia operating at the CEB now and the same person at the Head of the CEB! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, it is  probably true, it is  probably not  true. But, each time 

that  they  have  tried  to  test  this  before  a  court  of  law  or  before  a  tribunal,  they  have  been 

proved  wrong.  They  themselves  withdrew  their  challenge.  What  can  I  do?  Try  again!  Try 

again,  try  and  prove  that  there  is  the  mafia!  This  is  not  my  understanding  of  the  situation. 

Carry on, but don’t block the projects, like they have been doing all this time. The purpose is 

only to stop development of electricity production in Mauritius. This is their only… 

…their only… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments, please! Hon. Bhagwan! 

Hon. Bhagwan, I am on my feet! 

Hon. Uteem, yes! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  being  a  Senior  Counsel  knows  very  well 

that  people  can’t  challenge  once  the  specifications  have  been  laid  out.  So,  our  question  is 

very simple: who drafted the specifications? Is it someone from the CEB or is it an outside 

 

 

76 

consultant  with  international  experience  who  has  decided  that  this  is  the  best  model  for 

Mauritius? This is what we are asking; if it is someone from the CEB internally who drafted 

it or an international consultant. 

Mr Collendavelloo: At last, one intelligent question. 

(Interruptions) 

No! Hon. Uteem is also ‘malin’. Hon. Uteem ‘aussi malin’. 

(Interruptions) 

Bé to croire moi mo trop peur toi! To croire moi mo trop peur toi!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

Order, I said! Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t lose the time of the House! Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please reply! 

Mr Collendavelloo: It is an intelligent question. I don’t have the answer right now. I 

will check and come back to the House with the proper answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

CEB - RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES - BIDDERS 

(No.  B/171)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard  to  the  Request  for  Expression  of  Interest  for  the  Installation  of  Renewable  Energy 

Technologies (RET) for Power Generation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

the  Central  Electricity  Board,  the  list  of  the  successful  bidders  therefor,  indicating  the 

respective bid KwH price.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the CEB has launched an 

 

 

77 

Expression  of  Interest  (EOI)  for  the  Installation  of  Renewable  Energy  Technologies  (RET) 

for power generation on 01 June 2015 and at the closing date, it received 339 applications.  

Subsequently,  on  15  October  2015,  it  invited  Request  for  Proposal  exercise  through 

open advertised bidding for 10-15 MW solar PV projects with the aim of accommodating 40-

45 MW.  

At the closing date on 22 December 2015, it received 11 proposals out of which three 

have been identified as preferred bidders, namely – 

Name of Bidder 

Location of PV 

Equivalent Tariff in 

Farm 

MUR/kWh  (*) 

Voltas Eco-Biotech 

Solitude 

3.95 

Ltd 

Voltas Eco-Biotech 

Queen Victoria 

3.77 

Ltd 

Fuel 

Akuo Energy 

Henrietta 

4.64 

(Mauritius) Ltd 

I  would  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  CEB  has  launched  another  RFP  for 

solar PV farm of capacity 1-9 MW. The closing date is 13 May 2016.  

Aerowatt, an aggrieved bidder, has filed a challenge at the Independent Review Panel 

on  26  February  2016  and  an  application  for  injunction  in  the  Supreme  Court  on  29  March 

2016. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 

disclose the ownership of the land proposed to be used by Voltas? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, this requires a substantive question. 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  mandatory  condition  in  the  tender  that  the 

proof of ownership should be disclosed. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, of course, but a substantive question is required. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary  Question  Nos. 

B/187 and B/191 have been withdrawn. Next question, hon. Jahangeer! 

 

 

78 

STC - OIL & PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - TRANSPORTATION 

(No.  B/172)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 

regard  to  the  transportation  of  oil  and  petroleum  products,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain from the State Trading Corporation, information as to if an order has already 

been placed for the tankers therefor and, if so, indicate the - 

(a) 

name of the supplier thereof, and  

(b) 

respective purchase price thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

HIGHWAYS - LIGHTING  

(No.  B/173)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  highways,  he 

will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to if remedial measures will be taken 

for the provision of appropriate and effective lighting systems thereat to ensure the safety of 

the users thereof. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  since  the  highway  crosses  a  number  of  local 

authorities,  I  shall,  with  your  permission,  arrange  to  place  in  the  Library  of  the  National 

Assembly, the information which each local authority concerned, has provided in respect of 

the  street  lighting  network  which  is  found  on  the  stretch  of  the  highway  within  their 

jurisdiction area. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer:  Thank  you, Madam  Speaker. Can the hon. Minister come up with  a 

framework to solve this long-standing safety issue for road payers? 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I know it is a major problem. Since we came in about 

one year ago, we have been trying to make do with the system that was in place. The problem 

with  the  highway  lighting  is  that  it  is  installed  by  the  RDA,  maintained  by  the  local 

authorities, and we have eight local authorities trying to maintain the system.  That is why we 

are in such a mess. 

About  a  month  ago,  we  had  a  meeting,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 

Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport 

 

 

79 

and  myself,  and  we  have  decided  that  we  are  going  to  have  one  authority  only,  not  ten 

authorities, only  one  authority to  build  and maintain the system. We are  working  on it. We 

had a meeting about a month ago and we are working on it to come out so that we have only 

one authority to maintain the system. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Poor lighting is a cause of major accidents 

on the highway. So, may  I  have  from  the hon.  Minister, at  least,  a timeline as to  when this 

authority  would  be  set  up  and,  in  the  meantime,  if  people  can  speed  up,  RDA  can  go  and 

replace  the  lighting  because  there  are  a  number  of  black  spots  now,  in  the  motorway 

especially, as a result of failure of lighting? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  I  take  the  point  of  the  hon.  Member.  That  is  why  we  have  set  up  this 

Committee and, believe me, we are working on it. We have started the work about a month 

ago and we are working on it now. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

OBSERVATOIRE DES DROGUES - SETTING-UP 

(No.  B/174)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Observatoire des 

Drogues, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom – 

 (a) 

information as to the - 

(i)  

date of the setting-up thereof;  

(ii)  

name of the Chairperson and of the Board Members thereof;  

(iii)  

number of meetings held by the Board thereof as at to date, and  

(b) 

and table copy of any report produced as at to date.  

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  the  National  Drug  Observatory  (Observatoire  des 

Drogues) was set up on 11 September 2015 and its main objective is to provide up-to-date, 

factual,  objective  and  reliable  information  concerning  drug  addiction  in  the  country  and  its 

consequences.  

Madam Speaker, as regards part (ii) of the question, I would like to inform the House 

that  the  National  Drug  Observatory  is  a  coordinating  body  and  the  Chairperson  is  the 

Director-General  Health  Services  of  my  Ministry,  Dr.  Pauvaday.  A  representative  of  the 

 

 

80 

Prime  Minister’s  Office,  representatives  of  my  Ministry,  a  representative  of  the  Police  and 

the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  as  well  as  representatives  of  NGOs  form  part  of  the 

Committee. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (iii) of the question, I chaired a first meeting and, 

subsequently, there have been two meetings chaired by the Director-General Health Services. 

A Sub-Committee and a working group have been set up under this coordinating body. The 

Sub-Committee  has  met  on  29  November  2015  and  16  February  2016  while  the  working 

group has been meeting on a twice-weekly basis as from mid-February 2016.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  stakeholders  have  been 

requested  to  submit  information  relating  to  the  drug  situation  in  Mauritius  by  the  end  of 

January 2016 for the drafting of a first report. Working sessions for the compilation of data 

and writing up have been held frequently as from February 2016. 

A  first  draft  has  been  prepared  and  presented  to  the  Committee  members  at  the  last 

meeting. It is the international norm for National Drug Observatories to submit yearly and ad 

hoc reports as required. The yearly report of the National Drug Observatory is expected to be 

finalised by July 2016 and will be circulated to all stakeholders and will be made public. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir si le Chairman de l’Observatoire des 

Drogues a été déposer devant la commission d’enquête sur la drogue ou bien si ce n’est pas 

fait, est-ce qu’il va le faire à l’avenir? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I am not aware whether he went  personally, but  I will certainly be 

deponing  before  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  and  I  am  expecting  an  invitation  from  the 

Commission.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  As  far  as  l’Observatoire  des  Drogues  is 

concerned,  I  would  like  to  know  whether  among  the  technical  staff  there  is  a  specialist  in 

addictology and, if yes, who is he? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I understand that there is a specialist in addictology in my Ministry.  

I think his name is Dr. Jhugroo and he forms part of that team. Of course, there is all the staff 

dealing with substance abuse and drug addiction which forms part of this Observatoire. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

 

 

81 

Mr  Ganoo:  This  proposal  to  set  up  an  Observatoire  des  Drogues  was  an  interesting 

proposal  made  by  the  NGO  which  the  Ministry,  in  its  wisdom,  took  over  and  agreed  upon.  

But can I ask the hon. Minister - since the idea of setting up this Observatoire was to monitor 

the situation in the evolution of the fight against substance abuse - whether this Observatoire 

will regularly come up with a report which will be made public and distributed to the NGOs 

as well? 

Mr  Gayan:    Well,  the  NGOs  form  part  of  this  Observatoire,  but  I  must  say,  Madam 

Speaker, that when the NGOs went to the Commission of Inquiry on drugs chaired by former 

Justice Lam Shang Leen, they did not come up with any substantive information.  In fact, the 

Chairperson  of  that  Commission  lashed  out  saying  that  he  is  going  to  close  down  the 

Commission of Inquiry unless he gets people who come to denounce the drug traffickers, etc.  

I  think  this  is  a  major  problem.    I  hope  that  the  NGOs  will  collaborate  so  that  we  come  to 

grips with this drug situation in the country. But there will be reports; an annual report plus 

ad hoc reports as when necessary.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, again. I would like to know from the hon. 

Minister if he does not feel that l’Observatoire des Drogues is not doing the same redundant 

job as the Harm Reduction Unit of his own Ministry? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  the  Harm  Reduction  Unit  is  something  else.    In  fact,  we  will  be 

addressing this issue when we are dealing with  the Bill  on NATReSA later on.  But  I must 

say  that  l’Observatoire  des  Drogues  is  something  which  is  current  in  major  European 

countries and the aim is to collect information and data so that the authorities know where the 

problem lies.  Unless there is this information that moves from down to up, it is not going to 

be  possible  for  anybody  to  succeed  in  combating  the  scourge  of  drugs.    So,  the  Harm 

Reduction  Unit  will  be  restructured  and  I  will  be  dealing  with  that  when  we  come  to  the 

Second Reading  

of the Bill. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Has the Observatoire made any report specifically recently on drogues de 

synthèse? 

 

 

82 

Mr Gayan: A draft report is in preparation and I hope that it will be finalised, and once 

it is finalised, it will be circulated. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin, next question! 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH & SPORTS - CITADELLE MALL BUILDING – 

RELOCATION  

(No. B/175) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 

the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  relocation  of  the  offices  of  his 

Ministry at the Citadel Mall Building, in Port Louis, he will – 

(a) 

state the - 

(i) 

reasons therefor, and  

(ii)  monthly rental payable therefor, and 

(b) 

table copy of the Lease Agreement in respect thereof. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, when I took office as Minister, I noted that my 

Ministry  had  been  looking  for  additional  floor  space  since  2012  to  house  its  Finance  and 

Human Resource Division in view of the congested office space at the 3rd floor of Emmanuel 

Anquetil Building where the Ministry was accommodated.  The services of the Ministry have 

been expanding over the years and the number of staff has also been increasing. 

It is worth pointing out that already at that time the services of the Ministry were spread 

out  at  several  buildings,  namely  in  Rose  Hill,  Beau  Bassin  and  Port  Louis  and  this  was 

causing serious inconveniences to its customers and members of the staff as they had to move 

from  one  building  to  another.    Many  inconveniences  were  also  encountered  regarding 

movement of files.  

Further,  in  July  2014,  my  Ministry  was  requested  by  the  Ministry  of  Public 

Infrastructure  to  consider  the  possibility  of  migrating  to  another  building  and,  in  the 

meantime, to hold on all the investment projects. 

With  a  view  to  improving  accessibility,  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  control  of  its 

services,  a  decision  was  taken  to  relocate  all  the  offices  of  the  Ministry  under  one  roof.  

Consequently, all the services of the Ministry are now accommodated on the 7th and 8th floors 

of the Citadelle Mall in Port Louis. 

 

 

83 

As regards part (ii) of the question, the monthly rental payable for the 7th and 8th floors 

is  Rs1,309,804  for  a  total  area  of  24,760  square  feet.    A  monthly  fee  of  Rs35,000  is  also 

payable in respect of 10 parking slots at the building.   

Regarding part (b) of the question, the lease agreement has already been drawn up and 

is at the Attorney General’s Office. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Merci, Madame la présidente.  Peut-on savoir qui sont les propriétaires des 

nouveaux bureaux du Citadelle Mall? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  The owner is Orland Ltd. 

Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir qui en sont les directeurs? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I don’t have this information with me, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir, Madame la présidente, s’il  y a eu un appel d’offres avant 

que tout le personnel du ministère de la Jeunesse et des Sports bouge vers le Citadelle Mall? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Madam  Speaker,  bids  for  the  renting  space  with  amenities  in  the 

region  of  Port  Louis  to  house  the  services  of  the  Ministry  were  invited  through  open 

advertised bidding on 08 April 2015.  The closing date  for submission  of proposals  was 13 

May 2015.  At the closing date, two offers were received from Mascareignes Sterling Co. Ltd 

and Orland Ltd. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  May I know from the hon. Minister the total 

cost of moving his offices to the new office? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  I don’t have this information with me, but I know that it was done 

in-house. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Moving  on  the  same  line,  can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House 

whether  there  has  been  any  refurbishment,  purchase  of  furniture,  especially  for  the  two 

offices,  that  is,  the  hon.  Minister’s  office  and  the  Chief  Executive’s  or  the  Permanent 

Secretary’s  Office?    Can  we  know  whether  tenders  were  called  and  how  much  has  been 

spent? 

 

 

84 

Mr Sawmynaden:  I have no idea.  All went through the Procurement Office and they 

were the ones who were in charge of that.  

Madam Speaker:  Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr. S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the Firearms (Amendment) Bill (No. IV of 2016) was 

read a first time. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.14 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.45 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT BILL 

(No. II of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  National 

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Bill (No. II of 2016). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baboo! 

The  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  (Mr  S.  Baboo):  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very 

outset,  I  wish  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  hon.  Alain  Wong  Yen  Cheong,  Minister  of 

Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management,  for  the 

laudable  initiative  taken  for  the  introduction  of  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and 

Management Bill into the National Assembly. 

 

 

85 

This Government cares for the welfare of the population. We are committed to saving 

lives  and  changing  minds.  We  want  to  be  wise  before  any  event,  not  wise  after  the  event. 

Precaution is better than cure. Addressing a disaster is a tremendous challenge. The new Bill 

is geared to meet this challenge. 

Madam  Speaker,  due  to  climate  change,  there  is  a  steady  increase  in  the  number  of 

disasters.  Furthermore,  this  is  aggravated  by  a  growing  population,  an  increase  number  of 

people  living  in  hazard,  that  is,  prone  areas  and  environmental  degradation,  unsustainable 

development patterns, rapid and unplanned urbanisation and climate change. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  climate  change  is  altering  the  face  of  disaster  risks,  not  so 

increase  weather  related  variation,  sea  level,  beach  erosion,  disruption  to  natural  habitat, 

disappearance  of  islands  and  temperature  rises,  but  also  through  societal  vulnerabilities, 

excessive use of water, agriculture and the eco-system. 

This Bill will be instrumental in skilling up our risk reduction efforts and to reinforce 

the  resilience  of  local  communities.  It  will  decrease  vulnerability  and  exposure  to  hazards 

whilst strengthening capacity for resilience. 

Madam  Speaker,  a  disaster  is  not  only  the  concern  of  the  Government;  it  is  the 

concern of the whole population. Advocacy, awareness raising and education are essential in 

preparing the population to face unforeseen disasters. We have to empower the community to 

act when there is a natural calamity. The culture of solidarity in these situations is very strong 

in the population. This Bill shows them the way to join their efforts to  safe keep their area, 

parents, friends and neighbours. 

We  want  to  prevent  and  reduce  vulnerability  in  line  with  international  norms  and 

practices. Community preparedness will lead to reducing the vulnerability of individuals and 

households in  disaster prone areas and will improve their ability to  cope  with  the effects of 

disasters. We aim at preparing local response mechanism to handle disaster situation. 

Madam Speaker, animals have the flair to detect disasters. It is a natural instinct. It is 

reported that, during the tsunami of 2004, animals had already sensed the impending danger 

and had already run away before the tsunami struck. We have to inculcate this alertness in the 

minds  of  our  people.  This  Bill  will  help  us  to  ensure  that  our  people  are  fully  aware  of 

dangers  and  risks  in  time  of  a  disaster.  The  contribution  of  artists  and  creators  in  a 

sensitisation campaign will  be accentuated through video clips, posters, billboards, sketches 

 

 

86 

and  multimedia.  We  have  a  culture  of  safety  and  protection  in  our  society.  Our  cultural 

diversity is a source of unity. When there is a natural disaster, our unity is seen at its apogée.  

Madam Speaker, our heritage is our pride. We are in a country with a relatively short 

history, that is, some 200 years of history compared to the great civilisations. However, they 

have lost some of their major heritage and values during natural calamities and disasters. This 

Bill  will  help  us  protect  our  heritage  sites  from  calamities  thus,  preserving  them  for  the 

posterity. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  reminds  me  of  the  recent  floods  in  Tamil  Nadu.  Mosques 

opened  their  doors  to  accommodate  the  victims  and  Kovils  opened  their  doors  to  enable 

Muslims to offer prayers. This is a glaring example of solidarity when there is a disaster. The 

team  spirit  of  the  population  and  the  synergy  with  the  authorities  will  definitely  boost  the 

morale of the population in difficult time.  

There is no need for panic. We will keep our heads on our shoulders if we are fully 

prepared.  Recovery  aims  to  restore  and  improve  people’s  lives  to  pre-disaster  conditions 

making  them  less  at  risk  to  future  disasters  and  climate  change  impact.  The  Community-

Based Disaster Risk Reduction Centre will be empowered to bring back the required serenity 

in  the area, life returning to  normal  but  with  more resilience to future disasters and climate 

change impact. 

Madam Speaker, nature is considered as the teacher, the nurse and the healer by poets, 

but nature has also negative impacts on human life. Droughts, tsunamis, floods and famines 

are  some  examples.  This  Bill  is  attempting  to  reconcile  nature  with  man.  We  can  prevent 

disasters if we respect nature and plan properly our dwellings. Mother Nature is not harmful. 

To conclude, I quote the saying of Charles Darwin – 

“It is not the strongest species that survive, nor the most intelligent, but the ones most 

responsive to change.” 

This Bill is, therefore, fully responsive to climate change.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

 

 

 

(4.55 p.m.) 

87 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  National  Disaster  Risk 

Reduction and Management Bill was long-awaited due to the previous serious risk of disaster 

faced  by  the  natural  environment  of  Mauritius.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  Bill  is  far-

reaching in the sense that it also covers the economic environment too. 

For  instance,  who  can  forget  the  flash  flood  of  26  March  2008  and  30  March  2013 

respectively  which  shook  the  population  and  awakened  all  of  us?  It  is  good  to  note  that 

following the flash flood of March 2008, a report was prepared by the then Justice Domah. 

Significant  recommendations  were  made  on  this  issue  but,  unfortunately,  the  previous 

Government  had  not  given  due  consideration  to  those  recommendations  and  appropriate 

measures have not been taken. Had appropriate measures been taken, we would have been in 

a  better  position  and  well-equipped  to  manage  the  disastrous  flash  flood  in  2013  and  lives 

would not have been lost. 

Having  said  so,  Madam  Speaker,  it  was  indeed  high  time  that  the  Government  of 

Mauritius  comes  up  with  a  comprehensive  Bill  in  order  to  provide  for  an  institutional 

framework. This framework would - 

(i) 

 cater for the strategic actions that need to be urgently addressed and adopted 

for the effective risk reduction and management of national disasters, and 

(ii) 

provide for the design of risk reduction and management of national disasters 

at operational levels across the country. 

One laudable aspect of this Bill is that it lays the foundation towards the cultivation of 

yet another outlook of national risk reduction and management. With the implementation of 

the  provisions  of  this  Bill,  it  now  seems  that  the  Mauritian  population  would  not  be  taken 

aback  by  national  calamities.  Such  calamities  usually  leave  the  population  to  dwell  in 

national mourning for days in the aftermath of such national tragedies. 

Indeed, this Bill adopts an all-encompassing approach which provides –  

(i) 

for the prevention and reduction of the risk of disasters and disaster 

preparedness; 

(ii) 

when a disaster cannot be prevented and it does occur, the Bill provides for an 

effective response to that disaster and also for the mitigation of its adverse 

impact, and 

 

 

88 

(iii) 

it provides for the management of the post-disaster activities which would 

involve recovery and rehabilitation.  

This  is  where  my  Ministry  can  coordinate  and  collaborate  with  the  institution  that 

would  be  set  up  for  the  provision  of  effective  assistance  to  victims  of  floods,  cyclones  and 

also other natural calamities. 

I  earnestly  believe  that  this  Bill  is  paving  the  way  towards  the  development  of 

innovative  disaster  management  system  in  Mauritius.  This  would,  undoubtedly,  build 

resilience  to  disasters  including  natural  calamities,  as  I  have  just  said,  such  as  floods, 

cyclones, tsunamis and so on. It clearly shows that we are making the security and safety of 

our citizens a key policy priority. In the National Progress Report on the implementation of 

the Hyogo Framework for Action 2013-2015 the three  future outlook areas mentioned have 

been fully considered by the provision of this present Bill. 

The  first  future  outlook  area  considers  the  integration  of  disaster  risk  consideration 

into sustainable development policies, planning and programmes at all levels. This Bill lays a 

lot  of  importance  on  this  aspect.  The  second  future  outlook  area  refers  to  the  development 

and strengthening of institutions, mechanisms and capacities at all levels. This aspect has also 

been  incorporated  in  the  Bill  to  ensure  resilience  to  hazards.  The  third  future  outlook  area 

covers  the  systematic  incorporation  of  risk  reduction  approaches  into  the  design  and 

implementation of emergency preparedness response and also recovery programmes. Again, 

this has been catered for in the present Bill. 

Various  institutions  such  as  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management 

Council,  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Centre,  the  Local  Disaster 

Risk  Reduction and  Management Committee and the National  Crisis  Committee will be set 

up.  

They will be armed with extensive powers and they would be dedicated towards the 

implementation  of  their  respective  statutory  duties.  Therefore,  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and 

Management would be on the daily agenda of all authorities concerned.  

Public awareness of the dangers of national disasters and actions in response to such 

risk  would  become  rife;  this  is  actually  one  of  the  foremost  objectives  of  the  National 

Council. The involvement of the local authorities via the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and 

Management Committee is praiseworthy. We cannot deny that we are often faced with flood-

related  problems  in  the  local  communities.  The  creation  of  the  Local  Committee  in  the 

 

 

89 

strategic implementation of the Disaster Risk  Reduction and Management  will ensure close 

collaboration  with  the  national  institution.  This  will  ensure  rapid  and  also  effective 

intervention in risky and emergency situation. 

The Bill  also  provides for the setting up of related institution in Rodrigues, Agalega 

and  Cargados  Carajos  islands  given  that  they  are  equally  prone  to  the  risk  of  disasters  as 

Mauritius. This forward-looking Bill provides for local, national and regional linkage in the 

development of strategies to grapple with risk of disasters and their aftermath. We are not the 

first country to realise the pressing need of those institutions provided for under this present 

Bill. In the past, countries such as South Africa, the Philippines or Colombia have similarly 

developed  one  legal  framework  for  disaster  risk  reduction.  These  have  facilitated  the 

adoption of a holistic approach to the prevention and also reduction of the risk of disasters. In 

South Africa, the 2002 Disaster Management Act similarly designed a disaster management 

structure, disaster management frameworks for all levels of Governments with clear rules and 

mandates  established.  Likewise,  Colombia  has  adopted  framework  legislation,  which 

organises disaster risk management at all levels of the Government.  

What  I can see is  that we are indeed aligning ourselves on the international  front.  It 

would  not  be  long  when  our  national  policy  would  meet  major  international  policies 

framework.  Disasters  are  having  other  growing  social  and  economic  impacts  paralysing  so 

many countries across the globe. It is good that we are coming with this present Bill. The way 

this Bill provides for the creation of different institutions at different levels and the way that it 

caters for the coordination of these institutions on the local, international and regional levels 

are indeed exemplary.  

Moreover,  the  way  this  Bill  establishes  an  accountability  framework  on  the  national 

and  also  on  the  international  front  is  highly  commendable.  Indeed,  our  paradise  destination 

would continue to attract even more tourists when they would be reassured of the resilience 

of  Mauritius  towards  national  disasters  especially  when  we  are  talking  about  natural 

calamities. 

To  sum  up,  I  cannot,  but  command  and  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment, 

Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  for  bringing  forward  this 

present Bill for the better protection and improvement of the safety and also security of our 

Mauritian population. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

 

 (5.05 p.m.) 

90 

Mr S. Ramkaun (Third Member for Pamplemousses & Triolet):  Madam Speaker, 

I would like, first of all, to congratulate this Government and, more particularly, the Minister 

of  Civil  Service  Affairs  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 

Development, and Disaster and Beach Management for coming up with this Bill. 

It was high time to come along with such a document which will pave the way for a 

better living environment for the people of Mauritius, Rodrigues and the outer islands and for 

all those who visit the island. Although, being a small island State, Mauritius is not deprived 

of  intelligent  people  who  can  help  to  ensure  a  prompt  coordination,  monitoring  of  actions 

before and after possible risk of disasters.  Here, we are talking of disasters, be it cyclones, 

heavy  and  torrential  rains,  tsunamis,  heavy  waves,  water  crisis,  earthquakes,  landslides  and 

even terrorist attack, etc. 

Madam Speaker, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan covers 

four thematic areas, namely – 

(i) 

disaster prevention and mitigation; 

(ii) 

disaster preparedness; 

(iii) 

disaster response, and 

(iv) 

disaster rehabilitation …. 

Madam Speaker: Sorry to interrupt the hon. Member, but I can hear a phone ringing 

in the Chamber. 

Mr  Ramkaun:    …disaster  rehabilitation  and  recovery  which  corresponds  to  the 

structure of the National risk Reduction and Management Council.  

The  Senior  Chief  Executive  of 

the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 

Development, and Disaster and Beach Management in liaison with the police formulates and 

implements the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan and ensures that this 

physical  framework,  social  economic  and  environmental  plans  of  communities,  cities, 

municipalities and district councils are consistent with such plan. 

The  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Plan  is  consistent  with  the 

National  disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Framework  which  serves  as  principal 

guide  to  disaster  risk  reduction  and  management  efforts  to  the  country.  The  framework 

 

 

91 

envisions a country of “safer, adaptive and disaster resilient communities towards sustainable 

development.”  It  conveys  a  paradigm  shift  from  reactive  to  proactive  disaster  risk 

management wherein men and women have increased their awareness and understanding of 

disaster  risk  reduction  management  with  the  end,  in  view  of  increasing  people’s  resilience 

and decreasing their vulnerabilities. 

Madam Speaker, all of us have not forgotten the recent flash flood of 30 March 2013 

in Mauritius which has claimed, at least, 11 lives. About 152 millimetres of rainfall had been 

recorded  in  Port  Louis  within  three  hours.  I  still  cannot  believe  what  has  happened  to  our 

little beloved island. I do feel  that the bereaved  families and for people whose property has 

been destroyed in the catastrophic floods. The inquest will then begin. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the reasons why the area was overwhelmed leading to so 

many  deaths,  such  events  are  supposed  to  happen  only  once  in  a  lifetime,  but  we  had  two 

similar  events  in  a  few  weeks.  Who  is  to  be  blamed  for  the  inefficient  evacuation  of  flood 

waters? 

Talking  about  natural  disasters  around  the  world,  we  had  150  national  disasters 

affecting millions of people worldwide in 2015. Asia again, bore the brunt of these disasters 

reported  globally.  Floods  continued  to  be  the  most  frequent  occurring  natural  disasters  and 

also affect the most people worldwide. The following are the six worst disasters for the year 

2015 – 

massive earthquake devastated Nepal;  

  a  magnitude  of  7.8  earthquake  struck  Nepal  on  April  25,  2015,  killing 

more than 8,800 people;   

 

it damaged or destroyed nearly 900,000 buildings and created avalanche in 

the Himalayas, and left almost 1 million children out of school; 

  major  aftershock  including  a  magnitude  of  7.3  tremor  three  weeks  later, 

slowed recovery efforts and added to the devastation.   

This  was  the  deadliest  disaster  on  record  for  the  nation  of  26  million  people.    Flood  of  a 

century  shocked  Chennai,  India.    Weeks  of  torrential  rains  in  November  caused  the  worst 

flooding in Southern India city of Chennai had seen in 100 years.  The residents in the capital 

city of Tamil Nadu State were seen carrying belongings above their heads, working through 

the  streets  chest  deep  in  floodwaters,  walking  through  the  streets  while  entire  riverside 

settlements were washed away.   

 

 

92 

At  least  379  people  have  died,  including  54  in  neighbouring  Andhra  Pradesh  State 

where the floods also destroyed about 100,000 acres of crops worth $150 m. Heat waves hit 

southern India and the other one is Typhoon Komen, monsoon rains that inundated Myanmar, 

Bangladesh, India. 

Typhoon Komen blazed through the Bay of Bengal over the summer, killing hundreds 

of  people  in  Myanmar,  Bangladesh  and  India,  and  lashing  the  region  with  monsoon  rains. 

The  ensuing  widespread  floods  and  landslides  affected  millions  after  destroying  homes, 

crops, and roads. In hard-hit Myanmar, where 12 of 14 states were affected, 117 people died 

and  nearly  400,000  people  were  displaced.  Again,  Malawi,  Mozambique,  massive  floods 

were there.  Drought worsens food security in Ethiopia. 

Thus,  we  see  that  disaster  preparedness  is  of  paramount  importance.  While 

governments and humanitarian agencies rushed to meet the immediate needs of children and 

families affected by disasters, NGOs also  work  year round to  help  communities reduce risk 

and  help  themselves  when  disaster  strikes.    Lawren  Sinnema,  an  Emergency  Affairs 

Programme Management Officer, quotes the following – 

“Working with communities for preparedness is key,” (…). “Because while you can't 

entirely reduce risk from disasters, you can alleviate their effects if you are prepared.” 

We are doomed to be our own destroyers if we do not consider seriously the aléas of 

nature. We are so minuscule that we are constantly under the threat of being swept off by a 

simple  moment  of  carelessness.  Even  the  2014  report  of  the  United  Nations  inter-

governmental panel on climate change predicted that the world sea level would rise between 

30 and 90 centimetres by year 2100. For Seychelles, that would mean a loss of up to 70% of 

the country’s land mass. This rise in sea level would, of course, affect our island Mauritius, 

Rodrigues and more particularly our Outer Islands, which are merely a few metres above sea 

level.  A  historic  agreement  to  combat  climate  change  and  unleash  actions  and  investment 

towards a low carbon resilient and sustainable future was agreed by 195 nations in Paris on 

12 December 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  prevention  and  reduction  of  the  risk  of  disasters  and  disaster 

preparedness are the key words, and this Government will address this problem, so that such 

tragedies do not happen again. This is where the Bill has its importance. I totally agree with 

the  hon.  Minister  when  he  says  that  a  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management 

Council  need  to  be  set  up  to  a  culture  of  safety  and  resilience  to  disasters  amongst  other 

 

 

93 

mission statements of the Council. Accordingly, the National Council shall have the support 

of  all  the  Ministries,  authorities  and  other  competent  bodies  such  as  the  Meteorological 

Station and the Police Force, which will give the due dimension to the Council. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  the  setting  up  of  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and 

Management  Centre,  we  can  already  foresee  that  no  stone  will  be  left  unturned  as  far  as 

coordination and monitoring the implementation of a disaster risk reduction and management 

activities,  as  it  will  be  decided  by  the  National  Strategic  Framework  and  National  Plan. 

Besides  coordinating  and  monitoring,  it  is  good  to  see  that  the  collaboration  of  all  relevant 

stakeholders will be taken on board. 

Thus, they will be part of an integral objective of environmental related policies and 

plans, sound land use planning, natural resource managements, amongst others, along with a 

well-planned national infrastructure, through the enforcement of building codes. Accordingly, 

the  national  centre  is  being  called  to  develop  a  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 

Management  Plan,  to  be  reviewed  and  updated  as  and  when  necessary,  and  will  provide 

necessary measures for the prevention of disasters and to reduce their impact. Il va sans dire 

que all Ministries will have to do their task in order to fulfil their responsibilities to the best 

of their capacities. 

Madam Speaker, our so tiny island will not be able to accept another 30 March 2013. 

After  three  years,  Madam  Speaker,  les  cicatrices  de  ce  30  mars  2013  are  still  present  and 

fresh  in  our  minds.  This  Bill  will  bring  some  soulagement  and  will  show  that  this 

Government’s interest is in a better daily of the citizens of Mauritius whereas other people’s 

mind was focussed elsewhere. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  good  to  note  that  the  Bill  provides  a  Local  Disaster  Risk 

Reduction and Management Committee for every local authority. This  will bring concern of 

one and all to follow and to safeguard the physical aspect of the environment where the local 

people  have  to  live.  With  the  setting  up  of  the  Local  Emergency  Operations  Command,  a 

quick response to tackle any disaster is assured, thus preventing the chaotic situation to reach 

disproportionate dimensions. 

However,  Madam  Speaker,  it  needs  to  be  said  that  sometimes  a  disaster  does  not 

come by itself. Maybe, Madam Speaker, at times, we are all guilty of any disaster, be it small 

or big. We have witnessed in the past, sans le vouloir et peut-être sans le savoir, how plastic 

bags, illegal construction around the island have contributed to unexpected flooding. 

 

 

94 

Madam  Speaker,  I know it is  not time to  point out  to  anyone or to  be wise after the 

event,  but  it  should  be  said  that  if  things  were  done  properly,  Mauritius  could  have  been 

spared of these painful moments. This is why, Madam Speaker, this Bill will show to many 

that L’alliance Lepep Government is a caring one, not only in words, but in actions also. The 

participation  of  civil  society  organisations  is  crucial  to  ensuring  effective  reduction  of  risk 

and management of disasters. 

Underpinning the National Disaster Risk Reduction Management Framework, it is the 

principle  of  multi-sectorial  responsibility.  National  disaster  risk  reduction  management  is  a 

crosscutting  issue  and  it  encompasses  the  advancement  of  reforms  in  social,  economic  and 

political affairs. Disasters also affect the most vulnerable sectors of society. Therefore, these 

vulnerable  groups, particularly the poor, women,  children, elderly, and the differently  abled 

must have a say in how their lives are shaped. It is important that the voices of the grassroots 

communities  are  represented  and  heard.  Moreover,  civil  society  organisations  possess  a 

wealth  of  knowledge  in  effective  risk  assessment  and  risk  reduction  approaches  and  have 

played many key formal and informal roles in community recovery and risk reduction. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  time  for  action  and,  to  act,  we  need  the  tools  and  manpower. 

Among  tools,  I  wish  to  enumerate  some  measures,  which  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  will 

give due consideration and will give a more human dimension to the Bill. I am of the opinion 

that many of our  youngsters will be given the opportunity to prove themselves as good and 

well-trained patriots, so that they can tackle any environmental disaster in their locality. 

It is high time, Madam Speaker, to give a new dimension to our youngsters, to give a 

real  forme  à  la  vie  de  nos  jeunes  citoyens,  décideurs  de  demain,  car  ce  sera  leur 

responsabilité  de  mener  ce  pays  à  bon  port,  car  nous  avons  déjà  fait  le  plus  difficile  en 

l’arrachant  des griffes des prétentieux sans  vision. With adequate information and training, 

Mauritius will have the best squad for the local authorities and the national disciplined forces.  

Madam Speaker, parallèlement, with the best elements around, we should give them tools to 

enable to deliver.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  use  to  spend  some  time  with  my  family  at  the  seaside.  I  have 

always thought that la mer nourrit son homme, mais il s’avère que quand elle est fâchée, la 

mer ne fait pas de cadeau. 

(Interruptions) 

I still have in mind the deadly tsunamis which struck the countries … 

 

 

95 

(Interruptions) 

... of South East Asia, and we all know the chaos... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Ramkaun: ... that the tsunami creates. 

Madam Speaker, Mauritius under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, has always 

been avant-gardiste.  This is why I am suggesting vigilance towers to be constructed on all 

our public beaches with a well-formed personnel to follow the movement of waves. As I said 

before, we are living a world of certainties. At least, Madam Speaker, we will be able to say 

that  we  have  tried  our  utmost  best  to  safeguard  the  lives  of  our  dear  ones  because  there  is 

nothing we can do when we do not act promptly.  

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

(5.21 p.m.) 

Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central): 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on this Bill, which I have 

to say is very important for the Republic of Mauritius. I wish to congratulate hon. Ramkaun 

for his well-elaborated exposé. 

He has said it almost all.  I will try my best not to replicate. 

(Interruptions) 

Mauritius is very prone to natural disasters. Au-delà du changement climatique avéré, 

les  activités  humaines  et  les  mutations  des  territoires  peuvent  fortement  aggraver  les 

conséquences  négatives  des  aléas  naturels.  L’homme  n’est  plus  seulement  une  victime  à 

protéger,  il  est  aussi  devenu  un  générateur  majeur  de  risque  à  informer,  à  éduquer  et  à 

contrôler. 

Madam  Speaker,  motherland  of  ours,  Mauritius  paid  almost  exactly  three  years  ago, 

on 30 March 2013, an expensive price; lives were lost. When that happened, it must be said 

that  the  then  Government  was,  to  quote  now  a  famous  expression,  ‘active,  reactive  and 

proactive’, and I have witnessed it as a civil servant based at that material time at the Prime 

Minister’s Office. In the days following the incident, I was assigned by the then Secretary to 

 

 

96 

Cabinet  and  Head  of  Civil  Service,  Mr  Suresh  Seebaluck,  to  do  two  things,  which  I  feel 

bound  I  should  mention  here  today;  firstly,  to  coordinate  and  support  the  Singapore 

Cooperation  Enterprise  mission.  They  were  immediately  approached  by  Government  in  the 

days following the flash flood to send a team to Mauritius to help in the review of the flood 

situation. This was the first and only time I had the chance to work with the Singapore team 

and I must say that they worked well. They were accompanied by a team of experts from the 

Public Utilities Board of Singapore and their partners to help in this review. The Singapore’s 

delegations observations were captured  as initial  observations in  a report that seeks to  pave 

the way for future remedial action. The Singapore team observed the following, and I quote 

from the report - 

“The  disaster  risk  reduction  strategic  framework  and  action  plan  provides  a  strong 

analysis  of  risk  with  respect  to  flooding,  coastal  inundation  and  landslides.  There 

remains  a  need  to  take  a  multi-hazard  approach  to  assess  all  forms  of  risk  in  the 

country,  including  man-made  to  support  appropriate  preparation  and  mitigation 

strategies.” 

Against  this  backdrop,  a  resident  consultant  in  disaster  risk  management  and 

humanitarian  specialist,  whom  I  was  already  requested  to  establish  contact  with,  was 

recruited  as  Adviser  to  the  then  Prime  Minister,  Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  and  her 

primary task was to set up and manage a Disaster Management Centre that will precisely take 

that  multi-hazard  integrated  approach  to  assess  and  create  structures  to  support  disaster 

management  of  all  forms  of  natural  and  human  made  risks  for  Mauritius,  Rodrigues  and 

Outer Islands. The Centre served and is still serving as a national platform on Disaster Risk 

Management.  

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  adviser  started  her  work  at  the  Maurice  Île  Durable 

Commission,  the  Department  I  was  then  heading  at  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office.  So,  even 

though the Disaster Management Centre subsequently moved out  from  my  office, as it was 

getting  bigger  with  each  passing  week,  I  keenly  kept  following  the  activities  of  same,  and 

they were doing important things like reviewing of existing disaster management in Mauritius 

and  analysis  of  requirement  to  reinforce  this  system  and  undertaking  resource  and  risk 

mapping;  but,  more  importantly,  Madam  Speaker,  to  review  the  existing  legislative 

framework  for  disaster  management  and  disaster  risk  reduction  and  to  propose  a  sound 

legislative  framework  for  disaster  management  in  Mauritius  in  collaboration  with  key 

 

 

97 

stakeholders. The fruit of all that is before us today, in the form of this Bill which, I am glad 

to say, has positively evolved. 

Madam  Speaker,  year 2013 also  saw the finalisation of an  Inundation, Flooding and 

Landslide  National  Risk  Profile,  Maps,  Strategy  Framework  and  Action  Plan  for  Disaster 

Risk Management for the Republic of Mauritius. It was prepared by UNDP Consultants. It is 

a good Action Plan and the implementation of its recommendation involves billion of rupees 

and  requires  a  participatory  multiagency  and  multi-stakeholder  engagement.  I  hope  that  the 

Government will ensure that the recommendations of the consultants be implemented within 

a timeframe of two planning cycles as recommended; the first one being from 2013 to 2018 

and the second one from 2019 to 2025. 

Madam Speaker, it is worth mentioning that it is based on these recommendations that 

a  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Centre  (NDRRMC),  termed  as  the 

National  Centre  in  this  Bill,  was  set  up  in  2013  to  serve  as  a  national  platform  on  Disaster 

Risk Management. This centre is also responsible for coordinating the implementation of the 

recommendation of the Action Plan. 

Madam  Speaker,  back  then,  the  NDRRMC  was  tasked  to  develop  model  National 

Disaster Management Centre Organisational  Structures for advancing Disaster Management 

in  Mauritius,  to  recommend  procedures  for  undertaking  periodic  assessment  of  the 

organisational structure and to determine reliability, effectiveness and efficiency. I am glad to 

see that from as early as paragraph 2 of this Bill that a National Disaster Risk Reduction and 

Management  Council  will  be  set  up  and  that  it  shall  oversee  the  implementation  of  the 

National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy, National Disaster Risk Reduction 

and  Management  Strategic  Framework  and  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Management 

Plan. The National Council shall also lay down national guidelines for disaster risk reduction 

and management at all levels. This is definitely a step forward.  

Madam  Speaker,  education  is  the  cornerstone  to  natural  disaster  and  climate  change 

education,  so  says  Maurice  Île  Durable  third  education  policy  No.  3  which  advocates  the 

need to promote critical consciousness with regard to disaster risk reduction, climate change 

adaptation  and mitigation.  In line with  this and with  a view to  embrace  a  culture of risk, in 

September 2014, an international consultant was hired through the UNDP to prepare school 

safety  plans  and  to  ensure  the  integration  of  disaster  risk  reduction  in  Mauritius  in  primary 

and secondary school curriculums. 

 

 

98 

I  do believe that this  report  provides  good material  for the Ministry of Education and 

Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research and that the Ministry will look 

at it and put it to good use, and that the action that comes from it will follow. 

All this is expensive work and has been done and should be put to good use in the spirit 

of  continuity  of  Government,  and  I  must  say  that  I  am  pleased  to  see,  once  again,  from 

paragraph 5 (a), which entails the promotion of a culture of safety and resilience to disasters 

through the use of knowledge, innovation and education, is catered for in this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I have to say that the people who have worked on the first draft of the 

Bill in 2013 have done extensive consultations, including with the International Federation of 

the Red Cross and Red Crescent (IFRC) who are the international custodians of disaster law. 

I am aware that they reviewed the Bill - meaning the IFRC - positively and underlined how 

important it is for countries to have strong legislations in this area. They particularly praised 

the community-based aspect of the Bill. As a matter of fact, this has been retained as part 5 of 

this Bill, which provides that the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee 

at  local  authority  level  have,  within  their  midst,  as  committee  members,  Mayors  and 

Chairpersons of local authorities. 

Madam  Speaker, for sure, this Bill  before us today is to  a large  extent very much the 

same  as  compared  to  when  it  was  first  drafted,  but  some  changes  have  been  necessary 

structurally owing to the move of the centre from the Prime Minister’s Office to the Ministry 

of Environment. There has been an additional element included regarding the establishment 

of a Disaster Response Unit within the SMF which is good to see. This, undeniably reflects 

how understanding of Disaster Risk Management has grown since the centre was established 

in 2013, including the need to replicate the same model for Rodrigues as part of paragraphs 

23 to 34 of this Bill. Since its setting up in 2013, officers of the Disaster Management Centre 

have  been  to  Rodrigues  for  at  least  three  times.    So,  the  results  are  there.  Similar 

considerations are also being given to Agalega and the Cargados Island. 

On a more critical note, Madam Speaker, I wish to talk about the National Emergency 

Operations  Command,  sub-paragraph  17(4)(b)  in  the  Bill,  wherein  it  is  provided  that  the 

Commissioner  of  Police  or  whomsoever  he  will  delegate  his  powers  to,  may  cause  the 

evacuation, either voluntarily or using such force as may be necessary. It is to be understood 

that if any person refuses to vacate an area, a Police Officer may use such reasonable force as 

may  be  necessary  to  remove  that  person  from  that  area.  Now,  here  we  have  to  be  a  little 

 

 

99 

cautious  or  else  we  could  be  skiing  on  thin  ice  given  that  the  statement  does  not  specify 

whether a person is being removed, to be removed, is at risk because he is disaster affected 

although it could be argued that the same is implied.   

My  concern  here  is  that  this  element  could  be  used  to  forcibly  remove  people  from 

illegal  settlements  or  squatted  areas  or  may  in  any  situation  which  is  outside  the  limit  of 

disaster  management.  Now,  this  is  a  personal  view.  I  understand  that  Police  are,  anyway, 

permitted  to  use  reasonable  force  in  the  enactment  of  their  duties.  But  like  the  saying  goes 

‘better be safe than sorry’.  My suggestion is that this element requires a specific mention. 

Madam Speaker, as I have previously stated, this is an important piece of legislation 

for  Mauritius  and,  with  its  implementation,  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  answers  to  the 

following questions -  

(i)  What is the status of the national centre currently in terms of staffing, budget 

and operations? 

(ii) 

The Bill refers to National Strategic Framework, National Plan and Disaster 

Risk Reduction and Management Policy. Now, what is the time frame for 

development of these documents and will there be budget provisions in the 

upcoming budget to implement these? 

(iii)  Given the provisions to support evacuation of disaster affected areas, what are 

the existing policies governing entitlements for those evacuated in terms of 

alternative accommodation and/or compensation?  

(iv) 

There is no mention of use of management of funds  and/or relief funds from 

either  permanently  available  or  donated  by  the  public  for  relief  for  disaster-

affected  population.  What  legal  instruments  exist  that  oversee  this  area? 

International  best  practice  would  usually  require  that  the  use  of  relief  funds 

conforms  to  clear  guidelines  and  criteria  to  ensure  transparency,  clarity  and 

equity.  The  Government  could  look  up  to  the  guidelines  for  use  on  Natural 

Disasters  Relief  Fund  for  the  Seychelles  which  was  set  up  there  by  the 

President in the aftermath of the heavy floods caused in the southern region of 

the island as a result of the torrential rains that struck Seychelles during period 

27 January to 29 January 2013. I am tabling a copy of these guidelines for the 

information of the Government this evening. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  this  Bill,  the  time  is  right  for  this  Government  to  take  to  the 

next level, all the good initiatives undertaken by the previous Government and I have every 

 

 

100 

hope  that  they  will  strive  forward  for  the  sake  of  lower  risk  during  even  mosquito-borne 

diseases or deaths from road accidents, flash floods and cyclones. This helps to focus on the 

elements  relevant  to  reduction  of  risk.  There  is  not  much  we  can  do  about  the  hazards  of 

weather, but we can both reduce vulnerability and increase effective response so long as we 

can use an evidence-based approach to analysis of the costs and benefits. There is much we 

can  do  to  reduce  the  hazards  of  mosquitoes,  our  vulnerability  to  them  and  our  effective 

response to  cases found.  Once upon a time, there were 100,000 cases  a  year and today  we 

have only 2,000 cases due to malaria in certain places of the world, but now it is zero. Now, 

this has been eliminated in a highly cost-effective way and I would like to, if I may introduce 

the concept of cost-effectiveness of measures in relation to relative risks and would humbly 

remind the House that deaths from road accidents are a high risk, high vulnerability and, until 

now, we are weak in effective response.  

On this food for thought note, I shall end here and thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! 

(5.41 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade 

(Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): Madam Speaker, Thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, please proceed with your speech!  

(Interruptions) 

No  comments  from  those  who  are  leaving!  No  comments,  no  remarks,  I  said!    Hon. 

Lutchmeenaraidoo, please proceed with your speech. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes.    Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  subject  which  I  wanted  to 

develop  because  I  have  been  working  on  it  for  the  past  12  years  and  it  is  linked  to 

development  in  worldwide,  in  the  sense  that  since  now  more  than  15  years,  development 

climate changes and changes in the environment have imposed on us a reflection on what can 

be  the  world  trends  and  also  trends  in  Mauritius  which  we  have  to  plan.  The  idea  was 

 

 

101 

gouverner c’est prévoir and that we had to know what are the risks further down the road so 

that we can plan for it. 

We  have  seen,  in  fact,  for  the  past  15  years,  the  huge  degradation  at  the  level  of 

climate, at the level of the environment that has set up a situation where we have new events. 

The principle of disaster means - and even that is not predictable, that is unexpected - in fact, 

a black swan event. 

Therefore,  we  have  witnessed  since  2000  a  series  of  events.  We  have  seen,  for 

instance, at the level of contagious diseases, development of new diseases which are linked to 

deterioration in environment and climate changes. We have also seen in  Mauritius the flash 

floods to which we are not used to. Therefore, the idea then was to go in a big way to set up a 

centre that will manage those disasters. In this context, managing disasters mean that we need 

an  institution  that  is  far  larger  than  what  we  had  at  that  time.  In  fact,  the  conditions  for  a 

project like this to materialise is that number one: we need speed of intervention, crash of an 

airplane to buses that knock out on the road. 

In  all  those  cases,  because  of  the  emergency  element,  because  of  the  unpredictable 

element,  we  are  compelled,  in  fact,  to  be  able  to  act  very  fast.  This  is  probably  the  main 

reason  why  we  said:  how  can  we  move  ahead  to  ensure  that  intervention  is  done  within 

minutes? Which implies what? It implies at the level of logistics, of human resources and of 

finance,  an  approach  which  is  non-traditional.  I  take  one  example:  financial  facilities.  We 

can’t expect the centre to operate if the Director has got to request for permission each time 

with  the Ministry of  Finance  and Economic  Development  for approval  of expenditure, then 

disaster  will  be  well  behind  it.  So,  in  this  type  of  structure,  it  means  that  there  is  a 

decentralisation process  in  financial management whereby the institution can take decisions 

very  quickly,  instantly,  because  they  need  to  decide  if  they  have  the  financial  resources  to 

deal with those emergency cases. 

This is why in the Budget we thought about setting up something quite substantial and 

I am happy that this Government is doing it in a beautiful way, in the sense that we say this 

centre est appelé à devenir one of the largest Disaster Management Centre in the region. We 

have sought help from le plan recette from France and Reunion Island. So, this first element 

of finance is very important. 

The second element is logistics. We can’t deal with emergency in a soft way. A centre 

like  this  needs  equipment,  facilities,  logistics,  which  can  be  extremely  costly.  A  centre  like 

 

 

102 

this  needs,  for  instance,  helicopters  that  can  move  very  quickly  and  needs  equipment  that 

must be available very quickly. I speak of, let us say, floods. Well, there is equipment which 

exists  whereby  you  can  stretch  a  sort  of  bridge  and  create  a  communication  between  two 

pieces of land of say 150 metres. This  can be done. But  the centre must be equipped for it. 

So, the Capital Budget for this project is huge because we have to ensure facilities, equipment 

that can be used, therefore, for that purpose, logistics and speed of decision. 

And, third, now, are the human resources. Human resources, we said, we have SMF. 

We can probably put SMF to better use also. The idea is that human resources should also be 

a major component of it: finance, logistics and human resources, in which case, SMF would 

have  been  used  more  for  integrating  the  centre  itself.  Those  are,  therefore,  the  conditions 

which we defined at that time. 

As  I  say,  time  is  telling  us  that  it  is  better  that  we  be  prepared  and  not  to  react  to 

disaster. This is what Government is doing. We are setting up a centre that is there and that 

will  provide  for  emergency  action  in  all  situations,  whether  it  be  diseases,  accidents, 

cyclones,  tsunamis.  I  personally  feel  that  we  are  moving  in  a  period  which  is  getting  more 

and more unpredictable, with events also that are getting more and more unpredictable. 

This is why I think that Government has taken the right decision, at the right time, to 

go  ahead  with  this  project  and  I,  really,  in  the  depth  of  my  heart,  wish  good  luck  to 

Government  to  ensure  implementation  of  this  project  because  it  will  ensure  safety  for  the 

country, safety for the nation, safety for citizens. 

Madam Speaker, thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

 (5.48 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  and  Poudre  d’Or):  Thank 

you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a few words on this Bill. 

Let  me,  first  of  all,  thank  and  congratulate  everybody  who  has  contributed  in  the 

drafting, the preparation of this Bill. 

I  am  going  to  address,  Madam  Speaker,  four  issues.  The  first  issue  that  I  wanted  to 

address is that of linking any disaster risk reduction and management initiative to the issue of 

climatic  change  adaptation.  The  world  has  been  experiencing  unprecedented  climatic 

 

 

103 

changes.  Disaster  management  along  with  climatic  change  adaptation  has  been  at  the 

forefront of world debates during several decades. 

In  a  recent  article  in  the  journal  of  Institution  of  Engineers  of  Mauritius,  Mr  Jayesh 

Desai states and I quote – 

“The  impact  of  climate  change  is  producing  a  number  of  apparently  superfluous 

situations, unprecedented in many cases such as - 

 

 

 

 

 

increase in the annual mean temperature, predictions that by 2100 the global 

average surface warming will increase by 1.1 to 6.4 0C depending on the 

location; 

a declining trend in total annual rainfall, but an increase in the frequency of 

intense rainfall episodes; 

sea level rise, predicted to 18–59 cm by 2100; 

and a likely increase in the intensity of tropical cyclones with larger peaks of 

wind speeds and more heavy precipitation; 

oceans becoming more acidic. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you are disturbing the hon. Member. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  increasingly  an  emphasis  to  always  link 

any  decision  and  initiative  on  disaster  risk  reduction  and  management  to  the  concept  of 

climatic change adaptation. The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Bill aims 

at  preventing  and  mitigating  the  impacts  of  disasters,  but  also  emphasises  on  better 

responsiveness, preparedness to disasters and the management of post-disaster activities. 

My first observation, therefore, Madam Speaker, to the authorities responsible for the 

implementation  of  this  Bill  is  to  understand  that  any  disaster  management  initiative  cannot 

operate  in  a  vacuum  and  that  the  issue  of  climatic  change  adaptation  should  be  integrated 

gradually in this whole strategy of fight against natural calamities. It is in this respect that I 

believe  that  immediately  after  the  adoption  of  the  current  Bill  on  disaster  management,  the 

Government should come forward with a programme to respond to climatic change in order 

to  ensure  a  sustainable  development  in  the  long  run,  for  example,  an  impact  assessment  of 

climatic  change  in  the  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  enhancement  of  public  awareness 

and participation, the fostering of international cooperation to obtain foreign support. 

 

 

104 

Madam Speaker, the findings of an important research paper on Linking Disaster Risk 

Reduction  and  Adaptation  to  Climate  Change  by  the  German  Committee  for  Disaster 

Reduction mentioned, and I quote - 

“Disaster  risk  reduction  must  no  longer  be  seen  as  a  post  shock-oriented  tool  to 

restore  communities  affected  by  disasters  to  their  pre-disaster  condition.  Instead,  it 

must  be  acknowledged  as  a  toolkit  that  can  be  used  to  take  advantage  of  the 

opportunities that catastrophes provide for change and to create long-term resilience. 

Furthermore, it can provide sophisticated instruments to constantly monitor, evaluate 

and adjust adaptation strategies in the face of ongoing uncertainty and risk.  

If  adaptation  measures  fail,  the  humanitarian  community  is  the  first  one  to  be 

confronted  with  the  consequences.  While  the  potential  of  linking  Disaster  Risk 

Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation has already received growing acceptance 

within  the  scientific  and  also  the  humanitarian  and  development  community,  the 

integration of both fields of work has hardly been put into practice.” 

I  would,  therefore,  invite  the  authorities  to  seriously  consider  a  strategy  to  integrate  the 

initiatives related to disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation locally. 

The  second  issue  I  wanted  to  address,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  of  communication.  I 

have noted that section 4 of the Act defines the composition of the National Council. The fact 

that  ICT  has  become  an  extremely  important  tool  to  facilitate  disaster  risk  reduction  and 

management, I suggest that a representative of the Ministry of Technology, Communication 

and  Innovation  equally  forms  part  of  the  structure.  I  had  a  very  bad  experience  myself 

personally during the last floods which occurred on 10 February this year, Madam Speaker. 

Everybody  in  this  House  should  understand  that  this  is  an  issue  which  should  rise 

above party politics.  I personally witnessed water level  rising inside a few houses up to the 

beams in my constituency at Fond du Sac and tried to contact the Disaster Management Unit 

for  support,  but  could  hardly  reach  an  Officer-in-Charge  who  could  provide  support  or 

understand  the  urgency  of  the  matter.  The  situation  was  dramatic  since  3  a.m.  and  at  about 

9.30  a.m.  I  was  told  that  the  Disaster  Management  Committee  was  about  to  meet  at  10.00 

a.m. and that I could call afterwards for assistance. 

You  could  imagine  what  it  means  when  you  are  the  Member  of  Parliament  of  a 

region,  walking in  its main  street  with  water level  above  your knees and struggling to  have 

the assistance of the Fire Services, but constantly being told that all units of the Fire Services 

 

 

105 

around  the  island  have  been  mobilised  in  Port  Louis  because  that  was  the  area  mostly 

affected on that day. In fact, everybody took stock of the dramatic  situation in Fond du Sac 

on that same afternoon. But, once again, I wish to emphasise that this is an issue that should 

rise above party politics. 

It  is,  therefore,  extremely  important  to  understand  that  effective  communication 

would enable - 

(i) 

the structures to have precise and reliable information; 

(ii) 

appropriate and effective allocation of resources; 

(iii) 

timely intervention, and 

(iv) 

generation of valuable information for preventive measures. 

I,  therefore,  propose  that  there  is  an  effective  Communication  Unit  that  not  only 

collects  timely  and  reliable  information  in  moments  of  crisis  but  disseminates  the  same 

information  in  a  well-structured  way  regularly  to  the  different  structures  being  put  in  place 

with a view to define priorities of intervention. 

Madam Speaker, the third issue I wanted to address relates to funding. I have not seen 

any mention about funding of projects in the Bill. Natural calamities and disaster require the 

support  of  one  and  all.  The  private  sector  has  always  responded  positively  to  the  call  of 

Government to give a helping hand in the development of our economy. They will certainly 

have a major contribution to the representative of Business Mauritius in the National Council. 

However,  I  am  sure  that  there  are  wide  possibilities  of  attracting  major  sources  of 

finance available from either the local private sector or international organisations to finance 

programmes  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation  and  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  I,  therefore, 

propose the creation of a National Disaster Risk Reduction Fund. The Fund will be used for 

the purpose of - 

(i) 

investment in training and empowerment; 

(ii) 

investment in equipment and technology; 

(iii) 

research programmes; 

(iv) 

assistance to casualties following natural calamities, and 

(v) 

provision of temporary shelter amenities to victims of calamities. 

 

 

106 

Madam Speaker, the fourth issue that I wanted to address is based on the creation of a 

Local  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Committee  of  local  authorities,  which  is 

welcoming.  I  welcome  this  excellent  initiative  to  involve  the  local  authorities  in  the  fight 

against  disaster  risk  reduction.  The  local  authorities  have  often  been  blamed  for  issuing 

building  permits  on  wetlands.  I  have  myself  witnessed  a  series  of  morcellements  in  my 

constituency  where  residential  and  even  commercial  units  have  been  erected  on  wetlands. 

Today, there are still attempts by some promoters to seek permits for the construction of villa 

projects on wetlands. 

I believe that representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Lands and the Ministry 

of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  have  to 

form part of the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee.  In the Bill as it 

is  now,  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  and  the  Ministry  of 

Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  do  not  form 

part  of  the  Local  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Committee.  I  suggest  that  they 

should  be  present  in  that  Committee  because  they  will  have  an  important  role  to  play 

whenever there is consideration to be given where permits have to be issued for construction 

purposes by the local authorities. 

The inclusion of these representatives will ensure the following -  

(i) 

the  follow-up  on  all  morcellement  permits  about  to  be  approved  by  the 

Ministry of Housing and Lands for that local authority, and 

(ii) 

follow-up on all EIA submitted in the region of the local authority. 

The Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee should help to bring 

a  better  coordination  in  the  works  of  the  different  authorities  in  view  of  promoting  better 

discipline in the construction sector. It is expected that such collaboration will contribute in –  

(i) 

eliminating the issue of permits for construction on wetlands; 

(ii) 

identify and manage flood prone areas; 

(iii)  working out relocation plans for inhabitants of flood prone areas, and 

(iv) 

effective allocation of resources for disaster risk reduction. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the structure and functioning, I have always emphasised 

on the need to have the best people in structures of institutions in view of ensuring that at the 

end of the day we have results and objectives met timely. I have noted that the participation 

 

 

107 

of  the  private  sector  in  the  different  structures  is  very  limited.  I  would  suggest  that  we 

gradually  find  ways  and  means  to  call  representatives  from  the  private  sector,  especially  in 

the  Local  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Committee.  The  fight  against  national 

calamities is the responsibility of one and all, but certainly that of the private sector as well. 

They should be encouraged and allowed to participate fully in the process.  

I  would  like  to  thank  again  all  those  who  have  contributed  in  the  drafting  and 

preparation of the Bill and congratulate them. Thank you for your attention. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. François! 

(6.01 p.m.) 

Mr F. François (First Member for Rodrigues):  Madam Speaker, I stand in support 

of  this  timely  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Bill  2016  for  our 

vulnerable Republic, which could, at any time, be hit by any disaster. 

First  of  all,  I  want  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister,  Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong  and  all  the 

technicians for bringing this Bill forward. I also congratulate all previous orators before me.   

Madam Speaker, you will recall cyclones Carol in 1960; Gervaise in 1975; Celinde in 

1979; Bella in 1991, and Kalundé in 2003.  Natural disasters are in an increasing trend today 

as a result of poverty, climate change, environmental degradation, poor land use planning as 

rightly pointed out by hon. Minister Baboo. 

Madam Speaker, the main object of this Bill provides for four pillars of Disaster Risk 

Reduction  and  Management,  that  is,  mitigation,  preparedness,  response  and  recovery. 

Reference  has  been  made  to  Sendai  Blueprint  Priority  Actions  from  Japan  framework  for 

Disaster  Risk  Reduction  2015-2030,  which  is  exemplary  for  how  each  nation  should 

approach disaster risk. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to cite only two priority actions: to ensure 

that disaster risk reduction is  a national  and  a local  priority with  a strong institutional  basis 

for implementation. Priority action (5) says ‘to strengthen disaster preparedness for effective 

response to all levels’. 

Madam  Speaker,  for  us  here,  following  the  international  trend,  there  is  a  shift  from 

response  to  relief  and  really  focus  in  approach  to  becoming  mitigation  and  preparedness 

oriented. This is what this Government is trying to do. Madam Speaker, this Bill is crucial to 

 

 

108 

permit Government to fulfil its constitutional responsibility as per article 3(a) - the protection, 

safety and security of our citizens during any disaster.  

Hon. Bhagwan, rightly  argued that Mauritius  needs a fully  automated  early warning 

system for incoming surges, tidal surge and swell waves. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  is  actually  the  first  Small  Island 

Developing  State  to  have  a  fully  operational  Early  Warning  System  for  improving 

preparedness and resilience to extreme events like storms, tidal surge since September 2015.  

I  understand  that  the  EWS  (Early  Warning  System)  will  allow  the  coastal 

communities of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agalega and St Brandon to receive timely alerts up to 

three days in advance for safe evacuation.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  checked  the  list  of  cyclones  within  the  100  kilometres  belt 

around the Republic of Mauritius since 1945 to date from Metéo Vacoas. It is clear that our 

Republic is extremely vulnerable to cyclone. However, while a cyclone is the most frequent 

hazard,  earthquakes  and  tsunamis  are  potentially  the  most  damaging  and  disruptive  hazards 

that we may face nowadays. 

Madam  Speaker,  geographically  speaking,  Rodrigues  is  located  closely  to  the  Inter-

Tropical Convergence Zone and the Tectonic Active Areas of the Rodrigues Seismic Ridge. I 

mentioned this because I am talking about the hazard of earthquakes.  

According  to  Mr  Prem  Sadal,  in  l’Express  dated  08  November  2015,  Rodrigues 

location near the triple junction of the tectonically active subduction zone, generate frequent 

seismic  activities.  Here,  I  believe  that  this  Bill  must  allow  for  further  investigation  in  that 

regard. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  some  few  cross-cutting  issues  of  the  Bill,  the  National 

Council is the supreme body for Disaster Risk Reduction Management according to the Bill. 

Along  a  gender perspective,  I appreciate that the hon. Minister has  considered my proposal 

that  a  representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family 

Welfare forms part of the National Council as per amendment circulated. Why? Because the 

implication  of  gender  and  family  will  enhance  its  involvement  through  psycho-social 

problems  and  social  safety  net  in  order  to  mitigate  the  psychological  damage  of  vulnerable 

families  particularly  children,  women,  poor  and  disabled  persons  in  the  aftermath  of  any 

disaster.  I  have  in  mind  the  pictures  of  these  families  during  30  March  flash  floods  in  Port 

Louis and their sufferings.  

 

 

109 

Madam Speaker, further in gender, there is today a gender networking which is taking 

place  at  the  international  level  as  it  is  the  case  in  countries  like  Australia  and  Austria. 

Australia set up what we call a Gender and Disaster Task Force and Austria set up what we 

call a Women Exchange for Disaster Risk Reduction respectively. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  development  and  planning,  disaster  risk  is  spatial  in 

nature and is interconnected with development and planning.  

In  section  6  of  the  Bill,  it  is  stipulated  that  the  National  Council  shall  ensure  that 

disaster reduction becomes part of an integral objective of environmental -related policies and 

plans, land use planning, and so on, as well as infrastructure through enforcement of building 

codes - very important works.  

We have witnessed in our Republic unsustainable development sometimes, unplanned 

urbanisation,  environmental  degradation  and  inappropriate  land  use  through  local  examples 

such  as  what  we  witnessed  at  Canal  Dayot,  Fond  du  Sac,  Mont  Gout  floodings  and 

Chitrakoot landslide.  These are a few examples. 

Madam Speaker, you will imagine that the Planning and Development Act 2004, after 

12  years,  only  a  few  sections  have  been  proclaimed.  This  Bill  will  engage  new  policy 

commitments  and  initiatives  for  our  National  Development  Strategy  in  relation  to 

development and planning, our national coastal erosion strategy, our integrated coastal zone 

management policy, agriculture policy, forestry, and national bio-diversity policy.   

In the same breath, tourism development policies shall protect and preserve sensitive 

coastal zones, environmental sensitive areas and sand dunes. We must be bold enough to take 

drastic  policies  for  no  further  development  in  these  sensitive  zones,  if  we  really  want  to 

develop a new environmental culture and be sustainable.   

This Bill will encourage the revision of existing and the development of new building 

codes,  standards,  rehabilitation  and  reconstruction  practices,  particularly  in  informal  and 

marginal human settlements with a view to fostering disaster resistant structures.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  Rodrigues,  the  Chief  Commissioner,  Serge  Clair  and  the  OPR 

party from a social and political perspective argued that and I will say that in Creole –  

“Nous bizin fini avec sa banne ti lacaze tole qui meme pas capave resister un cyclone. 

Bizin aide banne dimoune pauvre ek vulnerable par ene bon lacaze en dur pou nou na 

pas gagne tracas ler ena gros cyclone.” 

 

 

110 

Madam Speaker, with regard to construction materials, the quality of iron bars on the 

market is very poor. People out there are saying that zordi ferraille pe rouiller, gonfler, apres 

éclater  bizarrement.  This  is  what  people  are  saying  out  there.  There  is  need  to  incorporate 

disaster resistant planning and resilient construction decisions in our built environment. This 

must  also  apply  to  the  coming  new  concept  of  smart  cities  as  priority  for  a  Smart  Cities 

Disaster and Climate Resilience Strategy. 

Madam Speaker, New Zealand provides a model for other countries wishing to reduce 

the  risk  from  hazards  and  to  respond  more  effectively  to  disasters  due  to  its  progressive 

approaches to emergency management. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  78th  Fédération  internationale  des  géomètres  Working  Week 

2016 will be held in Christchurch, New Zealand, between 02 and 06 May 2016 for surveyors 

and  spatial  professionals  all  around  the  world.  The  theme  of  the  Working  Week  is  very 

important  –  Recovery  from  Disaster,  which  reflects  New  Zealand’s  experience  recovering 

from the 2011 Christchurch earthquake sequels. 

Madam Speaker, our surveyors and spatial professionals are key actors in making an 

important contribution to improve, simplify and shorten the disaster mitigation, rehabilitation 

and reconstruction phase.  Why do  I raise that?  Because in  this context, I do hope that the 

Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  hon.  Soodhun,  will  ensure  the 

participation  of  our  surveyors  and  spatial  professionals  in  this  coming  international 

conference in New Zealand.  Very important about this experience, this sharing of experience 

from other countries from this perspective of spatial professionals and surveyors. 

Coming to the sustainable development goals, Madam Speaker, our Republic today is 

on this pathway towards achieving and enhancing sustainable development goals. Goal 13 of 

the  United  Nations  17  sustainable  development  goals  is  to  take  urgent  action  to  combat 

climate change and its impact, to strengthen resilience - very important words - and adaptive 

capacity to climate related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. The Framework for 

Disaster Risk Reduction, as reported by the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster 

Reduction  in  2004,  stated  that  sustainable  development  goals  cannot  be  achieved  without 

managing disaster risk. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  international  community  including  our  Republic,  of  course,  is 

committed  to  recognising  resilience  as  fundamental  to  the  achievement  of  three  key 

international agendas, namely – 

 

111 

 

 

 

 

Sustainable development goals - as I have just mentioned above 

The Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction Risk 2015-2030 

The  United  Nations  COP  21  Paris  Universal  Climate  Change  Agreement  in 

2015,  including  the  Warsaw  International  Mechanism  for  Loss  and  Damage 

associated with Climate Impacts and Climate Change. 

Coming to climate change and Paris COP 21 Agreement, Madam Speaker, Article 2 

of the COP 21 Paris Agreement aims, and I quote – 

 “(...) to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context 

of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, (...)” 

“Holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-

industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above 

pre-industrial  levels,  recognizing  that  this  would  significantly  reduce  the  risks  and 

impacts of climate change.” 

Madam  Speaker,  before  going  further,  allow  me  to  put  on  record  the  patriotic  work 

and commitment carried out by the high-level delegation from Mauritius in Paris COP 21 in 

December last, under the leadership of the former Minister of Environment, my good friend, 

hon. Dayal.  I am sure hon. Dayal will canvass what Mauritius contributed in Paris COP 21 

Agreement.  My  heartfelt  appreciation  also  goes  to  the  tireless  two  public  officers  from  the 

Ministry  of  Environment,  namely  the  Permanent  Secretary,  Mr  Jadoo,  and  the  Divisional 

Environment  Officer,  Mr  Seewoobaduth,  for  their  commitment  in  the  national  interest, 

without dinner at times, till very late to follow all negotiations. Congratulations, fellows! 

Madam Speaker, climate change is real and is happening quicker than we think, and it 

is inevitable. Yes, it is real. During a net fishing trip in Rodrigues I undertook a month ago, I 

have witnessed the consequences of hot sea water through bleaching of corals and the amount 

of  dead  fishes  around  the  lagoon.  Further,  in  Rodrigues,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  context  of 

climate change and to mark the World Earth Day 2016 on 22 April 2016, I will embark the 

population of Rodrigues to become resilient to the challenges ahead. What I am planning to 

do together with the newly set-up Citizen Advice Bureau of Rodrigues, we have scheduled a 

post COP 21 half-day campaign awareness talk in collaboration with the Rodrigues Council 

of Social Services, involving all the presidents  of the 100 community villages in  Rodrigues 

and their environment responsible persons, using a bottom-up approach to share what I have 

 

 

112 

learnt  and  observed  in  Paris  and  to  explore  our  actions  and  way  forward  with  regard  to 

climate change. 

Le  thème  de  la  rencontre  est  « Agir  ensemble  contre  le  changement  climatique,  la 

planète  terre,  l’urgence  climatique,  et  Rodrigues,  notre  pays,  notre  avenir,  une  prise  et  un 

réveil de conscience. » Voilà le thème de cette rencontre qui aura lieu à Rodrigues, Madame 

la présidente. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  addition,  I  believe  that  it  is  high  time  for  the  introduction  of  a 

Climate  Change  Bill  to  achieving  climate  change  outcomes,  which  implies  budgetary 

provisions as well. 

Coming to response and recovery, Madam Speaker, effective emergency preparedness 

and  disaster  reduction  requires  the  participation  of  the  entire  community  and  all  levels  of 

Government.  This  Bill  will  encourage  our  Republic  to  deepen  its  culture  of  mobilisation, 

solidarity  and  social  responsiveness  and  trust  in  Government  in  emergency  situations.  The 

Cuba  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Model,  which  I  have  read  -  very  important  for  reference  - 

evacuated 700,000 people in less than 48 hours when Hurricane Michelle struck in November 

2001, according to Red Cross International. 

I think this model shall inspire our Republic and, Madam Speaker, I believe that every 

institution and single citizen of our Republic must be embarked on track towards a culture of 

disaster prevention and resilience against natural hazards and must be well familiar with the 

concepts and practice of disaster risk reduction and this is where that comes to education, and 

rightly  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research has embarked in the 9-year Schooling Educational Reform, which, we, in 

Rodrigues,  fully  support  as  well.  Here,  I  would  suggest  that  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 

Management  and  Post  Disaster  Relief  and  Recovery  be  introduced  as  a  module  within  the 

higher  education,  research  and  awareness  courses  in  our  universities,  colleges  and  school 

curriculum.  

Tertiary institutions such as the Open University  of Mauritius,  dispensing courses in 

Disaster  Management,  should  be  called  upon  to  play  a  stronger  role  for  capacity-building, 

including  training,  research,  documentation  and  policy  advocacy  on  all  aspects  of  disaster 

management.  

Madam Speaker, in relation to poverty there is a proposed Marshall Plan by the hon. 

Minister  for  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment.  This  Bill  must  incorporate 

 

 

113 

disaster  risk  assessment  into  the  planning  and  management  of  disaster  prone,  highly 

vulnerable  populated  settlements,  les  zones  avec  des  poches  de  pauvreté,  avec  des  plans 

géographiques  très  spécifiques  et  bien  définis.  We  need  what  I  call  Hazard  and  Disaster 

Vulnerability Spatial Maps which have to be drawn to identify these highest zones of risk in 

our Republic.  

Madam Speaker, before concluding, I will just say a few words on Rodrigues. I have 

to  say  that  I  have  taken  good  note  of  the  valuable  consideration  given  to  Rodrigues  in  this 

Bill.  The  functions  of  the  Bill  have  been  decentralised  to  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly 

through  the  Rodrigues  Disaster  Risk  Management  Council  through  the  Rodrigues  Crisis 

Committee,  the  Rodrigues  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Centre  and  Rodrigues 

Emergency Operations Command.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Rodrigues  Police  Division,  as  per  the  Bill,  in  the  event  of  a 

disaster, shall be the lead disaster response operations. And I will say that despite the fact that 

Rodrigues  Police  shall  be  the  Response  Institution,  I  will  suggest  the  setting-up  of  a  well-

equipped  -  with  logistics  -  and  trained  Police  Specialised  Disaster  Response  Unit  in 

Rodrigues as well. In the same breath, I would say and reiterate the purchase of an armoured 

vehicle for emergency purposes in Rodrigues which is long-awaited.  

Madam  Speaker,  another  very  important  observation  of  this  Bill  in  the  case  of 

Rodrigues  is  that  the  various  institutions  provided  by  the  Bill,  apart  from  the  Police,  fall 

under the aegis of the Chief Commissioner’s Office. In section 32, I am happy to say that the 

chairmanship  of  the  Rodrigues  Crisis  Committee,  as  per  amendment  circulated,  will  be 

chaired by the Chief Commissioner and the Vice-Chairperson a public officer. This is  good 

because  it  will  keep  a  flow  of  authority  and  political  control  during  any  emergency  or 

disaster. The fact  that this Bill  considers the autonomous functionality of  Rodrigues reveals 

that  Government  understands  that  disasters  do  not  affect  places,  people  and  sectors  in  our 

Republic  in  the  same  way  or  to  the  same  extent.    For  example,  following  the  02  March 

Indonesia earthquake, the Australian Tsunami Service Provider cited only Rodrigues as being 

under threat in the Indian Ocean by the earthquake, just to substantiate what I just said before.  

Madam Speaker, Rodrigues must be able also to manage in moments of crisis, without 

having  to  wait for long  for support  from  mainland Mauritius  in  case both  islands are under 

crisis.  

 

 

114 

Madam Speaker, to conclude, I fully support the introduction of this National Disaster 

Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Bill  (No.  II  of  2016)  and  I  also  commend  the  Bill  to  the 

House.  

Madam Speaker, I am done, and I thank you for your kind attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dayal! 

(6.26 p.m.) 

Mr R. Dayal (First Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Madam Speaker, this Bill, 

the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Bill, has to be viewed in the context 

of the urgency and the state of emergency posed by climate change with all its uncertainties 

and  unpredictability  and  all  that  it  triggers  more  specifically  in  terms  of  more  violent 

cyclones,  intense  storm  surges  and  tsunamis  causing  coastal  inundations  with  heavy  beach 

erosion, landslides, flash floods with multiple fatalities exemplified by flooding at Mon Goût 

where I deponed and proposed for the creation of a Disaster Management Centre in the hon. 

Judge Bhushan Domah Select Committee. The recommendation was accepted and a Disaster 

Management Centre was created and is a reality today.  

Also, the 30th March 2013 flash floods claiming numerous lives, more than 10, which 

showed  the  absence  of  leadership,  command,  control  and  communication.  This  Bill  is  very 

timely in the wake of climate change and I am intervening in this Bill, as the former Minister 

of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management, with more 

than  30  years  of  disaster  management  with  outstanding  success.  I  had  the  privilege  to 

represent  the  Government  of  Mauritius  in  the  first  World  Conference  on  Disaster  Risk 

Reduction  in  Yokohama,  Japan,  in  May  1994,  and  where  I  intervened  and  Yokohama 

declarations have it in terms of priorities -  

Priority 1 - Understanding disasters; 

Priority 2 - Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk; 

Priority 3 - Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience; 

Priority  4  -  Enhancing  disasters  preparedness  for  effective  response  and  to  «Build 

Better» in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 

This  Bill  has  encompassed  the  Yokohama  declaration  and  the  Sendai  declaration 

philosophies  and  strategies  to  protect  life  and  property,  manage  disasters  linking  all 

stakeholders to ensure proper success whilst ensuring sustainable development and, here, the 

 

 

115 

political will of this Government has to be highlighted. This Bill is a clear indication of the 

political  will  of  the  Government  to  proactively,  actively  and  reactively  meet  the  challenges 

posed by climate change in terms of adaptation and mitigation strategies  and also including 

disaster  management  with  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment  Sustainable  Development,  and 

Disaster  and  Beach  Management.  This  political  will  is  based  on  vision.  We,  as  the 

Government,  recognise  the  close  relationship  between  disaster  reduction  and  sustainable 

development,  including  disaster  management,  building  from  the  Hyogo  Framework  for 

building resilience of the communities to face disasters with confidence. The political will is 

tangible in this Bill to protect life and property whilst ensuring sustainable development with 

capacity-building, optimising on resources available with collective responsibility.  

The  rationale  behind  disaster  management  is  intricately  linked  with  the  risks  and 

vulnerabilities  inherent  in  the  geological  morphology  of  the  Mauritian  territory  posed  by 

climate  change  to  the  nation’s  physical  environment  by  land  and  sea  in  its  multifarious 

ramifications  of  hardening  of  targets,  more  so  with  the  advent  of  earthquakes.  When  I 

committed pen to paper to review the drafting of this Bill, I had in mind the five key concepts 

of disaster management – 

(i) 

proper  command  and  control  and  communication  to  ensure  timely  getting  of 

responses in terms of strategies and dealing with crisis situations; 

(ii) 

hardening  of  targets  through  preparedness,  mitigation,  adaptation  and 

recovery; 

(iii) 

human factor engineering, in all its ramifications, to have everybody on board 

for proper disaster management;   

(iv) 

all  inclusive  resilience,  force  incorporation  of  the  conceptualisation  of  early 

warning  and  other  warning  systems  for  capacity  building  and  community 

involvement. Hence, taking MACOSS on board with hundreds of NGOs, and 

(v) 

empowering  all  stakeholders  with  the  right  skills  and  knowledge,  optimising 

the use of human and material resources in the Republic of Mauritius to meet 

disasters  in  a  sensitised  manner  with  the  optimum  level  of  preparedness  and 

for proper relief operations. 

I  had  equally  in  mind  how  to  integrate  re-engineering  technology  with  green 

technology in the conceptualisation of modern infrastructure and the physical urbanisation of 

the Mauritian territory for adaptation, mitigation and “build better.” In this spirit, we included 

the  Smart  City  concept  where  the  compendium  of  environmental  guidelines  to  harden  all 

 

 

116 

targets  within  the  ambit  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities,  hazards  and  calamities  of  all  types, 

notwithstanding the human factor engineering at all levels with decision-making and ensuring 

timely  command  control  and  communication.  This  Bill  must  be  read  in  conjunction  with 

already  in  force  integrated  concepts,  strategies  and  realistic  schemes  based  on  Mauritian 

realities.  

New innovative concepts of dealing with the urgency posed by climate change, to deal 

with coastal erosion and to do away with “gabions” - unfortunately the former Minister is not 

here - which has been a public waste and embracing sand engineering techniques.   

This is tangible when referring to the main object of this Bill which is to provide for - 

(a) 

prevention and reduction of the risks of disasters; 

(b)  mitigation of the adverse impacts of disasters; 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

disaster preparedness; 

effective response through disasters, and 

management of post-disaster activities, including recovery and rehabilitation. 

All  the  objects  of  the  Bill  can  be  realistically  realised  with  proper  leadership  at 

command, control and communication at all levels with professional mastery of all the phases 

inherent  in  the  disaster  clock  proactively,  actively  and  reactively  with  human  factor 

engineering.  

This  Bill  provides for a legal  framework as it befits  un État de droit and it is  coming 

from  this  Government  with  provision  for  the  setting  up  of  a  Council  in  terms  of  policy, 

strategic  framework  and  management  plans  at  all  levels  contrary  to  what  used  to  be  in  the 

past. Unfortunately they are not here to listen.  

This Bill caters for a National Centre for coordinating, monitoring the implementation 

of disaster risk reduction and management activities as per the national strategic framework 

and plan. This is to ensure timely response by the National Emergency Operations Command 

(NEOC),  supported  by  the  Local  Emergency  Operations  Command  (LEOC),  the  Rodrigues 

(REOC), that of Agalega and St. Brandon.  

This  Government,  faced  with  the  urgency  of  climate  change,  gave  the  Republic  of 

Mauritius an Early Warning System for storm surge and also engineered the construction of a 

coastal refuge centre at Quatre Soeurs, the first of its kind in this part of the World as a SIDS 

PIED.  This  initiative  has  been  applauded  regionally  and  internationally  and  has  laid  the 

foundation  for  a  Wave  Early  Warning  System,  sparing  no  effort  to  bring  state-of-the-art 

 

 

117 

innovative  technology  to  enhance  capacity  building  for  resilience  and  adaptation  strategies 

and hardening of targets for mitigating risk and vulnerabilities.  

The  harmonisation  of  Early  Warning  Mechanism,  Madam  Speaker,  with  community 

participation  cannot  be  overemphasised  to  secure  lives  and  properties  and  to  ensure  the 

successful implementation of all disaster-related measures. Global warming and the advent of 

sea  water  level  rise  have  also  been  taken  on  board  for  coastal  contingencies  and  seas. 

Hopefully, the Global Green Fund for which I was very vociferous in COP 21 and emanating 

from  COP  21  in  Paris,  for  which  I  pledged,  will  help  to  provide  the  essential  financial 

resources for adaptation and mitigation schemes, knowing the paucity of financial resources 

in our Republic.  My proposal is – 

(i) 

under  Part  II,  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Council,  clause  4  (2)  to 

add  after  (y),  ‘a  representative  of  MACOSS’  because  we  want  the  whole 

society to be involved in disaster management; 

(ii) 

under Part II again, clause 8 Meetings of National Council, subsection (1), to 

replace  the  wordings  ‘every  3  months’  with  ‘every  month’  because  the 

cyclonic  period  starts  on  01  November  and  ends  on  15  May  each  year  and 

there  is  a  need  for  an  inclusive  and  resilient  society.  Therefore,  the  Council 

has to meet regularly and once per month is not too much. 

I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing disaster management in 

the  Ministry  of  Environment  because  environment  and  disasters  are  intricately  linked. 

Therefore, for sustainable development, it has to be a Ministry where all these things could be 

engineered for the highest interests of our Republic. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(6.38 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Thank  you, 

Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the debate today. 

(Interruptions) 

Disaster  risk  reduction  aims  to  reduce  the  cause  by  natural  hazards  like  storms, 

earthquakes,  floods,  droughts,  cyclones,  landslides,  tsunamis,  wild  fires,  volcanos,  etc.    We 

know that we cannot prevent a hazard from happening, but we can prevent it to be a disaster.  

Disaster risk reduction can be a reality through an ethic of prevention.  A nation can be either 

more resilient or more vulnerable to disaster.  It depends on how a Government is proactive 

 

 

118 

in setting the right mechanism, training to the personnel, allocation of resources and funds to 

avoid  the  bad  consequences  of  natural  hazards.  It  depends,  for  example,  on  our  general 

culture, on how we build our houses, offices and high-rise buildings.   

The consequences of the hazards like floods, for example, could be less damaging if a 

well-studied  plan  is  drawn  in  accordance  with  the  topography  of  the  land  and  climate 

conditions  existing  in  our  country.  Disaster  risk  reduction,  by  definition,  is  –  one  of  the 

definitions existing - I quote – 

“The  concept  and  practice  of  reducing  disaster  risk  through  systematic  efforts  to 

analyse and reduce the casual factors of disasters.” 

It is today a general concern. It is a worldwide concern. All the population is concerned 

with  risk  management.  It  is  how  to  lessening  vulnerability  of  people  and  property  when 

having  a  hazard.  We  need  wise  management  of  land  and  the  environment.  We  need  to 

develop  a  culture  of  prevention  as  from  school  level.  We  need  to  invest  in  appropriate 

equipment, in awareness campaign, education, good training in law, etc. We must not hesitate 

to put all our strength, means and resources towards our objectives. Prevention pays; it is our 

choice. 

From  year  2000  to  2011,  2.7  billion  of  people  were  affected  with  hazards  and  1.3 

trillion  of  dollars  lost.  So,  we  need  to  develop  a  culture  of  prevention  and  not  a  culture  of 

reaction. We cannot prevent a hazard from happening, but we can prevent it from becoming a 

disaster,  and  we  can  mitigate  the  impact.  So,  we  have  to  learn  about  the  risk,  bring  people 

together,  review  our  policies,  laws,  as  we  are  doing  today.  We  need  to  make  a  nation 

resilient;  we  need  to  invest  in  urban  planning,  taking  into  consideration  risk  disaster  while 

setting  our  urban  planning.  We  need  to  educate  the  population,  develop  awareness  through 

normal  school  curriculum.  We  need  the  participation  of  the  population.  We  need  a 

sustainable development. We must invest today for a safer tomorrow. 

In Mauritius, Madam Speaker, we have developed a culture of building houses strong 

enough  to  resist  cyclones.  Sometimes  even,  we  exaggerate  in  our  structural  design,  in  our 

objective  to  build  strong  buildings.  It’s  not  the  case  for  countries  which  are  not  cyclonic 

countries.  Since  1960s,  I  mean,  since  we  have  had  cyclones  Carol  and  Alix,  we  have 

developed  a  culture  of  building  houses  resistant  to  cyclones  and  sometimes  without  even 

caring for the esthetical design of the building. This culture has been developing as a reaction 

 

 

119 

to cyclones Carol and Alix in those days. Now, we need to adopt the same culture in building 

our drains, rivulets, bridges, roads, underpass, overpass, overhead crossings, etc. 

Madam  Speaker,  these  past  two  decades,  we  have  been  witnessing  in  Mauritius 

construction  of  many  public  infrastructures  which  ignore  completely  the  topography  of  the 

land and which do not take into consideration the possibility of flooding. And more shocking, 

Madam Speaker, is the destruction of natural drains or covering of existing drains as in Jardin 

de  La  Compagnie,  Rogers  House,  Air  Mauritius  parking,  the  Medcor  building,  erection  of 

building  nearby  KFC  on  La  Chaussée  Bridge,  as  if  the  new  generation  of  engineers  and 

architects  were  challenging  infrastructures  as  they  were  hundred  years  ago.  You  know, 

Madam  Speaker,  what  was  the  result  of  such  a  wrong  practice?  Flooding,  loss  of  life, 

important material losses and loss of money! 

Many  morcellements,  today,  around  the  country,  are  being  constructed  on  wetlands, 

on natural drains or nearby. Today, these regions on the nearby are regularly flooded after a 

normal  rainfall.  So,  Madam  Speaker,  everyone  is  concerned  at  the  level  of  responsibility; 

whether  it  is  village  council,  district  council,  municipality,  Central  Government,  we  are  all 

concerned. So, we need to create awareness at all levels of the public sector first, then at the 

level of local authorities, village councils and municipalities. We need to take on board also 

Real  Estate  developers,  engineers,  architects.  Government  must,  according  to  me,  start  by 

uncovering  the  drains  at  Jardin  de  La  Compagnie,  at  Rogers  House  parking,  at  Medcor 

building. We must remove the KFC building on the bridge at La Chaussée. In fact, we must 

stop le massacre done by some famous engineers, and we must reinstate the sites where all 

these wrongdoings have been fatal and damaging to our country. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  good  piece  of  legislation.  It  sets  all  the  necessary 

responsible  organs  at  different  levels  and  allows  the  interaction  upwards,  downwards  and 

across all structural bodies of the public management. To make it a success, we need capable 

people, well-trained, dynamic personnel, specialists of risk disaster management. Efficiency 

must be the main objective at all levels. 

I  wish  this  legislation  would  give  us  a  new  vision  of  our  environment  management, 

making sustainable management a matter of national  interest.  May this legislation also  give 

birth  to  a  new  generation  of  engineers,  architects,  builders  and  developers  who  must  be 

sensible to  disaster risk reduction! But  they must be generally more sensible to  the issue of 

environment  itself.  We  must  take  into  consideration  all  our  topographic  problems  in 

 

 

120 

Mauritius,  our  weakness  and  strength  before  designing  or  building  here  and  there  without 

taking into consideration of the risks that they are doing to this country. 

So, we need, Madam Speaker, not only to take care of our country, but to make sure 

that  our  planet  be  sustainable.  Our  small  island  is  an  example  in  taking  this  matter  very 

seriously.  May all the population give a helpful hand to the Government and make it a reality 

for the coming generation! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Alain Wong Yen Cheong! 

 (6.50 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 

Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  (Mr  A. 

Wong Yen Cheong): Madam Speaker, it was high time to address the issue of disaster risk 

governance  at  national  level,  having  in  place  a  robust  legal  framework  to  better  face  the 

challenges  which  the  country  is  facing  in  the  wake  of  disasters  of  greater  magnitude  and 

intensity, due to their effect of climate change is overdue. 

This  will  also  enable  our  country  to  play  a  lead  role  at  regional  level  in  terms  of 

disaster  risk  reduction  and  management.  Just  from  January  this  year,  more  than  135  people 

lost  their  lives  in  disasters  such  as  earthquakes  in  Taiwan,  flash  floods  in  Louisiana  and 

Pakistan, and cyclones in Fiji. 

Madam Speaker, it is encouraging to note that there is consensus in this House on the 

national importance of this piece of legislation. I have taken good note of all hon. Members 

of this House - there were nine of them -, about their willingness to help and collaborate, and 

also about all their propositions. 

With these concluding remarks, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE NATIONAL DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT BILL 

 

 

121 

(NO. II of 2016) 

Clause 1 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 2 (Interpretation) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment 

in clause 2 - 

“in  the  definition  of  “emergency  services”,  in  paragraph  (b),  by  inserting,  after  the 

words  “Mauritius  Police  Force,”,  the  words  “the  National  Centre,  the  Rodrigues 

Centre,”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 2, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4 (National Council) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments 

in clause 4 (2) – 

 “(i) 

in  paragraph  (b),  by  deleting  the  words  “,  who  shall  be  the  Vice-

chairperson”; 

 (ii) 

by  inserting,  after  paragraph  (k),  the  following  new  paragraph, 

paragraphs (l) to (y) being relettered as paragraphs (m) to (z); 

 (l) 

the supervising officer or a representative of the 

Ministry  responsible  for  the  subject  of  gender 

equality; 

 

 

 

 

(iii) 

in 

the  newly  relettered  paragraph  (y),  by  deleting 

the  word  

 

“and”;  

(iv) 

by adding the following new paragraph, the full stop at the end of the 

newly relettered paragraph (z) being deleted and replaced by the words 

“; and” –  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Amendments agreed to. 

122 

(za) 

a  representative  of  the  Mauritius  Council  of  

 

Social Service.” 

Clause 4, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 5 to 7 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 8 (Meetings of National Council) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments 

in clause 8 - 

“(i) 

in sub clause (1), by deleting the words “3 months” and replacing them by the 

word “month”; 

(ii) 

in sub clause (2), by deleting the words “Vice-chairperson shall” and replacing 

them  by  the  words  “members  present  shall  elect  from  among  themselves  a 

member to”;” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 8, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 9 to 14 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 15 (National Crisis Committee) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment 

in clause 15(1)(b) - 

“by deleting the words “or his representative, who shall be the vice-chairperson”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 15, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 16 to 31 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 32 (Rodrigues Crisis Committee) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments 

in clause 32 - 

 

 

123 

“(i) 

by deleting paragraph (a) and replacing it by the following paragraph –  

 (a) 

the Chief Commissioner, who shall be the chairperson; 

 (ii) 

by inserting, after paragraph (a), the following new paragraph, paragraphs (b) 

to (e) being relettered as paragraphs (c) to (f) – 

 (b) 

the Island Chief Executive;” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 32, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 33 to 46 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

On motion made and seconded, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management 

Third Reading 

Bill (No. II of 2016) was read a third time and passed. 

 (6.58 p.m.) 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL AGENCY FOR THE TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION OF 

SUBSTANCE ABUSERS (REPEAL) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 

move  that  the  National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and  Rehabilitation  of  Substance  Abusers 

(Repeal) Bill (No. III of 2016) be read a second time. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  purpose  of  the  Bill  that  we  have  before  the  House  today 

concerns the repeal of the National Agency for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance 

Abusers (NATReSA) Act 1996. 

I wish to inform the House, at the very outset, Madam Speaker, that it is not certainly 

with  a  gaieté  de  coeur  that  I  am  introducing  this  Bill  in  Parliament  today.  The  decision  to 

 

 

124 

wind up NATReSA has been taken après mûre réflexion whilst considering its parcours over 

the past few years and after an objective assessment of its work. 

For Members of the House who are not familiar with the history of the NATReSA, it 

would  be  good  to  remember  that  the  NATReSA  was  set  up  in  September  1996,  as  a  body 

corporate  under  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security  and  National  Solidarity,  following  the 

restructure of the defunct Trust Fund for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts. 

At  that  time,  Madam  Speaker,  substance  abuse,  drug  trafficking  and  the  country’s 

degrading social situation were a matter of serious concern to Government. The idea behind 

the  setting  up  of  NATReSA  was  to  complement  Government’s  action  in  having  a 

drug/substance free society by the prevention of substance abuse, treatment and rehabilitation 

of  substance  abusers  and  facilitating  their  integration  in  the  mainstream  society  through  a 

multi-disciplinary approach. 

In  line  with  this  purpose,  the  NATReSA  was  entrusted  with  the  following 

responsibilities - 

(i) 

coordinate  and  facilitate  efforts  at  national  level  towards  the  implementation 

of  programmes  for  the  prevention  of  substance  abuse  and  the  treatment  and 

rehabilitation of substance abusers; 

(ii) 

complement existing facilities for - 

(a) 

(b) 

the prevention of substance abuse; 

the treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers; 

(iii)  mobilise resources locally and overseas for the treatment and rehabilitation of 

substance abusers, and 

(iv) 

set up and manage institutions for the treatment and rehabilitation of substance 

abusers; 

(v) 

provide after-care services for the rehabilitation of substance abusers, and 

(vi) 

advise,  guide  and  help  voluntary  social  organisations  engaged  in  the 

prevention  of  substance  abuse  and  in  the  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of 

substance abusers. 

Twelve  years  later,  Madam  Speaker,  that  is,  in  September  2008,  the  NATReSA 

migrated to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life as it was felt then, that this Ministry 

was better suited to deal with issues pertaining to substance abuse, be it alcohol, tobacco or 

dangerous drugs.  

 

 

125 

Irrespective  of  whether  it  was  under  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security  and  National 

Solidarity  or  under  that  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  the  NATReSA  was 

always provided with all the necessary support including financial and human resources, and 

the  required  legal  framework  and  autonomy  to  enable  it  to  fulfill  its  role  effectively  and 

safely with a view to obtaining tangible and measurable results.  

For instance, the management of the NATReSA was entrusted to a Board with a view 

to keeping it far from bureaucratic hurdles and constraints and enabling it to respond rapidly 

to emerging drug related challenges. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  was  also  provided  with  the  necessary  personnel,  some  of  whom 

were  redeployed  from  ex-Trust  Fund  I  mentioned  earlier.  These  officers  had  the  necessary 

knowledge and experience and the skills in the field of substance abuse.  

In  terms  of  funding,  although  section  9(a)  of  the  NATReSA  Act  provides  for  the 

NATReSA  to ‘receive funds from the Government and raise funds from other sources for the 

prevention  of  substance  abuse,  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of  substance  abusers’,  however, 

its source of funding up to now has been exclusively from Government grants.  

What I want to highlight, Madam Speaker, is that toutes les conditions étaient réunies 

to  allow  the  NATReSA  to  be  successful  in  its  mandate  and  to  fulfil  its  mission. 

Unfortunately, this did  not  happen.  I am  sure that  the whole House will agree with  me that 

the  NATReSA  has  been  a  major  disappointment  in  the  realm  of  prevention,  treatment  and 

rehabilitation of substance abuse in the country. With a few prevention campaigns here and 

there, from time to time, the NATReSA has neither been able to be in the frontline nor play a 

leading  role  in  curbing  the  drug  scourge.  It  has  failed  to  rise  to  the  occasion  and  it  has 

unfortunately not been pro-active when its primary role was to deal with substance abuse at 

the national level. 

Madam Speaker, shortly after I took office as Minister of Health and Quality of Life, I 

initiated a cost benefit and cost effectiveness assessment of all parastatal bodies falling under 

my  Ministry.  NATReSA  was  one  of  them.  In  the  course  of  the  assessment,  the  following 

came to light – 

(i) 

NATReSA  was  not  fulfilling  most  of  its  objectives  as  set  out  in  section 4  of 

the parent Act; 

(ii) 

NATReSA has become a body responsible for grants.  Its operation is limited 

essentially to the allocation of a monthly grant to 10 NGOs in Mauritius  and 

 

 

126 

two in Rodrigues, presumably involved in the prevention of substance abuse, 

treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers. 

It may be good for me to give the details of the grants and the bodies that received the grants 

– 

SN 

Name of NGOs 

Monthly Grant 

1 

Centre de Solidarité pour une Nouvelle Vie 

Rs370,000 

2 

Centre d'Accueil de Terre Rouge 

Rs215,000 

3 

Sangram Sewa Sadan 

Rs120,000 

4 

HELP De Addiction Centre 

Rs110,000 

5 

Dr. I. Goomany Treatment Centre 

Rs165,000 

6 

Chrysalide Centre 

Rs40,000 

7 

Groupe Renaissance de Mahebourg 

Rs10,000 

8 

ACTReSA- Human Service Trust (Ayurveda)  Rs70,000 

9 

Etoile d’Espérance–Association Alcool  

Rs140,000 

10 

LACAZ A 

Rs30,000 

11  Centre  d’Accueil  et  de  Réhabilitation  de  St 

Rs70,000 

Gabriel Rodrigues 

12  Centre Alcoologie, Rodrigues 

Rs70,000 

 

TOTAL 

Rs1,410,000 

 

 

127 

It  is  to  be  pointed  out,  Madam  Speaker,  that  apart  from  the  allocation  of  grants  to  the  two 

NGOs  in  Rodrigues,  NATReSA  has  not  carried  out  any  prevention  treatment  and 

rehabilitation programmes for substance abusers in Rodrigues.  

The  House  may  also  wish  to  note  that  the  NATReSA  costs  Government  over  Rs40  m. 

annually. For the financial year 2015/2016, the grant allocated to NATReSA is to the tune of 

Rs41,175,000  out  of  which  Rs23,175,000  is  to  meet  the  cost  of  its  annual  recurrent 

expenditure  including  fees  payable  to  its  Board  and  Rs18  m.  is  to  be  allocated  to  the  12 

NGOs under its Rehabilitation Programme for Alcoholics and Drug Addicts. 

(iii) 

the Harm Reduction Unit  of my Ministry had worked out  a strategy plan  for 

NATReSA in 2014, which it has not implemented. In fact, it should have been 

NATReSA working out the strategic plan for the Harm Reduction Unit; 

(iv) 

since its inception, NATReSA has been focusing on prevention programmes, 

which have not evolved over the years to meet the ever changing environment 

for substance abuse; 

(v) 

NATReSA  has  not  had  the  expected  impact  given  that  the  number  of 

substance abusers among students,  youth and the community at large has not 

shown any decline; 

(vi)  NATReSA does not have its own treatment and rehabilitation programme. Its 

role has been limited to allocate a monthly grant to NGOs providing codeine 

and methadone base treatment and operating as rehabilitation centres; 

(vii)  NATReSA does not exercise adequate monitoring and follow-up to ensure that 

the  funds  allocated  to  the  NGOs  are  used  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  are 

actually  meant  and  on  the  outcome  thereof,  i.e.,  the  number  of  beneficiaries 

being treated and rehabilitated; 

(viii) 

two  of  the  NGOs  receiving  a  grant  from  NATReSA  also  derive  an  annual 

grant from my Ministry; 

(ix) 

although  NATReSA  is  expected  to  keep  abreast  of  latest  information  on  all 

issues  relating  to  its  mandate,  it  has  not  been  vigilant  enough  to  detect  the 

emergence of synthetic drugs among youngsters and to take timely actions to 

prevent their proliferation, and  

 

 

128 

(x) 

there is  much overlap in the programmes of the  Harm Reduction Unit  of my 

Ministry  and  that  of  NATReSA.  This  calls  for  urgent  synchronisation  of 

actions so as to avoid duplication of efforts and wastage of public funds. 

Madam  Speaker,  NATReSA  could  have  played  the  role  of  an  apex  body 

harmonising the work of the NGOs with the resources of my Ministry to really curb the 

prevalence of dangerous of drugs and substance abuse.  

Following  these  findings  and  these  observations,  I  had  consultations,  Madam 

Speaker,  with  the  staff  of  NATReSA  in  mid-2015,  to  explore  avenues  for  better 

governance and a results-oriented approach and attitude. I regret to have to admit that the 

NATReSA  did  not  improve.  There  are  inherent  weaknesses  and  dysfunctioning  at  all 

levels  of    NATReSA.  As  a  follow-up,  in  December  2015,  I  had  a  further  assessment 

carried  out  which  confirmed  the  findings  I  just  mentioned  and  also  the  findings  of  a 

previous  assessment  carried  out  in  2012  by  officers  of  my  Ministry  on  the  activities  of 

NATReSA. 

Madam Speaker, the House would surely understand how distressing it is to note 

that despite such negative findings since 2012, the NATReSA, as  an institution, did  not 

improve. These shortcomings of the NATReSA called for urgent  action and a paradigm 

shift  in  our strategies to  be able to  respond in  a  more dynamic and proactive manner to 

the  challenges  posed  by  substance  and  drug  abuse.  Again,  in  the  light  of  these 

circumstances, and also  with a view to improving efficiency, effectiveness and ensuring 

judicious use of public funds, that the decision to wind up NATReSA was taken. 

The House may wish to note that the repeal of the NATReSA Act will not affect 

the ongoing programmes on prevention, treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers 

as  same  are  already  being  carried  out  by  the  Harm  Reduction  Unit  of  my  Ministry. 

Instead, my Ministry proposes to set up a comprehensive Substance Abuse Unit and will 

insist  on  the  need  for  NGOs  benefiting  from  grants  from  the  Government  for  the 

‘Rehabilitation  Programme  for  alcoholics  and  drug  Addicts’  to  provide  all  necessary 

information as and when requested and to ensure that those in need of help are effectively 

given the support and social accompaniment by the NGO. 

As  regards  the  personnel  of  the  NATReSA,  which  presently  consists  of  16  officers, 

holding permanent and pensionable posts, following consultations I had with them, they have 

all expressed, in writing, their willingness to be absorbed in my Ministry. The modalities for 

 

 

129 

their  redeployment  are  being  finalised  with  the  relevant  authorities  in  accordance  with  the 

prevailing legislation. It is to be highlighted, Madam Speaker, that the terms and conditions 

of  their  employment  in  my  Ministry  will  not  be  less  favourable  than  those  of  their  present 

employment. 

If, for any reason, anyone of them is no more interested to join my Ministry, they will 

be  given  the  possibility  to  retire  on  grounds  of  abolition  of  office  and  will  be  paid  their 

pension benefits.  The system for the pension benefits will be applicable as follows - 

(a) 

total  fund balance in  the NATReSA Pension Fund will be transferred to  the 

Government; 

(b) 

NATReSA  will  be  removed  from  the  schedule  to  the  Statutory  Bodies 

Pension Funds Act; 

(c) 

NATReSA  Repeal  Act  will  clearly  mention  that,  notwithstanding  the 

provisions of the Pensions Act, the existing pensioners of NATReSA will be 

deemed to be pensioners of the Government,  and 

(d) 

once all this is done, Government will take responsibility for the payment of 

pensions to present and future pensioners of the defunct NATReSA. 

With  regard  to  the  12  NGOs,  Madam  Speaker,  benefitting  from  a  grant  from  the 

NATReSA, arrangements have been made for them to receive their monthly funding from my 

Ministry.  The  NGOs  would  have  to  comply,  however,  with  the  conditions  of  the  financial 

regulations  as  set  out  in  their  respective  grant  memorandum  and  which  concern  essentially 

the need for transparency, accountability and the absolute necessity to show results. 

Action will also be taken to review the grant to the NGOs which are receiving double 

grants, that is, both from my Ministry and the NATReSA. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  merging  of  the  staff  of  the  NATReSA  with  my  Ministry  will 

bring  efficiency  gains  and  a  more  coordinated  and  effective  response  to  the  challenges  of 

drug abuse and the rehabilitation of the victims of substance abuse. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  decision  to  wind  up  the  NATReSA  should  have  been  taken  a 

long time back.  Having gone into the history of the NATReSA and having made a very fair 

and honest assessment of what it ought to have done but did not do, I believe this Bill is the 

best option that we could have. 

I  wish  to  reassure  the  House  that  this  issue  of  substance  abuse  will  be  kept  under 

constant review at my Ministry. 

 

 

130 

Madam  Speaker,  the  history  of  NATReSA  is  one  of  a  catalogue  of  missed 

opportunities.    On  a  more  general  note,  once  an  institution  which  is  designed  to  be  ‘sur  le 

terrain’ becomes ‘bureaucratised’, then it loses focus and its mission gets derailed.  That is, 

unfortunately,  the  legacy  of  NATReSA,  but  I  will  ensure,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Harm 

Reduction  Unit  of  my  Ministry  –  which  will  be  further  restructured  and  strengthened  by 

bringing  under  one  ‘leadership’  all  the  programmes  that  deal  directly  or  indirectly  with  the 

vexed issue of substance  abuse will be set up as soon as possible.  The officers in that Unit 

will  no  longer  be  desk-bound;  they  will  be  where  the  action  is  and  where  the  target  people 

are. 

In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  had  NATReSA  lived  up  to  its  priority  mandate,  the  drug 

scene in our country would have been different. It would not have been necessary, probably, 

for Government, in 2015, to set up a Commission of Inquiry on Dangerous Drugs chaired by 

former Justice Lam Shang Leen, with very wide terms of reference. 

I  am  confident  that, with  my Ministry in the driving seat  for dealing with  substance 

abuse, we will be able to meet the challenges posed by this scourge. 

Madam Speaker, with these words, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Roopun rose and seconded. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Quirin rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

(7.17 p.m.) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 19 April 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

Hon. Members, I have a long list of Members who wish to intervene on adjournment 

matters  today.  In  fact,  I  have  got  10  Members  and,  as  you  are  aware,  we  have  only  30 

 

 

131 

minutes for adjournment matters. So, I make an appeal to all Members to be brief. Not only 

brief,  but  very,  very  brief,  so  as  to  make  your  case,  but  at  the  same  time  to  allow  the 

Ministers to reply within 30 minutes. 

(7.18 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

PETITE RIVIERE - MORCELLEMENT GHURBURRUN - BUS SERVICE & ROAD 

WIDENING 

Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière): I shall be very 

brief,  Madam  Speaker.    I  would  just  like  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  Minister  of  Public 

Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  concerning  the  urgent  problem  of  the  inhabitants  of 

Morcellement Ghurburrun at Petit Verger Road, Petite Rivière. Morcellement Ghurburrun has 

just  been  annexed  to  my  constituency  before  the  general  election.  They  have  an  urgent 

problem  with  the  National  Transport  Authority  and  also  with  regard  to  security  along  Petit 

Verger Road. I have already drawn the attention of the Minister some time back, the matter is 

of extreme urgency, and I shall appreciate if the hon. Minister could direct the NTA to deal 

with  the  problem  of  bus  availability  and  also  with  the  RDA  to  see  what  can  be  done  with 

regard to the enlargement of the road. 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 

Madam Speaker, I will look into the matter. 

MITD - NC NO. 3 ELECTRICITY SUBJECT – EXAMINATION 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East): Madam Speaker, I wish to raise a matter, which will be addressed to the hon. Minister 

of Education, and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, who is also 

responsible for the MITD.  It concerns the examinations for the NC No. 3 Electricity subject 

where the candidates have sat for the said exams some six months back and, up to now, there 

has been no result published.  Each time the candidates and parents call at the MITD, they are 

told that the results will be available very soon. So, may I ask the hon. Minister to look into 

the matter? 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): I will certainly look into the matter. 

 

 

 

132 

ALBION BEACH – SECURITY MEASURES 

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 

présidente,  ma  requête  ce  soir  s’adresse  à  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  et  concerne 

l’insécurité qui règne les week-ends, en particulier les dimanches sur la plage d’Albion et aux 

alentours. 

Régulièrement  il  y  a  des  bagarres  entre  divers  groupes  d’individus,  agressant  même 

des  policiers  qui,  malheureusement,  sont  peu  nombreux  et  sont  souvent  dépassés  par  les 

évènements. Plus récemment, des individus se sont même permis de pénétrer dans l’enceinte 

du  Club  Med,  agressant  des  agents  de  sécurité  qui  essayaient  de  les  arrêter  alors  qu’ils 

pénétraient  dans  l’hôtel.  Plusieurs  objets  ont  été  volés  au  bar  de  l’hôtel,  et  le  plus  grave, 

Madame la présidente, est le fait que ces individus sont souvent sous l’influence de la drogue, 

d’après l’information  que  j’ai  reçue  de  ceux  qui  ont  été  témoins  de  ces  dérapages.  La 

passerelle de même que le ponton situé non loin du club Med sont les lieux de prédilection de 

ces  individus  qui  s’y  retrouvent  pour  consommer  leur  drogue.  Cette  situation  n’a  que  trop 

duré,  et  je  compte  sur  le  Premier  ministre  pour  porter  une  attention  particulière  à  ce 

problème. 

Merci. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I’ll  ask  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  look 

into this matter. 

MEDICAL OFFICERS - PRE-REGISTRATION EXAM 

Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Madam Speaker, my 

issue  is  addressed  to  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life.  This  concerns  the  pre-

registration exam that the Medical Officers are going to take or being called to take at the end 

of April.  I beg the hon. Minister to consider the letter that he has got, and I am going to table 

a copy in this Assembly. 

The issue is that those students went to a recognised medical school in this country, in 

Mauritius,  recognised  by  the  Medical  Council,  recognised  by  the  Ministry  of  Health, 

recognised even by the Cabinet. As a Member of the Council, I know how the process went. 

Those qualified doctors have been examined by the SSR visiting professors. 

They  are  examined  by  consultants  coming  from  abroad,  some  come  from  India  as 

examining consultants for those students  and then they are supposed to  go for an 18-month 

 

 

133 

pre-registration clinical in our hospital. There also, they are examined in each department and 

are followed by five consultants but, afterwards, they cannot get registration with the Medical 

Council. Where are we going? Mauritius has the know-how, we have recognised institutions; 

Cabinet  has  recognised  institutions.    How  come  we  cannot  give  them  registration?  Why  an 

Indian  body  has  to  come  to  Mauritius,  as  if  faire  un  affront  at  the  medical  institution  that 

gives  the  course  when  Cabinet  has  agreed  to  recognise  those  institutions?    The  consultants 

that we have in our hospitals certified their competence in the different departments. All have 

gone through, and then, all of a sudden, it is said that they have to take this Indian exam and 

these students do not have the syllabus.  

I think the hon. Minister should really consider that this exam be cancelled because, in 

my opinion, we have the know-how in Mauritius; we have agreed to all those institutions. If 

we force these students, who are qualified doctors now, but not registered, to take an exam of 

an  unknown  syllabus,  and  we  have  experienced  this  in  December  2013,  where  only  two 

students passed that exam and there was an uproar, and the Medical Council then gave those 

students who failed their registration.  I don’t see any reason today, in year 2016, with all the 

experience  in  the  medical  field,  with  all  the  consultants  that  we  have  that  follow  those 

students, to come and say, ‘Sorry, you are not to that level.’ 

Madam Speaker, we are questioning our own consultants as if they are no good, they 

are just giving a pass mark to those students. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, I have asked you to be brief!  

Dr. Sorefan: Yes, I am nearly finished. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  you  should  give  the  chance  to  others  also  to 

make their case. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  I  am  nearly  finished,  Madam  Speaker.  What  I  am  saying  is  that  the 

Ministry, the Government, the Cabinet should consider the case of those students,  that they 

should  not  take  this  exam  after  having  followed  all  those  steps;  they  go  to  the  Medical 

Council and they get registered, so that they can practice. 

Madam Speaker, thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 

would like to briefly respond to this. When the students start on their pre-registration course, 

they  know  that  after  18  months  they  have  to  sit  for  an  exam.  The  Medical  Council  is  the 

 

 

134 

regulatory  authority  for  this  kind  of  examination.  We  do  not  have  any  teaching  hospital  in 

Mauritius. We don’t have any doctors or consultants who are academics, who publish articles 

on medicine. This is why the Medical Council decided to have recourse to the Medical Board 

of Examiners of India. They set an exam - not the Indian exam - on medical issues, and this 

has been going on for some years. I know this is a vexed issue. Unfortunately, the situation is 

that we have students in medicine being trained in Mauritius, Ukraine, China, India and lots 

of countries. So, the system of education may not be the same. In France, for example, if you 

want  to  practise  medicine,  you  must  be  qualified  in  France.  It  is  a  closed  shop  -  Numerus 

clausus.  They do not allow anybody to come in unless you sit for their own exams. I believe 

this is not something that we have initiated; it was initiated in the past, and we just want to 

ensure that those who are going to deal with the life of patients have the minimum standards 

to deal with the patients. This is the reason why this exam exists.  

With regard to the other issue, it has a reason.  It is whether this exam should be taken 

en amont before the pre-registration starts or should it be taken after the 18 months. Now, this 

is the issue that is being addressed.  We don’t have any firm ideas on this, but the issue is that 

we  need  to  be  sure  that  those  who  are  going  to  treat  our  patients  have  reached  a  minimum 

standard,  and  this  body  from  India  which  sets  the  exam  has  been  coming  for  a  few  years. 

They  do it also  for the  dentists; they do it for the doctors.  Until we have a proper medical 

school with our own teachers, with the necessary qualifications and background, I think we 

will still need to rely on others like India to help us in this. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

 

TAMARIN & BLACK RIVER - BURGLARY & LARCENY 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you,  Madam 

Speaker. I am going to raise an issue which concerns the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. It relates to 

an  alarming  situation  in  the  regions  of  my  constituency,  that  of  Tamarin  and  Black  River, 

which  have  been  subject  recently  to  an  unprecedented  series  of  burglary  and  larceny  by 

breaking.  

The  victims  have  even  gone  to  report  the  matter  to  the  press.    A  number  of  houses, 

including villas and newly built residential buildings, have been visited by thieves, sometimes 

 

 

135 

even during broad daylight.  The inhabitants  of these regions  are living in a state of  fear, of 

tension.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  not  attempt  to  offer  the  reasons  for  such  an  escalation  of 

burglaries  in  these  regions.  Most  probably,  it  is  linked  to  the  proliferation  of  drugs  in  that 

area, but I would appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to use his good offices to talk to the 

Commissioner  of  Police  so  that  Police  resources,  in  terms  of  CID  members  or  the  regular 

Police Force be strengthened, be beefed up, so that there are more patrols and interventions 

and presence of the Police in that region. 

Thank you. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we are already aware of this situation. It is not 

only there;  in  many  places, burglaries are becoming very common.  I have discussed it with 

the Commissioner of Police, and the Commissioner of Police has promised me he is  taking 

steps to see how to deal with this matter in order to, I won’t say eliminate, but to minimise. 

Instead of this trend going on, we should try to eliminate it as much as possible. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

GRAND GAUBE/BELLIN/GOODLANDS – ROAD RESURFACING 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Madam  Speaker.  My  request  is  addressed  to  the  RDA  through  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 

Infrastructure and Land Transport for the resurfacing of the main road from Grand Gaube to 

Bellin/Goodlands. So, if the hon. Minister can look into the matter. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): I will 

certainly look into the matter. I have asked the RDA and they have said that we can have it in 

the next budget. 

Thank you. 

PORT LOUIS - HAWKERS - RELOCATION 

Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central): 

Madam Speaker. My point this afternoon pertains to the hon. Minister of Local Government, 

but I see he is not here. I hope the message will get through him.  

 

 

136 

Madam Speaker, last week, during Parliamentary Question No. B/106 on the subject 

of  relocation  of  hawkers,  I  raised  an  additional  question  on  the  due  diligence  that  was 

exercised by the Municipal Council of Port Louis in January this year in order to distinguish 

between seasonal and full-time hawkers, given that oftentimes, seasonal ones are privileged 

over the real ones.  

This  morning  the  representatives  of  Voice  Hawkers  Association  and  Association 

Marchands Ambulants have asked to meet me on this subject, given that there is a decision of 

Government  for all street  hawkers to  vacate the  streets  as from  18 April of this  year and to 

move  to  Decaen  and  Immigration  sites.  Their  main  concern  is  the  veracity  of  the  survey 

performed in October 2015 as mentioned by the hon. Minister in his reply and the Expression 

of Interest undertaken in January this year.  

My request is for the hon. Minister of Local Government, in a spirit of transparency, 

consider  making  public  as  soon  as  possible  a  copy  of  the  final  list  of  those  who  would  be 

entitled to a stall at these new sites.  

This  will,  undeniably,  allow  these  two  associations,  which  I  am  told,  are  registered 

ones, to compare the list of the Municipal Council with their own and, in the process, clear 

their  minds  of  the  perception  that  the  list  contains  the  names  of  people  who  allegedly  have 

been unduly favoured during the course of the two exercises performed.  

Thank you 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  

Madam Speaker, in the absence of my colleague, I am going to convey to him. I am sure that 

he is  going  to  take into  consideration what  has been suggested by the hon. Member  and he 

will come back with a statement. 

  

MARE D’ALBERT – SWIMMING POOL – OPENING HOURS 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 

Speaker, the matter that I am going to raise concerns the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports 

who, unfortunately, is not here.  

It concerns the swimming pool of Mare d’Albert which is under the responsibility of 

the Mauritius Sports Council.  In fact, since the last two weeks or so, the opening hours for 

the morning session have changed.  It was initially from 05.00 a.m. to 07.00 a.m. and this has 

 

 

137 

changed  to  much  later  hours,  and  this,  to  the  prejudice  of  a  lot  of  civil  servants  and  other 

workers who would prefer to attend the morning session before they go to work.  

Representations  have  been  made 

to 

the  authorities 

to  review 

the  matter.  

Unfortunately, instead of reviewing the opening  hours, the whole morning session has been 

cancelled.   

So, I am making a humble request to the hon. Minister to please look into the matter 

for the benefit of the inhabitants of Mare d’Albert. 

Thank you.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  

Madam Speaker, in the absence of my colleague, I am going to convey to him.  I am sure that 

the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports is going to take it into consideration, because they have 

set up a swimming pool for what purpose! 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  sure  that  the  hon.  Minister  will  take  into  consideration  the  suggestion  which  has  been 

made.  

At 7.35 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 19 April 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION – CHAIRPERSON – APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/143)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked the Rt.  hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

the  date  of  appointment  of  the  Chairperson  thereof,  indicating  his  terms  and 

conditions of appointment, and 

(b) 

the  number  of  cases  which  have  been  heard  by  the  Commission  since 

November 2015 to date, indicating the outcome thereof. 

 

 

138 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that Mr B.G was appointed 

Chairperson  of  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  on  24  April  2012  and  the  terms  and 

conditions of his appointment are as follows - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the period of the contract is four years; 

a monthly salary of Rs130,000 plus compensation at approved rates; 

a monthly special Judicial Allowance representing 15% of salary; 

2  months’  salary  as  gratuity  on  completion  of  each  12  months’  satisfactory 

service; 

a Government car of ceiling value of Rs2.5 m. plus an all-inclusive travelling 

allowance  of  Rs16,980  and  a  driver’s  allowance  of  Rs8,400  monthly  for  the 

employment of a personal driver; 

passage benefits in accordance with regulations in force; 

two business class return tickets to London every year during term of office; 

internet allowance at approved rates and rent free telephone plus 100 free local 

calls monthly, and 

annual leave of 21 working days which may be cashed at the end of the year of 

contract and 21 working days sick leave for each year of contract. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commission that during the 

period  November  2015  to  06  April  2015,  60  cases  have  been  heard  by  the  Commission  as 

follows - 

(i) 

48 cases are under investigation; 

(ii) 

in  10  cases,  there  is  no  evidence  of  discrimination  as  per  the  Equal 

Opportunities Act; 

(iii) 

one case has been referred to Equal Opportunities Tribunal, and 

(iv) 

one case has been withdrawn. 

STATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION – INVESTIGATION 

(No.  B/144)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked the Rt.  hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

 

 

139 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether, in regard to the State Investment Corporation, he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to, since 2009 to 

date, on a yearly basis 

(i) 

the names and qualifications of each of the Chairpersons and 

Managing Directors who have been in post thereat, indicating in each 

case the pay package thereof; 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the revenues, profits and dividends paid to Government, and 

if the financial situation thereof has deteriorated, and 

(b) 

state if consideration will be given for a – 

(i) 

(ii) 

full investigation to be carried out thereinto, and 

review of the strategic orientation thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, REGIONAL INTEGRATION AND 

INTERNATIONAL TRADE – LOAN – INQUIRY 

(No.  B/145)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  loan  granted  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional 

Integration  and  International  Trade  by  the  State  Bank  of  Mauritius  on  allegedly  unduly 

favourable  terms,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 

Police and the Bank of Mauritius respectively, information as to where matters stand as to the 

inquiries being carried out thereinto. 

(Withdrawn) 

MAURITIUS-INDIA – DOUBLE TAXATION AVOIDANCE AGREEMENT 

(No.  B/146)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreement  between  the  Republic  of 

Mauritius  and  the  Republic  of  India,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed 

review thereof. 

 

 

140 

Reply: Discussions on the India–Mauritius DTAC are still ongoing.  A delegation, led 

by  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  is 

currently in India to continue the discussions. 

At  this  stage,  it  would  be  premature  for  me  to  comment  further  on  the  discussions 

underway with India. 

PUBLIC EXPENDITURE 2015-2016 

(No.  B/147)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 

asked the Rt.  hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether, in regard to the fiscal year 2015-2016, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

recurrent public expenditure as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product; 

percentage of the current expenditure allocated for – 

(i) 

(ii) 

education; 

health; 

(iii) 

social security, and 

(iv) 

public administration, and 

(c) 

estimated fiscal deficit. 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  recurrent  expenditure  for  fiscal  year 

2015/2016, as published in the Budget Estimates, is estimated at Rs93.6 billion representing 

21.5% of GDP. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, the percentage of recurrent expenditure allocated 

in the Budget Estimates to the following functions is respectively - 

- 

- 

- 

- 

For Education:  

For Health: 

 

 

 

For Social Protection:  

 

 

 

14.6%; 

9.9%; 

28.6%, and 

For  Public  Administration  (which  is  known  as  General  Public  Services  under 

the Government Financial Statistics Manual), it is 25.7%. 

Concerning  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  estimates  for  budget  deficit  for  fiscal  year 

2015/2016 is Rs15.4 billion, that is, 3.5% of GDP. 

 

 

 

141 

DECLARATION OF ASSETS ACT – INTRODUCTION 

(No.  B/148)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 

asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether, in regard to the proposed introduction of amendments to the Declaration of Assets 

Act, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply: First of all, I would like to point out that the Government has, in its 2015-2019 

Programme,  pledged  to  introduce  a  new  Declaration  of  Assets  Act,  and  not  amendments  to 

the existing Declaration of Assets Act, as I already indicated in my reply to PQ B/102 on 03 

March 2015. 

Accordingly,  my  Office  has  already  initiated  action  for  the  implementation  of  this 

measure.    In  fact,  a  Committee  of  officials,  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  Secretary  to 

Cabinet  and  Head  of  the  Civil  Service,  has  examined  numerous  issues  pertaining  to  a  new 

declaration of assets regime.  The proposals made by the Committee of officials are currently 

being examined by a Ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of hon. Collendavelloo, 

Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Energy and Public Utilities. 

The Attorney General’s Office will be requested to prepare the Declaration of Assets 

Bill as soon as the Ministerial Committee completes its assignment. 

I  wish  to  reassure  the  House  that  Government  will  stand  by  its  commitment  and 

introduce a new Declaration of Assets Bill into the National Assembly as soon as it is ready. 

TRANQUEBAR – FOOTBALL PLAYGROUND 

(No. B/149) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

whether, in regard to the football playground found at Cremation Road, Tranquebar, in Port 

Louis, he will state the reasons why the local inhabitants do not have access thereto although 

the National Development Unit has completed the physical construction thereof in 2014. 

Reply:  In  my  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/427  of  08  September  2015,  I 

informed the House that the football pitch at Tranquebar is a NDU project consisting of three 

phases namely - 

 

142 

earth  works,  masonry  walls,  construction  of  French  drains,  levelling  and 

turfing; 

fencing and fixing of gates, and 

lighting of football ground. 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

I  also  informed that the  contract  for Phase  I  was awarded to the  contractor, Modern 

Jurassic  Building  and  Construction  Ltd  on  07  November  2012  for  the  sum  of  Rs3,957,328 

(VAT inclusive). The starting date was scheduled for 10 January 2013 with a completion date 

of 10 June 2013. 

However,  the  contract  was  terminated  on  30  July  2014  due  to  delays  and  non-

performance on the part  of the then contractor.   As a result, the levelling  and turfing of the 

football ground remained outstanding. 

I also drew attention to the fact that on 01 August 2014, the NDU awarded a contract 

for  Phase  II  of  the  project  to  Safety  Construction  Co.  Ltd.  for  the  sum  of  Rs7,095,688.60 

(VAT  inclusive),  without  including  the  outstanding  works  in  Phase  I,  namely  the  levelling 

and turfing of the football ground.  Phase II of the project started on 01 September 2014 and 

was completed on 27 February 2015. 

A  tentative  handing  over  exercise  of  the  site  was  subsequently  effected  on  14  April 

2015  by  the  relevant  Project  Manager  with  the  Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports.    However, 

given  that  the  ground  was  not  properly  levelled  and  the  turfing  was  not  to  standards,  the 

exercise could not take place. 

Consequently,  the  NDU  on  22  October  2015  issued  additional  works  amounting 

Rs1,696,526 (inclusive VAT) to Safety Construction for the levelling, supply of topsoil and 

grass planting at the football ground. 

The  commencement  date  for  the  works  was  fixed  for  09  November  2015  and  the 

completion  date  for  30  December  2015.  However,  this  excluded  the  3  months'  period, 

normally required for the turfing to be fully grown. 

I  am  informed  by  the  NDU  that  the  handing  over  of  the  project  to  the  Ministry  of 

Youth  and  Sports  has  been  scheduled  for  19  April  2016.  Local  inhabitants  will  then  have 

access thereto. 

Moreover, it is to be noted that the NDU has already initiated action for the lighting of 

the football ground and same is expected to be operational before December 2016. 

 

 

143 

PARLIAMENT – WOMEN REPRESENTATION 

(No. B/150) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 

regard to women representation in Parliament, he will state if consideration will be given for 

the introduction of a proposed constitutional amendment to provide for any political party or 

alliance contesting the National Assembly Elections to present at least one female candidate 

in  respect  of  each  constituency,  pending  the  finalisation  of  the  works  of  the  Ministerial 

Committee on Electoral Reforms and the reaching of a consensus in relation thereto and the 

adoption thereof by Parliament. 

Reply: As the House is aware, the Government Programme 2015-2019 provides that 

our  Electoral  System  will  be  reformed  to  introduce  a  dose  of  proportional  representation  in 

the National Assembly and guarantee better women representation. 

In  this  context,  Government  has  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  to  make 

recommendations  on  electoral  reforms.    The  terms  of  reference  of  the  Committee  does 

include the issue of representation of women in the National Assembly. 

Since the Committee is still working, it will be premature to introduce, at this stage, 

any proposed constitutional amendment concerning women representation in Parliament. 

FOREIGN NATIONALS – MAURITIUS PASSPORT 

(No.  B/151)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether, in regard to the foreign nationals, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

the  Passport  and  Immigration  Office,  a  list  of  those  having  been  issued  with  a  Mauritian 

passport since 2014 to date, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

reasons therefor, and 

benefits derived by the country therefrom, if any. 

Reply: I am informed that no Mauritius Passport has been issued to foreign nationals 

since January 2014 to date. 

 

 

 

 

144 

RODRIGUES – ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES  

(No.  B/152)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister,  Minister of Defence, Home  Affairs,  Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  commitment  of  the  Government  of  Mauritius  for  the  continuous 

supply and provision of essential commodities to its outer islands, he will state if he is aware 

that the inhabitants of Rodrigues are complaining about the scarcity of such commodities due 

to delay in supply and, if so, will he consider the advisability of increasing the frequency of 

the supply of commodities through the maritime route to improve the situation. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  that  it  has  received  no 

complaints from the inhabitants of Rodrigues regarding the scarcity of essential commodities 

due to delay in supply. 

Moreover,  the  Consumer  Protection  Unit  in  Rodrigues,  which  undertakes  regular 

monitoring exercise to ensure that essential commodities are supplied smoothly in Rodrigues, 

has also not reported any shortage. 

I  am  also  informed  that  there  are  two  vessels,  namely,  the  Mauritius  Trochetia  and 

MV  Anna  which  effect  regular  trips  to  Rodrigues  to  ensure  a  continuous  supply  of  all 

commodities in the island. 

The full cargo load for every voyage of the ships amounts to  only 50 to 60% of the 

vessels’  full  capacity.    Therefore,  the  question  of  increasing  the  frequency  of  supply  of 

commodities in Rodrigues does not arise. 

STADIA – FOOTBALL MATCHES – POLICE OFFICERS 

(No.  B/176)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  incidents  that  occurred 

during the final of the Republic Cup between the ASPL 2000 and the  Cercle de Joachim at 

the King George V Stadium on Sunday 13 March 2016, he will, for the benefit of the House, 

obtain from the Mauritius Football Association and from the Mauritius Professional Football 

League respectively, the measures that have been or that will be taken to avoid the recurrence 

of similar incidents in the future. 

Reply: I am informed by the Mauritius Football Association (MFA) that arrangements 

have been made to increase the number of police officers during matches. Full bag checks are 

 

 

145 

being effected at  all stadia entries.  MFA is  also envisaging to  set  up a steward programme 

for the Fan clubs of all teams and an aggressive sensitisation campaign would be launched for 

all coaches, players, team staff and stewards. 

 Teams  and  players  involved  in  undisciplined  behaviours  on  and  outside  football 

pitches would be sanctioned by way of fines. 

WEIGHTLIFTING - ROUMANIAN COACH - EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/177)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  weightlifting,  he  will,  for  the 

benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Amateur  Weightlifters  &  Powerlifters 

Association,  information as to  if the Romanian  Coach, Mr  U. C., is  currently the  Directeur 

Technique National thereof and, if not, indicate the reasons therefor. 

Reply: I have to inform the House that the Roumanian Coach, Mr U. C is employed 

as National Technical Director in weightlifting by my Ministry with effect from 10 February 

2015 and he is still in post as at date. 

POCHES DE PAUVRETÉ - SURVEY 

(No.  B/178)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 

asked the Minister of Social  Integration and Economic Empowerment  whether, in  regard to 

the  poches  de  pauvreté,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  has  carried  out  a  survey  for  the 

identification thereof in mainland Mauritius, in Rodrigues and in Agalega Island respectively 

and, if so, will he - 

(a) 

table  the  list  of  the  places  so  identified,  indicating  the  number  of  families 

concerned therewith, and  

(b) 

indicate the benchmark definition of poverty that has been accepted and used 

by his Ministry in the course of the survey. 

Reply:  In  April  2015,  Government  decided  that  beneficiaries  of  the  National 

Empowerment  Foundation  should  imperatively  be  registered  and  found  eligible  under 

the  Social  Register  of  Mauritius  before  benefitting  from  support  under  the  existing 

Schemes. Consequently,  a survey was carried out in  Mauritius  by the Foundation from 

June to December 2015.  

 

 

146 

As at 31 December 2015, 10,958 households from NEF database were surveyed 

and  some  7,601  households  have  been  found  eligible.  On  the  other  hand,  6,816 

households were already eligible under the SRM under the Child Allowance Scheme. 

Consultations are presently being held with Statistics Mauritius for its support for 

the elaboration of a poverty map, including pockets of poverty.  

Insofar as Rodrigues is concerned, as at December 2015, some 4,000 households 

are to be found in the database of the Foundation. The survey will be undertaken as from 

May 2016.  

With  regard  to  Agalega,  the  Outer  Islands  Development  Corporation  has 

informed that most of the inhabitants in Agalega are employed by the Corporation, with 

their monthly salaries exceeding the poverty threshold of Rs6,200. 

The current poverty line adopted by  Government is  that the monthly income of 

households  in  Mauritius  and  in  Rodrigues  should  not  exceed  Rs6,200  and  Rs5,000 

respectively. 

NINE-YEAR BASIC CONTINUOUS SCHOOLING PROGRAMME - 

CURRICULUM & SYLLABUS 

(No.  B/179)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Nine  Year  Basic  Continuous  Schooling  Programme, 

especially, regarding the first cohort of pupils who will be taking part in the Primary School 

Achievement Certificate Examinations in 2017, she will state if the curriculum and syllabus 

for each subject are ready and, if so - 

(a) 

table copies thereof, and  

(b) 

indicate - 

(i) 

where matters stand as to the training of the educators therefor; 

(ii) 

the number of educators being trained therefor;  

(iii) 

(iv) 

the course contents of the training dispensed to the educators, and 

the  mode  of  assessment  of 

the  Primary  School  Achievement 

Certificate, indicating who will be assessing the pupils for the modular 

and the written assessments respectively. 

 

 

147 

Reply: My Ministry in collaboration with the Mauritius Institute of Education (MIE) 

has  come  up,  after  extensive  consultations  with  stakeholders  in  the  sector,  with  a  revised 

National  Curriculum  Framework  (NCF)  -  the  “Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic  Education 

(NYCBE)”.  The  NCF  was  approved  by  Government  on  06  November  2015  and  officially 

launched on 15 December 2015. 

The  teaching  and  learning  syllabuses  have  subsequently  been  prepared  by  the  MIE 

and the textbooks have been made available to schools. 

In the past,  detailed syllabuses for the different  subjects  taken at  Primary  level  were 

not prepared. What did exist was the assessment syllabus for the various subjects. This was 

captured in the Annual Programme elaborated by the MES, which provides for the rules and 

regulations for the organisation and conduct of the end-of-cycle examinations. 

Accordingly,  the  Annual  Programme  for  Primary  School  Achievement  Certificate 

(PSAC) that contains the assessment syllabuses for the various subjects to be offered in 2017 

has been published and gazetted on 5 December 2015 by way of General Notice No. 2432 of 

2015. This has been circulated to the schools and is also available on the Ministry’s website. 

I am tabling a copy of the Annual Programme for the PSAC Assessment 2017 as well 

as the copies of the teaching and learning syllabus for each subject that will be taken by the 

first  cohort  of  pupils  in  2017.  These  syllabuses  are  also  available  on  the  MIE’s  website  for 

consultation.  

As regards part (b) - 

(i) 

the MIE has already initiated training programmes for Educators in the context 

of the implementation of the NYCBE. 

 

Training  of  Educators  has,  in  fact,  been  ongoing  for  Grades  1-5  since 

November 2015.  

(ii) 

2,321 persons comprising Educators, Head Masters, Deputy Head Masters and 

Mentors have been trained. This includes 397 Educators of the current Grade 5 

classes who have been trained keeping in  view the specific needs of the  first 

cohort of pupils sitting for the PSAC in 2017.  

(iii) 

Training sessions involved familiarisation with new materials for all subjects, 

innovative  pedagogies,  integration  of  ICT  in  the  Curriculum  as  well  as 

assessment and evaluation. 

The contents of training dispensed to Educators also covered, inter alia - 

 

148 

 

-  

-  

-  

the main features of nine year schooling; 

the New National Curriculum Framework for  Grades 1-6; 

introduction  to  the  textbooks  and  teaching  materials  for  each  grade, 

and  

-  

teaching strategies in and assessment for each grade. 

(iv) 

The NYCBE reform provides for the introduction of the PSAC as from 2017 

to gauge the progress and achievement of the children at the end of the first six 

years of basic education.  

We  are  introducing  a  new  form  of  assessment  whereby  a  number  of  features  will 

henceforth be evaluated in an overall manner at the end of 6 years of primary schooling -  

 

 

 

gains in learning outcomes,  

skills acquired, and  

the attainment of curricular objectives.  

This form of evaluation is both formative and summative in nature. 

The  Mauritius  Examinations  Syndicate  (MES)  will  be  responsible  for  all  written 

assessments and that includes History and Geography, and Science that will be assessed on a 

modular mode. 

The assessment for the only non-core subject, that is, “Communication skills” will be 

carried out at the level of the school and will be moderated by the MES. 

NINE-YEAR BASIC CONTINUOUS SCHOOLING PROGRAMME - 

EXPERTS  & CONSULTANTS - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/180)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  education  sector  reform,  especially,  in  regard  the  Nine 

Year  Basic  Continuous  Schooling  Programme,  she  will  state  if  her  Ministry  has  sought  the 

assistance of foreign experts in the field in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the views and 

recommendations thereof. 

Reply: The Nine Year Continuous Basic Education (NYCBE) is a major component 

of the Mauritian  education reform  agenda and it has earned  a lot of positive  feedback from 

international quarters for its rationale, philosophy, design and implementation strategies.   

 

 

149 

Eight Working Groups (WGs) have been set up at my Ministry to advance the design 

and  implementation  plans  for  the  Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic  Education  reform  and  the 

World Bank had been approached to support my Ministry in the initial and subsequent phases 

of this reform. 

The Working Groups had met for a  workshop  in October 2015  and the  World  Bank 

was  invited  to  participate  therein.  The  objective  was  to  have  lessons  from  international 

experience built into the design of key areas of the reform program.  The World Bank team, 

which  comprised  highly  experienced  international  experts  from  Singapore,  Korea  and 

Ireland, thus participated in the workshop in an advisory capacity. 

 The experts, who came back again in March this year, assisted as well in the creation 

of linkages between the various areas inherent  to  the reform.  This  was to ensure a coherent 

overall  reform  program.  They  also  assisted  in  the  Costing  and  Financing  as  well  as  the 

Communication exercises. 

Among  the  major  recommendations  made  by  the  different  Experts  and  Consultants 

were the following -  

(i) 

Abolishing the CPE in its present form and replacing  it by an assessment that 

would  define  the  level  of  achievement  attained  by  each  learner  -  a  criterion-

based assessment, to be organised nationally; 

(ii) 

The  introduction  of  a  system  of  continuous  school-based  assessment  (SBA), 

especially for the non-core subjects ; 

(iii) 

The discontinuation of the Pre-Vocational Education stream; 

(iv) 

(v) 

Increased autonomy to schools and Zones for improved learning outcomes; 

The  review  of  MIE’s  role  and  functions  to  reposition  it    to  meet  new  and 

future challenges, and  

(vi) 

The  adoption  and  consolidation  of  learner-centred  inclusive  approaches  and 

methodologies at the classroom level. 

The  World  Bank  has  commended  the  soundness  of  the  NYCBE  reform  which  is 

aligned with  the Sustainable Development  Goal  of ensuring inclusive and quality education 

for all and promoting lifelong learning.  

I am pleased to inform the House that two of the teams of Experts commissioned by 

the European Union (EU) Delegation fully concurred with the reform strategies propounded. 

 

 

150 

Finally,  allow  me  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat,  at  my 

Ministry’s  behest,  is  providing  the  services  of  a  Senior  Education  Adviser  over  a  period  of 

two  years  to  guide  the  wider  process  of  educational  reform.  We  will  also  benefit  from  the 

services  of  another  Expert  who  will  focus  on  supporting  the  Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic 

Education Curriculum Framework review.  

DRUG ABUSERS - SUBSTITUTION THERAPY - METHADONE & 

SUBOXONE/NALTERXONE 

(No.  B/181)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the national 

policy for substitution therapy for drugs abusers, he will state where matters stand as regards 

the - 

(a)  Methadone Substitution Therapy, and  

(b) 

availability of Suboxone/Nalterxone as a new substitution therapy, indicating 

the - 

(i) 

number of patients already benefitting therefrom, and 

(ii) 

outcome thereof. 

Reply: Presently, 42 methadone dispensing sites are operational throughout the island 

catering  for  around  4600  clients  compared  to  18  sites  as  at  end  of  December  2014.  This 

figure is inclusive of the methadone dispensing within the prison services. 

Since  the  decentralisation  of  dispensing  in  January  2015,  there  is  no  overcrowding 

and  loitering  at  the  dispensing  sites.  The  methadone  beneficiaries  are  attending  their 

respective centres for medical follow up. 

The  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy  is  in  fact  a  Maintenance  Therapy  where  the 

beneficiaries have been taking their doses daily for years and even for life.  Very few of them 

have been weaned off up to now. 

Government  firmly  believes  that  drug  addicts  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to 

undergo detoxification thereby enabling them to reintegrate the mainstream society. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  a 

detoxification programme using Suboxone/Naltrexone has been introduced in Mauritius since 

January 2016 for all newly registered opioid dependents. The injecting drug users who wish 

 

 

151 

to  benefit  from  the  treatment  and  detoxification  programme  can  either  directly  enroll 

themselves at any of the methadone centres of my Ministry or can be referred by NGOs for 

appropriate screening. 

To  date,  28  patients  have  completed  treatment.  Among  the  28  patients  who  had 

undergone  treatment,  17  patients  have  consistently  been  drug  free  since  discharge  from 

hospital as evidenced by random and supervised urine drug tests.   

The programme includes psychosocial support services which are being implemented 

in close collaboration with referral NGOs and staff of NATReSA who have been redeployed 

to my Ministry. 

Like all detoxification programmes, there is a high risk of relapse.  In this respect,  a 

team has been put in place to continue to support those who have relapsed so that ultimately 

they manage to go through the detoxification successfully.  

With regard to the outcome and impact of the programme, it is too early to speculate 

on its effectiveness without conducting a proper evaluation exercise.   

In  this  respect,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  a  team  from  the  United  Nations  is 

expected to come for an evaluation exercise in six months. 

HEPATITIS C INFECTION - TREATMENT 

(No.  B/182)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles 

&Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

national  policy  for  the  Hepatitis  C  infection,  he  will  state  if  new  guidelines  for  patient 

management  and  treatment  are  being  applied  since  new  potential  drugs  such  as  Sofosbuvir 

and Ledipasvir have been recommended therefor. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that my Ministry is maintaining the existing policy 

on  the  management  of  patients  suffering  from  hepatitis  C.  Treatment  is  being  provided  to 

patients  who  have  contracted  the  disease  through  blood  transfusion  prior  to  1997  and  to 

healthcare staff who have contracted the disease while delivering the service. 

HOSPITALS - ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT – DOCTORS 

POSTING 

(No.  B/183)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles 

&Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

regional  hospitals,  he  will  state  the  number  of  additional  doctors  that  will  be  posted  in  the 

 

 

152 

respective casualty departments thereof following the introduction of the new shift system for 

the doctors posted thereat, indicating the new – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

scheme of duties,  

schedule of work, and  

remuneration grid of the said doctors. 

Reply: With  the recent  recruitment  of doctors, my  Ministry has implemented a shift 

system in the Accident and Emergency Department in the 5 Regional Hospitals on 01 April 

2016. 81 doctors have been posted for the shift system as follows - 

 

Dr. A.G. Jeetoo hospital 

Victoria hospital 

J. Nehru hospital 

SSRN hospital  

Flacq hospital   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 18 

- 18 

- 15 

- 15 

- 15 

 

 

 

3 groups of 6 

3 groups of 5 

The  unions  have  requested  for  a  long  time  for  the  introduction  of  the  shift  system.  

We have acceded to their request. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, there is no change in respect of the scheme of 

duties of the doctors who will be working on shift.  

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  my  Ministry  will  implement  a  2-tier  shift 

system as follows -  

 

 

(i) 

08.00 hours to 17.00 (day shift), and 

(ii) 

17.00 hours to 08.00 hours (the following day) 

With regard to part (c) of the question, the salary and allowances payable to doctors 

are determined by the PRB 

 

VALLEE PITOT -  BOULEVARD VICTORIA – RING ROAD ALIGNMENT 

(No. B/185) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

the construction of a viaduct above Boulevard Victoria in Champ de Mars and Vallée Pitot as 

part of the Circular Road Project and the Port Louis Ring Road Phase 2 Project, he will state 

when consultations with the inhabitants living in the vicinity of Boulevard Victoria will start. 

 

 

153 

Reply: In the reply to PQ B/785 last year, the House was informed that the alignment 

of the Ring Road comprises a viaduct above Boulevard Victoria, as proposed by J. Maynard, 

the  Transaction  Advisor  appointed  by  the  Road  Development  Authority  for  the  Road 

Decongestion Programme.  The viaduct, of an approximate length of 1.1 Km and 11 m wide, 

would have started at the end of Ring Road Phase 2 at Champ de Mars by means of an access 

ramp  and  would  have  ended  near  the  junction  of  Military  Road.    It  would  have  been 

supported on piers which would have been constructed within the existing central verge.   

However,  according  to  experts,  the  construction  of  the  proposed  viaduct  over 

Boulevard  Victoria  at  Vallée  Pitot  may  not  be  feasible  because  it  presents  several  critical 

technical,  social  and  environmental  constraints  such  as  the  need  to  demolish  places  of 

worship and the impossibility to build piers at the start of Boulevard Victoria.  

In  view  of  the  above,  a  new  alignment  is  being  considered.    The  question  of 

consultations with the inhabitants of the region does not arise at present.  However, before the 

finalisation  of  the  alignment,  all  stakeholders,  including  the  inhabitants  concerned,  shall  be 

invited to participate in the process in due course.  

 

MINISTRY OF PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND LAND TRANSPORT – 

ROAD TRANSPORT COORDINATOR - CONTRACT 

(No. B/186) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

Mr D. R., adviser at his Ministry, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

date of appointment thereof;  

duties and responsibilities thereof, and  

net monthly pay and allowances that he is drawing. 

Reply:  As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  Mr  Daniel  Raymond  is  employed  on 

contract  as  Road  Transport  Coordinator  for  a  period  of  one  year  with  effect  from  23 

September 2015. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  main  duties  and  responsibilities  of  Mr  D. 

Raymond are as follows - 

(i) 

advise Government on road safety policy including the drafting of regulations, 

guidelines and policies, and 

 

154 

 

(ii) 

assist  the  Government  in  strengthening  the  road  safety  management  capacity 

of  the  Lead  Agency  and  the  capacity  building  of  other  core  road  safety 

agencies towards result focus interventions. 

I am tabling his detailed duties and responsibilities as well as his Curriculum Vitae. 

As regards part (c) of the question, Mr D. Raymond is drawing a net monthly salary 

of 3000 Euros + an all-inclusive monthly allowance of 1000 Euros for disturbance, travelling 

and other expenses.  

Given  the  importance  of  road  safety,  the  National  Road  Safety  Council  has  been 

reconstituted  under  the  Chair  of  the  Senior  Chief  Executive  of  my  Ministry  to  advise  me, 

inter  alia,  on  the  introduction  of  appropriate  road  safety  measures  and  proper  law 

enforcement  methods.  Mr  Raymond  who  is  a  member  of  the  Council  plays  a  key  role  in 

advising on road safety policies and appropriate legislation to provide for a safe road traffic 

system.  

In addition, I wish to inform the House that a National Road Safety Commission has 

been set  up under the Chair of the Prime Minister to  spearhead all road  safety initiatives at 

national  level.  The  first  meeting  of  the  National  Road  Safety  Commission  is  scheduled  by 

end of May.  

LAGOON – FISHING - REGULATIONS 

(No. B/187) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 

whether, in regard to the project  for  the prohibition of fishing in the lagoon, he will state if 

consideration will be given for a review of the regulations in relation thereto. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

WESTMINSTER FINANCIAL LTD. - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/188)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 

whether, in regard to the Westminster Financial Ltd., he will - 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, 

information as to the -  

(i) 

amount of money invested therein, and  

(ii) 

outcome  of  any  inquiry  undertaken  in  relation  thereto  following  the 

closure thereof, and  

 

 

155 

(b) 

state if Government proposes to financially assist the victims thereof, if any. 

(Withdrawn) 

WORKSITES – DIGITAL FINGER PRINTS 

(No.  B/189)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training whether, in regard to the 

digital finger prints, he will state if consideration will be given for proposed amendments to 

be introduced to the existing legislation to allow the use thereof on sites of work in respect of 

the employees. 

Reply:  I thank the hon. Member for his question and for giving me the opportunity to 

clarify this issue. 

I am informed by the Ministry of Technology, Communication and innovation that 

it  is  not  proposed  to  amend  legislation  to  compel  the  use  of  digital  finger  prints  at  sites  of 

work. 

JIN FEI, RICHE TERRE – DEAD HUNG DOG – INQUIRY  

(No.  B/190)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the recent reported case of 

cruelty on a dog which was found hanged and had sustained several bodily injuries, he will 

state if - 

(a) 

(b) 

his Ministry has carried out an inquiry in relation thereto;  

a  post  mortem  investigation  of  the  corpse  has  been  carried  out  and,  if  so, 

indicate the findings thereof, and  

(c) 

consideration will be given for proposed amendments to be introduced to the 

existing  legislation  to  provide  for  severer  punishments  for  perpetrators  of 

cruelties to animals. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  a  joint  site  visit  was  effected  on  the  same  day  at  Jin  Fei, 

Riche Terre by officers of the Animal Welfare Unit of the Division of Veterinary Services of 

my  Ministry  and  the  Mauritius  Society  for  Animal  Welfare  following  the  photograph  of  a 

dead  hung  dog  posted  on  Facebook  on  21  March  2016.  The  officers  found  the  carcass  of  a 

male dog aged between 4 to 5 years old in putrefaction state on site. 

 

 

156 

A statement regarding the case was made at the Terre Rouge Police Station for inquiry 

and the carcass of the dog was sent to the Division of Veterinary Services for a post mortem 

investigation.  

The post mortem examination was carried out on 22 March 2016, and revealed that the 

death of the dog was caused by suffocation. No bodily injuries were detected in view of the 

advanced stage of putrefaction. The police inquiry is still ongoing. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  Section  3  of  the  Animal 

Welfare  Act  2013  already  provides  for  punishment  against  people  found  guilty  of 

perpetrating  cruelty  to  animals  and  contravenants  to  provisions  made  under  the  legislation 

are, upon conviction, liable to a fine not exceeding Rs15,000 and to imprisonment for a term 

not exceeding 6 months. In view thereof, I am not proposing to amend the legislation. 

 

INTEGRITY REPORTING SERVICES AGENCY – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/191)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in 

regard  to  the  Integrity  Reporting  Services  Agency  and  the  Integrity  Reporting  Board 

respectively, he will state where matters stand as to the setting up thereof, including the- 

(a) 

appointment of the Director of the Agency and of the recruitment of the staff 

thereof and  

(b) 

appointment  of  the  Chairperson  and  of  the  two  Board  Members  and  of  the 

recruitment of the staff thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

GOODLANDS, PETIT RAFFRAY & GRAND GAUBE – ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 

 (No. B/192) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 

the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Northern  part  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central 

Electricity Board, information as to the causes of the frequent power blackouts which occur 

thereat,  indicating  the  reasons  why,  during  the  blackouts  which  occurred  thereat  at  about 

1930 hrs on Sunday 03 April last, several failures in the restarting of power occurred and if 

same had put at risk electrical installations and equipment in buildings. 

Reply:  The records indicate that there are no frequent blackouts in the Northern part of 

Mauritius. 

With  regard  to  the  incident  in  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  there  was 

disruption  of  electricity  supply  on  3  April  2016  at  around  19.15  hrs.  after  a  private  car  hit 

 

 

157 

against a high tension pole at Rouillard, Petit Raffray. This accident affected 132 distribution 

transformers supplying around 8,500 customers in the regions of Rouillard, Goodlands, Petit 

Raffray and Grand Gaube. 

CEB  intervention  teams  acted  promptly  and  electricity  supply  was  restored  within  50 

minutes  to  around  8450  customers.  The  remaining  50  customers  were  reconnected  around 

23.00h.  

I am informed that such incidents do not affect customers’ appliances and equipment, 

which  are  normally  designed  to  sustain  such  interruptions  of  supply.  Only  one  case  of 

material  damage  has  been  reported  in  the  region  of  Daruty,  Petit  Raffray.  This  case  is 

currently under investigation by the CEB. 

MAURITIAN DOCTORS – OVERSEAS RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/193) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 

the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Mauritian doctors, he will 

state  if  there  have  been  offers  for  the  recruitment  thereof  overseas  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 

actions initiated as at to date by his Ministry in relation thereto. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  following  offers  to  recruit  Mauritian  doctors  made  by 

Botswana  and  Saudi  Arabia,  in  late  2015,  my  Ministry  invited  doctors  working  in  public 

health  institutions  to  express  their  interest  to  work  there.  The  following  submissions  have 

been received – 

 

 

Applications from  

Botswana 

Saudi Arabia 

General 

Practitioners 

Specialists 

36 

5 

69 

18 

We  are  now  awaiting  the  relevant  authorities  in  these  two  countries  to  carry  out  the 

selection  exercise  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations  and 

Training.  The terms and conditions of employment of doctors overseas will also have to be 

finalised by all relevant parties before the Mauritian doctors proceed abroad for employment.  

There is a scarcity of specialists in the public sector.  Even though they are recruited 

to work abroad, they will not be released by my Ministry. 

 

 

158 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  employment  opportunities  for  Mauritian  doctors  in 

French speaking African countries will also be explored due to our comparative advantage of 

being bilingual. 

MEDICAL COUNCIL – DOCTORS - REGISTRATION 

(No. B/194) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the doctors, he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Medical Council, information as 

to the number thereof awaiting – 

(i) 

recognition  from  their  respective  universities  although  they  have 

already been registered with the Medical Council but not yet gazetted, 

indicating the reasons therefor and  

(ii) 

registration  with  the  Medical  Council,  indicating  in  each  case,  since 

when they are waiting and  

(b) 

state  if  post-internship  procedures  and  assistance  will  be  provided  to  those 

willing to work overseas. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  following  criteria  are  taken  into 

consideration by the Medical Council for the recognition of medical institutions.  The criteria 

are as follows - 

(i) 

The  Council  consults  World  Directory  of  Medical  Schools  published  by  the 

WHO or the International Medical Education Directory of the Foundation for 

Advancement of International Medical Education and Research (FAIMER); 

(ii) 

The  Council  ascertains  that  the  Medical  Institution  which  has  awarded  the 

degree/diploma  in  medicine  is  recognised  as  such  by  the  country  where  the 

qualifications have been obtained; 

(iii) 

The duration of the course and attendance of graduates; 

(iv)  Duly  certified  full  curriculum  of  the  Medical/Dental  course  as  well  as  mark 

sheets of applicants are scrutinised; 

(v) 

Pre-clinical training and clinical facilities in respect of Anatomy, Physiology, 

Bio-chemistry, Embryology, Pathology and Post-Mortem Training; 

(vi)  Details  about  procedures  used  for  clinical  evaluation  of  students  by  the 

institution; 

(vii)  Quality assurance of the course. 

 

 

159 

Upon receipt of an application at the Medical Council, the latter adopts the proposed 

course of action.  In case the institution is already listed by the Medical Council and the latter 

is satisfied that all requirements are met, the application is approved within two weeks from 

the date of application. 

In case the institution is not included in the recognised list of Medical Institutions of 

the  Council,  the  Medical  Council  considers  the  application  taking  into  consideration  the 

criteria  set  for  the  recognition  of  Medical  Institutions.  If  additional  information  is  required, 

the Council contacts the relevant institutions and depending on the response, the application 

may take up to six months before being approved.  At times, further enquiries are also carried 

out by the Council for clarifications, before submitting its recommendations to my Ministry.   

I am informed that the Medical Council has issued a press communiqué to advise all 

medical  students  to  complete  their  clinical  training  in  a  teaching  hospital  affiliated  to  the 

university where they have been enrolled. 

Once my Ministry is  in  receipt of the recommendation of the Council for the  listing 

and  recognition  of  an  institution,  draft  Regulations  are  vetted  by  the  Attorney’s  General 

Office and Government’s approval is sought accordingly.  Upon confirmation the following 

week,  the  Regulations  are  gazetted  for  the  purpose  of  recognition  of  the  institutions  and 

registration of doctors.  This process may take up to six weeks. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, following Government’s approval on 01 April 

2016, three foreign medical  educational  institutions are  yet  to  be gazetted.   This  process  is 

expected to be completed by the end of this week. 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that the Medical Council of 

Mauritius  is  currently  processing  the  applications  of  10  doctors  who  have  applied  for 

provisional  Registration  as  Pre-Registration  Trainees.    However,  as  the  degree  awarding 

medical  institutions  are  not  included  in  the  recognised  list  of  medical  institutions  of  the 

Council, additional information has been sought and the Council is awaiting for response.   I 

am informed that the process may take around 2 months. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, procedures for the recruitment and selection of 

doctors  vary  between  different  countries.    I  am  informed  that  Botswana  has  proposed  to 

recruit 36 General Practitioners and 5 Specialists from different fields from Mauritius. 

These doctors would have to take an entrance examination prior to their enlistment by 

the Botswana Authorities.   In this respect,  my Ministry is  working on a strategy  for mutual 

recognition of Medical qualifications by the Medical Councils found in the SADC region. 

 

 

160 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  Medical  Council  of  Mauritius  has  laid  down  stringent 

measures  for  the  registration  of  doctors  including  assessment  for  pre-registration  House 

Officers.    It  is  mandatory  for  medical  graduates  to  follow  18  months  of  pre-registration 

training  in  various  disciplines  and  they  are  assessed  by  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Health 

during the course of their training.  Furthermore, those who have applied as Pre-Registration 

Trainees  after  December  2013  have  to  undertake  the  medical  registration  examination 

conducted by the National Board of Examinations of India.  Hence, we have to ensure that we 

develop a framework with the SADC regulators whereby countries of SADC may exchange 

doctors  once  countries  are  fully  satisfied  that  they  have  the  required  qualifications  and 

expertise. 

NHDC - HOUSING UNITS - ELIGIBILITY 

(No.  B/195)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

National Housing Development Company  Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 

therefrom,  information  as  to  the  types  of  housing  units  that  the  Company  constructs, 

indicating the - 

(a) 

eligibility  criteria  to  benefit  from  the  acquisition  thereof  in  respect  of  each 

type thereof, and  

(b) 

reasons  why  the  Company  is  claiming  a  deposit  of  up  to  Rs100,000  for  the 

acquisition of a housing unit thereof in many cases. 

Reply: In line with the policy of this Government to provide decent housing facilities 

to  underprivileged  households,  the  National  Housing  Development  Co.  Ltd  has  been 

requested to construct housing units of an approximate area of 50m² on a duplex basis and a 

ground plus one structure as opposed to an area of 39m2 per unit constructed by the previous 

Government.  Each  housing  unit  of  50m2  will  comprise  two  bedrooms,  a  proper  dining  and 

living  room,  a  kitchen  and  a  separate  bathroom  and  toilet.  The  housing  units  will  be 

constructed on housing estates where social facilities such as, onsite leisure and recreational 

amenities,  children’s  playground,  green  space  and  landscaping  will  be  provided.  These  are 

new facilities which are being provided by this Government. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  beneficiary  of  a  NHDC  housing  unit 

should  not  be  owner  of  a  house  or  owner  of  a  residential  plot  of  land  and  should  earn  a 

monthly  family  income  between  Rs6,200  and  Rs20,000.  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that, 

formerly,  only  households  earning  less  than  Rs10,000  were  considered  for  allocation  of  a 

social  housing  unit.  This  Government  took  cognizance  that  there  are  around  7,800 

 

 

161 

applications  from  families  earning  between  Rs10,001  and  Rs20,000  as  at  date  and  decided 

that housing facilities be extended to these families as well, the more so as most of them have 

applied to the NHDC since more than ten years back at a time when they were earning less 

than  Rs10,000  a  month.  However,  priority  of  consideration  will  be  given  to  the  more 

vulnerable families earning between Rs6,200 and Rs10,000 a month. The cost  of a housing 

unit  is  usually  around  Rs1.2  million  and  the  beneficiary  will  pay  part  of  the  total  cost  in 

accordance with  a subsidization schedule for three different  income groups, as approved by 

this  Government.  The  applicants  are  requested  to  make  a  deposit  of  at  least  10%  of  the 

subsidized price of a housing unit.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  with  a  view  to  alleviating  the  financial  burden  on 

beneficiaries of social housing units, Government has also waived the registration fee of 5% 

of the selling price of  a housing unit payable by  each beneficiary  which amounts to  around 

Rs60,000.    Furthermore,  as  a  caring  Government,  our  role  is  to  ensure  that  repayment  of 

monthly instalment to the NHDC does not exceed 30% of the monthly household income of 

the  beneficiary  for  the  subsidized  purchase  price  of  the  housing  unit  in  line  with  the 

philosophy  of  all  lending  institutions.  As  provided  for  in  the  Borrowers’  Protection  Act, 

before granting a credit facility to any beneficiary, the NHDC is taking all reasonable steps to 

verify that the beneficiary has or is likely to have the means to repay the monthly instalment. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the amount of deposit to be effected depends on 

the  household  income  and  the  age  of  the  beneficiary.  The  latter  should  have  the  repayment 

capacity  to  service  the  mortgage  debt  for  the  purchase  of  the  house  and  the  monthly 

instalment  should  not  exceed  30%  of  the  household  income,  as  I  explained  earlier.  In 

addition, the age of the beneficiary will have a bearing upon the deposit to be made and the 

repayment period. The maximum repayment period is 30 years.  

BAIN DES DAMES, CASSIS & TERRASSON - SEWERAGE PROJECT 

(No.  B/196)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

the Sewerage Network System, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Waste 

Water  Management  Authority,  information  as  to  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the 

connection thereto of the regions of Bain des Dames, Cassis and Terrasson, and, if not, why 

not.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  that  a  feasibility 

study and preliminary design of regions of Bain Des Dames Sewerage Project was completed 

in May 2015. The project will be implemented in the financial year 2018/2019.   

 

 

162 

I am also informed that the region of Terrasson will be implemented under the Pointe 

Aux  Sables  Sewerage  Project.    A  Pre-Feasibility  Study  was  completed  in  October  2015.  

Given  its  high  investment  estimated  at  about  Rs2  billion,  the  WMA  is  considering  the 

implementation of the project in phases, subject to availability of funds. 

COPYRIGHT ACT - AMENDMENTS 

(No.  B/197)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard the Right Management Society, he 

will – 

(a) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Society,  information  as  to  the 

reasons why the Society was unable to organize the elections of the artists on 

the Board thereof, and  

(b) 

state if consideration will be given for proposed amendments to be introduced 

to the existing legislation to review the provisions in relation thereto and, if so, 

when. 

Reply: Section 43(4) (h) of the Copyright Act 2014, provides for three members to be 

elected to form part of the Board of the Society. 

I am informed that the Society had initiated procedures for the holding of elections 

of the three representatives of the artists to be held on 12 July 2015. 

However, prior to the election being held, an injunction was entered by a member, 

namely, Mr G. L., prohibiting and restraining the RMS and Ministry of Arts and Culture from 

proceeding with the election of the members to the Board.  The Court found that there was no 

legal provision in the Copyright Act for the amount to be paid as fee.  Hence, the election was 

cancelled. 

As regards part (b) of the question, a High-Powered Committee chaired by  a Senior 

Official of the State Law Office is presently reviewing the Copyright Act 2014 and will make 

proposals for amendments to the Act.  The amendments will include, inter alia, provision for 

payment  of  the  membership  fee  as  well  as  the  election  procedure.    A  first  draft  of  the 

amendments is expected by the first week of May.  The draft will be examined by an expert 

of WIPO who will be in Mauritius from 02 to 06 May. 

The draft amendments of the Copyright Act 2014 and the new Act will be proclaimed 

sometime in August 2016.  Elections of members to sit on the RMS Board will be carried out 

thereafter. 

 

 

 

 

163 

ST GEORGES CEMETERY - FOOTPATH - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/198)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the project for the construction 

of footpaths adjacent to the wall of the St Georges Cemetery, at Les Salines, in Port Louis, he 

will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis, 

information as to the reasons why the works therefor have been stopped. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  that,  in  fact  no  work  has 

started  regarding  the  construction  of  footpaths  adjacent  to  the  wall  of  the  St  Georges 

Cemetery. 

The  Public  Infrastructure  Committee  of  the  Council  has,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  at  its 

sitting  of  29  March  2016  recommended  the  construction  of  250  metres  of  footpath  along 

Marlborough  Street,  Cassis,  subject  to  availability  of  funds.  These  works  will  therefore,  be 

carried out as soon as necessary funds will be identified. 

CONGOMAH & LES MARIANNES – WATER SUPPLY 

(No.  B/199)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 

Longue) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard to the severe and prolonged water problems faced by the inhabitants of Congomah and 

Les Mariannes in Constituency No. 4, Port  Louis North and Montagne Longue, he will, for 

the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority,  information  as  to  if 

remedial measures have been taken in relation thereto and, if so, indicate where matters stand 

and, if not, why not. 

Reply: I am informed by the Central Water Authority that the  regions of Congomah 

and  Les  Mariannes  are  supplied  from  the  Salazie  reservoir  which  receives  water  from 

Rempart dam and from  Camp Thorel borehole. The reservoir has a limited capacity of only 

400m3.  

I am also informed that in order to improve water supply in the region - 

(i) 

on  27  March  2016,  the  Central  Water  Authority  awarded  a  contract  for  the 

upgrading  of  the  pumping  and  pipeline  at  Rempart  Dam.  The  project  is 

expected to be completed by February 2017, and 

 

(ii) 

it  will  launch  bids  in  August  2016  for  the  construction  of  two  new  service 

reservoirs with a capacity of 3000m3 and 2000m3 respectively in Salazie and 

Eau Bouillie. The works are expected to be completed by December 2017. 

 

 

 

164 

LONG MOUNTAIN HOSPITAL – PHARMACY SERVICES 

(No.  B/200)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 

Longue)    asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Long 

Mountain Hospital, he will state if he will consider the advisability of –  

(a) 

extending  the  opening  hours  of  the  pharmacy  found  thereat  beyond  2000 

hours, as was the case in the past and, if not, why not, and  

(b) 

reviewing the conditions thereat to allow the operation thereof as a full fledge 

hospital. 

Reply:  Long  Mountain  Hospital  operates  on  a  24-hour  basis  but  pharmacy  services 

are provided from 8.00 hours to 20.00 hours.  According to records available, the attendance 

during  the  past  five  years  shows  that  an  average  of  175  patients  attend  the  Long  Mountain 

Hospital daily.  However, from 20.00 hours till 06.00 hours the following day, an average of 

3  patients  attend  the  hospital.  There  is  an  ambulance  service  to  cater  for  any  emergency 

cases. 

I am informed that patients attending Long Mountain Hospital after 20.00 hours and 

who are in need of medication are given the first doses of drugs at the Casualty department of 

the hospital itself.  Such patients are advised to collect the required drugs the next morning at 

the Pharmacy of the same hospital. 

 With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  given  that 

catchment  area  and  the  average  number  of  patients  attending  regional  hospitals,  it  is  not 

considered  feasible  and  cost  effective  at  this  stage  to  convert  the  Long  Mountain  Hospital 

into  a  full-fledged  health  institution.    My  Ministry  is  considering  providing  additional 

facilities such as dialysis at the hospital. 

 

