No. 02 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 05 APRIL 2016 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS  

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 

Minister 
of 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 

 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 02 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 05 April 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

        The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office  ‒ 

(a)   Certificate of Urgency in respect of the National Agency for the Treatment 
and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill (No. III of 2016) (In 
Original)  

(b)   The Annual Report 2014 of the Gambling Regulatory Authority.  

(c)   The Digest of International Travel and Tourism Statistics 2014. 

(d)   The  Securities  (Brokerage  Fees  for  Exchange  Traded  Funds  on  Foreign 
Underlyings (Amendment) Rules 2016 (Government Notice No.42 of 2016). 

B.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Mauritius Institute of Health. (In Original) 

C.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Imports)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 40 of 2016) 

(b)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Scrap  Metal)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 41 of 2016) 

D.    Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions ‒ 

(a)   The Annual Report 2014 of the National Solidarity Fund. 

(b)   The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 

National Pension Fund for the 18-month period ended 31 December 2010. 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ROAD ACCIDENT - HON. T. HENRY - INQUIRY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to 
the road accident which has cost Mr S. A. his life, on Saturday last, he will - 

 (a)  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to -  

(i) the time at which - 

A.  the  accident  was  reported,  indicating  the  names  of  the  Police 

Officers involved in relation thereto;  

B. Mrs V. H. was arrested;  

C. Mrs V. H. confessed that she had not been driving, and  

D. Mrs V. H. was transferred to a clinic;  

(ii)  why  hon.  Joseph  Hugo  Thierry  Henry,  MP,  Parliamentary  Private 
Secretary, was not arrested, indicating if he refused to undergo an alco 
test, and  

(iii) if there has been any political interference in the inquiry being carried out 

thereinto, and  

(b)  state  if  hon.  Joseph  Hugo  Thierry  Henry  has  stepped  down  as  Parliamentary 

Private Secretary. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like first of all to present my sincere 
condolences  to  the  bereaved  family  of  Mr  Stephane  André  who  lost  his  life  in  the  road 
accident at Bois Marchand on Saturday last. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)(i)A  of  the  Private  Notice  Question,  I  am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that on Sunday 03 April 2016, at about 00 15 hours, 
Mrs V. H. called the Police Information and Operation Room and informed that the car she 
was  driving  had  met  with  an  accident  along  the  New  Trunk  Road,  near  the  entrance  of 
Arsenal. 

 

9 

Police  Inspector  Mootia  along  with  Police  Constables  Jeewon,  Emambux  and 
Gokhool of Terre Rouge Police Station attended the case. The accident had occurred near the 
flyover along the new Trunk Road,  Bois Marchand involving Government vehicle bearing 
Registration No. T1219, make BMW, allocated to hon. Thierry Henry, Parliamentary Private 
Secretary.  Mrs V. H. stated that she was the driver of car T1219 and she was driving towards 
the North when suddenly an unknown male person crossed the road in front of her from the 
left  side.  At  that  time  she  was  driving  along  the  fast  lane  of  the  road  when  she  knocked 
against  the  pedestrian.    SAMU  was  called  on  the  accident  spot  and  the  Medical  Officer 
certified  the  death  of  the  victim  on  the  spot.    The  body  was  removed  to  SSR  National 
Hospital.  

In regard to part (a)(i)B of the question, Mrs V. H. was arrested at 02 24 hours on 03 

April 2016. 

In regard to part (a)(i)C of the question, Mrs V. H. confessed at  12 10 hours  on 04 

April 2016 that she had not been driving the car. 

As for part (a)(i)D of the question, according to the Police, Mrs V. H. declared that 
she  was  not  feeling  well  and  was  about  to  faint.    She  was  consequently  taken  to  SSRN 
Hospital at 03 00 hours on 03 April 2016.  At her request, she was transferred to Clinique du 
Nord at 03 44 hours. 

 Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)(ii)  of  the  question,  hon.  Henry  was  not 
arrested because Mrs V. H. confessed to the Police that she was driving the car at the time of 
the accident. 

 However,  given  there  was  suspicion  that  hon.  Henry  could  have  been  the  driver, 
Police  requested  him  to  undergo  an  alcohol  test  which  he  refused  on  the  ground  that  Mrs 
V.H. was driving the car. 

 At the material time, Police warned hon. Henry of the offence of refusing to undergo 

an alcohol test. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a)(iii) of the question, I have been told that there 

has been absolutely no political interference in the inquiry nor will I allow any. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  that  a  provisional  charge  of  “obstructing  a  Police  Officer  in  the 

 

10 

performance of his duties” has been lodged against Mrs V. H.  Section 3(1)(a) of the Public 
Officers Protection Act reads as follows - 

I quote -  

“(1)   Any  person  who,  by  force  or  violence,  resists,  opposes,  molests, 

hinders or obstructs a - 

(a) 

public officer in the performance of his duty; 

shall commit an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a 
fine  not  exceeding  10,000  rupees  and  to  imprisonment  for  a 
term not exceeding 3 months.” 

Hon. Henry called at the Terre Rouge Police Station on Sunday 03 April 2016 at 16 
10 hours accompanied by his lawyer and he confessed being the driver of car T1219 at the 
time of the accident.  Hon. Henry was then detained at Pointe aux Cannoniers Police Station 
on a charge of “involuntary homicide by imprudence”.  

He  appeared  before  Pamplemousses  District  Court  the  following  day  and  he  was 
provisionally charged for “involuntary homicide by imprudence”.  He was released on bail 
upon furnishing a surety of Rs50,000 and recognizance of Rs100,000. 

Section 239 of the Criminal Code provides as follows - 

I quote - 

“(1)  Any  person  who,  by  unskillfulness,  imprudence,  want  of  caution, 
negligence  or  non-observance  of  regulations,  involuntarily  commits 
homicide, or is the unwilling cause of homicide shall be punished by 
imprisonment and by a fine not exceeding 150,000 rupees. 

(2)   Where wounds or blows only have ensued, the punishment shall be a 
fine  not  exceeding  100,000  rupees  and  imprisonment  for  a  term  not 
exceeding one year.”   

Since the inquiry is still on-going and besides the fact that the pedestrian crossed the 
road  in  front  of  the  car,  there  is  no  other  evidence  to  the  contrary,  therefore  the  issue  of 
requesting hon. Henry to step down does not arise. 

 

11 

 I wish to state that an enquiry has been initiated by the Police which will establish all 
the relevant facts and it will be for the DPP and, eventually, the Court, in case of prosecution, 
to determine whether any criminal offence has been committed. 

Madam Speaker, I reiterate that whoever errs, will be dealt with by the appropriate 
independent institutions so that justice and truth prevails.  I wish to reassure the House that 
there  will  be  no  political  interference  and  that  the  Police  will  carry  out  the  inquiry  in  all 
independence, as it should be.   

Mr Bérenger: Of course, I renew the expression of my sympathy to the family of the 
young deceased. If I can start with the Police, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister gave the names of 
those who turned up on the spot. Can I know who is in charge of the enquiry as a whole? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have the information here. I have the names of all 
the  Police  Officers  who  went  there  and  no  mention  is  made  as  who  is  in  charge  of  the 
enquiry. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as the coming of the Police on the spot, can I know, because I 
did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say at what time the Police was on the spot, how 
much time went by? How long did it take the Police as from the phone call to be on the spot? 

The Prime Minister: I understand as soon as the phone call was made, instructions 

were given to the Police to go on the spot and to enquire. 

Mr Bérenger: How long it took? 

The Prime Minister: I don’t have the exact time, how many minutes elapsed. 

Mr Bérenger: We heard how the PPS - I would wish I could say former PPS - Henry 
refused to undergo an alco test and what took place; we have just heard. Can I know the name 
of the Police Officer who decided not to arrest him, the Officer-in-Charge who decided not to 
arrest him? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  from  what  I  have  been  given  to  understand  is  that  
Temporary Inspector Mootia, who was at the Head of the team that went there, naturally must 
have decided not to arrest hon. Henry because he refused to allow alcohol test to be effected 
and  I  can’t  see  why  he  should  be  blamed,  because  if  he  was  not  driving,  whether  he  was 
under influence of drink or not, it does not matter. 

Mr Bérenger: I suppose that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - I suppose - will agree with 
me that the whole purpose of that lying criminally to the Police, lying to say that it is his 

 

12 

spouse who was driving, getting away with it, not being arrested, allowed him to go away de 
cuver son vin for more than 20 hours and to come back later when he would have cuvé son 
vin, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that this is what took place? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  misconceived 
things, what really happened.  I have been told that as soon as the Police arrived there, it was 
the wife of hon. Henry who came forward herself, voluntarily and she said: “I was driving the 
car.”  Therefore, there was no question of hon. Henry telling the Police, at that time, that his 
wife was driving the car.  

Mr Bérenger:  May I remind the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that he, himself, said that 
the Police had strong suspicion that PPS Henry was lying and, therefore, it was when there 
was a suspicion, that they asked him to undergo an alco test. He has just said that! 

The Prime Minister:  Yes. 

Mr Bérenger: Now, since there was suspicion,  I  would wish to know  whether the 
Police took the trouble to check whether she was allowed, because this is a Government car 
under the responsibility of a PPS, as per regulations - because they had suspicion - to drive 
that car. 

The Prime Minister:  Whether she was allowed or not, that is another matter.  But 

suspicion, is it enough to allow Police to arrest a person?  Well, I say no! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  I am not surprised that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said: “No”.  For 
some, if the provisional charge - hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, he would ask him to step down, but 
he has three provisional charges and he congratulates him!  Can I know, Madam Speaker, 
how this went on; who came forward to say:  “No, in fact, I was driving”, meaning the spouse 
of the PPS?  Do we have the time?  I didn’t hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give us the time, 
but how did this take place and who was the Police Officer in charge when that episode took 
place? 

The Prime Minister:  I have said that there was Inspector Mootia. I suppose he was 
the person to whom she must have come forward and said voluntarily that she was driving the 
car. 

13 

 
Mr Bérenger: Till the time when the spouse confessed that she had not been driving 
and the time when PPS Henry turned up at the Police station, what did the Police do? Did 
they try to find out where he was? Did they try to arrest him? What took place? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I can’t see the reasoning.  Why should the Police try to 
arrest him?  Unless they had evidence that he was driving and when there was evidence that 
he was driving, Police took action.  So, what more do we want? 

Mr Bérenger:  No, the point in time when the spouse confessed and the point in time 

when he turned up at the Police, what happened during that period? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, the wife confessed some time in the morning and in the 

afternoon, he turned up and he confessed that he was driving. 

Mr Bérenger:  Shame! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told us that there has been no 
political interference.  Can I know whether he checked whether any VVIPs, Ministers called 
on PPS Henry when he was under arrest? 

The Prime Minister:  I am not an enquiring officer. 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

I am on my feet!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am on my feet! Hon. Members, please!   

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Members,  please  don’t  get  excited!    The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  asked  a 
question,  that’s  his  right;  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  replying  and  that’s  his  right  too.  
Allow him to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I know only what the Commissioner of Police has told me. 

Mr Bérenger:  I pointed out when hon. Dayal was asked to step down, that leaders 
from  the  MSM  Party  expressed  their  solidarité  with  him.    Does  he  find  it  proper  that  in 

 

14 

Court, on Monday, some of his Ministers turned up in Court to show solidarity with that kind 
of behaviour? 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    I  was  not  present  there.    I  don’t  know  who  was  there,  who 

turned up, who turned out…. 

…who turned down! I don’t know! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  You don’t want to know. That is the truth! We heard what provisional 
charges have been laid against PPS Henry.  Can we know why minor charges have been laid, 
but,  in  fact,  PPS  Henry  and  his  spouse  conspired  to  pervert  the  course  of  justice?  
Conspiracy!  The Police is very strong at finding everybody guilty of conspiracy all over the 
place and arrest and in this case, it is so clear that there was a conspiracy between those two.  
Firstly, the spouse said she was driving.  The other one refuses the alco test, then he goes 
away for long hours, then the story changes.  Why not the charge of conspiracy to pervert the 
course of justice?  

The Prime Minister:  The hon. Leader of the Opposition should have been the Chief 

Justice of this country. 

For there to be conspiracy, there must be proof of an agreement between the two parties… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Where was the agreement?  Where was the evidence that there was… 

(Interruptions) 

When  Police  arrived,  the  wife  came  forward  and  she  said  she  was  driving.    Where  is  the 
evidence of a conspiracy in this case? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  Question is being put, it is so obvious for anybody who wants to see 
that there was a conspiracy between PPS Henry and his wife; what she would say at first and 
what would be said later on and so on.  It is absolutely clear, since you have asked! I find it 
shameful that we should get this kind of reply today. 

 

15 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Gayan, please! 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has checked, and, if 

yes, if we can have the details of any previous conviction by PPS Henry? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, at this juncture, what has previous conviction to do!  It is 
only  when  there  is  a  case,  when  there  is  a  conviction,  it  is  only  then  that  the  previous 
conviction comes into play.  So, why should I worry myself in finding whether there has been 
previous conviction or not? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  The question is not only what charge will finally be put by the DPP.  
The Police clearly are messing up the case by putting very minor charges.  But as a Prime 
Minister - a case like that, Government property is damaged by the PPS who lies criminally, 
his spouse and himself, so it is not just a question of what charge will be put, how the case 
will go – doesn’t he feel that he should be asked to step down?  He is going to drive another 
car and kill somebody else!  He should be asked to step down as PPS, pending the enquiry 
being completed and the case in Court. 

The Prime Minister:  I am really ashamed of the attitude of the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

The  Prime  Minister:    Because  there  is  a  car  belonging  to  Government  damaged, 

therefore, he should have been locked up.  What nonsense! 

What nonsense! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order! Yes. Hon. Sorefan! 

16 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As per my information, there were two 
other persons in the car.  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm same?  I would also like to 
know whether these two persons were called to give a statement. 

The Prime Minister:  I know there were other persons in the car. I think there were 
about four in all, but whether the Police has so far taken any statement from the others or not, 
it is still inquiring into the case. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After coming into power, this Government 
went at great length to prosecute the former Prime Minister for Roches Noires because there 
was agreement to pervert the course of justice. Today, we hear in this House that one PPS 
lied to the Police, his wife lied to the Police about the death of a person. So, will the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister inform the House why this deux poids deux mesures, when it comes to one of 
their midst, there is no conspiracy charges, they are minor offences, and when it comes to the 
former Prime Minister, then there is a conspiracy charge? 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order, please! 

Hon. Bhadain! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: I have been passed on… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Please! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is standing to reply to the question, please allow him to 
reply. 

17 

 
The Prime Minister: I have been given a list of the persons who were present. There 
were  hon.  Thierry  Henry,  Mrs  Henry,  Jacques  Didier  John  Duval,  Mrs  Fiona  Caroline 
Sinapen, Mrs Vicky Caroline Henry and also one Jean-François Moutia. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, since he has said himself that the 
inquiry is still on, why is it that the hon. PPS has been released only the next day since the 
inquiry is till on, especially in view of the fact - I wish to draw the attention of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister to that - that the Police, since the beginning of this year, has taken a policy 
decision  of  keeping  in  detention  those  who  are  suspected  of  having  committed  voluntary 
homicide? I know of a case where a lady driver had been detained for 10 days when she was 
suspected of having committed the case of involuntary homicide. This is the practice of the 
policy of the Police now,  why in such a case, compared to the lady who was detained for 10 
days, who was not under the influence of alcohol and released before Bambous District Court 
- I have the cause number and I can give it to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - hon. Henry was 
released only the next day when the inquiry was not over yet? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  know  the  circumstances  in  which  the  lady  driver, 
mentioned by the hon. Member, was kept for 10 days. If she didn’t do the needful, she didn’t 
ask  to  be  bailed  out, it’s  not  my  problem.  But,  in  this  case,  I  see  no  justification  why  the 
person  should  have  been  kept  in  jail  or  in  custody,  and  after  all,  bail  was  granted  by  the 
Court. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Without the Police objecting to bail, now he has the cheek to come and 
hide behind the Police! Madam Speaker, I’ll conclude with one last question. It’s clear what 
took place. It’s clear that both PPS Henry and his wife lied so that he would not be arrested, 
he refused to undergo an alcotest, disappeared for long hours to cuver son vin and then came 
back himself and his spouse to say that they had lied and to break the truth. The same PPS is 
on bail now even if the charges are minor compared to what we are talking about. Therefore, 
will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell the country whether he will reconsider and have the PPS, 
at least, step down, now that he is on bail, after having admitted to have lied criminally about 
this death of a young person in that road accident? 

The  Prime  Minister:  That  they  both  lied,  there  is  no  doubt.  But,  is  that  enough, 

would that warrant the Police Officer to keep them in custody. I don’t think so. 

 

18 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

The Prime Minister: But so far as I am concerned, asking the PPS to step down, I 
have said it, I am waiting for the inquiry. When there is a case, then I will ask him to step 
down, but so far, from what I know, from the evidence that there is, what I have been told by 
the Police is that the person negligently crossed the road in front of the car. So, if that is true 
and if that is established, I can’t see how, for the homicide, hon. Henry can be blamed. 

Madam  Speaker:  If  there  is  no  other  question,  hon.  Members,  since  there  is  a 
question on the Order Paper concerning me personally, I would request the Deputy Speaker 
to take the Chair. 

At this stage, the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that Parliamentary 
Question B/136 with regard to Ms Y. C., Director of the Independent Broadcasting Authority 
and addressed to the hon. Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation will now 
be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. Parliamentary Question B/90 with 
regard to the Land Research and Mediation Unit and addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications. Hon. Jhugroo! 

BANKS - SKIMMED/CLONED CARDS  

(No. B/80) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  detected  cases  of  skimmed/cloned  cards,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number 
of reported cases thereof, indicating the – 

(a) 

number of – 

(i) 

(ii) 

banks and clients concerned therewith, and 

arrests effected in connection therewith, if any – 

(b) 

(c) 

total amount of money defrauded, and 

preventive measures taken in relation thereto. 

19 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Police  that  from  January  2015  to  01  April  2016  one  case  involving  cloned  cards  and  two 
cases related to skimmed cards were reported to the Police. 

In regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed that three banks are concerned 
with  those  cases.    As  far  as  the  number  of  clients  is  concerned,  I  understand  from  the 
Commissioner of Police that the cases were reported by the banks and not the clients, and the 
banks  have  not  disclosed  information  in  relation  to  the  clients  as  such  information  is  of  a 
confidential nature. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  as  for  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  seven 

persons of foreign nationality were arrested in those cases. 

Two  of  them  have  been  sentenced  to  one  year  imprisonment  for  having  breached 
section  10(a)  of  the  Computer  Misuse  and  Cybercrime  Act.  Four  others,  who  are 
provisionally  charged  for  unauthorised  interception  of  data  under  section  5(b)  of  the 
Computer Misuse and Cybercrime Act, have been remanded to jail since 19 August 2015.  
After completion of the enquiry, the Police have submitted their case files to the Director of 
Public  Prosecutions  for  advice  on  16  March  2016.    The  remaining  one  has  also  been 
provisionally  charged  for  unauthorised  interception  of  data  under  section  5  (b)  of  the 
Computer Misuse and Cybercrime Act, and Police enquiry is still underway. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the accused persons were not 

able to defraud money. 

As far as part (c) of the question is concerned, the Police have taken the following 

preventive measures - 

(i) 

(ii) 

foot and mobile patrols have been intensified near banking institutions; 

Field  Intelligence  Officers  are  keeping  vigilance  over  Automated  Teller 
Machines; 

(iii)  

the Passport and Immigration Officer is working closely with INTERPOL to 
track persons wanted for cybercrimes; 

(iv)  Bank  Managers  have  been  advised  to  carry  out  daily  viewing  of  CCTV 

footage captured near Automated Teller Machines, and 

(v) 

awareness campaigns are being conducted to sensitise people on the way they 
could mitigate the risks of their cards being wrongly used.  

20 

 
I  have  also  been  informed  that  banks  on  their  parts  have  initiated  the  process  of 
replacing the existing cards with chip-based safer cards and one of them has installed in its 
Automated Teller Machines, the Jitter technology which works as the anti-skimming device.  
I hope that other banks will follow suit.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister state whether the Police Department 
had  taken  up  this  matter  with  the  relevant  international  agencies  with  regard  to  foreigners 
involved in the cloning of credit cards in Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister: I think I have just stated in my answer that the Police is taking 

all steps, including having information from abroad, in order to deal with such matters. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

PORT LOUIS – CCTV STREET SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM  

(No. B/81) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if he is aware of the poor recordings during night-
time  of  the  Closed  Circuit  Television  Street  Surveillance  System  installed  thereat,  which 
result from the inadequate street lighting thereat and from the fact that the said CCTV Street 
Surveillance System is not equipped with infra-red cameras and, if so, indicate if remedial 
measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to refer the hon. Member to my 
reply to PQ B/358 on 01 September 2015, wherein I informed that, in regard to the CCTV 
Street  Surveillance  System  in  Port  Louis,  a  new  video  management  software  had  been 
commissioned by the Police on 15 December 2014.  This new system comprises, inter alia, 
the  installation  of  infra-red  illuminators  at  strategic  locations  where  poor  images  were 
reported at night. 

 
I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  82  Full  HD  Low  Light  Fixed 
Cameras and 19 infra-red illuminators have been installed in November and December 2015 
respectively, in regions of Port Louis where there was report of poor street lighting. 

21 

 
 
I am further informed that following representations made by the Police to the City 
Council of Port Louis regarding inadequate luminosity in certain places, a joint survey was 
carried out on 14 January 2016 by Officers of the Police Communication Branch and the City 
Council.  Subsequently, 205 sites were identified for additional street lighting.  I understand 
that the City Council of Port Louis has initiated procedures for the acquisition of 300 LED 
lamps to replace the conventional lanterns. 

 
According  to  the  Police,  the  272  CCTV  cameras  installed  in  Port  Louis  are 
operational  and  the  quality  of  their  recording  will  be  further  improved  following  the 
installation of LED lamps.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: M. le président, est-ce que le Premier ministre est au courant que 
d’après  un  article  du  «Défi  Plus »  du  samedi  13  février  2016,  sur  les  272  caméras 
mentionnées, il n’y a que 10% de ces caméras qui sont installées  avec des infrarouges ce qui 
fait qu’avec une luminosité insuffisante le soir, ils n’arrivent pas à distinguer les visages des 
gens et que beaucoup de ces caméras sont installées à des places stratégiques telles que le 
bâtiment de Trésor, le bureau du Premier ministre, le Parlement, la Place D’armes là où il y a 
plusieurs banques ? Est-ce que le Premier ministre est au courant de cet état de lieu ?  

The Prime Minister: I don’t take into account whatever newspapers publish! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can I raise on a point of order because 
this is becoming a habit? Under the Standing Orders, one cannot quote a newspaper article or 
a press article to form the substance of a question. So, all these questions should be ruled out 
of order as soon as they are formulated. This is Standing Order 22. 

The Deputy Speaker: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister is right. According to Standing 

Orders 22 (1) (l) –  

“a question shall not be asked whether statements in the press or of private individuals 
or unofficial bodies are accurate;” 

However, I have to say that I have not fully heard the question of the hon. Member 
whether he has asked about this accurateness. If the House will allow me, later on to look at 
the transcript but, as a matter of practice it is out of order to ask whether a statement of the 
press is accurate. 

 

22 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member did not ask the hon. Prime 

Minister whether that press report was accurate. He said: what is the state of affairs? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, as I said, I will have a look at 
the recording. I have not heard fully the question of hon. Ameer Meea and I would give a 
ruling later on. Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I go according to your ruling. 
But within the answer that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just gave he himself said that there are 
272 cameras that were installed in Port Louis. According to my information, these cameras 
do not have infrarouge and these cameras are being placed at bâtiment Trésor, le Parlement, 
la Place D’armes, là où il y a plusieurs banques. So, I am asking the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
what is the state of affairs and what is he doing to remedy the situation? 

The Prime Minister: I have stated to the House the information that has been passed 

on to me. I have not gone on the spot to enquire. It is not my job! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The subject of poor recordings 
will  be  enhanced,  according  to  the  reply  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  following  the 
installation of LED lights. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the time frame with 
which this will be done? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t say the time frame, but I hope it should be done as 

soon as possible. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, a last supplementary! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
confirm whether before purchasing these CCTV cameras there have been tender procedures 
going on? There have been professional dealings with this, so how come the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister will know whether in the specifications there have been infra-red or not? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister care to answer? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am afraid I can’t answer such questions. 

 (Interruptions) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

23 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: On a point of order, by virtue of section 22 (n) of the Standing Orders, 
any matter arising within the jurisdiction of the Speaker cannot be questioned. If today we 
will allow this question to pursue it will be a dangerous precedent for the democracy! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence!  

Allow me to answer! 

 (Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, I have listened to your point of order. There was no question put to me with 
regard to this. 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: I have already said it, PQ No. B/82! The hon. Member is making 

us lose our time! There was another more important question. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Put your question! 

PORT LOUIS MARITIME & PORT LOUIS EAST - FLOOD-PRONE AREAS 

(No. B/82) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No_ 3, Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East, he 
will state if the National Development Unit has  carried out a survey to identify the flood-
prone  areas  thereat  at  times  of  heavy  rainfalls  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  areas  concerned 
therewith and the preventive measures taken or that will be taken to avert the recurrence of 
floods thereat, if any. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  reply  I  made  to  Parliamentary 

Question B/318 of 28 April 2015 still holds. 

24 

 
For financial year 2015-2016, the National Development Unit has awarded 3 Works 
Orders on 05 February 2016 for drain projects for a total amount of Rs13.7 m. The locations 
are as follows -  

(i) 

(ii) 

Desbouchers Street, Roche Bois; 

Imam Bocus Sobdar (Ex Corps de Garde) Street, Plaine Verte, and 

(iii)  Mario Flore Street, Roche Bois. 

These projects were initiated on the basis of complaints received from the inhabitants 
and surveys effected by NDU technical officers.  The implementation of these three projects 
has started in March 2016 and is expected to be completed by June 2016. 

Furthermore, the NDU is also shortly awarding Consultancy contracts for the study, 

 
design and supervision of drain projects at - 

(a) 

(b) 

Oscar  Grandcourt  from  Route  des  Pamplemousses  to  A. R. Nawab 
Street, Plaine Verte, and 

Jardin  Despaux  from  Route  des  Pamplemousses  to  Canal  Bathurst, 
Plaine Verte. 

In addition, further drain projects are to be initiated in the regions of Cité Martial, St 

François, Camp Yoloff, Roche Bois and Plaine Verte as from July 2016. 

All these NDU drain projects will hopefully alleviate flood problems in Constituency 

 
No. 3. 

Mr Rutnah:  Now, I rise properly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on the point that I made 
earlier  on  that  by  virtue  of  section  22(n)  of  the  Standing  Orders,  this  question  cannot  be 
asked, and if we allow this question today, it will set a dangerous precedent…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!  Hon. Baloomoody!  A question has been 
asked to me.  Are you the Speaker of this House?  Let me answer!  Hon. Rutnah, the Speaker 
has accepted and has allowed for this question to be put on the Order Paper.  It has, therefore, 
been allowed … 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

 

25 

MADAM SPEAKER – OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/83) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to each of the overseas missions undertaken by Madam Speaker since 
her election to date, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain a list thereof, indicating in 
each case the – 

(a) countries visited and composition of the delegation;  

(b) purpose and duration thereof, and  

(c) total amount of money spent in terms of air tickets, per diem and other allowances. 

The Prime  Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member should know that 

there is a separation of powers between the Executive and the Legislature. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Hon. Prime Minister! 

Order! 

Hon. Jhugroo!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo!  I will not tolerate any interruptions!  Hon. Ameer Meea has asked a question.  
The Rt. hon. Prime Minister rose to answer the question.  If you are not interested with the 
answer and if you are going to interrupt proceedings, we will move on to the next question.  
Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

26 

 
The Prime Minister:  Well, the hon. Member should know that there is a separation 
of powers between the Executive and the Legislature.  This question raises an issue which 
falls  squarely  under  the  control  of  the  Legislature,  which,  in  our  constitutional  set  up,  is 
independent from the Executive.  Moreover, the Legislature and the Executive are subjects of 
different chapters of our Constitution. 

 
Having  said  so,  it  is  a  well-known  constitutional  principle  that  the  office  of  the 
Speaker is independent.  I have neither control nor responsibility on overseas missions, and 
the  decision  to  accept  or  refuse  an  invitation  to  attend  a  conference  rests  solely  with  the 
Speaker  acting  in  her  own  wisdom,  and  taking  into  consideration  different  factors.    The 
Executive has nothing to do and cannot interfere in the decision of the Speaker in the exercise 
of her duties.  Therefore, my interference in matters under the control of the Speaker would 
be against the principle of separation of powers as enshrined in our Constitution.  To this end, 
it is worth referring to what obtains in the UK House of Commons and the Lok Sabha.   

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

The  Prime  Minister:  In  the  House  of  Commons,  questions  dealing  with  matters 
under the jurisdiction of the Speaker must be taken in private with the Speaker.  In the Lok 
Sabha, questions on matters which come under the administrative control of the Speaker are 
disallowed. 

In  the  present  case,  the  House  may  wish  to  know  that  the  Speaker  has  used  her 

 
discretion, despite the provision of our Standing Orders, to allow the Question. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  this  matter  is  a  line 
budgeting?    We  have  voted  this  figure  in  this  Parliament  and  we  are  talking  about  public 
funds.  This Government has stressed about good governance and now we are covering the 
Speaker by not giving this figure. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, if you want to … 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

27 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I am standing up!  If you are going to question the Speaker’s conduct, you 
may do so with a substantive motion.  I will disallow any further question which relates to 
this. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with due respect, I did not do that.  I am 
just asking that we are using public funds for it.  We are just scrutinising what has been voted 
in the Budget.  This is my point.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that the Speaker has 
travelled 11 times and five times she has brought her spouse with her…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Hon. Ameer Meea!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, I disallow this question! 

The  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  he  should  have  taken  it  with  the 

Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

MAUBANK – LOANS RECOVERY 

(No.  B/84)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the toxic loans of the former Mauritius Post Co-operative Bank, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the MauBank, information as to where matters stand 
as to the recovery thereof, especially, those granted to Mr R_ G_, indicating the total amount 
thereof recovered as at to date. 

28 

 
The Prime Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by MauBank Ltd that a 
dedicated team has been set up to take all necessary steps for the speedy recovery of the long 
outstanding loans at the bank. 

Those  measures 

include 

debt 

restructuring, 

appointment 

of  Receiver 

Managers/Consultants, forced sale of assets and other appropriate legal actions.  

I am informed by MauBank Ltd that, as at 01 April 2016, out of Rs1.7 billion of toxic 

loans, some Rs337 m. has been recovered and recovery actions are still under way. 

As  regards  the  request  for  information  concerning  the  account  of  Mr R.  G.,  I  have 
been advised that it will not be legally in order to disclose information on individual bank 
accounts.  

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I  ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will direct these 
MauBank  people  to  make  no  favour  to  anybody  specially  to  Mr  R.  G.  concerning  the 
recovery of a toxic loan as said by ‘Mr Razor’ here? 

The Prime Minister:  As  I said, the process is still on.  Of course, whoever owes 

money to the bank, that money must be recovered.  There should be no exception. 

Mr Uteem:  May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, as at to date, how much 

money the Government has injected in MauBank to recover all these toxic assets? 

The Prime Minister:  I need a specific question for that. 

Mr Bhagwan: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether Mr R. G. has beneffited 
from any special favour through any Minister or Mr ‘Razor’, who is not here - special razor - 
for having loans with other banks to pay the MauBank? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister make special enquiry with regard to 

interference of Mr ‘Razor’ in all the accounts of Mr R. G? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: I disallow this question.  Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

The Prime Minister: I’ll become an enquiring officer! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Okip Razoir! 

29 

(Interruptions) 

Gueter pas koze are moi toi hein ! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Are moi pas roder papa! PQ No. B/85. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply! Have 

some respect! 

MBC - DIRECTOR GENERAL - POST 

(No.  B/85)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the post of Director General of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the date on which the 
vacancy therefor occurred, indicating, since then – 

(a) 

(b) 

the  name  of  the  person  who  has  been  acting  as  Officer-in-Charge  of  the 
Corporation and the additional remuneration paid thereto therefor, if any, and  

if procedures for the filling of the vacancy therefor have been initiated and, if 
so, indicate when and where matters stand. 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I shall reply to 
PQs  No.  B/85  and  No.  B/86  at  the  same  time,  as  they  both  relate  to  the  Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation. 

Sir,  in  regard  to  PQ  No.  B/85,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting 
Corporation that the post of Director General of the Corporation is vacant since 24 August 
2015. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  Mrs  S.F.C.K.S.,  Team  Leader,  Finance  and 

Marketing, was acting as Officer in Charge of the MBC in the absence of a Director. 

 
With  the  approval  of  the  MBC  Board,  Mrs  S.F.C.K.S.  was  drawing  a  monthly 

30 

allowance of Rs50,000 for shouldering additional responsibilities at the level of Director. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Corporation  that  the 
vacancy of the post of Director General was advertised in the local press and on the website 
of  the  MBC  between  28  August  2015  and  04 September  2015.  The  closing  date  for  the 
submission of applications was 10 September 2015. 

In response to the advertisement, 20 candidates  submitted their applications for the 

post of Director General. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Corporation  that  the  Board  did  not  proceed  with  the 

filling of the vacancy as none of the candidates met the required profile. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to PQ No. B/86, I am informed by the Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation that the Report of Mr R_J_ on the Investigation into the Financial 
Situation at the MBC was submitted in two parts, namely – 

(i) 

investigation into the payment of a golden handshake compensation to the 
then Director General, Mr D.C., and 

(ii) 

the Findings, Analysis and Recommendations on - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the causes of the deteriorating financial situation and any case of 
mismanagement and financial malpractice since 2010; 

the recruitment made since 2010, and 

the procurements made and contracts entered into since 2010. 

The  second  part  of  Mr  R.J.’s  Report  has  shed  light  on  the  mismanagement  of  the 
Corporation by the former Director General who had the blessing of the then Prime Minister 
and the previous MBC Board which condoned all his doings. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the contract of employment of the Team Leader, Finance and 
Marketing has been terminated today, and my Office has already arranged for the temporary 
posting of Mr Dharamraj Paligadu, Director, Economic and Finance, Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development, to perform the duties of Officer in Charge  of the Corporation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to reiterate that the reconstitution of the MBC Board, 
as well as the filling of the vacancy for the post of Director General of the Corporation will 
be done very shortly. 

31 

 
Mr Bérenger: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if we can have the name and 
status of the Chairperson of the MBC at present chairing the Board of the MBC and whether 
there is any non-civil servant present on the Board of the MBC today? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have just been informed about Mr A. Fokeer, Permanent 

Secretary. I suppose he is the Chairman of the Board. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  would  like  to  know  whether  there  is  any  private  sector,  private 

people or they are all civil servants. 

The Prime Minister: There is no private sector appointed yet. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  have  two  supplementary  questions.  Being  given  that  there  is  no 
Director  General  -  we  will  have  a  new  one  and  this  is  good  news.    That  lady  was  in 
connivance with Mr Hitler then; Mr Callikan alias Hitler - can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
inform  the  House  whether,  on  a  day  to  day    basis,  his  Senior  Advisor,  Mr  Beekharry,  is 
giving  directives  to  the  MBC/TV  for  the  preparation  of  news?  I  give  one  example.  
Yesterday’s prime time news, everybody in Mauritius was interested with what will happen 
with the case of Mr ‘Razor’, Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo. That judgment of Justice Caunhye was 
deliberately omitted in all the news of the MBC/TV - 7.00, 7.30 and even 8 o’clock. Can the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least inform the House whether there were directives given by a 
Senior Advisor not to give news on the judgment of Justice Caunhye? 

The Prime Minister: That is not correct. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, just a point of clarity.  Is that a fact that, as at 
present, the Chairperson and Officer in Charge of the MBC are public officers, namely Mr 
Fokeer and Mr Paligadu respectively?  Is that correct? 

The Prime Minister: Mr Fokeer is a public officer; he is Permanent Secretary! 

Mr Mahomed: Mr Paligadu as well. 

The Prime Minister: I think both of them. 

Mrs  Selvon:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  state  the 
reasons why, since independence to date, the MBC has never been truly independent from the 
Government of the day, especially regarding the news reporting? 

 
The Prime Minister:  I think Members on the other side are in a better position to 

32 

answer this. 

 (Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  I  will  allow  you  a  last  supplementary.  Very 

quick, because time is running out. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will give assurance to 
the House that his Senior Adviser, Mr Beekharry, won’t interfere in the day to day affairs of 
the MBC/TV? 

(Interruptions) 

Ki to problem?   Let the Rt. hon. Prime Minister reply! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, I have allowed you a question though time has 
run out because you had asked me earlier. Don’t waste the time of the House!  Thank you. Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister! 

The Prime Minister: I have no information that he is interfering. 

MBC – FINANCE DEPARTMENT - REPORT 

 (No.  B/86)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the actions taken following the submission of the 
Report of Mr R. J. in relation thereto, especially regarding the issue of mismanagement in the 
Finance Department thereof, including if any action has been initiated against the Head of the 
said department and, if so, give details thereof and, if not, why not. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/85) 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank  you. Time is over! Hon. Members, PQ No. B/88 has 

been withdrawn as well as PQ No. B/136. 

 

 

33 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN - DRAINS   

(No. B/104) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to 
Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, he will state if any survey has been 
carried  out  of  the  drains  which  have  been  covered  by  the  sugar  estates  during  the 
mechanization process and which have become the causes of floods during heavy rainfalls 
and, if so, indicate the findings and recommendations thereof. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that my Ministry has 
not been involved in any survey nor is in the presence of any reports on drains which may 
have been covered by the sugar estates during the mechanisation process or which might have 
been the causes of flooding during heavy rainfalls. 

I am also informed that based on areas affected by flooding during heavy rainfall of 
February  2016,  we  have  only  the  regions  of  Gros  Billot  and  Rose  Belle  as  nearest  places 
reported to have encountered flooding.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Minister take up the matter with the relevant sugar estates 
pertaining to the flood prone areas like Mare Tabac, Plein Bois and Trois Boutiques which 
are mainly due to the mechanisation process which have eliminated the natural drains? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  proposed  to  convene  sugar 

estates concerned to a meeting on Monday, 11 April 2016.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question! 

PUBLIC BEACHES - TOILETS - CLEANING & MAINTENANCE 

(No. B/105) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
public beaches, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Beach Authority, a list 
of the contract for the cleaning and maintenance of toilets thereat, indicating in each case the 
- 

(a) name of the contractor therefor; 

 

34 

(b) period of contract thereof;  

(c) cost thereof, and  

(d) procedures followed for the allocation thereof. 

Mr Wong  Yen Cheong: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I wish to inform the  House that 
contracts  for  the  cleaning  and  maintenance  of  public  beaches,  including  cleaning  and 
maintenance of toilet blocks are awarded by my Ministry and the services provided by the 
cleaning contractors are supervised by the Beach Authority. 

With  regard  to  parts  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  the  requested 

information. 

As for part (d) of the question, all contracts awarded by my Ministry are on the basis 
of  competitive  bidding  exercises  and  procedures  followed  are  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act  2008  and  directives  issued  by  the  Procurement 
Policy Office. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Minister aware that some public toilets found on the beaches 
of  Le  Morne,  Flic-en-Flac  and  Blue  Bay  are  not  properly  maintained,  rendering  this 
inappropriate  for  public  use,  and  also  is  there  any  supervision  on  behalf  of  officers  of  the 
Beach Authority? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As far as I am concerned, I am not aware of this but I will 

look into the matter surely.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  From  the  reply  of  the  hon. 
Minister, it sounded to me that the contract covers the beach, including toilets. Is that correct, 
maintenance for the beach including toilets? So, that being the case, I would like to know 
from the hon. Minister whether maintenance of trees also forms part of that contract? To rest 
my case, there were replacement of filao trees which were falling down by coconut trees and 
these same coconut trees - several figures have been mentioned, millions and so forth - are 
now also dying out. So, what action is being taken if that falls under their contract? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  As  far  as  I  am  informed,  the  contracts  are  different  on 
different beaches. Sometimes the contracts are only for the cleaning and maintenance of the 

 

35 

toilets and some are often for the cleaning of the beaches and refuse collections. So, we have 
to look into it and who has got the responsibility to do these actions. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, last supplementary! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister ask the Beach Authority to make provision for 
two tanks; one on the first floor and one on the ground, equipped with a water pump in each 
public toilet found on beaches so as to cater for a regular water supply, because we have a 
very big problem in the western part of the country where we do not have a proper water 
supply in that region? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I welcome the hon. Member for the 

proposals and I will see if we can do a better service in the future.  

The Deputy Speaker: Next question! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

PORT LOUIS – HAWKERS - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/106)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
relocation of the hawkers operating in Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as to where matters stand. 

Dr. Husnoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I 
made  on  01  September  2015  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/374  regarding  the  relocation  of 
hawkers  in  Port  Louis.  As  the  House  will  recall,  I  stated  that  the  Ministry  of  Public 
infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  is  working  on  the  redevelopment  of  Victoria  and 
Immigration Square Bus Stations, with provisions to accommodate hawkers. The project at 
Victoria Bus Station will start in a few months’ time.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the meantime, I am informed that the City Council of Port 
Louis has published a press notice on 05, 06 and 07 January 2016 inviting hawkers to register 
themselves at the Council to operate at the two sites identified, namely at Decaen Market/Fair 
and Transportation Centre Fair, that is, Immigration Square, for their temporary relocation. A 
total of 1,094 and 1,144 applications were received for the 606 spaces available at Decaen 
market fair and 357 spaces available at Transportation Centre respectively. A screening of the 
2,238 applications received was conducted taking into consideration the following criteria set 
by the Council for selection - 

 

36 

•  Firstly, applicant should not pay a trade fee except as seller of foodstuff and 

non-foodstuff (mobile) except on public beaches, commonly known as 
‘Hawkers Licence’ and ‘Distributor of general merchandise’; 

•  Secondly, applicant should not be a stallholder in any market or fair, and 
•  Thirdly applicant should be on the Survey conducted by the Council in 

October 2015. 

I  am  informed  that  following  the  screening  exercise,  582  applications  were  found 
eligible for Decaen market fair and 501 applications for the transportation centre fair, making 
a total of 1,083 eligible applications. Subsequently on 18 January 2016, a drawing of lots was 
effected  in  the  presence  of  the  Supreme  Court  ushers,  auditors,  municipal  ushers,  police 
officers and members of the press. 582 spaces were allocated for Decaen market fair and 357 
spaces  for  transportation  centre  and  the  remaining  144  eligible  applications  for  the 
transportation  centre  fair  have  been  put  on  a  waiting  list  due  to  unavailability  of  spaces 
thereat. 

A  total  of  937  letters  of  award  for  both  sites  have  been  issued  to  those  successful 
applicants  inviting  them  to  sign  an  acceptance  letter  with  the  Council.  As  at  date,  438 
acceptance  letters  have  been  signed  for  Decaen  market  fair  and  306  acceptance  letters  for 
transportation centre. 18 and 10 undelivered letters of award for these two sites have returned 
to the Council. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that the Council has decided to 
house the 144 remaining eligible applicants at  Decaen market fair at other sites identified, 
behind the post office and Monneron fair and the allocated spaces of those who did not turn 
up to sign their acceptance letters, would be allocated to those found on the waiting list. 

According to the work plan… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, sorry to interrupt you. Will it be much longer? 

Dr. Husnoo:  No. One last sentence. According to the work plan established by the 

Council, the temporary relocation of those hawkers shall be effective this month itself. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The hon. Minister, as soon as 
he assumed office, he stated to the House that this is one of his main priorities, that is, the 
relocation of the hawkers. He said that he needed a year for that to be possible and now, we 

 

37 

have been made aware that it is the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
who will be in charge of the relocation in a … 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please come… 

Mr Ameer Meea: …dream project on la gare du Nord and la gare du Sud.  So, my 
question to the hon. Minister is: what is the time frame are we looking at pour que ces gens-
là peuvent être relocated durablement? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member asked the same question in 

September last year… 

…and I told him… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Wait for the answer! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo:  Let me answer, please!   

Let me answer, please! Can I asnwer!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Member has asked his question; he must give me the time to answer! 

(Interruptions) 

Okay. Anyway, as I just mentioned, the hon. Member asked the same question and I told him, 
at that time, I was going to do the project, but then we changed.  Now, with my colleague, we 
are doing it together.  That is what I told him in September.  It is not one year yet and in a 
few months’ time, the project is going to start.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo: In a few months’ time! 

(Interruptions) 

You want me to give you which month! 

 

38 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Husnoo! 

Dr. Husnoo:  To tell you Monday. Tuesday as well. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Husnoo! 

No, cross talking! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

You address the Chair!  Hon. Mahomed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  My question pertains to…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  have  some  respect  for  hon.  Mahomed!    He  listened  to  your  question, 
listen to him! 

Hon. Mahomed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mahomed:    Thank  you.    My  question  pertains  specifically  to  the  exercise,  the 
expression of interest that was conducted by the Municipal Council of Port Louis in January 
this  year.  What  kind  of  due  diligence  has  been  exercised  by  the  Council  in  order  to 
distinguish between seasonal and full-time hawkers?  Because often there are complaints that 
such and such hawkers are not real hawkers to the detriment of the real ones. 

Dr.  Husnoo:    As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  are  three  factors  that  were  taken  into 
consideration. There are some hawkers who have been working in the Council of Port Louis 
from 2004 and who are paying the Council fee. They were taken on board. We were taking 
those people who are not stallholders in any market fair in the City of Port Louis and those 

 

39 

people  who  were  on  the  survey  in  October  2015.    So,  different  criteria  were  taken  into 
consideration for those people who are going to be allocated the stalls. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, next question! 

 

 

 

40 

 

MEDICAL & HEALTH OFFICER - RECRUITS 

(No. B/107) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the posts of Medical and Health 
Officer/Senior Medical and Health Officer, he will – 

(a)  give a list of the new recruits, indicating in each case, the - 

date of registration thereof with the Medical Council of Mauritius, and  

(i) 
(ii)  posting thereof, and  
state the number - 
(i) 

(b) 

of vacant posts as at to date, indicating the number thereof that will be 
filled, and  
thereof forecasted to be recruited in the years 2017, 2018 and 2019. 

(ii) 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, following a selection exercise carried out by the 
Public Service Commission in 2015, 136 Medical and Health Officers/Senior Medical and 
Health Officers have been recruited on 21 March 2016.   

I  am  tabling  the  list  of  the  136  newly  recruited  Medical  and  Health  Officers/Senior 
Medical and Health Officers indicating their respective dates of registration with the Medical 
Council of Mauritius and their posting.  

With regard to part (b)  (i) of the question, there is, as at date, no vacant post in the 
grade  of  Medical  and  Health  Officers/Senior  Medical  and  Health  Officers  on  the 
establishment  of  my  Ministry.    However,  in  case  of  any  vacancy  arising,  same  will  be 
reported to the Public Service Commission.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, I wish to inform the 
House  that  with  the  expansion  of  existing  services  and  introduction  of  new  services  and 
taking into consideration, the attrition rate, around 125 Medical and Health Officers/Senior 
Medical and Health Officers would be recruited annually from 2017 to 2019. 

I  also wish to inform the House that  following the recruitment of the 136 doctors,  a 
shift system has been successfully implemented in the Accident and Emergency Department 
of the five regional hospitals.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

41 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Out of the new recruits this year, 
can the hon. Minister give us the number who did not accept the post and how the vacant 
posts will be filled? Will it go through the PSC for a new interview or will it be from the 
waiting list after the interview done recently? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, from the information I have, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, out of the 136 
doctors,  101  have  accepted  the  offer  of  appointment;  30  have  requested  for  less  than  two 
months’ delay and this request has been acceded to; 1 requested for more than two months’ 
delay to enable him to complete post-graduate course and a case will be made to the PSC 
with  our  recommendation  that  this  is  not  acceptable;  2  have  not  accepted  and  2  had  not 
responded.  So, a case will be made to the PSC to withdraw the appointment of these 2.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Prior to the recruitment by the PSC, 
the Ministry had offered contractual employment to a number of Medical Practitioners.  So, 
may I know from the hon. Minister, after the recruitment by the PSC, whether any of those 
people who were offered contractual temporary position, are still on contractual basis or have 
their contracts been terminated? 

Mr Gayan:  No, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In fact, those who are recruited on a month-
to-month basis are still working on the same basis because we have about 85 Medical and 
Health Officers who are on study leave without pay in other countries to follow post-graduate 
courses and we need to have these doctors to provide the service. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr.  Joomaye. 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I would like to know from the hon. 
Minister,  from  the  list  of  those  appointed  on  a  contractual  basis  in  November  2015,  how 
many of them have been appointed on a permanent basis this time? 

Mr Gayan:  From the information I have, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it looks like about 

17 or 18.   

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

Mr Leopold:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I just want to ask the hon. Minister 
for how long the new recruits have been out of practice and whether he has a programme for 
refreshment course, and whether all the doctors are going on shift directly after recruitment. 

 

42 

Mr  Gayan:    My  understanding  is  that  it  is  only  in  the  Accident  and  Emergency 
Department that the shift system is operational. But I take it that all the doctors who have 
been interviewed and selected by the PSC are up to the standard. I have no other information 
on that. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last supplementary on this question! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you.  If I heard the hon. Minister right, for the years 2017, 2018 
and 2019, every year there will be a recruitment of about 125 doctors. Can the hon. Minister 
inform the House as to how many new doctors will join the market - an unemployed market, 
if I can say so - in the years to come? Has he got any idea? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I don’t have any exact number, but I am in the process of carrying 
out an audit with all the countries where other students are studying so that, at least, we have 
a  picture  of  what  the  future  will  look  like  in  the  medical  field,  but  that  audit  exercise  is 
ongoing. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan, next question! 

REGIONAL HOSPITALS – YARDS & PARKING AREAS - STRAY DOGS 

(No. B/108) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the regional hospitals, he will 
state if he is aware of the – 

(a) 

absence of adequate lighting systems in the yards and parking areas thereof or, in 
cases where they exist, that many of them are defective, and  

(b)  presence  of  stray  dogs  thereat  representing  hazards  and  inconveniences  to  one 
and all, especially at night and, if so, indicate if urgent remedial measures will be 
taken in relation thereto. 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the policy of my Ministry is to ensure that there 
is adequate lighting system in both the yards and the parking areas in all the hospitals. I wish 
to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  considering  regulating  parking  areas  in  hospitals 
since some people are using the hospital parking slots to keep their vehicles and they go to 
work by bus. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the position in respect of lighting in the yards and parking 

areas in the regional hospitals is as follows - 

(i) 

Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital 

 

(ii) 

43 

I am informed that there is adequate lighting in  the  yard and in the parking 
areas. 

Flacq Hospital 
In spite of the fact that the hospital yards and parking areas are lit at night, the 
hospital  authority  has  envisaged  the  installation  of  additional  lighting  for 
improved visibility. 
 

(iii)  Victoria Hospital 

I am informed that since October 2015, the Energy Services Division of the 
MPI  and  Land  Transport  has  been  upgrading  the  existing  yard  lightings.  At 
present, the hospital  yards and parking areas are adequately lit. Moreover, a 
sum  of  Rs800,000  will  be  earmarked  in  the  next  budget  to  cater  for  the 
additional upgrading works and further improvement in the lighting system. 

(iv)  

Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital 

I  am  informed  that  the  yards  and  parking  areas  are  adequately  lit  as  22  led 
flood lights have been installed on the premises of that hospital. Installation of 
additional yard lightings would be carried out by the end of this month. 

I  am  also  informed  that  a  new  parking  area  project  to  provide  for  parking 
space for 160 vehicles is presently being implemented. The new parking area 
is expected to be completed in June this year. 

SSRN Hospital 
I  am  informed  that  the  yard  lightings  have  been  recently  upgraded  with  the 
installation  of  95  flood  lights  and  this  has  greatly  improved  the  visibility. 
Additional  flood  lights  will  be  considered  as  part  of  phase  II  of  the  project 
“Upgrading of Electrical Installations” at the hospital. Moreover, installation 
of  boundary  lighting  system  will  also  be  considered  in  the  project 
“Construction of boundary wall at SSRN Hospital”. 

(iv) 

My Ministry is seriously considering the use of renewable energy for the lighting of 

hospital premises. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the 
House that, at present, stray dogs are found, unfortunately, in nearly all the regional hospitals. 
They  are  a  real  nuisance.  My  Ministry  has  requested  the  Mauritius  Society  for  Animal 

 

44 

Welfare (MSAW), which is responsible for the control of stray dogs and cats, to provide its 
services to our health institutions against a monthly payment of Rs100,000. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank  you. I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether in 
each regional hospital there is a Pest Control Unit or is this service being contracted to the 
private? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I don’t have a specific answer to that particular question, but if a 

substantive question is asked, I will answer it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Regarding lightings of the regional 
hospitals,  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  as  per  information.  I  would  really  invite  the  hon. 
Minister to have a site visit because in doctors’ areas, they have to walk, in certain places, in 
a dark region at night.  A hospital,  I take it, say the Dr. A. G.  Jeetoo  Hospital, brand new 
hospital, but inside terrible, the parking area with the stray dogs creating havoc. Will the hon. 
Minister really go and have a look because the information that he is getting is only 50% the 
real truth? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have to rely on my officers and this is 
what I have been informed, but should I happen to go by regional hospitals, I will certainly 
pay a visit. 

 The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Is the hon. Minister aware that with 
the number of staff working at Victoria Hospital and the number of cars belonging to these 
staff, most of the parking are really full and there is no parking left for patients or relatives 
coming to the hospital? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I must say that the issue of parking is a difficult 
issue. I am arranging for parking bays to be available in all hospitals so that anybody coming 
with a patient is allowed to park in the parking bay, alight the patient and then go and look for 
parking elsewhere. But, unfortunately, it would appear that some of the parking slots in our 
hospitals are being used by people who are not authorised to do that and we need to have 
some form of regulation like in other countries. Parking is not free in other countries. Medical 
care is free, but parking is not free. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

45 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  fact  that  the  extent  of 
infrastructure that there is in the Ministry of Health, may I request the hon. Minister to please 
look into the possibility of ensuring that there is a full Staff and Maintenance Unit that can 
cater for the maintenance of the infrastructure of the Ministry? 

Mr Gayan: Well, there are Maintenance Units in all the hospitals, but, for the major 
works, we have to go to the MPI and this can take some time. As far as possible, the needful 
is done whenever there is any difficult situation. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, one short question! 

Dr. Sorefan: Keep getting the last question, but for my question, I should, at least, get 

two supplementaries, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. According to my information… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, let me just clarify this matter. The discretion 
of  allowing  supplementary  questions  rests  with  the  Speaker.  I  don’t  have  to  give 
supplementary questions and I am giving you two supplementary questions even though time 
is running. So, please be quick. 

Dr. Sorefan: Yes. Regarding stray dogs, I think I heard the hon. Minister mention a 
certain amount. Will that be to pay to the MSAW to look after the stray dogs? Because they 
don’t  come  and  work  at  night,  they  have  to  be  paid  these  people.  Is  that  what  the  hon. 
Minister meant there is certain sum he mentioned? 

Mr Gayan: Well, unfortunately, we do not have many Bodies that can really control 
the stray dogs. But it is interesting for the House to know that, for example, in the year 2012, 
59 dogs and 11 cats were caught at SSRN Hospital. But then, when you look at the amount of 
money being spent, it looks like about Rs5,000 is spent on catching one dog. But it has to be 
done. 

The Deputy Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.01 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

 

46 

BUSES – HYDRAULIC STEPS 

(No. B/109) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the high floor buses,  he  will  state  if  he  will  consider  rendering  it  mandatory  for  the  steps  thereof to  be replaced by hydraulic steps so as to ease access thereto, especially, for the elderly and the 
handicapped persons when travelling and, if not, why not, and if so, indicate if consideration will further be given for the subsidization and exemption of duties and of the Value Added Tax on the importation of hydraulic steps.


Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
of my Ministry that the  present design of the bus chassis and body structure of high  floor 
buses does not allow the replacement of the existing steps by hydraulic ones for the following 
reasons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

 (iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

provision of the hydraulic steps at the entrance door in its present  position is 
not  possible  because  of  engine  placement  and  other  accessories  in  all  front 
engine buses. Moreover, the doors and steps cannot be further widened; 

the  configuration  of  the  steps  leading  to  the  gangway  is  not  aligned  for 
wheelchair access; 

the gangway width which is 38 cm does not allow for wheelchair movement 
inside the bus; 

safety  anchorage  points  will  have  to  be  provided  in  each    bus  to  keep  the 
wheelchair steady when the bus is in motion, and 

provision  of  an  area  to  accommodate  wheelchairs  will  require  the  space 
presently occupied by 6 seats.  

Should such facilities be provided, it would involve displacing the entrance door to 
the  middle  part  of  the  bus  body,  as  well  as,  the  fitting  of  electro  hydraulic  motors  and 
associated mechanism for the operation of the hydraulic steps. This would require extensive 
structural  modifications  to  the  bus  body  and  the  cost  thereof  is  estimated  to  be  around 
Rs400,000 per bus. For the whole fleet of around 2000 existing buses the cost would amount 
to around Rs800 m.  

47 

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  cost  of  a  fully  built  semi-low  floor  bus 
equipped with hydraulic steps at the exit door including wheelchair area and anchorage points 
is around Rs4 m. 

Madam Speaker, Government is committed to promote an inclusive society where the 
specific needs of the elderly and disabled persons are taken care of. In this respect, even if the 
cost of a fully built semi-low floor bus is quite high, my Ministry will consider the possibility 
to procure a certain number of such buses fitted with hydraulic steps to improve mobility and 
enable easy access to buses for our elderly and disabled citizens.  In this context, my Ministry 
will  discuss  with  major  operators  to  include  a  certain  number  of  such  buses  within  their 
fleets. Financial incentives for acquisition of buses equipped with hydraulic steps are being 
considered under the Bus Modernisation Programme where Government, since last year, is 
already subsidising the purchase of new semi-low floor buses to the tune of Rs1 m. per bus 
and granting exemption of VAT. 

Moreover, consideration will also be given to the possibility of adjusting the height of 
boarding platforms at bus shelters and bus terminals in order to ease access of wheelchairs to 
buses offering public transport. This concept will be introduced at the design and upgrading 
of the bus terminals at Victoria Square and the New Transport Centre at Immigration Square. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you.  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  all  the  actions  that  will  be 
taken.  But in the beginning, he has said bus chassis, I am sure he will agree with me that 
most of them are lorry chassis and that is why we are having problems today. May we know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  high-floor  buses  we  have  got,  that  is,  at  the  NTC  and 
private and when these buses will be off the road approximately? 

Mr Bodha: Well, we have a fleet of about 2000 buses and half of the fleet is more 
than 10 years. So, what we are doing in fact is trying to renew the fleet and the renewal rate is 
only 4 percent. As the hon. Member is aware, the individual operators are against the semi-
low floor buses. So, what we are doing in fact is, first of all, trying to renew the fleet of the 
NTC with 500 buses starting this year. In fact, the hundred buses are going to be delivered in 
April 2016 and every year we will have hundred buses. On Thursday I am, in fact, launching 
10 semi-low floor buses for Triolet Bus Service Co. Ltd. So, gradually we are going towards 
the semi-low floor bus and I think the most interesting thing will be when these individual 
operators will be convinced that, in fact, we need semi-low floor buses. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

48 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that 
since he himself has stated that those chassis are lorry chassis, there are many other countries 
in the world where accidents have been caused because those buses are, in fact, lorry chassis 
and many countries have banned them purely and simply, not waiting for operators to realise. 
Can the hon. Minister, therefore, consider the possibility of literally coming up with a phase-
out plan, in other words, a controlled banning process of those lorry chassis because they are 
a danger to members of the public? 

Mr Bodha: Well, Madam Speaker, the Government of the hon. Member did ban. In 
fact, we have banned the lorry/bus high-floor chassis because there is a law saying that, now, 
all buses should be semi-low floor. But, I totally agree with him that what we should have is a 
phase-out plan which we are implementing at the level of the NTC. We will have, now, to 
convince the individual operators to do same. In fact, the other companies are already doing it 
and I said that this week Triolet Bus Service Co. Ltd. is going to launch ten new semi-low 
floor buses on a smart line. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Minister where matters stand regarding the 
Rs1 m. subsidy to private bus owners to change their fleet? There were objections, are they 
still maintaining the objection? 

Mr Bodha: The subsidy is maintained, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mauritius is party to the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with  Disabilities which requires the  Government to take steps to enable 
mobility of people with disabilities.  May I ask the hon. Minister whether he would consider 
at least introducing a quota for all bus companies to have a certain number of buses which are 
equipped to cater for people with disabilities? 

Mr Bodha: I think that this is a very interesting suggestion. The subsidy is still there. 
Today, a semi-low floor bus costs about Rs3 m., a high-floor bus costs  about Rs2 m., the 
hydraulic bus will cost Rs4 m. So, I think we will have talk to the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development to see whether we can have this facility and I totally agree with the 
hon. Member  as regards a quota. Those buses, in fact,  could also be used at certain times 

 

49 

during the day, for example, between 10 and 3 o’clock just to encourage our elderly and the 
disabled to take those buses the more so as the elderly have a free transport system.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question pertains to semi-low floor 
buses.  At times, when there is resurfacing of roads, the drains get deeper because we don’t 
resurface the drains. Will that not be a problem going forward? 

Mr  Bodha:  Concerning  semi-low  floor  buses,  we  have  decided  that  on  a  national 
basis we are going to apply this rule of semi-low floor buses, but the RDA and the TMRSU, 
in fact, examine each route to see. There are going to be a certain number of routes where 
because  of  the  alignment  of  the  road,  because  of  the  condition  of  the  road  or  because  of 
maybe the curves of the road, we will not impose the semi-low floor bus. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  where  matters  stand 
concerning dedicated school buses and whether there is an estimated number of buses which 
have been earmarked by the CNT and other companies? 

Mr Bodha: As regards the PNQ of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, some time back 
when we had the incident in the South, we increased the number of school buses by 60 to 
reduce the ratio per bus. But what is interesting now is that the CNT - the fact that we are 
going  to  have  hundred  new  buses  -  will  be  able  to  provide  better  buses.  We  are  also 
considering the possibility of seeing to it that we have a lesser ratio so that the students are 
more comfortable in the buses.  

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  The hon. Minister said that the CNT is replacing the old buses by low 
line buses mainly from China. Those buses at the rear are very high so they are shifting the 
problem  of  engine  from  the  front  and  going  at  the  back.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider 
Leyland from Poland, which is producing a low line bus with a flat floor for increasing the 
capacity of carrying whereas with the China bus, we have problem with capacity passengers? 

Mr Bodha:  I agree with the hon. Member. We have to move towards the low floor 

bus. 

 

 

50 

ROAD DECONGESTION PROGRAMME – SOUTH LINK ROAD 

(No. B/110)  Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the Road  Decongestion  Programme,  he  will  state  if  a  study  has  recently  been  carried  out  in relation thereto and, if so, indicate – (a) the name of the consultants therefor and the cost thereof;  
(b) the total estimated cost thereof, and  (c) if the south link road through the Ferney Valley will be reconsidered in view of the limited road capacity existing between the east and the south of the country. 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the RDA that there has not been 
any  study  carried  out  recently  in  regard  to  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  (RDP). 
However, in April 2009, the RDA appointed SPP Project Solutions Ltd of South Africa, later 
renamed as J Maynard, as Transaction Adviser to carry out a feasibility study in relation to the 
Road Decongestion Programme under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. The cost of 
the consultancy was 5.799 m. 

In November 2015, following my participation in the World Road Congress, held in 
Korea, I had side meetings with my counterpart and representatives of the Korea Expressway 
Corporation (KEC), that is, the equivalent of the RDA in Mauritius.  

During  the  meetings,  I  requested  that  the  Korean  authorities  visit  Mauritius  and 
technically reassess the  Road Decongestion Programme. Subsequently,  a Korean delegation 
effected  a  visit  to  Mauritius  from  28  November  to  03  December  2015  and  on  29  February 
2016, they have submitted a mission report on the following projects – 

• 
• 

• 

• 

Construction of Phoenix interchange; 
Construction of the A1/M1 link road with the bridge from Coromandel to 
Sorèze; 
Construction of Ring Road Phase II, that is, the tunnel inside Montagne des 
Signaux, and 
Construction of Ring Road Phase III, that is, from the outlet of the tunnel to 
connect with M1 at Quay D. 

51 

 
As regards part (b) of the question, I am further informed that in June 2014, the then 
Government  decided  to  review  the  scope  of  the  project  which  was  then  valued  at  Rs30.5 
billion.  

In March 2015, this Government - when we came in Government - the Transaction 
Adviser  presented  to  my  Ministry  the  different  options  of  the  revised  Road  Decongestion 
Programme  which  were,  upon  the  request  of  my  Ministry,  further  amended  to  propose  the 
optimal solution to relieve the traffic congestion around Port Louis and their estimated cost of 
this Road Decongestion Programme was revised downwards to Rs15 billion in May 2015. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, I am informed that the South 
link road through the Ferney Valley, known as the South Eastern Highway Project, did not 
form part of the RDP.  

I am informed that the then Government did not go ahead with the project due to 

protests from environmentalists. 

Madam Speaker, following the cancellation of the link between Ferney and Kewal 
Nagar  passing  through  the  Grand  Port  mountain  range  via  the  Ferney  Valley,  the  RDA 
launched  a  consultancy  service  for  the  upgrading  of  the  existing  coastal  road  B28  from 
Mahebourg to Bel Air over a length of 31 km costing Rs1.3 billion comprising the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

widening and strengthening of the existing road to 6-7 meters depending on 
availability of space; 
realignment of existing road in certain sections wherever possible like 
Bambous Virieux, Grand Sable and Deux Frères; 
provision of footpaths and drains and safety measures, and 
improvement of hydraulic structures such as culverts and bridges. 

(iii) 
(iv) 
Mr  Sesungkur:  Thank  you  for  this  detailed  answer.  My  interest  is  precisely 

concerning the link road between the South and the East. The main point here is … 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr Sesungkur:  I am coming to it, Madam Speaker. The main point is the distance 

between the Airport and the East although Government is making an effort to … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, please don’t make a statement. Put it in the form 

of your question. 

52 

 
Mr  Sesungkur:  When  the  then  government  decided  to  stop  the  Ferney  project,  I 
understand that this was for an ecological reason. Can  I know  from the Minister if, in the 
initial plan that was made, the ecological factor was not taken into consideration? So, this is 
what the inhabitants of the East are asking: how come that there was an initial project which 
was there and then suddenly Government came with a sudden decision to stop everything? 
Since 2005 they are awaiting for that project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, I think you have made your point. 

Mr Bodha:  Madame, c’est une colle.  Madam Speaker, what I would like to say is 
that  there  was  an  EIA  as  regards  that  road,  but  there  was  a  national  outcry  and  the 
Government then decided to preserve the ecosystem, not to go ahead with highway. Then the 
former Minister came with the possibility of having consultancy services to go for the road 
which exists, make it a better road and the project is a very ambitious one because, in fact, it 
relates to 31 kilometres and Rs1.3 billion. So, that’s where we are. 

Mr Bérenger:  The hon. Minister gave us how much it will cost. I am not sure it is 
feasible  to  rehabilitate  this  road  all  along  the  coast,  31  kilometres,  I  hear.  What  I  want  to 
know is: has this Government taken the decision to go ahead with that project concerning the 
coastal road? 

Mr Bodha: No decision has been taken yet on this. What has been done, in fact, is we 
have launched, under a  consultancy, for the upgrading of the existing coastal road, but no 
decision has been taken as regards the implementation of the project. 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has mentioned all these projects to the tune of Rs15 
billion, which I think is a burden to the Government right now financially. Will this project or 
part of this project be on a BOT with South Korea? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I can assure the House, as my colleague would say, the 

issue of toll has never been addressed. 

ROAD DECONGESTION PROGRAMME - PROJECTS 

(No.  B/113)    Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the Road Decongestion Programme, he will state the – 

(a) number of projects falling thereunder;  

(b) the costs thereof, and  

 
 (c) how it will be financed. 

53 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by 
the RDA that the number of projects falling under the Road Decongestion Programme (RDP) 
will consist of the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the A1/M1 link road, that is, the bridge over the Grand River North West, 
from Coromandel to Sorèze; 
the construction of grade separated interchange at Pont Fer/Jumbo/Valentina 
Roundabouts, that is, all the three roundabouts connecting with the Terre 
Rouge/Verdun; 
the Ring Road Phase 2, which is the tunnel inside Montagne des Signaux, 

(iii) 
(iv)  Rind Road Phase 3, which is the connection from the outlet of the tunnel via 

(v) 

(vi) 

Vallée Pitot and then connecting with the M1 at Quay D. 
The final alignment is being reviewed to ensure that there is no displacement 
of the squatters and no social disturbances. 

 It also involves - this has been added - the contruction of a grade separated 
junctions along the Motorway M1 at Decaen and Immigration Square, so that 
we don’t enter Port Louis at Place d’Armes. Coming from the South, we will 
enter  at  Victoria  Square  and,  coming  from  the  North,  we  will  connect  at 
Immigration Square. 

The project was subsequently included in the RDP to provide an alternative access 
from  the  South  to  the  City  Centre.  Provision  has  consequently  been  made  in  the  National 
Budget 2015-2016 for an amount of Rs50 m. to start works, including the consultancy. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  estimated  cost  of  the 

projects falling under the RDP was estimated at Rs15 billion. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) of the question, different modes of financing 
are  being  envisaged,  and  necessary  provisions  will  be  made  in  the  Budget  as  and  when 
required. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether,  when 
considering  the  mode  of  financing,  it  is  envisaged  to  have  toll  roads  -  paying  roads  -  to 
finance the construction of these roads? 

54 

 
Mr Bodha: I can assure the House that, in fact, when Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo was the 
Minister of Finance, we had a meeting, and it was staggered over six years in the Capital 
Budget with Rs2.5 billion, and the issue of toll was never addressed. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, could the hon. Minister tell us or tell the House how 
he  does  reconcile  the  move  of  going  for  Heritage  City  and  emptying  Port  Louis  in  the 
process?  Therefore, why go ahead with all those projects with regard to the ring road or road 
decongestion  for  Port  Louis  when  Port  Louis  is  being  emptied  of  all  its  people  by  this 
Heritage City? 

Mr Bodha: I answered this question, Madam. So far, the thinking has been to have 
about half a million people moving from Upper Plaines Wilhems to Port Louis. Everything 
was on that corridor. The fact that we have a Heritage City, it changes the center of gravity to 
some  extent  as  regards  to  infrastructure.  We  have  a  triangle.  But  Heritage  City  caters  for 
1,400 places;  the population to be added. The other thing is that moving a few Ministries 
would not change the fact that Port Louis will remain that dynamic city.  In fact, with the 
development at the Port, with the development at the bus terminals - the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister will agree with me; we have discussed this matter. We have only 300,000 tourists 
coming to Port Louis out of 1.2 million - the idea is to bring 600,000 of those tourists to Port 
Louis, offering Port Louis as a cultural attraction. I think that Port Louis by Light has shown 
that if  you organise life in Port Louis, we can make this city what it has always been and 
become a vibrant city, being the port of the region, being a cultural city, being the financial 
city.  It is not because a few Ministries and the Parliament are going to Heritage City that the 
political decision making process will not remain in Port Louis. All the banks are going to be 
here. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  -  I  have  put  the 
question to the former Minister, and I am putting it to the present Minister - whether the full 
decongestion programme is supported by a study and, if yes, when was the study carried out 
and by which consultant? If there is a study, I would like to know whether that study has been 
updated to take into consideration the present road parameters. 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  the  whole  decongestion  programme  was  based  on  the  study  by 
Maynard  when  they  came  with  this  decongestion  programme.  In  fact,  I  have  just  asked 
Luxconsult to update that study, so that it fits in the new decongestion programme. 

55 

 
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, we heard the hon. Minister talk about the Rs15 billion 
that it will cost. May I know from the hon. Minister, since he took office, since 2015 to date, 
what is the amount that has been spent by the RDA, by his Ministry on road descongestion 
programme? 

Mr  Bodha:  Not  much  has  been  spent.  We  have  just  paid  some  consultancy  to 
Maynard and then we have paid some consultancy for Luxconsult for the study on transport. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem. 

WORKERS (FOREIGN) - WORK PERMITS 

(No.  B/114)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  foreign  workers,  he  will  state,  since  December  2014  to  date,  the 
number of – 

(a) 
(b) 

work permits issued thereto, and 
applications received for the renewal of the work permits thereto. 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, I am informed that 11,537 new work permits have 
been issued by my Ministry in respect of foreign workers since 01 December 2014 to date, 
and  14,620  applications  have  been  received  for  the  renewal  of  work  permit  for  the  same 
period. 

Mr Uteem: May I know from the hon. Minister why has his Ministry taken so long to 
revise the criteria for allocation of work permit, so much so that one of the leading textile 
manufacturers has threatened to move its operation outside of Mauritius? 

Mr Callichurn: Representations were made only recently, and we took prompt action 

to remediate the situation. 

Mr Uteem: In regard to the criteria laid down in the Cabinet decision of 04 March 
2016, which will guide your Ministry in allocating, approving application for work permit, 
there is now a recommendation for the ratio of local to foreign workers to be reviewed to 1:1. 
I understand that the ratio currently is 2:1. May I know from the hon. Minister why this has 
been reduced and what would be the impact on the unemployed in Mauritius? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, Madam Speaker, the ratio was 3:1 and then it was reviewed to 
2:1 and, after representation from the operators of the manufacturing sector, we decided to 
review the ratio to 1:1.  This is because we have been made to understand that Mauritians do 

 

56 

not want to work in the textile-manufacturing sector specifically.  That is why we took the 
wise decision to review the ratio. 

Mr  Uteem:  With  regard  to  the  criteria  for  the  duration  of  stay  of  foreign  workers 
being extended to eight years, may I know from the hon. Minister whether the criteria will 
also  be  extended  to  priests  and  other  workers  in  the  religious  sector  who  come  for 
employment in Mauritius?  Will this category of people also now be able to get an eight-year 
work permit? 

Mr  Callichurn:  The  decision  taken  by  Cabinet  was  with  regard  to  textile-

manufacturing sector only. 

WATER SUPPLY - DISTRIBUTION 

(No. B/115) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  water,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water 
Authority,  information  as  to  the  measures  being  taken,  if  any,  to  address  the  issue  of  the 
perturbed  distribution  thereof  at  times  of  heavy  rainfall  or  lack  thereof,  in  the  light  of  the 
implementation  of  the  smart  cities  projects,  the  promised  economic  miracle  and  the 
consequential high income economy that is expected to follow. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  disruptions  during  heavy  rainfall,  I  am 
informed  by  the  CWA  that  two  out  of  its  six  water  treatment  plants  located  at  Rivière  du 
Poste and Mont Blanc, which derive water from rivers, are affected by high turbidity during 
heavy rainfalls. Works for the upgrading of these plants will start by January 2017.  The same 
problem which existed at Pailles Treatment Plant, which supplies the region of Port Louis, 
has now been resolved since November 2015 with the installation of new filters, which are 
called rapid gravity filters. 

As regards the disruption of water supply due to deficient rainfall, the CWA mobilises 
water through operation of standby boreholes, abstraction of water from rivers and provision 
of water tanker services in affected areas. 

I also wish to inform the House that the Bagatelle Dam is expected to be completed 

by the end of 2016 and will be an additional source of water. 

It is also planned to upgrade La Ferme and La Nicolière Dams.  

 

57 

Concurrently, the CWA plans to construct new treatment plants at Bagatelle, Rivière 
des  Anguilles,  La  Ferme  and  Pont  Lardier  at  Deep  River  Beau  Champ  and  to  upgrade  La 
Nicolière and Piton du Milieu Treatment Plants.  

With  the  implementation  of  these  projects  and  the  abstraction  of  water  from  new 
boreholes,  it  is  expected  that  an  additional  volume  of  about  200,000  m3  per  day  will  be 
available by 2030 to meet the future development needs. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: In the last PNQ on petroleum pricing mechanism, we were informed 
that  in January  2015  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund,  contribution  to  it  was  increased  by  300%. 
Precisely, for financing works related to water distribution network so as to provide a more 
regular  water  supply  to  the  population.  We  were  also  talking  about  24-hour  water  supply, 
smart water distribution, so to speak. So, may I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, a 
time indication when water supply will be enhanced so as we get more regular water supply, 
if not 24-hour water distribution? 

Mr Collendavelloo: We hope that with the new strategy for water, we will be able 
within two years to enhance the water distribution system in Mauritius, but all depends on 
many  matters  such  as  procurement  procedures,  especially  funding,  we  have  the  Build 
Mauritius Fund. I don’t want to spend money, as I have said, uselessly. We want to have a 
good project leadership in order to use the money from the Build Mauritius Fund judiciously. 
So, it is difficult for me to give a timeline as such. With the World Bank Report coming in 
May, we will see a bit clearer in all this. 

 Madam Speaker: Next question! 

UTILITY REGULATORY AUTHORITY - OPERATIONAL 

(No. B/116) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
information as to when the - 

(a) Board thereof will be appointed, and  

(b) Authority will become operational.   

 

58 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, the Utility Regulatory Authority Act was voted in 2004 
and was amended and proclaimed in 2008.  

In spite of costly international advertisement to identify a person with the necessary 
experience to act as Chairperson of the Authority, the previous Government did not consider 
it expedient to appoint the Board of the Utility Regulatory Authority.  

This Government has taken the commitment to make the Authority operational.  

In view of the critical and determining role of this institution in the Utility Sector, I 
am considering the appointment of members with utmost caution. I will soon be consulting 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on the membership of the Board and I hope that the Authority 
would become operational within the next few months. 

Mr Mahomed: My question stems on the fact that last year during your presentation 
of the MARENA Bill, you mentioned the following against the backdrop why there was a 
delay in the past, like you just did - 

 “I have to inform the House that I am taking the necessary steps to appoint the Board 
of  the  URA  (Utility  Regulatory  Authority)  which  should  be  operational  early  next 
year.”  

That is, early 2016, and now the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is saying a few months later.  

Are you sure? To me, early is January. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  of  course,  I  entirely  agree.  It  is  not  a  joking  matter, 
because  that  is  very  important  and  I  entirely  agree  with  the  hon.  Member  that  we  were 
already late last year and the year before last and the year before last year. But let us just see 
what are the qualifications to be a Chairperson. He must be the holder of a University Degree, 
no less than five years proven professional academic or managerial experience in connection 
with the provision of any utility service. So, five years as a Manager of Electricity Sector, for 
instance, and then he must not have had an interest in the utility sector two years before his 
appointment, which makes it very restricted. For the Commissioner, he must be a holder of a 
University Degree. He must have experience in relation to electricity or water or wastewater, 

 

59 

but then he should not have been a Director or a shareholder of any of these sectors for the 
last two years.  

If I am unable to find a proper composition, let’s say within the next weeks or so, I 
will consult with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, then I shall ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
consider altering the law to make it more flexible. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, unfortunately, the IBA was quicker than I. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  from  what  we  understand  from  the  hon.  Vice-
Prime  Minister  whether  it  be  qualification  or  experience,  it  is  very  restrictive.  So,  let  us 
amend the legislation. We have been with that piece of legislation since 2004 until today and 
we have not been able to find l’oiseau rare, comme on dit. Let us all put our heads together 
and amend the legislation once and for all. 

Madam Speaker: Will the Vice-Prime Minister reply to this or not? 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is not a question. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to remember also the question of 
this Authority becoming operational does not depend only on  finding the Chairman of the 
Board or the Director with all the qualifications that he has just listed, which is in the law. 
There is another important matter for this body to become operational. According to the law 
which  we  passed  in  2004,  the  law  says:  ‘subject  to  the  relevant  Utility  Legislation,  the 
Authority may…’, and so on and so forth. So, therefore, there must have been the relevant 
utility legislation, the sector specific legislation, and that is why in the original Act you will 
see - I am sure the hon. Vice-Prime Minister knows - the Electricity Act was already in the 
Schedule.  

So, for it to become operational in the water sector, we must have a new Water Act or 
a water legislation or whatever name it will be called and we have to review of the Electricity 
Act  if  we  are  not  happy  with  the  contents  of  the  Act  which  was  passed  during  the 

 

60 

MMM/MSM Government. So, these relevant utility regulations must first be passed for the 
whole Authority to become operational in addition to finding the rare birds.  

Mr Collendavelloo: Now, this is a debate. I am prepared to debate, of course, but I 
don’t think that is the forum to do so. I take the points. They are perfectly valid points, of 
course. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

FOOTBALL – FRENCH COACH - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/117)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the nomination of the French 
Coach, Alain Happe as Directeur Technique Nationale de Football, he will - 

(a) state the terms and conditions of the contract of employment thereof, indicating 

the cahier des charges therefor, and  

(b) table copy of his - 

(i) project for local football, and  

(ii) curriculum vitae.     

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that Mr Alain Happe, 
the  DTN,  is  not  employed  by  my  Ministry.  He  is,  in  fact,  employed  on  contract  by  the 
Mauritius Football Association (MFA) and I did try to get information from them and I am 
informed by his employer that the information asked for is privileged and cannot be released. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  je  trouve  cela  aberrant  qu’un  ministre  du 
gouvernement actuel sollicite la MFA pour des informations nécessaires au fonctionnement 
des écoles de foot, du centre national de football, etc., et que la MFA ne puisse pas remettre 
ces  informations  au  ministre.  Et  ma  question  est  la  suivante:  est-ce  que  le  ministre  a les 
informations suivantes, est-ce que la nomination de M. Happe comme DTN s’est faite avec 
l’accord de l’actuel ministre de la jeunesse et des sports, et si oui, est-ce que M. Happe a déjà 
exercé comme DTN dans un autre pays avant de venir à Maurice? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  think  the  hon.  Member  himself  always  says 

that we should not interfere in the matters of the federation. This is the case. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question! Hon. Quirin! 

 

61 

SPORTS BILL - INTRODUCTION 

(No.  B/118)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Sports Act, he will state 
when the proposed amendments thereto will be introduced, following the Cabinet decision of 
19 February 2016 in relation thereto, indicating if a draft copy of the proposed amendments 
will be circulated in the meantime. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  Cabinet’s 
approval has been obtained on 19 February 2016 for drafting instructions for a new Sports 
Bill to be issued to the State Law Office.  

 A tentative draft Bill has been worked out and submitted to the State Law Office and 

the matter is still at the level of that Office.   

The hon. Member may rest assured that once the draft Bill has been finalised, same 

will be circulated to all stakeholders. 

Mr Quirin: Donc, Madame la présidente, dois-je comprendre que jusqu’à présent le 
draft qui a été préparé par le ministère de la jeunesse et des sports n’a pas été circulé même 
au niveau des fédérations et du COM? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madame  la  présidente,  on  a  écouté  tous  les  stakeholders,  parmi 
même  les  recommandations  de  l’honorable  Quirin.    Je  lui  ai  même  demandé  à  maintes 
reprises,  il  m’en  a  envoyé.  Tout  le  monde  m’en  a  envoyé.    On  a  travaillé  là-dessus.  
Maintenant,  le  draft  copy  is  with  the  State  Law  Office.    Once  it  is  finalised  at  this  level, 
definitely it will be circulated among all stakeholders for their opinions. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin, next question! 

MORCELLEMENT HERMITAGE, COROMANDEL - REHABILITATION WORKS 

(No. B/119) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the proposed 
rehabilitation  works  to  be  carried  out  at  Morcellement  Hermitage,  in  Coromandel,  he  will 
state where matters stand. 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will reply to this question.   

In reply to Parliamentary Question B/998, the House was apprised that the JICA, from 
Japan Expert Team, in collaboration with the Landslide Management Unit of my Ministry, 

 

62 

had carried out structural investigation for suspected ground movement and risk of rock falls 
at Morcellement Hermitage, Coromandel.  The Expert Team had recommended a series of 
remedial measures, as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

removal of all unstable soil and pile of boulders that may affect the houses in 
the vicinity; 
the protection of all exposed bases of existing boundary walls against erosion 
and slope failure, and 
the profiling of the platforms to its safe slope that will not cause any ground 
movement when exposed to adverse climatic conditions. 

The following measures have already been taken to ensure the safety and security of the 

inhabitants - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin/Rose Hill has caused hoarding to be 
fixed to protect the private properties from falling rocks and boulders; 
a trench has been dug along the public roads to divert surface run-off water 
away from the nearby residences; 
appropriate signs have been affixed along the roads to warn inhabitants and 
other people of the potential risks; 

(v) 

(iv)  A flushing exercise to diffuse the accumulated rock dust along the escarpment 
of the river bank was carried out in April 2015 by the Special Mobile Force.  
Further flushing could not be carried out due to roots of dense vegetation; 
some 300 tonnes of rock dust have been removed from the escarpment on the 
river in October 2015, with the assistance of United Basalts Products Ltd, and 
 regular simulation exercises and community policing activities are being 
conducted to sensitise the residents and ensure their preparedness in case of 
any eventual landslide. 

(vi) 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Landslide  Management  Unit  has  also  prepared  the  design  of 
countermeasure works for the whole area.  These will comprise erection of protective walls, 
cross drains and cut off drains. 

However, as these works will require acquisition of privately owned land, the Ministry 
of Housing and Lands was requested to carry out a survey to identify the owners and proceed 
with  the  acquisition  procedures.    I  am  informed  that  the  searches  on  land  ownership  and 
acquisition procedure are on. 

 

63 

The rehabilitation works will start as soon as the acquisition of land will be completed. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  malgré  toutes  les  informations  fournies  par 
l’honorable ministre, il est bon qu’il sache qu’en période de grosses pluies, les habitants de la 
région sont sur le qui-vive et je ne le souhaite pas mais si à l’avenir il y a un cyclone, les 
choses  pourraient  en  effet  se  détériorer  et  c’est  pour  cela  que  j’aimerai  qu’il  nous  dise 
combien de temps cela va prendre.  Est-ce qu’il y a un budget qui a été voté? Parce que je 
sais qu’il y a un rapport des experts japonais qui a été soumis au gouvernement.  Est-ce qu’on 
peut savoir combien de temps cela va prendre pour mettre en pratique ce plan et comme il 
vient de le confirmer lui-même, il y a aussi un plan de réhabilitation qui est fait.  Donc, les 
choses peuvent évoluer s’il y a un budget qui est débloqué rapidement afin de soulager les 
habitants dans cette situation d’insécurité. 

Mr Bodha:  I totally agree, Madam Speaker, the urgency and the concern of the hon. 
Member. In fact, the site has been classified as level 4, very high landslide prone area.  The 
design,  from  what  I  have  here,  by  the  Landslide  Management  Unit,  has  already  been 
completed.  You have Phase I at the cost of Rs13 m. and Phase II at the cost of Rs6.3 m. I 
will discuss with the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands so that we 
can expedite matters and then we can, most probably, use some of the budget that has been 
allocated to urgent works for landslides and drains. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  within  this  study 
carried  out  by  the  Japan  Expert,  it  was  recommended  to  stop  giving  permits  for  building 
construction in order to avoid cases of landslide?  Can he also inform the House whether this 
has  been  implemented  and  whether  immediate  action  has  been  taken  against  this 
unscrupulous promoter, Mr Beerjeeraz, who is an HC, I can say, in illegal construction or is 
the Ministry contemplating to take action against him? 

Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  the  proposed  countermeasures  also  said  that  the  area 
could  not  sustain  any  further  developments  and  for  any  further  developments,  appropriate 
EIA certificate will have to be sought from the Ministry of Environment.  So, I believe that 
the Ministry of Environment is doing what has to be done.   

As regards Mr Beerjeeraz, there was a case in Court and, in fact, what happened, from 
the information I have here, is that the Counsel for the Municipal Council was not in Court 

 

64 

and  they  lost  the  case.    From  what  I  have  here  is  that  they  are  taking  all  the  necessary 
measures to see to it that the rules of safety are respected. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether he intends to make a 
site visit and look on the opposite side where you have Sunray and the Neetoo Industries?  
From what we can see on the other side of the road, there is an imminent case of landslide 
where you can see rocks coming out from behind Neetoo Industries and also Sunray.  Can 
urgent action be taken in order to prevent un désastre ? 

Mr Bodha:  In view of the concern of the hon. Members of the Constituency, I would 
be very keen to do a site visit together with my colleague from the Ministry of Environment.  
We will do it together.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Gobin, next question! 

BASIC INVALIDITY PENSION – ELIGIBILITY 

(No.  B/120)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to pensions/social benefits, she will state the procedure that her Ministry has to follow 
before disallowing the claim of a person who is already benefitting therefrom, indicating if 
the beneficiary thereof is – 

(a) 

(b) 

medically examined prior to her Ministry deciding to disallow the claim and, 
if not, why not, and  
afforded an opportunity to make representations prior to her Ministry deciding 
to disallow the claim and, if not, why not. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  presume  that  the  hon.  Member  is 
referring to Basic Invalidity Pension, for which a medical assessment is required to determine 
eligibility of an applicant.  As a matter of fact, if the applicant suffers from a disability which 
is not less than 60% and likely to last for a period of not less than one year, he qualifies for 
the Basic Invalidity Pension. 

Concerning part (a) of the question, I have to inform the House that payment of Basic 
Invalidity Pension is discontinued when the period for which the benefit was granted by the 
Medical Board lapses. At the time of the assessment to determine an application, the Medical 

 

65 

Board establishes whether the incapacity is permanent and if it is not permanent whether the 
applicant must be medically re-boarded or not.  

If  the  incapacity  is  not  permanent  and  if  no  re-boarding  has  been  recommended, 
payment of the Basic Invalidity Pension is discontinued at the expiry of the benefit period.  
However,  a  notice  is  sent  to  the  beneficiaries  three  months  before  the  expiry.    They  are 
therein informed that in case they consider that they still suffer from an incapacity of not less 
than 60%, they can make a fresh application for the said pension. This is subject to a new 
medical certificate being produced.   

In  case  re-boarding  has  been  recommended,  the  case  is  processed  within  3  months 

before the expiry of the benefit period for the beneficiary to be re-boarded. 

As for part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that all those who have been 
boarded or re-boarded and found not to be suffering from the required disability level, are 
issued with a notice stating the outcome of the medical assessment.  They are given a right to 
appeal, at no cost, against the decision of the Medical Board.   

The appeal must be filed to the Medical Tribunal within a period of one month of the date of 
the disallowance notice. In case they do not appeal, they may make a fresh application for the 
benefit after six months or earlier in the event there is aggravation of the medical condition of 
the person supported by a medical certificate. In case an appeal is favourably determined, the 
pension is reinstated. 

I also wish to highlight that those who do not qualify for Basic Invalidity Pension can 

apply for Social Aid Benefit which is means-tested. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the hon. Minister stating that 
the notice that is sent to the beneficiary is sent, at least, three months before the disallowance. 
Unfortunately, I don’t have the documentation right now with me, but I know of cases where 
that delay of three months is not being respected. May I impress upon the hon. Minister to 
ensure  that,  at  least,  the  notice  of  three  months  is  respected  in  case  of  disallowance  of 
benefits? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I take on board the query of my Learned Friend. I will look 
into the matter. One thing should be clear; I have given proper instructions with regard to re-

 

66 

boarding. A notice has to be sent to the beneficiary three months before the expiry period of 
payment. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  May  I  know  if  there  is  any  standardised  process  or  guideline  in  the 

evaluation of incapacity by the Board of Doctors. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, the doctors are guided by the Sixth Schedule of the 
National Pensions Act and the medical guidelines which have been prepared by specialists of 
the Ministry of Health. So, they are guided by both. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding part (b) of my question and by 
comparison  with  part  (a)  where  there  is  a  notice  of  three  months  being  given  whereas  the 
opportunity  to  make  any  representation  for  part  (b),  there  is  no  such  period.  Can  the  hon. 
Minister  consider,  at  least,  giving  an  opportunity  before  the  disallowance  as  opposed  to 
disallowing the allowance and then giving a right of appeal to the beneficiary? Thank you. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Okay, I will look into the matter. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  consider 
amending the Schedule because as it is now there is a lot of confusion as to the amount of 
incapacity and if the hon. Minister has the figures with her as to the number of people whose 
incapacity benefit has been terminated last year? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Regarding  the  first  part  of  your  question,  I  am  working 
with  the  State  Law  Office  to  see  if  we  have  to  revisit  the  Sixth  Schedule  of  the  National 
Pensions Act. With regard to the second part, unfortunately, I don’t have the figure. Kindly 
do come with another appropriate question. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, hon. Gobin! 

MEDICAL OFFICER - DOMICILIARY VISITS – BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/121) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard  to  the  domiciliary  visits,  she  will  state  the  eligibility  criteria  prescribed  therefor, 
indicating if persons – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

67 

who are bedridden but below 75 years of age are eligible thereto and, if not, 
why not, and 

with severe disabilities, irrespective of age, are eligible thereto and, if not, why 
not. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  currently  administers  a 
scheme  which  provides  for  a  free  monthly  domiciliary  visit  by  a  medical  officer,  to  three 
categories of beneficiaries, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

upon application to children with severe disabilities or who are bed-ridden and 
who are between 0 and 18 years old; 

upon application to elderly persons above 75 years old but below 90 years old 
who  are  severely  disabled  or  bed-ridden  and  are  in  receipt  of  a  Carer 
allowance, and 

(iii) 

elderly persons above 90 years old. 

I wish to point out that no application is required for those above 90 years old. 

I have to inform the House that when combining the three categories of beneficiaries I 
have referred to, this makes a coverage of 6,466 domiciliary visits monthly, broken down as 
follows -  

 (i) 

(ii) 

75 for children; 

3,154 for elderly persons aged between 75 and 90, and 

(iii) 

3,237 for elderly persons aged 90 and above. 

Those visits are effected by doctors employed by my Ministry on a sessional basis. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Madam Speaker, after hearing the reply of the hon. Minister, the category 
of 18 to 75, I think they are in a vacuum. What are the measures being contemplated for those 
between 18 and 75, more particularly persons with disabilities. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Yes.  Good  question!  So,  we  share  common  interests  on 
that  issue.  In  fact,  it  is  true  that  domiciliary  visits  are  currently  not  provided  to  persons 
between 18 and 75. This is a matter of serious concern. I am of opinion that, irrespective of 
age, persons with severe disabilities and bedridden should be granted the domiciliary visits. 

 

68 

So,  I  am  presently  working  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  see  to  it  that  we  extend  this 
service to persons who are in need. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/130 and B/131 have been 

withdrawn. Next Question, hon. Ganoo! 

STC & BETAMAX LTD – CONTRACT 

(No. B/122) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
transportation of petroleum products, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
State Trading Corporation, information as to the date of termination of the contract therefor 
between the Corporation and Betamax Ltd., indicating if – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the prior advice of the State Law Office was sought and obtained therefor; 

Government has been  apprised of any indemnities that would be payable to 
Betamax Ltd. as a result thereof; 

there  is  a  possibility  to  renegotiate  the  price  therefor  to  reflect  the  market 
conditions, and 

(d) 

an arbitrator/mediator has been appointed therefor and, if so, indicate the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

profile thereof, and 

current status of the arbitration/mediation. 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I am advised by the State Trading Corporation, that is, 
the  STC,  that  Betamax  Ltd.  has  lodged  an  arbitration  against  STC  under  the  Singapore 
International Arbitration Centre, that is, the SIAC Rules as provided for under the contract 
between the STC and Betamax Ltd. 

The arbitration is ongoing. No information can be disclosed so as not to cause any 

prejudice to the arbitration proceedings as per the Confidentiality Clause of the SIAC Rules. 

Madam Speaker: Yes.  

Mr Ganoo: I understand the stand of the Minister, but can the hon. Minister reply, at 

least, to part (a) of the question, that is, whether advice was tendered? 

Mr Gungah: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I can’t give more information, as I said, 

because of the Confidentiality Clause. 

 
Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  who  is  representing  the  STC  or  the 

69 

Government of Mauritius before the arbitration process? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I want to give the information, but I cannot and I am 

sure the hon. Member will appreciate that. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  are  the  points  that  have  been  taken 
before  this  arbitration  process  started.  This  contract  between  STC  and  Betamax  was  a 
contract which is flawed at its root, that is, ab initio, that is, this is a contract which could 
have been fraudulently entered to because the procurement legislation in our country was not 
respected before signing this contract? Was this point taken before the arbitrator? 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  I  said  that  because  of  the  Confidentiality  Clause,  I 

won’t be able to disclose any information. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I can understand confidentiality as regards the content 
and  the  defence  of  the  Government.  What  we  are  asking  here  is:  who  is  representing  the 
Government of Mauritius and how much this is costing taxpayers? That has nothing to do 
with the content of our defence. We ought to know in this Parliament who is representing the 
Government and how much is being paid to these legal advisers? 

Mr Gungah: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I won’t be able to give the information. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mrs Selvon! 

HANDICAPPED PERSONS – EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/123)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the qualified handicapped persons, she will state the policy of her Ministry for the 
employment thereof in her Ministry, indicating the – 

(a) 

number thereof – 

(i) 

(ii) 

presently employed thereat; 

having been laid off since December 2014 to date, and 

(b) 

percentage thereof represented on the establishment of her Ministry. 

70 

 
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, the employment of persons to hold or act 
in any office in the public service, including my Ministry, is under the responsibility of the 
Public Service Commission by virtue of Section 89 of the Constitution of the Republic of 
Mauritius.  By  an  instrument  of  delegation  of  powers  by  the  Commission,  Ministries  and 
Departments can, however, carry out certain recruitment exercises. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  that  there  are  two  public 
officers  with  disabilities  on  the  establishment  of  my  Ministry,  of  whom,  one  is  a  General 
Worker and the other an Office Care Attendant. They have been recruited by my Ministry 
and the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms respectively, under delegated 
powers. 

Regarding  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  no  public  officer  with 

disabilities has been laid off by my Ministry since December 2014 to date. 

As regards part (b) of the question, it is not possible for me to give a percentage as 
there is no such data collection in my Ministry; and I believe in the Civil Service as a whole, 
which would indicate whether an officer has a disability or not. Besides, there could certainly 
be quite a few serving officers who suffer from some form of a disability but who have never 
officially declared or do not want to declare their disability for one reason or the other. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister just mentioned that nobody has been sacked in 
her Ministry and we know that a few weeks ago one Mr A. M. of Pailles was sacked and he 
has been working there for seven years consecutively on a contract renewable each year.  Can 
the hon. Minister confirm that and then I will have another question? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, this question is about employment. Mr  A. M. was 
not  employed.  He  was  under  the  Skill  Development  Programme  at  the  Training  and 
Employment of Disabled Persons Board. So, he was not employed by our Ministry. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Yes,  but,  the  question  is  whether  priority  will  be  given  to  these 
persons who have been on placement! He has been there for seven years and up to now he 
has not been employed on a permanent basis and, in fact, he has been transferred to another 
centre in Rose Hill where he is worst off. He is getting less money than what he was getting 
before. 

71 

 
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, one should understand that traineeship or placement 
is offered to disabled persons. We have presently 14 disabled persons in traineeship. So, we 
have to make room to train other disabled persons. If we continue keeping those who are still 
there, we will not be in a position to have other disabled persons in traineeship.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

LOCAL AUTHORITIES - MEMBERS & STAFF – OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/124) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Chief Executive Officers, 
Chairpersons and Council Members and members of the staff of the local authorities, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the overseas missions that 
they have undertaken in the course of the current financial year, indicating in each case, the - 

(a) costs thereof, and  

(b) particulars thereof. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, the information requested is being compiled and will 

be placed in the Library of the National Assembly as soon as it is ready. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: May  I know from the hon. Minister whether each and every overseas 
mission is approved by the hon. Minister and, if so, what are the criteria that are used for the 
approval of those missions? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Usually,  we  see  how  relevant  the  missions  are  and  then  we  approve 

them basically. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS - REGISTRATION 

(No.  B/125)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
implementation of the new policy for the registration of drugs with his Ministry, he will state 
where matters stand, indicating the fees applicable therefor. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with  your permission, I am replying to Parliamentary 

Questions B/125 and B/127 together.  

72 

 
Regulations have been made, Madam Speaker, as per Government Notice No. 47 of 
2016  to  set  out  the  procedures  for  the  implementation  of  the  charging  of  fees  for  locally 
manufactured and imported pharmaceutical products as from 01 April. 

With regard to the fees applicable, I am tabling an extract of the Government Notice 
which specifies different rates applicable for the processing, registration, renewal and change 
in characteristics of locally and imported manufactured pharmaceutical products. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  2013,  the  Pharmacy  Board  only  registers  combination 
preparations which have been proven through clinical trials to be effective and safe. With the 
implementation of the new registration procedures as from 01 April 2016, it is ensured that 
stringent  conditions  are  met  before  pharmaceutical  products  are  registered.  Moreover,  at 
renewal of registration of pharmaceutical products, strict adherence to established criteria is 
being ensured. 

Madam Speaker, following the ban of 344 fixed dose combination products in India, 
my  Ministry  carried  out  a  survey  that  revealed  that  two  fixed  dose  combinations,  namely, 
Salbutamol plus Bromhexine and Menthol with two brands Ascoril and Vifex cough syrups, 
Terbutaline,  and  some  other  complicated  names,  with  two  products  Bro-Zedex  and  Zedex 
cough syrups had been approved by the Pharmacy Board well before 2013. At that time, the 
Pharmacy Board acted on the best evidence available. No adverse effect of these drugs has 
been  reported  to  my  Ministry  so  far.  Pending  the  decision  of  the  High  Court  of  India  the 
Pharmacy Board is keeping these products under review. 

Let me reassure the House, Madam Speaker, that the ban in India is not due to any 
adverse  reporting  on  these  medications,  but  rather  due  to  an  administrative  measure  being 
given  that  the  fixed  dose  combinations  on  the  banned  list  have  not  been  approved  by  the 
Central Drug Regulatory Authority of India.  

Furthermore,  these  cough  syrups  are  not  available  in  public  health  institutions  in 
Mauritius.  We  are  also  seriously  considering  setting  up  a  National  Medicine  Regulatory 
Authority when the new Pharmacy Bill will come before the House. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister what measures he will take to control the consequent increase in price of drugs that 
will happen following the registration and application of a fee?  

 
Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I am given to understand that there won’t be any 

73 

significant increase in the price of medicines. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware that by registering… 

Madam Speaker: No, sorry, I have already ordered the next question! 

PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS - QUALITY CONTROL 

(No.  B/126)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the quality 
control of pharmaceutical products dispensed and/or used in public hospitals, he will state - 

(a) how same is carried out; 

(b) the frequency thereof, indicating the date of the last exercise therefor; 

(c) the laboratory where the qualitative and quantitative tests thereof are performed, 

and 

(d) the actions taken in case of non-conformity. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform 
the House that quality assurance starts right from the beginning of the procurement exercise. 
Public  procurement  is  facilitated  through  a  tendering  process  and  only  WHO  prequalified 
products or those marketed in countries with stringent regulatory authority are considered as 
eligible products. Wholesalers and manufacturers are also screened to ensure their legality, 
credibility  and  integrity.  After  inspection,  at  the  port  of  entry,  the  medicines  procured  are 
brought to the Central Supplies Division of my Ministry. 

Furthermore,  each  consignment  of  medicines  received  at  the  Central  Supplies 
Division  is  compulsorily  accompanied  by  a  Batch  Analysis  Certificate  from  the  Quality 
Control  Department  of  the  manufacturer  certifying  that  the  products  have  passed  all  the 
quality tests.   

Over and above, random sampling is carried out on different classes of drugs received 
at the Central Supplies Division. Each year, different molecules are sent for analysis. This is 
in line with best international practice. 

As for part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, samples are sent three times a year 

for analysis. The first batch of 15 items was sent for analysis on 08 March 2016. 

74 

 
With regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that samples are 
sent  for  analysis  to  the  Government  Analyst  Division,  Réduit  which  is  an  arm  of  my 
Ministry.  

If  the  standards  for  certain  molecules  are  not  available  at  the  Government  Analyst 
Division and in the case of an emergency, samples are sent to a private accredited laboratory 
in Mauritius. 

With  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  in  case  of  non-conformity  to  the  British 
Pharmacopoeia and the United States Pharmacopoeia standards, products are recalled from 
all  Government  health  institutions  and  distribution  and  dispensing  of  those  medicines  are 
stopped forthwith. In addition, the supplier indemnifies the Ministry for the affected quantity 
of  drugs  unused.  The  supplier  is  also  reported  to  the  Procurement  Policy  Office  for  poor 
performance.  Thereafter,  the  Procurement  Policy  Office  (PPO)  would  start  the  process  of 
disqualification  under  the  Public  Procurement  (Disqualification)  Regulations  2009  at  the 
request of the Ministry for a limited time. And, where the Director of the PPO considers that 
there  are  grounds  for  disqualifications,  he  shall  issue  the  supplier  a  notice  for  proposed 
disqualification. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister if he is satisfied that random sampling for control of drugs dispensed at the public 
hospitals are done only three times a year? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  ideally  we  should  have  testing  for  all  medicines,  but  it  is  not 
possible  for  the  number  of  medicines  that  we  have.  But,  apart  from  the  random  sampling 
there are tests and certificates which accompany the medicines. So, I believe that the process 
is well developed to ensure that the quality of pharmaceutical products is not impaired.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister has mentioned suppliers 
in the answer. In the Ministry, do we have a list of suppliers of drugs who are fully registered 
in their own countries? 

Mr  Gayan:  I  am  not  sure  I  got  the  question.  The  suppliers  of  drugs  registered  in 

which country? 

 
Dr.  Sorefan:  Do  we  have  a  list  of  suppliers  at  the  Ministry  and  are  those  people 

75 

registered in their own country? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  my  understanding  is  that  the  suppliers  are  local  ones,  but  the 
manufacturers are based in some other countries. We try to ensure, at the Ministry, that the 
manufacturer procures all the certificates for quality control and the supplier has to submit 
same to the Ministry. I must also say that it has happened that sometimes the suppliers do not 
comply  strictly  with  the  terms  of  the  tender  documents  and,  in  such  cases,  that  particular 
supply is rejected. 

Dr. Joomaye: I would like to know from the hon. Minister if he is contemplating to 
set  up  a  quality  control  specialised  drug  laboratory  for  Mauritius  on  the  model  of  the 
Mauritius Standards Bureau? 

Mr Gayan: I have said, Madam Speaker, that we are in the process of setting up a 
regulatory authority for the control of quality of all medicines on the same line as in India or 
the US or it is going to come in the New Pharmacy Bill. 

COUGH SYRUPS - BANNING   

(No.  B/127)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the  Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, following the banning of 
cough  syrups  containing  salbutamol  and  other  drugs  in  India  and  since  many  of  these 
medications are available on the local market, he will state the measures being taken by his 
Ministry in relation thereto. 

(Vide reply to PQ B/125) 

EMPLOYEES – LAID OFF – LABOUR LAWS 

(No. B/128) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to job losses, he will state the number thereof since January 2015 to date, indicating if 
consideration will be given for the labour laws to be amended to better protect the employees 
from being laid off without appropriate notice and compensation and, if so, when. 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, for period January 2015 to March 2016, 12,961 
cases of job losses were registered at the level of my Ministry out of which 3,913 jobs were 
lost for economic reasons and 9,048 for other reasons such as poor performance, misconduct 
and end of determinate contract. 

76 

 
Madam Speaker, as regards the second part of the question, the House may wish to 
know that my Ministry has already embarked on a major review of the Employment Rights 
Act  and  the  Employment  Relations  Act  in  line  with  the  decision  of  Government  to  better 
protect  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  workers.  In  this  context,  I  have  set  up  a  Technical 
Committee  which  has  conducted  consultations  with  both  workers’  and  employers’ 
organisations. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  who  are  the  members  of  that 
Technical Committee and how many consultations there have been with the workers and the 
trade unions? 

Mr Callichurn: There have been several consultations. I cannot tell you the exact 

number of meetings they had, but several consultations have already taken place. 

Mr Baloomoody: What about the composition? 

Mr  Callichurn:  The  committee  comprises  of  workers  union,  my  Ministry  and 

employers federations. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister just mentioned that a Technical Committee has 

been set up. May we know the composition? 

Mr Callichurn: Unfortunately, I do not have the list and information at hand at the 

moment. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House - because during one of his last 
answer that he gave to the House concerning the reintroduction of severance allowance to be 
paid at normal rates, he said he would review the legislation and consider the possibility of 
introducing it anew in our labour legislation - when will this be done? 

Mr  Callichurn:  This  proposition  is  being  taken  on  board  in  the  exercise  of  the 

review of the labour legislation. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  fundamental  question,  it  will  impact  not 
only on the welfare of the workers, but on the economy itself. It is a fundamental issue. The 
hon. Minister tells us that he has set up a Technical Committee which has had consultations, 
but he cannot remember - fine - the composition of that committee. Can we, at least, know 
the name and status of the Chairperson of that very important Technical Committee? 

Mr  Callichurn:  The  Technical  Committee  is  being  chaired  by  the  Permanent 

Secretary of my Ministry. 

77 

 
Mr Ramful:  I received observations, especially from the union, as to the need of 
setting  up  an  Independent  Disciplinary  Committee.  Is  this  one  issue  which  would  be 
considered with the amendment? 

Mr Callichurn: Yes, indeed it will be considered. 

Mr Uteem: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is a timeframe when 

this Committee has to come up with its final report? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, as soon as possible, I suggest. 

Mr Baloomoody: I was going to ask the same question. The hon. Minister just said 
that there have been several meetings.  Are there going to be more meetings with the unions 
or have the consultations been over and we are waiting for the Committee’s report? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Consultations  are 

still  ongoing  and 

I  am  expecting 

recommendations soon. 

PAILLES - SEWERAGE NETWORK PROJECT 

(No. B/129) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the implementation of the sewerage network project in the region of Pailles, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Waste Water Management Authority, information as to 
where matters stand, indicating the expected completion date thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Wastewater Management Authority 
that  the  contract  for  the  phase  I  of  the  project  which  consists  of  the  construction  of  trunk 
sewers and pumping station was awarded on 23 September 2015. The works are expected to 
be completed by May 2017. 

Regarding  phase  2  of  the  project,  which  consists  of  construction  of  lateral  sewers, 
about 3,000 house connections and replacement of CWA pipes, an Expression of Interest for 
the  supervision  of  the  works  contract  was  launched  on  24  February  2016  and  proposals 
received are being evaluated.  

I am informed by the Authority, that a prequalification exercise to shortlist contractors 
for the works will be launched by the Central Procurement Board. It is expected that works 
will start by January 2017 and be completed in 30 months. 

78 

 
Mr  Armance:  Will  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  confirm  that  the  contractor  will 
resurface the road once the excavation and connection are completed? Is it part of the scope 
of the contractor? 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is normally part of all the contracts, but let me just check. 
Although, I do not have the precise information on file, I can tell the House that normally in 
these contracts there is always a clause for retarring of the road after the excavation. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  what  are  the  financial 

implications of this project? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The phase  I of the project  is financed by  a loan from funding 
agencies  to  the  tune  of  USD10  m.  The  contract  has  been  awarded  to  Sotravic  Ltd  in 
September 2015 for the sum of Rs250 m. inclusive of VAT. That is for Phase 1. For phase II, 
we are, of course, awaiting the procurement exercise before we can have figures. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    In  the  previous  reply,  more  or  less  the  same  question,  the  hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister said that we are looking for funds for Phase  II. May  I know whether 
funds are available for phase II? 

Mr Collendavelloo: For the moment, what I can say, is that this part of the project 
will  be  funded  by  Government.  This  is  how  matters  stand  now.  We  will  see  the  liquidity 
situation, as time goes by, but we have Government spending which has been earmarked for 
it. 

Mr  Armance:  Will  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  let  us  know,  after  completion  of 

phase II, if the whole region of Pailles will be connected? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Ultimately, the whole region of Pailles will be connected. 

CONGOMAH & LES MARIANNES - WATER SUPPLY 

(No.  B/130)    Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the  Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the severe and prolonged water problems faced by the inhabitants of Congomah and 
Les Mariannes in Constituency No. 4, Port Louis North and Montagne Longue, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority,  information  as  to  if 
remedial measures have been taken in relation thereto and, if so, indicate where matters stand 
and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 
LONG MOUNTAIN HOSPITAL – PHARMACY – OPENING HOURS 

79 

 (No.  B/131)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Long 
Mountain Hospital, he will state if he will consider the advisability of – 

(a) extending the opening hours of the pharmacy found thereat beyond 2000 hours, as 

was the case in the past and, if not, why not, and  

(b) reviewing the conditions thereat to allow the operation thereof as a full- fledged 

hospital. 

(Withdrawn) 

FLIC-EN-FLAC – ST PATRICK CLINIC - OPERATION 

(No.  B/132)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the St 
Patrick Clinic of Flic-en-Flac, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

date of coming into operation thereof; 

date  on  which  the  application  for  the  issue  of  an  Environment  Impact 
Assessment Licence in relation thereto was received at his Ministry, indicating 
the date of issue thereof;  

(c) 

distance of the;  

(i) 

(ii) 

building housing same to the nearest residence, and  

stand-by  generator, 
is  compliant  with 
recommendations and regulations applicable therefor in each case. 

indicating 

if 

it 

the 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a), I wish to inform the 

House that the St Patrick Clinic of Flic-en-Flac came into operation in January 2014. 

With regard to part (b), the application for an EIA licence by LP Health Care Ltd to 
convert  the  existing  St  Patrick’s  outpatient  clinic  into  a  10-bedded  facility  with  necessary 
amenities to operate a full-fledged private hospital was received on 26 May 2011. The EIA 
licence was issued on 03 October 2011. 

80 

 
Madam Speaker, as for part (c) (i), this private hospital is located within a ground +2 
building, and the hospital is accommodated within the ground floor and part of the first floor. 
The remaining part of the building is used as residential apartments. 

As for part (c) (ii), the standby generator is housed within a concrete enclosure with 
corrugated iron sheet roof, and the distance to the surrounding residence is around 18 metres. 
I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  which  is  the 
enforcing agency for noise, has undertaken a noise monitoring on 30 October 2015 at 10.20 
hours. The noise measurement revealed a level of 72 decibel, which is above the permissible 
limit  of  60  decibel,  as  per  the  Environment  Protection  (Standards  for  Noise)  Regulations 
1997, for daytime. My Ministry requested the clinic to have recourse to sound proofing of the 
generator as a remedial measure. 

On 04 November 2015 and 26 January 2016, noise measurements were undertaken 
anew by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, which revealed that the noise levels were 
still above limits despite soundproofing of the generator room. 

Accordingly,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  has  served  a  Programme 
Notice  on  LP  Health  Care  Ltd  for  noise  emanating  from  the  standby  generator  during 
operation,  as  the  noise  level  was  above  permissible  limit.  The  matter  is  being  monitored 
closely by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and my Ministry. 

The proponent has indicated that the standby generator is used only when there is a 
power  failure  on  the  grid,  for  instance,  the  generator  has  operated  four  times  for  a  total 
duration of one hour since January 2016. 

I would like also to inform the House that, as to date, no complaints associated with 
noise has been received at the level of my Ministry and the Ministry of Health and Quality 
Life with respect to the clinic. 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, I did not hear the hon. Minister mention the date of 
operation of the clinic. According to my information, the clinic was operating a long while 
before having the EIA certificate. Will the hon. Minister confirm this state of affairs? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  have  no 

information that they were operating before the EIA was issued to them. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  this  building,  in  the 
original  permit,  was  for  the  ground  floor  to  be  commercial  and  the  rest  of  the  floor 

 

81 

residential?  And then, all of a sudden, like my friend has said, they came with a clinic and 
were  functioning  without  EIA.    Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  we  have  a  big  problem  of 
parking  at  the  site  where  the  clinic  is?    Because  the  residents  on  the  third  floor  are 
complaining about parking. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, as I have said, as far as I am concerned, I 
have no information that there has been any complaint up to now.  But I am taking on board 
what the hon. Member is saying, and I will see to it. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, according to my information, this clinic is operating 
an  X-ray  Department  within  a  residential  complex.    I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister  if  the  EIA  Committee  has  taken  into  account  the  effects  of  scattered  rays  on  the 
environment and on the people living in that building. 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  no  information  about  X-rays  or 

whatever kind of apparatus they are using in the clinic with me. 

Mr Barbier: The hon. Minister is not having complaint, but we do receive complaints 
as  Members  of  this  Parliament.  Part  (a)  of  my  question  concerns  the  date  of  coming  into 
operation thereof. So, may I insist upon the hon. Minister to see whether he has the date of 
coming into operation in his file? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: It is to be noted that, in September 2010, the Ministry of 
Health  and  Quality  of  Life  granted  a  licence  to  the  clinic  to  operate  as  an  outpatient  with 
general consultation and observation wards. Thereafter, the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life issued a second licence to the clinic to operate as a private hospital in November 2010. 

Mr Barbier: Being given that it is now clear that the clinic was operating long before 
getting the EIA permit, will now this new Government look into it to know what were the 
reasons for this state of things, for the Ministry of Health to give a licence to operate prior the 
clinic  having  its  EIA  licence?    Will  Government  establish  this  state  of  affairs  and  take 
appropriate measures now to correct all these wrongdoings which have been ongoing there? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Member’s question to 
be  addressed  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  because  as  far  as  the  EIA  is 
concerned, as I said, the date of application was on 26 May 2011. I cannot reply and I cannot 
know if they were operating before that. 

82 

 
Dr. Joomaye: Following the information given here, I would like to know from the 
hon. Minister if he will now ask the Radiation Protection Authority to do a due diligence on 
the equipment being used in that clinic. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I will look into it. 

NELSON MANDELA CENTRE FOR AFRICAN CULTURE - VACANCIES 

(No.  B/133)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the Nelson Mandela Centre for 
African Culture, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
number  of  vacancies  existing  thereat,  indicating  if  same  have  been  advertised  and,  if  so, 
indicate –  

(a) 

(b) 

when, and  

the closing dates for submission of applications therefor.  

Mr  Baboo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Nelson  Mandela  Centre  for 
African Culture that there are currently five existing vacancies. The posts were advertised in 
three different newspapers during the first week of March 2016. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  closing  date  for  the 

submission of applications was Monday 21 March 2016 at 3.30 p.m. 

Mr Barbier: Could the hon. Minister confirm that there was a lot of trouble at this 

Centre about the closing date and whether he is aware for which reasons? 

Mr Baboo: Sorry, I am not aware. 

FISHERS - FISHING CARD 

(No.  B/134)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the fishers, he will state the number thereof who are – 

(a) 

(b) 

in possession of a valid fishing card, and 

not professionally active. 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  am  tabling  a  list  of  1,994 
fishers who hold a valid fisherman’s card, out of which 78 are not professionally active.  For 
those  78,  I  can  give  the  breakdown.  32  fishers  are  on  sick  leave  and  receiving  social  aid. 

 

83 

Their fisherman’s cards have been retained and they are not receiving bad weather allowance. 
Three  fishers  are  in  jail.  Their  fisherman’s  cards  have  been  retained  and  they  are  not 
receiving bad weather allowance. 

Eight fishers have been lost at sea, awaiting Police report to delete their names from 
register. One fisher is untraceable. The Fisherman’s Card is not being stamped and the fisher 
is  not  receiving  bad  weather  allowance.  The  Fisherman’s  Card  will  be  cancelled  after  six 
months if the fisher does not report to the respective fisheries posts.  

Two fishers have proceeded abroad. The Fisherman’s Card is not being stamped and 
the fisher is not receiving bad weather allowance. The Fisherman’s Card will be cancelled 
after  six  months  if  the  fishers  do  not  report  to  their  respective  fisheries  posts  and  last,  32 
fishers are not fishing. Their cases are being closely monitored with a view to withdrawing 
their fisherman’s Card. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Barbier! 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, adding to what the hon. Minister just said, there are a 
lot of fishermen who have their fishers card but they are not active anymore, they are doing 
other things. This is the case in my Constituency and I will take only one example at Bain des 
Dames  where  we  have,  maybe,  one-third  of  those  who  have  their  fishing  cards  who  are 
actually professionally active. While we have other new fishermen who are active - the hon. 
Minister has got a list - and they  are asking for a fishing card but, unfortunately, they are 
waiting for years now. Being given all these information we just have, is it not high time now 
for the Ministry to act upon it and make justice to those who are actually waiting for a fisher 
card for so long? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, this question was raised last year and I said that we 
have got about 150 fishermen cards with the Ministry and that we have started an exercise.  A 
monitoring exercise is on-going for the issue of new fisherman card for off lagoon fishing. 
The monitoring exercise is expected to be completed by mid-April, this month. Those who 
are found to be eligible for a fisherman card will have to undergo a medical examination and, 
thereafter,  if  found  medically  fit  to  fish,  follow  a  training  course  to  be  dispensed  by  my 
Ministry. 

 
INDEPENDENT BROADCASTING AUTHORITY- DIRECTOR - POST 

84 

(No. B/136) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to Ms 
Y.  C.,  Director  of  the  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Authority, information as to the - 

(a) post she occupied immediately prior to her appointment thereat, indicating the date 

on which she resigned therefrom, and  

(b) date on which she submitted her application therefor, and  

(c)  number  of  applicants  who  applied  for  the  said  post,  indicating  their  respective 

qualifications. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

(4.07 p.m.) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS    

ELECTORAL REFORMS - MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  in  January 

2016 a Ministerial Committee on Electoral Reforms was set up under my Chairmanship.  

The mandate of the Committee includes - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

proportional 
representation;  

representation 

and 

guaranteeing 

better  women 

mandatory declaration of community; 

anti-defection measures;  

 
(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

85 

widening of powers of the Electoral Supervisory Commission;  

the Financing of Political Parties, and 

amendments to the Electoral System in Rodrigues.  

The Ministerial Committee has met on four occasions so far and, in the first instance, 
considered the issue of financing of political parties. I submitted its recommendations which 
have  been  approved  by  Government  on  Friday  01  April  2016.  These  recommendations 
pertain to –  

•  Accountability and transparency 
•  Sources of funding 
•  Expenditure Limits.  

In view of the fact that such reforms touch the very core of our electoral system and 
democratic  principles,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  arrangements  have  been  made  for 
copies of the proposals to be circulated to each hon. Member of the National Assembly and 
tabled.  

The House may also wish to know that the Ministerial Committee will next address 

the issue of widening of powers of the Electoral Supervisory Commission.  

 Thank you. 

(4.08 p.m.)   

 WATER SECTOR - REFORM – WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  am  making  a  statement  on  the 
Study on the Reform of the water supply system currently undertaken by the World Bank.  

In  my  reply  to  my  Parliamentary  Question  Nos.  B/29  and  B/46  on  Tuesday  last,  I 
informed the House that Government has sought the assistance of the World Bank to advise 
on the reform of the water sector. 

 In  the  course  of  the  supplementary  questions,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
requested that the Terms of Reference be circulated and wished to know the composition of 
the World Bank expert delegation.  

I am tabling the Terms of Reference.  The names of the persons composing the World 
Bank team is also included in the paper that I am tabling except that we need to add the name 

 

86 

of  Jalakam  Solutions  Private  Ltd.  India  as  Engineering/operation  consultants  and  BLC 
Chambers as a local legal consultant on focussed legal due diligence. 

 

Thank you. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded  the  National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and 

Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill (No. III of 2016) was read a first time. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.10 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.52 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT BILL  

(No. II of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong): Madam Speaker, I move that the National Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Management Bill (No. II of 2016) be read a second time. 

The main object of this Bill is to provide a legal framework for the prevention and 
reduction  of  the  risk  of  disasters,  mitigation  of  the  adverse  impacts  of  disasters,  disaster 
preparedness,  effective  response  to  disasters  and  management  of  post-disaster  activities 
including recovery and rehabilitation for the Republic of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, climate change is one of the most daunting challenges in the world, 
in particular Small Island Developing States and countries in Africa are facing. According to 
the  Fifth  Assessment  Report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC, 
2014),  the  world’s  climate  is  unequivocally  heading  on  a  dangerous  pathway  causing 
irreversible adverse impacts on the economy, ecosystems, lives and livelihoods of peoples. 

 

87 

Madam  Speaker,  climate  change  is  already  manifesting  itself  through  a  number  of 
extreme climate related disasters globally, affecting millions of people in the most vulnerable 
countries. According to the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO, 2015), for the period 
2005 to 2014, 83% of recorded disasters, 39% of recorded deaths, 95% of the recorded total 
affected population, and 70% of the recorded total damages were linked to natural hazards 
related to weather, water and climate. In addition, the impacts of disasters on economies and 
societies have become major obstacles that are seriously impeding our efforts to achieving a 
sustainable socio-economic development.  

With more than 200 million people affected every year, disaster losses continue to rise 
with  grave  consequences  for  the  survival,  livelihood  and  dignity  of  people,  especially  the 
poor.  Vulnerable  groups 
including  young  children,  pregnant  and  nursing  women, 
unaccompanied  children,  widows,  elderly  people  without  family  support,  disabled  persons 
are most at risk.  

Over  the  past  years,  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  has  been  witnessing  severe  weather 
events and natural disaster such as cyclones, storms and tidal surges, tsunamis, floods and 
flash  floods,  landslides,  torrential  rains  and  earthquakes.  This  vulnerability  is  further 
increased  by  climate  change  and  rapid  urbanisation.  In  fact,  according  to  the  latest  World 
Risk Report (2015), Mauritius is ranked as the 13th country with the highest disaster risk and 
ranked 7th on the list of countries most exposed to natural hazards.  

Madam Speaker,  as far as our country is concerned, disaster management had in the 
recent past been carried out on an ad hoc basis within an administrative setup. Following the 
flash floods of March 2013 where 11 of our citizens lost their lives, a number of decisions 
were taken and implemented with a view to improving disaster management.  These include 
the setting up of – 

 (i) 

(ii) 

a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council to oversee disaster 
management in Mauritius and the outer Islands; 

a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre to act as the main 
institution  for  the  State  of  Mauritius  for  the  planning,  organising,  coordinating 
and monitoring of disaster risk reduction and management activities at all levels; 

(iii)  a Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee in the Municipal 
City  Council  and  the  Municipal  Town  Councils  and  the  District  Councils  to 
manage disaster risk reduction in the respective localities; 

 

88 

(iv)  a  Rodrigues  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Council  to  assist  in  the 
preparedness response, rehabilitation and recovery operations before, during and 
after the occurrence of a disaster of an emergency in Rodrigues, and 

(v) 

a Rodrigues Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre to be responsible 
for  the  planning,  coordinating  and  monitoring  of  disaster  risk  reduction  and 
management activities in Rodrigues.  

Madam  Speaker,  risk  reduction  and  management  is  no  longer  an  option.  In  our 
endeavour to better manage disasters in the Republic of Mauritius, our country participated in 
the Sendai World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction held in Japan in March 2015. The 
goal of the Sendai Framework is to “prevent new and reduce existing disaster risk through the 
implementation of integrated and inclusive economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, 
educational,  environmental,  technological,  political  and  institutional  measures  that  prevent 
and reduce hazard exposure and vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for response 
and recovery, and thus strengthen resilience”. 

Parties to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, which was 
adopted in the Third World Conference in March 2015 in Sendai, Japan, have been called 
upon to introduce a legal framework for strengthening governance in view of better managing 
disaster risk.  Various countries have already in place such legal frameworks based on which 
this Bill has been developed.  

This Bill provides for the necessary legal framework to work towards the goal set under 

the Sendai Framework. I will now highlight the main provisions of the Bill – 

(i) 

a  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Council  which  shall, 
inter alia, oversee the implementation of the National Disaster Risk Reduction 
and Management Policy, Strategic Framework and Plan. The National Council 
shall  also  lay  down  national  guidelines  for  disaster  risk  reduction  and 
management  at  all  levels.  To  enable  the  Council  to  discharge  its  role 
effectively,  the  latter  will  have  well  defined  functions  as  well  as  powers.  
Among others, the National Council may require any Ministry, Government 
department, Local Authority or any other body to provide such information in 
such manner and within such time as it may determine and as well as cause 
any Ministry, Government department, Local Authority or any other body to 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

89 

provide their facilities and resources for the protection and preservation of life 
and property in disaster risk reduction and management. 

a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre which shall be a 
department  within  the  Ministry.  The  National  Centre  shall  act  as  the  main 
institution in Mauritius for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of 
disaster risk reduction and management activities. The centre shall be headed 
by a Director-General who shall be a public officer. The latter will be legally 
empowered by this Act to discharge his/her functions most effectively in the 
interest of public safety. 

Provision  has  been  made  for  the  setting  up  of  a  National  Crisis  Committee 
which is a leaner body as opposed to the National Council so as to allow for 
decisive and timely actions before, during and after a disaster to save life and 
protect  property.  Here,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  National  Crisis 
Committee  may,  after  consultation  with  the  Prime  Minister,  issue  orders 
directing any person to remain indoor or evacuate their premises or any public 
place as well as not to venture near rivers, canals, water courses, cliffs, at sea, 
beaches  or  on  islets  on  safety  and  security  grounds.  The  National  Crisis 
Committee will also have the power to declare a localised area a disaster or 
potential disaster area and cause the evacuation and restrict access thereat. 

a National Emergency Operations Command, known as NEOC, which shall, 
in the event of a disaster, be activated to coordinate and monitor all response 
and recovery activities. The National Emergency Operations Command shall 
be a multi-agency, including members from the public and private sectors and 
it shall report to the National Crisis Committee. The Commissioner of Police 
shall  head  the  National  Emergency  Operations  Command  and  lead  disaster 
response operations as may be appropriate in the circumstances. The National 
Emergency Operations Command shall have such powers as may be necessary 
to discharge its functions most effectively and may, in the interest of public 
safety - 

(a) 

cause  to  be  closed  or  diverted  any  public  road  which  represents  a 
potential risk to road users;  

 

90 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

cause the evacuation, either voluntarily or by using such force as may 
be necessary, of persons who are at risk;  

cause  public  facilities  such  as  emergency  shelters,  educational 
institutions, stadiums, gymnasiums, parking spaces or any other public 
place  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  sheltering  displaced  persons  or 
storage of emergency supplies;  

direct the closure of any underground facilities, subways, underpasses 
or such other places or facilities as may be necessary, and  

cause  to  be  deployed  such  resources  that  may  be  required  in  the 
circumstances. 

(v) 

a specialised unit within the Special Mobile Force, to be known as the Disaster 
Response Unit shall provide assistance in disaster response operations. It will 
consist of well-trained personnel for prompt intervention to assist victims and 
families in the event of natural disasters. 

Local  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Committee  at  the  level  of 
(vi) 
local authorities. These local committees under the guidance of the National Centre 
will among others - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

prepare  and implement,  in accordance with  any  guidelines laid down 
by the National Council, the Local Plan to be approved by the National 
Centre;  

promote  and  implement  disaster  risk  reduction  and  management 
education and public awareness programmes;  

build capacity, acquire resources and coordinate disaster risk reduction 
and management activities, and 

conduct  trainings,  drills  and  simulation  exercises  involving  the  local 
communities.  

(vii) 

the appointment of a Local Disaster Management Coordinator for each local 
authority; 

(viii)  a Local Emergency Operations Command to lead disaster response operations 
for  that  specific  local  authority,  in  the  event  of  a  disaster.  The  Local 

 

91 

Emergency  Operations  Command  shall  report  to  the  National  Emergency 
Operations Command and within the purview of a local authority concerned, 
exercise the same powers of the National Emergency Operations Command. 

(ix)  Madam Speaker, as far as Rodrigues is concerned, provision has been made in 

the Bill for the setting up of a similar structure which will consist of -  

a  Rodrigues  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Council  with 
the Chief Commissioner as Chairperson; 

a Rodrigues Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre  which 
shall be under the responsibility of the Chief Commissioner’s Office; 

a  Rodrigues  Crisis  Committee  with  the  Island  Chief  Executive  as 
chairperson, and 

a Rodrigues Emergency Operations Command similar to our National 
Emergency  Operations  Command,  which  shall  in  the  event  of  a 
disaster,  be  activated  to  coordinate  and  monitor  all  response  and 
recovery activities. 

 (a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

and 

(x) 

for  Agalega  and  the  outer  Islands,  provision  has  been  made  under  the 
legislation for Disaster Management Coordinators for Agalega and Cargados 
Carajos  which  shall  be  under  the  administrative  control  of  the  General 
Manager  of  the  OIDC.  The  latter  shall,  in  consultation  with  the  National 
Centre, lead all disaster response operations in Agalega and Cargados Carajos. 
With the activation of the National Emergency Operations Command, disaster 
response  operations  will  be  led  by  the  National  Emergency  Operations 
Command  with  the  assistance  of  the  General  Manager  and  the  National 
Centre. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  also  makes  provision  for  the  declaration  of  a  state  of 
disaster in situations which call for exceptional measures to protect life and property. For that 
purpose, the Prime Minister may, depending on circumstances prevailing at his discretion, or 
after consultation with the Chairperson of the National Crisis Committee and as the case may 
be, declare a state of disaster in the Republic of Mauritius. The Prime Minister may arrange 
for issue of necessary directives for the mobilisation of human and material resources with a 

 

92 

view  to  facilitating  emergency  relief  and  response  as  well  as  post  disaster  recovery  and 
reconstruction  in  the  national  interest.  Such  directives  may  also  include  any  other  vital 
measures necessary to prevent the escalation of a disaster or alleviate, contain and minimise 
the impact of the disaster. 

Madam Speaker, in case it is beyond our national capacity to deal with a disaster or an 
emergency situation, provision has been made in this Bill for the Prime Minister to request 
for  international  relief  assistance  from  friendly  countries  or  international  institutions  to 
expedite  rehabilitation  and  reconstruction  and  attenuate  sufferings  until  the  situation  gets 
back to normal. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  witnessed  on  various  occasions  that  citizens  act 
irresponsibly during disasters exposing themselves unnecessarily to risk and danger whereby 
frittering  the  resources  of  response  agencies.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  acts  and 
behaviours of such persons prevent authorities from discharging their duties effectively and 
diligently. For this very reason, provisions have been made at paragraph 42 in the legislation 
for penalties for any offence constituting an impediment or hurdle in coping with disaster. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  highlight  that  my  Ministry  has  already  come  up  with  a 
National Disasters Scheme which is a working document which complements this Bill. The 
National  Disasters  Scheme  defines  roles,  responsibilities  and  actions  of  all  relevant 
stakeholders before, during and after disasters. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude by stating that with climate change, our country is 
prone  to  natural  calamities  and  disasters.    We  find  today  countries  such  as  the  United 
Kingdom, Japan, France, South Africa, India, Philippines and Malaysia. It is high time that 
we have a comprehensive legislation to cope with disaster risk. There is pressing need to do 
things in a well-coordinated and organised manner.  It is also critical to vest all officers with 
the appropriate legal powers so that they discharge their duties diligently. This is presently 
what this Bill will address, keeping in line with international best practices as spelt out in the 
Sendai Framework. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill will go a long way towards building the resilience of our 

nation and is therefore of national interest. 

With these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

93 

 
Mr  Callichurn rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan. 

(5.10 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, at the time we are discussing the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management 
Bill, a very important Bill, the population will note that, at the same time, there is disaster 
within Government. 

Disaster! We are talking about disaster for… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, but hon. Bhagwan, come straight to the Bill. This has nothing 

to do with the Bill. 

Mr Bhagwan: I am coming to the Bill, Madam. It’s national disaster. When we are 

introducing this Bill… 

Hey, écoutez! Pas fer moi vine koz lor la. I am talking… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  no  crosstalking!  Please  address  the  Chair  and 

concentrate yourself… 

…concentrate yourself on the Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: At the time we are discussing this Bill, Madam Speaker, we have to 
note that the former Minister of Environment, who has been involved in the preparation of 
this  Bill,  has  provoked  himself  a  national  disaster.  I  won’t  go  into  the  details.  The  whole 
population knows it. And now he is followed by  – the country will take note that there is 
another disaster - Mr Goldfinger, the Minister of External Affairs. Another disaster! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, may I kindly request you. 

Mr Bhagwan: I am coming to the Bill. 

94 

 
Madam  Speaker:  Please!  May  I  kindly  request  you  not  to  make  these  sorts  of 
remarks which are outside the precinct of this Bill? You have asked to talk on the Bill, please 
come straight to the Bill. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, these are the worries of the population. The worries 
of the population that, at the time we are discussing this National Disaster Risk Reduction 
and  Management  Bill,  the  population  has  the  right  to  know  what  is  happening.  It’s  a 
Parliament, it’s a whole Government, it is us, here,  who are being asked to vote this very 
important  Bill,  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Bill.  And  what’s 
happening? Who are those MPs who will be asked to talk on this Bill, to intervene, to vote on 
the Bill and this is what the population is asking. 

Madam Speaker, while we are busy discussing this very important Bill, what are the 
public officers saying outside: ‘Le vrai désastre est le PRB’. ‘Economic Operators say le vrai 
désastre c’est le décollage économique.’ 

Madam Speaker: No! Excuse me, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: What the PRB has to do with this Bill? Now, you are a seasoned 
politician, you know very well what are the Rules of the Assembly. You are intervening on a 
Bill  and  you  have  got  the  Explanatory  Memorandum.  I  am  sure  you  must  have  gone 
thoroughly through the Bill. If you could please, I appeal to you, make your comments on the 
Bill. 

Mr Bhagwan: …the population realise about disaster. 

(Interruptions) 

There are so many disasters. 

La  morale  de  l’histoire  est  que  ces  petits  et  grands  désastres  de  tous  les  jours 

semblent préoccuper davantage la population. 

(Interruptions) 

I won’t go into the details of that. Don’t you see the moral of the population when you talk 
about disaster? 

Madam Speaker, now, I will come to the Bill itself. 

(Interruptions) 

 

95 

(Interruptions) 

The Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) aims to reduce the damage caused by natural hazards - 
what  we  are  witnessing  is  man-made  hazard  -  like  earthquakes,  floods,  droughts  and 
cyclones, through an ethic of prevention. The aim of this Bill is to save lives and property of 
our citizens, so, this is why we welcome the presentation of this Bill, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, since the deadly flash flood of 30 March, the people of this land is 
praying  for  never  ever  to  face  this  kind  of  tragedy  again.  We  have  all  witnessed  what 
happened. Madam Speaker, just last week, a Remembrance Day Ceremony was held and we 
have all witnessed how sometimes memory fades but the suffering of the close relatives and 
friends does not.  The parents of those who lost their lives were there and it was very hard to 
witness their feelings. 

The  then  Government,  following  the  flash  flood,  Madam  Speaker,  did  take  this 
national  tragedy  as  a  wake-up  call  and  initiated the  process  for  a  DRR  policy  formulation 
with  the  help  of  the  UNDP.  In  fact,  this  Bill  is the  logical  outcome  of  this  process  where 
many  technicians,  many  persons,  especially  the  Head  of  the  Special  Mobile  Force, 
Commandant Servansingh, have contributed a lot for the preparation of this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, disasters unfortunately occur all over the planet. They leave despair 
and  grief  behind.  According  to  the  United  Nations  Office  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 
(UNISDR), Madam Speaker, there were 346 reported disasters in 2015, 22,773 people dead, 
98.6  million  people  were  affected  by  those  disasters  and  some  66.5  billion  US  dollars  of 
economic  damages.  The  top  five  most  disaster  hit  countries  were  China,  USA,  India, 
Philippines and Indonesia.  

Because disasters occur regularly all over the planet, the UN System rightly took the 
decision to organise World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, focusing on disaster and 
climate change risk management in the context of sustainable development. 

The  World  Conference  has  been  convened  three  times,  Madam  Speaker,  with  each 
edition to date having been hosted by Japan: - and here, in Mauritius, we benefit from the 
assistance  of  the  Japanese  Government  -  in  Yokohama  in  1994;  in Kobe in  2005  and 
in Sendai in 2015.  

Madam Speaker, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 is the 
successor instrument of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) 2005–2015: Building the 
resilience of nations and communities to disasters. The HFA was conceived to give further 

 

96 

impetus to the global work under the International Framework for Action for the International 
Decade  for  Natural  Disaster  Reduction  of  1989,  and  the  Yokohama  Strategy  for  a  Safer 
World: Guidelines for Natural Disaster Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation and its Plan 
of  Action,  adopted  in  1994  and  the  International  Strategy  for  Disaster  Reduction  of  1999 
were passed. 

In  spite  of  all  these  international  efforts,  according  to  the  Sendai  Framework  for 

Disaster Risk Reduction Report 2015-2030 and I quote, Madam Speaker –  

“Over  the  same  10-year  time  frame,  however,  disasters  have  continued  to  exact  a 
heavy  toll  and,  as  a  result  the  well-being  and  safety  of  persons,  communities  and 
countries  as  a  whole  have  been  affected.  Over  700  thousand  people  have  lost  their 
lives, (…)” 

In disasters -  

 “(…)  over  1.4  million  were  injured  and  approximately  23  million  were  made 
homeless as a result of disasters. Overall, more than 1.5 billion people were affected 
by  disasters  in  various  ways.  Women,  children  and  people  in  vulnerable  situations 
disproportionately affected. The total economic loss was more than $1.3 trillion.  In 
addition,  between  2008  and  2012,  144  million  people  were  displaced  by  disasters. 
Disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate change (…)” 

which is one of the most important issues these days –  

“(…) and increasing in frequency and intensity, significantly impede progress towards 
sustainable development. Evidence indicates that exposure of persons and assets in all 
countries has increased faster than vulnerability has decreased, thus generating new 
risk and a steady rise in disasters losses with a significant economic, social, health, 
cultural and environmental impact in the short, medium and long term, especially at 
the local and community level.” 

This is why it is good that in this Bill there are committees which have been set up for local 
and for the community. Undoubtedly lessons have been learned from the Hyogo Framework 
for Action; gaps and future challenges have been identified. 

The  Sendai  Framework,  the  last  one,  is  built  on  elements  which  ensure  continuity 
with the work done by States and other stakeholders under the HFA and introduces a number 
of innovations.  

97 

 
Many commentators, Madam Speaker, have identified the most significant shifts as a 
strong  emphasis  on  disaster  risk  management  as  opposed  to  disaster  management,  the 
definition of seven  global targets, the  reduction of disaster risk  as an  expected outcome, a 
goal focused on preventing new risk, reducing existing risk and strengthening resilience, as 
well as a set of guiding principles, including primary responsibility of States to prevent and 
reduce disaster risk, all-of-society and all-of-State institutions engagement. 

In addition, Madam Speaker, the scope of disaster risk reduction has been broadened 
significantly  to  focus  on  both  natural  and  man-made  hazards  and  related  environmental, 
technological  and  biological  hazards  and  risks.  Health  resilience  is  strongly  promoted 
throughout. 

The  Sendai  Framework  also  articulates  the  following:  the  need  for  improved 
understanding  of  disaster  risk  in  all  its  dimensions  of  exposure,  vulnerability  and  hazard 
characteristics;  the  strengthening  of  disaster  risk  governance,  including  national  platforms; 
accountability for disaster risk management; preparedness to “Build Back Better” - following 
disaster  -;  recognition  of  stakeholders  and  their  roles;  mobilisation  of  risk-sensitive 
investment  to  avoid  the  creation  of  new  risk;  resilience  of  health  infrastructure,  cultural 
heritage and work-places; strengthening of international cooperation.   

The seven global targets of the Sendai Framework, Madam Speaker, are –  

(a)  substantially reduce global disaster mortality by 2030, aiming to lower the average 
per 100,000 global mortality rate in the decade 2020-2030 compared to the period 
2005-2015; 

(b) substantially reduce the number of affected people globally by 2030;  

(c)  reduce direct disaster economic loss in relation to global gross domestic product 

(GDP) by 2030; 

(d) substantially  reduce  disaster  damage  to  critical  infrastructure  and  disruption  of 

basic services; 

(e)  substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk 

reduction strategies by 2020.  

This is what we are being called upon to vote this legislation. 

98 

 
(f)  substantially  enhance  international  cooperation  to  developing  countries  through 
adequate  and  sustainable  support  to  complement  their  national  actions  for 
implementation for the present framework by 2030, and 

(g) substantially increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard early warning 

systems and disaster risk information and assessments to people by 2030. 

Taking  into  account  the  experience  gained  through  the  implementation  of  the  Hyogo 
Framework for Action, and in pursuance of the expected outcome and goal, there is a need 
for focused action within and across sectors by States at local, national, regional and global 
levels in the following four priorities areas – 

•  Priority 1: Understanding of disaster risk; 
•  Priority 2: Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk; 
•  Priority 3: Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience, and  
•  Priority  4:  Enhancing  disaster  preparedness  for  effective  response  and  to 

“Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.  

This is how it is seen at the international level.  I have to give some light to what is happening 
at the level of UNDP at the international level. 

Coming to our Republic of Mauritius, Madam Speaker, what are the disaster risks that 
we have to face in Mauritius.  Until the deadly flash flood, the only disaster risks, which we 
all  Mauritians  are  well  aware  are  cyclones.    Now,  the  situation  is  dramatically  different.  
First, on the climate change font. Studies on Climatic Risk Analysis have confirmed that the 
average temperature  in the Republic of Mauritius shows an increasing trend of  about 0.15 
Celsius per decade, compared to 1961-90, the average temperature increased by 0.74 - 1.2 
Celsius. 

The  precipitation  on  the  other  hand  shows  a  decreasing  trend  over  the  period  from 

1905 to 2007. The reduction in precipitations amounts to 57 millimetres per decade. 

The 4th Assessment Report (AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) assumes that the temperature in the Indian Ocean region will increase of about 2.1 
degrees  centigrade  by  2080  to  2099,  compared to  the  1980 to  1999  scenario.  The  average 
temperature on Mauritius Island is expected to increase of 1-2 degrees centigrade by 2070.  

As a result of the climate change, the intensity and frequency of extreme precipitation 
events  are  likely  to  increase  even  if  the  total  annual  precipitation  remains  constant  or 

 

99 

increases slightly as indicated by the results of the climate risk analysis for the Republic of 
Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, the synthesis report 2012 has revealed and I quote – 

“significant exposure to flood hazard of different intensity.” 

On Mauritius Island, some 5.70 km2 of built-up land and 19.30 km2 of agricultural 
land are exposed to flood hazard. This is in the official report.  This can affect 2.4-3 km of 
motorway, 18-29 km of main roads and 68-109 km of secondary roads.  According to official 
report, Madam Speaker, on Rodrigues Island, the extension of built-up and agricultural land 
prone to flood hazard amounts to 0.4 km2 and 0.5-0.6 km2 respectively. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  total  critically  exposed  area  ranges  from  25  to  110  km2  on 
Mauritius Island. They are: Port Louis area, Rivière du Poste, Flacq, Rivière Sèche Basins; 
Rivière du Rempart West to GRNW; Citrons Basin and some other areas around the country, 
and some lowlands location in Mauritius like Rivière du Poste where water can accumulate 
during heavy precipitation. 

On Rodrigues Island, according to the report again, the most flooded affected areas 
are near rivers’ mouths. High risk arises when urban areas are located exactly near rivers’ 
mouths. Settlements located higher in the mountains are exposed to lower hazards. 

Coming  to  coastal  inundation,  Madam  Speaker,  the  inundation  risk  assessment 
identified  coastal  sites  prone  to  inundation  hazards  on  Mauritius  Island.  These  areas  are 
according to official report – 

•  between  Pointe aux Cannoniers and Cap Malheureux; 
•  between Mon Choisy and Baie de l’Arsenal; 
•  between Cap Malheureux and Poudre d’Or; 
from Baie du Tombeau to Grande Rivière; 
• 
from Flic en Flac to Petite Rivière Noire; 
• 
in Pointe aux Roches, Pomponenette, Riambel and Mahebourg, and 
• 
•  at Trou d’Eau Douce, Poste de Flacq and Roches Noires. 

These are the areas which can be affected from the official report. 

Madam Speaker, the northern area of the Mauritius Island is highly exposed to coaster 
risk, especially the zone between Pointe aux Cannoniers and Cap Malheureux where there are 
wide inundated areas. High coastal risk appears for Port Louis area also.  In total, Madam 

 

100 

Speaker, some 12.2 km2 of built-up land and around 11.8 km2 of expansion areas are exposed 
to high or very high hazard of inundation on Mauritius Island.  Same applies for around 60 to 
80 km of primary roads. 

The exposure is relatively lower on Rodrigues Island, with some 0.56 km2 in built-up 
areas. Considering the sea level rise increases scenarios (from 2.5 to 6 mm), the population 
exposed to inundation ranges from 22,800 to 63,400 people in Mauritius, while in Rodrigues 
exposed population ranges from 800 to 1,800 people. 

With regard to landslide risk, the total amount of economic value for element exposed 
at has also been estimated to about Rs7 billion, for both Mauritius and Rodrigues islands. In 
terms  of  comprehensive  risk-exposed  areas,  there  are  also  hotels,  residences  and  public 
buildings. 

Madam Speaker, the only available Digital Elevation Model (DEM) for Agalega and 
St Brandon islands, which forms part of the Republic of Mauritius, has a horizontal resolution 
of  90m  and  a  vertical  resolution  of  1m;  this  coarse  resolution,  together  with  the  complete 
absence of data about land use and susceptibility, poses substantial limits to a comprehensive 
analysis of exposure of risk in these islands.  We already have rather a good idea of the risks 
involved and now we have to hence enhance our preparedness. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  no  such  thing  called  natural  disaster.    We  have  natural 
hazards which turn into disaster when we are unprepared to cope with them.  I understand 
that the primary purpose of this Bill is precisely to upgrade the level of preparedness of the 
country so that we can save lives and property. 

The  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Strategy  should  be  implemented  along  with  the 

following key objectives – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

defining the DRR strategic framework of action as envisaged by the Hyogo-
Sendai Framework for Action; 

building a strong institutional basis for DRR; 

integrate the DRR into national planning policies with the help of the Ministry 
of Housing and Lands; 

(iv) 

enable and support DRR through improved national legislation, and 

(v) 

empower relevant stakeholders and local communities. 

101 

 
Madam  Speaker,  while  working  on  this  Bill,  I  realised  that  without  an  ethic  of 
prevention and a culture of preparedness, this Bill won’t be saving lives.  We need to create 
new synergies between the public and private sectors to enhance national capacities in terms 
of  technical  governance.  The  Minister  of  Infrastructure,  himself,  acknowledged  that  the 
design of roundabouts are bad.  How can you expect to build resilience if our engineers lack 
expertise? 

In Mauritius, we do not yet have a culture of maintenance, and it is everywhere. We 
can  build  nice  infrastructure,  which  rapidly  are  spoiled  due  to  lack  of  proper  and  regular 
maintenance.  Building safer and more resilient infrastructure is the first step, and we also 
need efficient and reliable warning systems. 

Everytime  we  have  torrential  rains,  there 

is  a  lot  of  confusion  regarding 
meteorological buildings and the  closing of educational institutions. We have witnessed in 
the past such problems, and this cannot be allowed to continue. 

We need to provide the human and technical resources to the meteorological station, 
so that they can perform efficiently. We are still waiting for the installation of the weather 
radar at Trou-aux-Cerfs, which will enhance quality of forecast. Mauritius also needs a fully 
automated  early  warning  system  for  incoming  surges,  tidled  surge  and  swell  waves.  The 
implementation of this EWS will enable the early and safe evacuation of coastal communities 
in Mauritius like Bambous Virieux and other areas, as well as Rodrigues and Agaléga. We all 
realise the  extreme vulnerability of Agaléga in the event of  a storm surge or swell waves, 
which are expected to be more severe through sea level rise and climate change. 

Madam  Speaker,  investing  in  disaster  risk  reduction  for  resilience  is  of  prime 
importance.  The  implementation  cost  for  planning  activities  for  the  two  planning  cycles, 
2013-2018 first cycle and 2019-2025 second cycle, will not be less than Rs5 billion according 
to experts. It is almost useless to prepare all these plans to get this Bill through and keep all 
these plans locked in filing cabinets.  We have to provide funds for the effective and timely 
implementation of the risk  reduction strategy. 

That’s why, Madam Speaker, taking all this into account - we are creating the Council 
-  the  Council,  accordingly,  should  have  been  under  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  like  the 
National Environment Commission chaired by the Prime Minister.  The Prime Minister can 
give guidelines and meet the Committee even on a half-yearly basis with the representatives 

 

102 

of  all  the  different  Ministries  and  other  sectors.    We  don’t  also  see  in  the  Bill  the 
representatives of the airport authorities and those of the Ministry of Information. 

With regard to an operational aspect of the Bill, I would like to highlight the issue of 
protection of properties after evacuation of persons at risk. Madam Speaker, you will agree 
with me that that can give rise to quite a few problems before, during and after an evacuation.  
It  is  mentioned  in  the  Bill  that  the  Committee,  the  Director  can  make  evacuation  during 
cyclonic  periods.  In  spite  of  all  our  national  efforts,  we  need  to  enhance  international 
cooperation  with  other  countries  and 
international  organisations  for  an  effective 
implementation  of  the  present  framework  by  2030.    By  hosting  the  SIDS  (Small  Island 
Developing  States)  Summit  in  2005,  Mauritius  had  opened  a  wide  avenue  of  international 
cooperation,  especially  for  building  resilience  of  vulnerable  countries  but,  unfortunately, 
petty politics killed this laudable initiative. 

Within the Mauritius Declaration Framework, our country would have beneffited a lot 
to overcome some of its inherent vulnerabilities. Madam Speaker, before leaving the floor, I 
wish to remind the House that real prepareness is not about what you have to do on a day to 
day basis, but rather on how much you don’t have to do on D-day. 

It  is  not  the  number  of  police  vehicles  on  the  road,  the  number  of  JCBs  digging 
trenches  on  that  day  or  the  helicopter  going  everywhere.    The  battle  is  won  well  before 
through a real ethic of prevention, and the mission starts now.  As far as we are concerned, 
we wish well to the hon. Minister and hope that he has sufficient  funds, and also that the 
appointment of the Director not be made on a policy de petit copain, that the right person be 
appointed, because this will be a very, very important job, with the lives of our people in his 
own hands. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Baboo: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Gungah rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(5.39 p.m.) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 12 April 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

 
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

103 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTER RAISED 

(5.39 p.m.) 

PORT LOUIS – GOVERNMENT OFFICES - DELOCALISATION 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East):  Madame  la  présidente,  le  mercredi  2  mars  2016,  le  Conseil  des  ministres  a  pris  la 
décision  d’aller  de  l’avant  avec  la  construction  d’une  nouvelle  ville  au  coût  de  R  28.5 
milliards. Pour ne pas alarmer une bonne partie de la population, surtout les port-louisiens, le 
gouvernement ne fait mention que d’une ville administrative. En réalité, Ebène deviendra la 
capitale  administrative  et  législative  du  pays  en  y  délocalisant  l’Assemblée  nationale,  le 
bureau du Premier ministre, des ministères, le State Law Office, entre autres. 

Ainsi, Port Louis, ne sera que la capitale officielle. Un point c’est tout. Elle est vouée 
à  une  crise  sociale.  D’ailleurs,  le  numéro  trois  du  gouvernement,  l’honorable  Soodhun,  a 
concédé dimanche, dans une fonction à Vacoas, que Port-Louis est en danger. Je le cite – 

« Nous devons … 

Je le cite… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Lisez le journal ‘Défi Quotidien’ d’hier. Je vous cite – 

(Interruptions) 

«Nous devons sauver Port-Louis ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Je vous cite - 

« Nous devons sauver Port-Louis en faisant tout pour que la capitale reste une ville 
vivante et touristique. » 

 

En ajoutant – 

104 

« Il faut sauver aussi Le Caudan. » 

Ces mots ont été prononcés par vous à Vacoas. 

(Interruptions) 

C’est clair que ce gouvernement est parfaitement conscient qu’en délocalisant … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  please!  Don’t  go  into  controversies.    If  you 
have  something  specific  to  address,  please  speak  about  that.  Don’t  go  into  controversial 
issues. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, I am not inventing anything. These words were 
said by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister.  Maybe, he has not heard himself.  It was said on Radio 
Plus.  I heard it! 

I heard it! 

I am not lying! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, I have asked you… 

(Interruptions) 

No crosstalking, please! I am on my feet! Hon. Ameer Meea, please sit down! You’ve got 
something  specific  to  address  at  adjournment  time.  Please  do  so  without  getting  into 
controversial issues. 

Mr Ameer Meea: But I am not lying.  This was said, and I heard it. J’ai mentionné 
plus haut que Port-Louis est destiné à devenir une ville morte, comme je l’ai prévenu depuis 
le mois de janvier. Ce qui me pousse à dire que c’est un  crime prémédité contre les port-
louisiens et les habitants des régions avoisinantes, d’autant plus que le plan de délocalisation 
du  gouvernement  déclenchera  un  effet  domino.  Les  unes  après  les  autres,  les  grosses  et 
moyennes entreprises vont bouger vers Heritage City pour être le plus près possible du centre 
administratif du pays. Sans l’ombre d’un doute, Port-Louis ne sera plus la principale source 

 

105 

d’emplois  directs  et  surtout  indirects  du  pays.  La  grosse  majorité  des  petits  commerces 
n’auront pas leur raison-d’être, ce qui fait que bon nombre de port-louisiens qui travaillaient 
… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Ameer Meea: … pour leur propre compte seront sans emploi. Certes, la décision 

du gouvernement va appauvrir la majorité des 150,000 habitants de Port-Louis. 

Ce  n’est  pas  un  port  modernisé  qui  pourra  compenser  l’ampleur  des  pertes  d’emplois. 
D’ailleurs, les récents chiffres officiels démontrent que le chômage est en constance hausse. 
C’est un héritage macabre que laissera ce gouvernement en fin de compte.  

En proposant de délocaliser l’Assemblée nationale, les ministères, la Cour suprême, le 
Prime Minister’s Office, tous ces symboles qui font de Port Louis sa raison-d’être, qu’est-ce 
qui  fait  en  contrepartie.  L’ancien  ministre  des  Finances  en  compagnie  du  ministre  des 
Infrastructures publiques, le ministre des Collectivités locales, Monsieur Gaëtan Siew avaient 
brandi l’investissement de R 52 milliards pour transformer Port Louis en un smart city. Mais, 
Madame la présidente, par qui, par le secteur privé !  

Alors, c’est le secteur privé qui va investir R 52 milliards dans le smart city à Port 
Louis. On peut se demander quelle est cette firme privée qui investira des milliards de roupies 
dans  Port  Louis  à  un  moment  où  l’Assemblée  nationale,  le  bureau  du  Premier  ministre  et 
plusieurs autres ministères vont s’installer à Heritage City. Il faut vraiment prendre des gens 
pour  des  demeurés.  Ce  n’est  que  du  bluff !  Plus  grave,  c’est  une  arnaque  contre  les 
Portlouisiens.  Comment  peut-on  faire  de  tels  investissements  et  en  même  temps  vider  la 
capitale ? Quel retour sur l’investissement peut attendre le secteur privé ? On cherche à jeter 
de la poudre aux yeux des Portlouisiens afin de mieux traficoter avec les biens publics, les 
joyaux  historiques  du  patrimoine  pour  faire  de  la  place  au  méga  projet  du  Heritage  et 
aménager des vested interests.  

Le  gouvernement  laisse  croire  que  les  300 000  m²  des  bureaux  vides  seront 
transformés  en  8,000  unités  résidentielles.  Cela  a  été  dit  par  les  honorables  ministres  qui 
avaient  fait  la  conférence  de  presse  par  rapport  à  Port  Louis.  D’où  sortiront  ces  8,000 
familles, Madame la présidente? Si Port Louis n’est plus la ville administrative de Port Louis, 
qui pourra acheter un logement de R 6 millions dans une ville morte, voire dans le Newton 
Tower, dans le Chancery House, dans le Emmanuel Anquetil Building ?. Est-ce que l’hôtel 

 

106 

du gouvernement, le Treasury Building seront transformés en hôtels ou en musées ? Il faut 
nous  expliquer  comment  les  régions  périphériques  de  la  capitale,  telles  que  Plaine  Verte, 
Vallée Pitot, Roche Bois, Cité la Cure, Cassis, Tranquebar, ainsi de suite, vont en tirer profit? 
Comment les gens des faubourgs vont être parties prenantes de ces développements fonciers? 
Comment des appartements au coût de R 6 à 10 millions vont les intéresser? Comment les 
emplois  vont  être  créés  par  milliers?  C’est  encore  des  rêves  qu’on  veut  vendre.  Avant  les 
élections, l’Alliance Lepep vendait des rêves, maintenant ils les offrent en cadeau !  

On  vient  d’annoncer  la  deuxième  phase  du  ring  road  à  coût  de  R  5  milliards  pour 
décongestionner Port Louis. À quoi sert-il d’investir autant d’argent dans un tel projet alors 
que  Port  Louis  ne  sera  plus  le  centre  administratif  du  pays ?  N’est-ce  pas  un  gaspillage 
d’argent ? D’autre part, le gouvernement a signé un contrat avec une compagnie privée en 
vue d’utiliser l’eau provenant des fonds marins pour refroidir les bâtiments de la capitale. À 
quoi sert-il d’avoir un tel projet si on vide de la capitale? Qu’est-ce qu’on doit refroidir? Peut-
être le port !  

Madame la présidente, durant la dernière campagne électorale, l’Alliance Lepep avait 

critiqué… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ameer Meea: L’Alliance Lepep avait critiqué le projet métro léger. Comme quoi 
ce n’était pas une priorité et que c’était du gaspillage des fonds publics. Le projet métro léger 
aurait créé des emplois et un développement durable et aurait bénéficié à toute la population, 
et surtout aurait hissé l’île Maurice à un autre niveau de développement.  

D’ailleurs, ce n’est pas moi qui le dis, dans un entretien du 29 février 2016 le Docteur 
Vasant Jogoo  dans  les  Défi  Quotidien  à  une  question,  dans  le  manifeste  électoral  du 
Mouvement  Socialiste  Militant  qui  dit  que  l’aménagement  du  territoire  sera  le  pivot  du 
développement durable. Il répond exactement, je cite - 

 «Je  me  demande  si  les  dirigeants  ont  lu  et  compris  cette  partie  du  programme. 
Manifestement, à l’intérieur de mon parti - parce qu’il est membre du MSM - il y a 
certains  qui  ne  sont  pas  sensibles  aux  préoccupations  nationales.  Je  dois  admettre 
qu’après 14 mois au pouvoir, le MSM n’a toujours pas compris ce qu’il a vendu à la 
population. »  

 

À une autre question -  

107 

« Est-ce que vous avez parlé au dirigeant? » 

 Il répond – 

 « Bien sûr ». 

 Et dire que cette somme colossale qui sera investie dans Heritage City aurait bien pu être 
utilisée  dans  des  projets  de  développement  économique  qui  d’une  part  consolidera  notre 
économie et d’autre part, créé des emplois durables.  

Ce gouvernement pèche dangereusement de par son incohérence et manque de vision. 
Le gouvernement Lepep est résolu à tuer Port Louis et par extension, les citadins, avec son 
projet de construire une nouvelle ville administrative à Heritage City pour que Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth  puisse  laisser  un  héritage,  telles  sont  les  paroles  du  ministre  de  la  bonne 
gouvernance. 

(Interruptions) 

Taler Vishnu pou occupe toi la! Alle lire l’affidavit la! 

Comme quoi, c’est la priorité… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t make remarks! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Comme  quoi  c’est  la  priorité  nationale  où  l’affaire  de  lance  du 
mirage  du  deuxième  miracle  économique !  C’est  grave  que  le  culte  de  la  personnalité  soit 
privilégié au détriment de l’intérêt de la nation. Au lieu de rétrograder… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Au  lieu  de  rétrograder  la  cité  de  Port  Louis  qui  regorge  des 
souvenirs et des symboles au niveau d’une simple ville portuaire, on devrait penser à toutes 
ces promesses faites à l’électorat urbain lors de la campagne électorale. Les gens pataugent 
toujours dans les eaux nauséabondes avec des matières fécales lors des pluies torrentielles. 
Les centres de refuge sont pris d’assaut à la moindre alerte. Les gens sont toujours en quête 
d’emploi.  Les  jeunes  se  morfondent  dans  l’oisiveté  fautent  d’une  politique  de  loisir  sain, 
digne de ce nom. La classe moyenne s’appauvrit davantage. 

 

108 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Tout  cela  est  devenu  soudain  le  cadet  des  soucis  de  nos 
gouvernants. Que représente une capitale sans son Parlement? Sauf sans le bureau du Premier 
ministre, sans centre administratif, pour tuer la capitale il n’y a pas mille façons. On n’a qu’à 
lui  priver  des  rôles  qu’elle  a  toujours  assumés,  on  a  qu’à  lui  ôter  son  âme.  Est-ce  par 
vengeance  politique  pour  avoir  fait  élire  quelques  députés  de  l’Opposition?  C’est  un  fait 
indéniable que dans presque tous les pays du monde le Parlement se trouve dans leur capitale. 
L’État  est  déjà  propriétaire  de  l’Assemblée  nationale  et  du  bâtiment  du  Trésor  qui  loge  le 
Prime Minister’s Office. Même le ministre des finances est logé au Government House. Ces 
bâtiments  historiques  ont  été  rénovés  à  grands  frais,  y  compris  le  bâtiment  du  Trésor,  le 
Parlement  à  plus  de  R  500  millions  et  avec  raison,  il  y  a  quelques  années  de  cela.  En 
faisant… 

(Interruptions) 

En faisant ce déménagement qui ne s’impose pas, le pays contracte une dette que les 
générations  futures  auront  à  rembourser.  Qu’est-ce  qu’on  va  faire  du  Parlement  et  du 
bâtiment du Trésor ?  Peut-être un musée ! L’hôtel du gouvernement va être transformé en 
quoi?  L’hôtel  du  gouvernement  sera  peut-être  transformé  en  un  hôtel  tout  court !  Avec  ce 
projet on s’attaque à des symboles historiques. Pourquoi les grandes nations entretiennent-
elles avec fierté les bâtiments qui symbolisent leurs histoires nationales? Parce que les lieux 
et bâtiments symboliques de la nation ne sont pas que des objets ! En tant que témoin de la 
naissance  de  la  nation,  ils  sont  investis  d’une  puissance  de  représentation.  Ce  sont  des 
symboles majeurs au cœur de la capitale du pays et qui lui procuraient son identité, son fierté. 
Le déplacement des lieux de l’exercice du pouvoir et de l’État-nation tels que le Parlement et 
le siège du  gouvernement constituerait une atteinte profonde  et irrémédiable à la nationale 
mauricienne. Et là, Madame la présidente, dans une interview du Business Mag, L’architecte 
Gaëtan Siew avait suggéré que dans plusieurs autres villes dans le monde il y a eu la création 
des nouvelles villes.  

Il  avait  notamment  cité  le  Brazilia  au  Brésil,  Canberra  en  Australie,  Cape  Town  en  Sud-
Afrique.    Mais,  Madame  la  présidente,  en  Brésil,  il  y  a  200  millions  d’habitants  avec  une 
superficie de 8.5 millions de kilomètres carrés et l’Australie en elle-même… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

109 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  …est  un  continent  et  l’Afrique  du  Sud  a  une  superficie  d’un 
million de kilomètres carrés avec 53 millions d’habitants.  Ce n’est pas comparable.  A l’île 
Maurice, on est que 2000 kilomètres carrés et 1.3 millions d’habitants.  We must compare like 
with like.  Il n’y a aucune comparaison.  Dans ces pays-là, il y avait raison pour faire une 
autre ville. Il y avait des aspects, des facteurs socio-économiques… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, can I just stop you because you know we have 
got only 30 minutes for adjournment time.  If your speech is too long, you won’t give ample 
time to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply.  We have got only up to 6.10 p.m. So, would you 
wind up, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Madam Speaker, I have only two minutes left.  Mostly I have 15 

minutes. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, but you will have to wind up because we have got only 30 
minutes for adjournment time and we are ending at 6.10 p.m.  So, I think it is only fair that 
the hon. Prime Minister also has ample time to reply to you.  So, wind up, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Yes, I am almost done. I will need only two minutes.  Il y avait 
des  facteurs  socio-économiques  tels  que  le  climat  extrême,  les  conditions  sismiques, 
l’environnement naturel, les mains d’œuvres et plusieurs autres facteurs.  Et d’après ce même 
magazine, je cite – 

« Avec la délocalisation (…) ». 

Madam Speaker:  I am sorry.  I’ll have to interrupt the hon. Member now. 

(Interruptions) 

It’s already 5.55 p.m.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister will need ample time to reply.   

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry.  But in half an hour, I don’t think the Rt. hon. Prime Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

Because you have to be fair to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister also!  

(Interruptions) 

 

110 

You have asked time; you have been given ample time.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister needs 
time also to reply.  It is already 6.00 p.m. We have got only ten minutes. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Madam Speaker, I need only one minute.  

Madam Speaker:  Sorry, I have given my ruling! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Donc, en conclusion… 

Madam Speaker: I have already given my ruling.  

(Interruptions) 

The floor is yours Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: We have 30 minutes.  I told you I need only one minute. 

Madam Speaker:  No, you don’t have 30 minutes for yourself!  You have taken most 

of the 30 minutes for you.  So, please sit down! 

(Interruptions) 

Sit down when I speak! Now it is for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply. 

(Interruptions) 

(5.56 p.m.) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  his 

intervention… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Excuse me!  But the hon. Member can’t say whether I am fair or I 

am unfair.  I am doing my job! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: …because it gives me the opportunity to put forward the whole 

situation in its right perspective.  

In my Economic Mission Statement, I announced that an important component of our 
innovation strategy is to transform Mauritius into a SMART island, an evolution of the Cyber 
Island I envisioned in 2001, which would make us a model for innovation in this part of the 
world.  

111 

 
Our aim is to embed the use of technology in the day to day life of every Mauritian. 
This  would  imply  that  Government  services,  businesses,  lifestyle  as  well  as  our  physical 
infrastructures would be centered around digital infrastructure. 

In the Government Programme 2015-2019, I had announced that a new strategic land 
use  planning  framework  will  be  developed  to  achieve  major  social  and  development 
objectives.  In  this  context,  my  Government  will  revisit  and  unlock  several  investment 
projects that have been stuck in the pipeline for too long. Highlands City was one of the three 
major projects which had not been able to lift off under the Labour regime. 

The House may recall that in 2001, under the Illovo deal, Government acquired the 
plot of land to an extent of 3000 acres in Highlands for a specific purpose of creating a new 
City. It was not meant to be kept under cane cultivation forever. Unfortunately, the previous 
Government  has  failed  in  its  attempts  to  execute  the  Highlands  City  Project  in  spite  of 
significant resources spent on Master Planning. 

This year, Government will be embarking on mega projects involving Heritage City 

and Smart Cities.  

These will be designed with 4 key focus objectives, namely: ecological sustainability; 
economic competitiveness; digital connectivity; with an improved quality of life within the 
“Live, Work and Play” concept. 

The ‘Heritage City’ is one of the first components of the integrated development of 
the 3000 acres of land acquired in Highlands. Government has decided that the Ministry of 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms would be responsible for the 
development of the ‘Heritage City’ Project on a plot of land of 336 acres (141 Hectares) out 
of the said 3000 acres.  

In this context, Government has approved the setting up of Heritage City Co. Ltd, a 

wholly owned State corporation, for the implementation of this project.  

The ‘Heritage City’ site is situated opposite Ebène Cybercity, at Minissy, on the left 
of Bagatelle Dam. The master plan has been conceptualised and the ‘Heritage City’ will be an 
‘ellipse shape’ symbolising the unity of public and private dimensions, with an International 
Convention Centre placed at the fulcrum of the ellipse, joining the public buildings and the 
commercial half.  

112 

 
The ‘Heritage City’ represents the synthesis of the civic world  and the commercial 
domain, public spirit and local community. It will unify a complex mix of uses, people and 
institutions  and  involve  the  construction  of  a  new  iconic  Parliament  Building;  Prime 
Minister’s Office; six (6) Government office buildings with high-end ICT and E-Governance 
infrastructure and data centres; a new International Convention Centre; mixed-use retail and 
commercial  centres,  and  affordable  mid-scale,  upper-scale  apartments,  town-homes  and 
villas. 

The  objective  of  my  Government  is  to  create  an  integrated  development  for  the 
current and future working generation in a ‘Live, Work and Play’ environment that serves a 
range  of  people  including:  students;  young  professionals;  public  officials;  families  with 
children; retired persons and high net worth investors in Mauritius.  

The  project  value  for  the  construction  of  the  new  Parliament  Building;  Prime 
Minister’s  Office;  Government  buildings;  Civic  and  Cultural  Arts  facilities;  the  Pedestrian 
Spine, and infrastructure for the whole site is estimated at USD 375 million (approximately 
Rs13.1 billion) which will be financed through the issue of cumulative redeemable preference 
shares issued by Heritage City Co. Ltd at a defined coupon rate and a syndicated loan with a 
consortium  of  leading  local  banks  in  Mauritius.  It  is  worthy  to  note  that  the  capital 
expenditure  of  this  project  is  not  being  financed  from  the  Consolidated Fund,  as  has  been 
wrongly reported in certain quarters. 

The  New  International  Convention  Centre  will  in  addition  cost  around  USD  50 

million which will be financed through an existing line of credit currently available. 

With regard to the private, residential and commercial phase of the project, this will 
be executed under the “Vente en Etat Future d’Achèvement” (VEFA) model and will include 
mid-scale apartments; upper scale apartments; town-homes; villas; two hotels, and mix-use 
retail facilities.  

The  overall  impact  on  economic  growth  as  a  result  of  the  implementation  of  the 
‘Heritage City’ project is expected to be: 0.2% in 2016; 0.8% in 2017; 0.9% in 2018; 0.4% in 
2019 and 0.3% in 2020. 

Concerning  Port  Louis,  the  Opposition  and  certain  quarters  have  been  peddling 
untruths to the effect that the whole public administration would be leaving Port Louis and 
the Supreme Court and the Judiciary will also move out of Port Louis, thus turning Port Louis 
into a ghost city. Nothing could be further away from the truth. 

113 

 
I wish to reiterate to the House what I said on previous occasions that Port Louis will 
remain the Capital City of Mauritius. In fact, Port Louis will be a more lively, vibrant and 
dynamic City. Instead of being just a business centre, which stops at 5 p.m., Port Louis will 
be also enhanced into a buoyant touristic and cultural destination. 

With the execution of the ‘Heritage City’ project, it is estimated that not more than 
2,500  civil  servants  currently  working  in  Port  Louis  is  expected  to  relocate  to  the  new 
Government Buildings in Heritage City. 

In fact, if this relocation is not effected, Port Louis will be completely overcrowded 
and congested by 2020. We can also imagine what Port Louis would have been like today, if 
I did not have the vision to create the Ebene Cybercity 15 years ago.  

Any  reduction  of  activities  due  to  the  relocation  of  some  government  offices  from 
Port Louis City centre to Heritage City will be more than offset by the additional business 
and  economic  opportunities  arising  from  new  commercial,  leisure,  cultural  and  touristic 
activities and events we are now going to create for Port Louis, our capital city. 

I also wish to emphasise that the social and economic impact of ‘Heritage City’, will 
be further addressed as part of the EIA process which is underway and for which consultants 
have been appointed. 

Furthermore, an Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee will be responsible to chart the 
development  and  implementation  of  the  Port  Louis  2030  Master  Plan.  This  Steering 
Committee will have wide consultations with all stakeholders. 

And, I must, before ending, state emphatically that nothing will stop us going ahead 

with the Heritage City. 

At 6.10 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising adjourned to Tuesday 12 April 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ICTA – LEGAL ADVISORS – APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/87)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Information Communications Technology Authority, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

114 

date of appointment thereof; 
fees payable thereto, and 
amount claimed and paid thereto as at to date, and 

the names of the legal advisors whose services are presently retained thereat, 
indicating in each case the – 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
if the services of Mr K. T. as legal adviser has been retained thereat and, if so, 
indicate the – 
(i) 
(ii) 

period concerned therewith, and 
total amount of fees paid therefor. 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Officer-in-Charge of 
the Information and Communication Technologies Authority that the Authority is currently 
retaining the services of Mr Roshan Rajroop, Attorney at Law.  He is providing his services 
to the Authority since 01 July 2015. 

For the period 01 July 2015 to 31 January 2016, an amount of Rs473,750 has been 
paid to Mr Rajroop for legal services.  The total amount of legal fees claimed and not yet paid 
to Mr Rajroop by the ICTA amount to Rs609,000. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Officer-in-Charge of ICTA 
that the Authority retained the services of Mr T. from 22 May 2015 to 21 March 2016.  The 
total amount of fees claimed and paid to Mr T. for that period amount to Rs3,314,895. 

BANKS – TOXIC LOANS 

(No. B/88) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the banks in which Government is a shareholder, he will state if he will consider 
introducing amendments to the existing legislation with a view to prevent the recurrence of 
the state of affairs that prevailed thereat regarding the toxic loans and the writing off of debts 
and, if so, indicate if provision will also be made for the – 

(a) 
(b) 

possibility of recouping the loans, and 
said amendments to have retroactive effect over the past seven years. 

(Withdrawn) 

MEDIA TRUST – BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

115 

 
(No.  B/89)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Media Trust, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the date of appointment of the Board of Trustees thereof, indicating – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

(d) 

the composition thereof; 
the number of meetings held to date; 
if it has presented a report on the evaluation of the profession of journalists, 
and 
if new regulations will be proposed therefor. 

Reply: At the very outset, let me point out that the Media Trust was inactive since 

2006. 

In my reply to Parliamentary Question No. B/316 on 28 April 2015, I informed the 

House that the Board of the Media Trust was being reconstituted. 

The Board of Trustees of the Media Trust for the Years 2015-2016 was reconstituted 

on 24 June 2015 and the Trust is fully operational. 

In regard to part (a) of the Question, the composition of the Board of Trustees is as 

follows: 

Mr  Lindsay  Rivière,  an  experienced  media  professional,  is  the  Chairperson  of  the 

Board. 

The other Members are - 

(a)  Mr  Oodaye  Prakash  Seebaluck,  Assistant  Director,  Government  Information 

Service; 

(b)  Mr  Vikraj  Ramkhelawon,  Analyst,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development; 

(c)  Mr Louis Jacques Gabriel Maunick, Representative of the Electronic Media; 

(d)  Ms Michaella Seblin, Editor-in-Chief, 5 Plus, Representative of the Press; 

(e)  Mr Rabin Bhujun, Editor-in-Chief, ION NEWS, Representative of the Press; 

(f)  Mr Jean-Luc Emile, Journalist, Defi Media, Representative of the Press; and 

 
(g)  Mr  Patrick  Sylvano  St  Pierre,  Journalist,  L’Express,  Representative  of  the 

116 

Press. 

The  Chairperson  and  the  representatives  of  both  the  print  and  electronic  media  are 
serving on the Media Trust Board on a voluntary basis.  Hence, no fee is being paid to them 
even though they are entitled to it. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, as at date, the Board has held sixteen meetings. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, let me recall that, by virtue of Section 4 of the 
Media Trust Act, the Trust has been set up to, inter alia, cater for the training needs of the 
local media.  As such, the Media Trust constantly monitors the standards and training needs 
of the profession.  It is not a Regulatory Body and it is not within its mandate to formally 
evaluate the profession of Journalists and to submit written report thereon. 

In  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Media  Trust  that  new 

regulations are not necessary to further its current objectives and mission. 

 

 

LAND RESEARCH AND MEDIATION UNIT – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/90)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Land Research and Mediation Unit, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the –  

(a) date of the setting up thereof; 
(b) composition thereof, and  
(c)  number  of  inquiries  carried  out  on  land  transactions  as  at  to  date,  indicating  in 

each case, the outcome thereof. 

Reply  (Deputy  Prime  Minister):  I  shall  reply  to  part  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question 

together.   
 
I wish to refer the hon. Member to the Statement I made at the sitting of 17 November 
2015 whereat I informed the House of the setting of the Land Research and Mediation Unit 
with effect from 16 November 2015 and comprising of - 

•  Mr Mahmad Rehan Mandary, former Deputy Chief Surveyor, Head of the Unit; 

 

117 

•  Mrs. How Man Youn Koo Yuk Cheong - retired Deputy Registrar, Registrar 

General’s Office; 

•  Mr Hunchun Gunesh – Attorney on a part-time basis, and  

•  Mr Ahmade Akhtar Andoo, Land Surveyor, seconded by the Ministry of Housing and 

Lands on a part-time basis. 

I am informed by the Head of the Land Research and Mediation Unit that there are 
 
424 cases of land dispute which have been referred to the Unit where inquiries have been/ are 
being carried out. Out of these cases: 
 

•  69 cases have been found to be non-land issues and have been set aside. 
•  95 cases have been set aside after investigations. 
•  32 have been assisted to build up their case and advised to contact a legal advisor to 

seek redress in the Supreme Court.  

•  11 cases are pending before the Supreme Court and in 1 case a judgement has been 

• 
• 

delivered where the case has been dismissed. 
In 8 cases the dispute has been resolved. 
In the remaining cases investigations and searches are ongoing. 
 
I am tabling a summary of the cases examined by the Unit. 

 

I  would  also  like  to  inform  the  House  that  this  whole  exercise  is  proving  to  be  a 
tedious task as most of the cases of land dispute date to more than 100 years back.  The land 
searches involve careful examination and interpretation of title deeds and plans.  The Unit has 
first to interview the complainants and gather as much information from them and thereafter 
carry  out  intensive  searches  in  different  land  register  kept  in  different  format  by  different 
organisation such as the Registrar General’s Office, the National Archives, the Ministry of 
Housing and Lands, Municipal Councils and the Sugar Insurance Fund Board. After having 
examined and verified the various transactions involved, the Unit is required to trace back all 
the heirs of the ancestors and draw up the genealogical tree.  It is to be noted that during the 
French period, land  records were kept at the National Archives and  when the  British took 
over the island the land transactions were  effected and archived  at the  Registrar General`s 
Office. 

118 

 
 
As the House will note that this exercise is very complex which is time consuming 
and  requires  a  lot  of  resources.  My  Ministry  is  already  incurring  a  recurrent  monthly 
expenditure amounting to more than Rs300,000 for the functioning of the Unit, which clearly 
demonstrates  the  will  of  this  Government  to  bring  some  relief  to  those  who  have  been 
dispossessed of their properties and to give them the necessary advice and assistance in their 
quest to recovering back their land. 

 

However,  towards  the  end  of  the  year,  I  shall  review  the  situation  and 

determine whether the Land Research and Mediation Unit should be continued into 2017 

BANK OF MAURITIUS – NET PROFIT & DIVIDEND 

(No.  B/91)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Bank of Mauritius, he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the amount of 
– 
(i) 
(ii) 

net profit made, and 
dividend  paid  to  Government  since  2012,  indicating  the  estimates 
thereof for the year 2015-2016, and 

(b) 

state – 
(i) 

how the change, if any, in the net profit made and the dividend paid to 
Government since 2012 would impact the current budget. 

Reply: With regard to part (a)(i) of the question, I am informed that for the financial 
years ending June 2012 and 2013, the Bank of Mauritius realised net profits of Rs395 m. and 
Rs70 m., respectively. 

For  the  years  ended  June  2014  and  2015,  the  Central  Bank  incurred  net  losses  of 

Rs218 m. and Rs284 m., respectively. 

For the current financial year, it is expected that the Bank of Mauritius will continue 

to make a loss. 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, in accordance with Section 11(3) of Bank 
of Mauritius Act, an  amount of Rs336 m. and Rs60 m. for financial  years 2012 and 2013 
were transferred as dividends to the Consolidated Fund respectively. 

 
For financial years 2014 and 2015, no dividend has been paid in view of the losses. 

119 

As regards part (b) of the question, there has been a negative impact on the Budget 
since  there  has  been  a  shortfall  of  some  Rs336  m.  as  dividend  receipt  from  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius compared to the year 2012. 

HELICOPTERS – HON. MINISTERS – COST 

(No.  B/92)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the helicopters, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of times honourable Ministers have 
made use thereof since December 2014 to date, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

name of the honourable Minister; 

purpose thereof, and 

cost thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that since December 2014 to 01 

April 2016, Police helicopters had been used on eight occasions as follows:- 

(a) (i) 

on  30  April  2015,  hon.  J.  R.  Dayal,  then  Minister  of  Environment, 
Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management effected an 
aerial survey at Roches Noires following environmental concerns raised by 
inhabitants in connection with the Smart City Project and also to assess the 
environmental impact of an application for the extension of the Azuri IRS 
Villa Complex.  The cost of the trip amounted to Rs46,575; 

      (ii)  Hon.  Dayal  also  used  the  Police  helicopter  on  10  February  2016,  in  his 
capacity  as  Chairperson  of  the  National  Disaster  Crisis  Committee,  to 
assess the flooding island-wide following the heavy rainfall.  It was free of 
charge as it was considered a case of national security; 

(b) 

on 30 July 2015, hon. A. Wong Yen Cheong, Minister of Civil Service and 
Administrative  Reforms,  used  the  helicopter  for  an  official  visit  of  a 
Senegalese delegation.  The cost amounted to Rs37,375; 

 
(c)  (i) 

120 

on  26  August  2015,  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  and  hon.  S.  Baboo, 
Minister of Arts and Culture accompanied H.E. the President of Ghana who 
was on a State Visit to Mauritius. The costs were waived. 

       (ii)  Hon. Duval also used the helicopter on 12 January 2016 to effect a visit to 
Round  Island  for  the  shooting  of  a  reportage  on  Mauritius.    The  cost 
amounted to Rs 92,000; 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

on  01  October  2015,  hon.  M.  Seerattun,  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and 
Food  Security  effected  a  site  visit  to  Gabriel  Island  and  the  cost  was 
Rs164,833; 

on 25 October 2015, hon. S. Soodhun, Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of 
Housing  and  Lands  and  hon.  S.  Bhadain,  Minister  of  Financial  Services, 
Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, accompanied the Minister of 
Finance  of  Saudi  Arabia  who  was  on  an  official  visit.    The  costs  were 
waived because of the foreign guest, and 

on 29 January 2016, hon. E. Sinatambou, then Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Regional Integration and International Trade, effected a trip in the context 
of  the  reactive  monitoring  mission  of  Le  Morne.    The  cost  amounted  to 
Rs53,666. 

ICTA – OFFENCES  

(No.  B/93)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  offences  under  the  Information  Communication  and  Technology 
Act,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  reported  cases  thereof  since  December  2014  to  date, 
indicating the number of – 

(a) 
(b) 

arrests effected in connection therewith, and 
convictions secured in relation thereto. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that from 01 December 2014 to 
31 March 2016, 1,315 cases have been reported to the Police relating to offences committed 

 

121 

under the Information and Communication Technologies Act.  The offences include the use 
of abusive language on mobile phones, harassment, sending indecent messages and causing 
annoyance, amongst others. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that so far - 

(i) 

49 persons have been arrested in connection with these cases and 4 of them 
have already been convicted; 

(ii) 

208 cases have been disposed by Police, and 

(iii) 

1,107 cases are still under investigation. 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY – MAURITIAN CREOLE LANGUAGE 

(No. B/94) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the proposition for the introduction of the Mauritian Creole language in the course 
of the proceedings and debates of the National Assembly, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  The  proposal  for  the  introduction  of  the  Mauritian  Creole  language  in  the 
course  of  the  proceedings  and  debates  of  the  National  Assembly  has  been  the  subject  of 
several Parliamentary Questions in the past. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  section  49  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  the  official 
language  of  the  Assembly  shall  be  English,  but  any  Member  may  address  the  Chair  in 
French. 

Standing  Order  5  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National  Assembly 
provides that the proceedings and debates of the Assembly shall be in English language, but a 
Member may address the Assembly in French. 

As  already  indicated  in  reply  to  previous  Parliamentary  Questions  on  this  subject 
matter, there are a number of issues that would need to be addressed before contemplating the 
formal use of the Mauritian Creole language in the National Assembly. 

As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  will  never  accept  to  introduce  Creole  language  in  the 

National Assembly. 

TERRORISM - LEGISLATION 

122 

 
(No.  B/95)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to counter-terrorism, he will state if measures have been taken at national 
level to avert against terrorist threats and attacks from the Daesch organisation, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

if  there  exists  any  agreement  for  information  sharing  and  mutual  help  with 
friendly countries in relation thereto; 
if  the  existing  legislation  in  relation  thereto  requires  to  be  toughened  in  the 
wake of the rise of the Daesch organisation, and 
the  number  of  Mauritian  nationals  presumed  to  have  joined  the  said 
organisation as at to date. 

Reply: It is an undeniable fact that terrorism remains a global security challenge that 
threatens  and  violates  the  basic  precepts  of  democracy.    It  constitutes  a  threat  not  only  to 
peace and security, but also to the economic development and social harmony of a country.  
Recent  terrorist  attacks  have  demonstrated  that  no  country  is  immune  from  the  threat  of 
terrorism. 

Mauritius  is  no  exception  given  our  strategic  position  in  the  Indian  Ocean  coupled 
with being a well-known tourist destination with open and direct air and maritime access to 
many  countries.    Hence,  there  is  need  to  constantly  reinforce  measures  to  reduce  our 
vulnerability while at the same time, increase our ability to respond effectively during period 
of heightened alert. 

Since I took office as Prime Minister in December 2014, I have constantly laid stress 
on the importance of enhancing security of the nation, inasmuch, the Government Programme 
2015-2019, has highlighted that my Government is fully committed to guaranteeing security 
and law and order to the citizens of the country and foreigners as well. 

I can assure the hon. Member and the House at large that my Government is leaving 

no stone unturned to combat terrorism. 

However, as the question of the hon. Member relates to State Security, it will not be 

appropriate to divulge the measures being taken. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  consideration  is  being  given  to  amend  the 
Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act  so  as  to  reinforce  the  legal  framework  against  terrorism  and 
related matters. 

123 

 
In regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that according to our 
intelligence agencies, the presence of Mauritian citizens in the war zones of the ISIS has been 
reported.    However,  it  would  not  be  proper  for  the  time  being  to  give  the  number  with 
exactitude as confirmation from the concerned authorities is still being awaited. 

SMART CITY PROJECTS – IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/96) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the implementation of the thirteen employment rich megaprojects, including eight 
smart cities on 7,000 acres of land with expected private investment of MUR 120 billion, as 
announced in the 2015-2016 Budget Speech, he will, in each case, state where matters stand. 

Reply: The information requested is being tabled. 

BOULOUX DROP IN CENTRE - METHADONE BENEFICIARRIES 

(No. B/97) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard  to  methadone  distribution,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if the local residents of Douglas Street, Cassis, in 
Port Louis and the parents of schoolchildren thereat and in the vicinity thereof have reported 
cases  of  alleged  misbehaviour  of  the  groups  of  people  who  assemble  thereat  to  receive 
methadone and have requested for the regular presence of police officers thereat to ensure the 
safety and security of the said residents and schoolchildren and, if so, indicate the measures 
taken in relation thereto if any, and if not, why not. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that there have been no cases of 
alleged misbehaviours of methadone beneficiaries of Bouloux Drop In Centre reported to the 
Police  by  residents  of  Douglas  Street,  Cassis  or  from  parents  of  children  attending 
Seeneevassen Government School. 

However, I am informed that the Secretary of the Forces Vives Les Salines has in a 
letter dated on 05 February 2016 addressed to the Commissioner of Police and the Ministry 
of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  complained  of  inconveniences  caused  by  methadone 
beneficiaries of Bouloux Drop In Centre to residents of Les Salines. 

124 

 
I am further informed by Police that following the complaint, a meeting was held with 
representatives of Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, Police Department and the Forces 
Vives Les Salines.  The latter made a proposal for the shifting of the methadone distribution 
from  Bouloux  Drop  In  Centre  to  Bain  des  Dames  Police  Station.    This  request  was  not 
acceded to because of the lack of space at the Police Station. 

In  order  to  ensure  safety  and  security  of  the  inhabitants  in  that  area,  Police  has 
reinforced  its  presence  during  methadone  distribution  at  Bouloux  Drop  In  Centre.  The 
measures taken include the following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

foot and mobile patrols by the personnel of the Bain des Dames Police Station, 
Divisional Support Unit and Emergency Response Service; 

deployment  of  Central  Investigation  Division  team  to  prevent  and  detect 
illegal activities, and 

discreet  surveillance  and  regular  patrol  by  ADSU  team  with  a  view  to 
identifying any suspicious and irregular activities. 

 

GOVERNMENT OF MAURITIUS – LEGAL ADVISERS – APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/98) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard  to  the  legal  advisers  whose  services  have  been  retained  by  Government  since 
December 2014 to date, he will give a list thereof, indicating in each case, the – 

(a) 
(b) 

date of appointment thereof, and 
terms and conditions of contract thereof. 

Reply: The information requested by the hon. Member is being tabled. 

MINISTERS – CODE OF CONDUCT 

(No.  B/99)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Ministers, he will state if he proposes to introduce a code of conduct 
therefor,  as  is  the  case  in  most  OECD  countries,  following  the  recent  cases  of  corruption 

 

125 

related inquiries initiated by  the  Independent Commission against Corruption in respect of 
two of them. 

Reply: The elaboration of a Code of Conduct for Ministers is indeed being envisaged 
in  line  with  our  commitment  to  demonstrate  exemplary  governance  in  the  management  of 
public affairs and achieve meaningful change. 

LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE COMMISSION – MR R. R. – POLICE 

INQUIRY 

(No. B/100) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to Mr R. R., member of the Local Government Service Commission, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 
where matters regarding the police inquiries initiated against him, indicating if the latter is 
presently on bail in respect of any one of them and, if so, give details thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  inquiries  have  been 

initiated in 16 cases in which Mr R. R. is involved as a suspect. 

In  all  16  cases,  Mr  R.  R.  was  arrested  on  provisional  charge  for  the  offence  of 
‘swindling’  and  was  released  on  bail.    In  13  cases,  after  having  furnished  a  surety  of 
Rs15,000 and entering into a recognisance of debt of Rs100,000, he was ordered by Court to 
report to Rose Belle Police Station on every Wednesday at any time between 06.00 hours to 
18.00 hours. 

In the remaining three cases, he has furnished a surety of Rs10,000 and entered into a 

recognizance of Rs100,000; and has also paid an amount of Rs400 as costs. 

I  am  also  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  as  at  date,  the  provisional 
charge in 6 cases have been struck out by Court and as such Mr R.R. is still on bail in respect 
of 10 cases. 

The Commissioner of Police has further informed that enquiry has been completed in 
15 cases and will soon be referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice.  In one 
case, enquiry is still ongoing. 

I have been made to understand that the said Mr R. R is no longer a member of the 

Local Government Service Commission since 31 March 2016. 

 

126 

NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - FUNCTIONS 

 (No. B/101) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, following the remarks made by the learned Judges in their judgment in the Supreme 
Court case of the Director of Public Prosecutions v Jugdawoo & Ors 2016, in particular, for 
the  need  to  have  in  place  an  effective  law  enforcement  agency  for  the  prevention, 
investigation and punishment of violation of human rights, he will state the measures, if any, 
he proposes to take in relation thereto. 

Reply:  Government  has  already  put  in  place  the  necessary  legal  and  institutional 
framework to safeguard the human rights of both our citizens and non-citizens living in the 
country. 

The  National  Human  Rights  Commission  which  operates  under  the  Protection  of 
Human Rights Act provides for the protection and promotion of human rights in Mauritius. 
The Act was amended in 2012 so as to broaden the role of the Commission by setting up a 
Human Rights Division, a Police Complaints Division and a National Preventive Mechanism 
Division, within the Commission. 

The functions of the Human Rights Division include the promotion of human rights 
and the harmonisation of national legislation and practices with international human rights 
instruments. 

As regards the Police Complaints Division it has been empowered to investigate into 
complaints  made  against  Police  Officers,  other  than  allegations  of  corruption  and  money 
laundering. The Division can also investigate into the death of a person occurring in Police 
custody  or  as  a  result  of  Police  action  and  can  advise  on  ways  in  which  any  Police 
misconduct may be addressed. 

The  National  Prevention  Mechanism  Division  has  been  set  up  to  give  effect  to  the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment, to which Mauritius is a Party. The Division has as main functions: 

(i) 

the sensitisation of Prison Officers on the need for a human rights approach 
towards detainees; 

(ii) 

to assess prisons’ facilities and make recommendations thereon, and 

 
(iii) 

127 

to  conduct  thorough  investigations  into  allegations  of  violence  against 
detainees. 

I am, however, advised that it would be against established practice, as advocated by the 
Paris  Principles  to  which  we  adhere,  for  national  human  rights  institutions  or  any  other 
human  rights  agency  to  be  mandated  to  punish  human  rights  violations.  There  are  other 
existing  mechanisms  such  as  the  Judiciary  or  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission 
which are empowered by law to consider inflicting punishments. 

I also wish to inform the House that my Office has already initiated the required action 
for the setting up of an Independent Police Complaints Commission to be chaired by a former 
Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  with  a  view  to  further  ensuring  that  the  human  rights  of  our 
citizens are respected, as announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019.  The draft 
Bill for its setting up is being finalised and will soon be introduced in the National Assembly. 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE – BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 

(No. B/102) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the budgetary provisions for the fiscal year 2015-2016, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

the amount thereof spent – 
(i) 

for capital expenditure in absolute terms and both as a ratio of Gross 
Domestic Products and of total expenditure, and 
to date by each Ministry and 

(ii) 
if the total amount thereof is expected to be spent by the end of the said fiscal 
year. 

Reply: With regard to part (a)(i) of the question, the total amount spent for capital 
expenditure during the period 01 July 2015 to 31 March 2016 stood at Rs6.6 billion.  This 
represents 1.6% of the estimated GDP and 41% of the total capital expenditure for fiscal year 
2015-2016. 

In  respect  of  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  the  information  on  the  amount  spent  on 

capital expenditure by each Ministry and Department is being tabled. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, there is indication that, as in previous years, there 
would  be  some  under-spending  of  around  10  percent  in  the  capital  budget  mainly  due  to 

 

128 

implementation delays regarding certain projects.  The updated revised estimates for capital 
expenditure will be available and published in the 2016-2017 Budget documents. 

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL – INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/103) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW &Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the proposed introduction of a Freedom of Information Bill to promote 
transparency and accountability in public administration, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  In  my  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/475  on  15  September  2015,  I 
informed the House that, although many jurisdictions have adopted a Freedom of Information 
Act, the nature and scope of such a legislation is still evolving and that once the necessary 
groundworks  are  completed,  my  Office  will  give  drafting  instructions  to  the  Attorney-
General’s Office to proceed with the preparation of the Bill. 

As publicly announced on 22 January 2016, drafting instructions have already been 

given to the Attorney-General’s Office to proceed with the preparation of the Bill. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  that  the  drafting  exercise  is  in 

progress. 

I wish to reiterate that all stakeholders will be consulted prior to the introduction of 

the Bill in the National Assembly. 

CAMP LA PAILLE, BAMBOUS – INHABITANTS - RELOCATION 

(No. B/111) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the squatters of 
Camp  La  Paille,  in  Bambous,  and  the  proposed  relocation  thereof  in  the  region  of  Beaux 
Songes, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  In  the  context  of  the  rehabilitation  of  the  La  Ferme  Dam  Project  by  the 
Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  72  families  living  at  Camp  La  Paille  in  Bambous 
need to be relocated. 

Following  an  exercise  carried  out  in  2011,  these  families  were  to  be  relocated  as 

follows - 

•  17 to a site at Camp Le Vieux and; 
•  55 to a plot of State Land at Bambous behind the Black River District Council  

 
In the same Year 2011, my Ministry issued letters of intent for the grant of a building 

129 

site lease to the 72 beneficiaries out of whom 42 have already signed their lease agreement.  

Subsequently, it was found that development of the two sites at Camp Le Vieux and 
Bambous would have involved high infrastructural costs and I am informed that in November 
2014,  it  was  decided  not  to  go  ahead  with  the  project.    Nevertheless  despite  the  fact  that 
infrastructural facilities had not been provided, 14 families have started construction or have 
completed construction of their housing units on the site at Bambous.  

The remaining 58 families will be relocated over a plot of land of an extent of 5A23P 

at Beau Songes, acquired from Medine Ltd under the Government-MSPA Agreement.   

My Ministry has initiated necessary action for the provision of infrastructure facilities 

on the site at Beau Songes.  

BLACK RIVER - DOLPHIN & WHALE WATCHING  

(No. B/112) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  whether,  in 
regard to dolphin watch in the region of Black River, he will state if his Ministry proposes to 
review the regulations in relation thereto. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that the Tourism Authority (Dolphin and Whale 
Watching)  Regulations  were  promulgated  in  November  2012  to  regulate  the  Dolphin  and 
Whale Watching activities, minimise disturbance to cetaceans and ensure safety and security 
of all stakeholders involved therein. However, the implementation of the regulations met with 
strong resistance from the Federation of Pleasure craft operators as the prescribed fees were 
felt to be exorbitant. 

Accordingly, my Ministry has, after consultation with the Federation of Pleasure craft 
operators,  amended  the  regulations  on  01  December  2015  to  reduce  the  licence  fee  from 
Rs10,000 to a token amount of Rs500 per annum. 

The  Tourism  Authority  (Dolphin  and  Whale  Watching)  Regulations  2012  make 

provision for, inter alia - 

(i) 

Issuance of  a Tourist Enterprise  Licence for Dolphin and Whale Watching 
and Dolphin and Whale Watching with Swimming; 
Regulated hours of swimming with dolphins; 

(ii) 
(iii)  Requirement  of  the  skipper  to  hold  a  certificate  in  dolphin  and  whale 

watching; 

130 

 
(iv)  Compliance with a Code of Conduct; 
(v) 
Use of safety and security equipment; 
(vi)  Recruitment of a life saver, and 
(vii)  Labelling of the craft to facilitate enforcement. 

However, I am informed by the Tourism Authority that no applications for a Tourist 
Enterprise  Licence  (TEL)  for  Dolphin  and  Whale  Watching  and  Dolphin  and  Whale 
Watching with Swimming, have been received so far. 

 I  am  also  informed  that  the  Chairman  and  Members  of  the  Board  of  the  Tourism 
Authority, along with officials of the Tourism Authority, effected a site visit on 16 January 
2016 from Wolmar, Flic-en-Flac to Pointe Moyenne which is located between Albion  and 
Flic-en-Flac to make an assessment of the situation. Following the site visit, the Board of the 
Tourism Authority proposed that the region stretching from Pointe Moyenne to Tamarin, be 
declared as a Dolphin and Whale Park. 

The proposed park will be a demarcated zone of a width of 200 metres seawards from 
the barrier reefs, where a speed limit of 5 knots will be introduced. The zone will be solely 
restricted to dolphin and whale watching and swimming with dolphin, as nautical activities, 
and all stakeholders will have to abide by a strict Code of Conduct. 

This proposal is currently being examined at the level of my Ministry. It is expected 

that a new regulation will be introduced so as to - 

(i) 

To  exercise  better  control  over  the  pleasure  craft  operators  engaged  in 
dolphin and whale watching activities; 
To protect the dolphins and whales, and 

(ii) 
(iii)  To  ensure  that  swimming  with  dolphins  and  dolphin  and  whale  watching 
activities  are  carried  out  in  a  responsible,  orderly,  safe  and  sustainable 
manner. 

 

BRUNIKEL BRIDGE (NEW) - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/135)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Brunikel bridge, lying between Roche Bois and Tombeau Bay, he will state if consideration 
will be given for the widening thereof to ease out traffic thereat. 

131 

 
Reply: I am informed that the RDA is already aware of the current state of Bruniquel 
Bridge which is, in fact, a very old bridge (the year of construction of the bridge is unknown) 
crossing Latanier River and lying between Roche Bois and Baie du Tombeau located in the 
district of Pamplemousses along the classified Road B29. 

The  bridge  is  situated  between  two  very  sharp  bends  resulting  in  poor  visibility  in 
both directions.  Moreover, there are no dedicated walkways along this stretch of the road and 
the  mixture  of  pedestrians,  motorized  and  non-motorized  traffic  using  the  same  space 
constitutes a potential road safety hazard. 

I am further informed that, during a site visit conducted by the RDA in January 2015, 

it had been observed that the bridge has suffered considerable deterioration. 

In view of the existing road safety problems posed by the conditions of the bridge, the 
RDA  would  not  recommend  its  widening.    Instead,  the  highway  authority  is  seriously 
envisaging  the  construction  of  a  new  bridge  parallel  to  the  existing  one  with  an  improved 
alignment. 

For  that  matter,  Request  for  Proposals  for  Consultancy  Services  for  the  design  and 
preparation  of  the  tender  document  for  the  project  is  being  proposed  by  the  RDA  in  the 
2016/2017 budget.  Construction works are being, however, planned for implementation in 
Financial Year 2017/2018 as the project will entail land acquisition.   

Pending  the  construction  of  the  new  bridge,  I  have  requested  the  Commissioner  of 
Police, the RDA and the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit to regulate the traffic 
situation along the bridge and to identify short term measures to safeguard road safety.    

 

 

 

