No. 16 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 12 JULY 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 16 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 12 July 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)   Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Protection  of  Elderly  Persons 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XV of 2016). (In Original) 

(b)   The Civil Aviation (Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 

139 
of 2016) 

(c)   The Rodrigues Regional Assembly (Allowances and Privileges) (Amendment 

of Schedule) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 146 of 2016) 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

(a)   The  Customs  Tariff  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No.138 f 2016) 

(b)   The  Investment  Promotion  and  Protection  Agreement  (Republic  of  Côte 

d’Ivoire)) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 140 of 2016) 

(c)   The Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (Democratic Republic 
of Sao Tomé and Principe) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 141 
of 2016) 

C.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

The Private Health Institutions (Fees) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 
142 of 2016)  

D.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

(a)   The Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes (Fair) (Amendment) Regulations 

8 

2016.  (Government Notice No. 143 of 2016) 

(b)   The Municipal Council of Curepipe (Fees for Classified Trade) (Amended) 

Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 144 of 2016) 

 

 

E.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

The National Heritage Fund (Amendment of Schedule) (No. 3) Regulations 2016. 
(Government Notice No. 145 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

9 

 

 

 

 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES - UN CONVENTION 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in regard to 
the persons and children with disabilities, she will state – 

(a) 

the measures being taken in Mauritius pursuant to the recent publication of the 
Report  of  the  United  Nations  Committee  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with 
Disabilities (CRPD), indicating when the –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

reservations  to  the  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with 
Disabilities will be withdrawn;  

Optional Protocol to the said Convention will be ratified, and  

discriminating  provisions  in  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius in relation thereto will be repealed;  

(b) 

the  budgetary  provisions  agreed  upon  in  the  forthcoming  budget  in  relation 
thereto –  

(i) 

(ii) 

in respect of the Non–Governmental Organisations, and  

for the provision of inclusive schools, and  

(c) 

when the Disability Bill will be introduced in the House. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall in reply to this 
Private  Notice  Question  also  be  answering  to  the  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/737  as  it 
deals with the same subject matter. 

As the House is aware, Mauritius signed the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities in September 2010 and ratified it in January 2010. By virtue of our being a 
State Party to that Convention, Mauritius has to ensure compliance with provisions of that 
Convention in terms of promotion of rights of persons with disabilities. 

There is an existing protocol which allows the UN agency to monitor the degree of 
compliance  of  the  State  Party  in  terms  of  its  obligations  towards  the  application  of  the 

 

10 

provisions  of  the  Convention.  Within  that  established  framework,  Mauritius  submitted  its 
initial State Party Report in April 2012 wherein Government gave an account of actions taken 
with a view to aligning with the requirements of the Convention. This report was the subject 
of an examination at the level of the UN Committee of Experts on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. 

Subsequently, in accordance with the calendar established by the UN, Mauritius was 
invited in August 2015 to discuss the contents of the report.  I led a delegation to Geneva. 
During  the  Interactive  Working  Session  with  the  UN  Committee  of  Experts,  the  latter 
expressed appreciation in respect of the following – 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

the fruitful dialogue that took place between the UN experts and the members 
of the Mauritius delegation; 
the substantial increase in the social budget in support of persons with 
disabilities; 
the launch of a database on disability; 
the enactment of legislation to prohibit harassment on the basis of disability at 
the place of work, and 
the report of Mauritius was prepared in accordance with the UN Reporting 
Guidelines and has been presented within the prescribed time limit. 

However, the UN Committee made a number of observations and recommendations, 

the main ones being the removal of the following reservations on the Convention – 

(i) 

reservation  on  Article  11  concerning  situations  of  risk  and  humanitarian 
emergencies. This Article stipulates that States Parties shall take all necessary 
measures  to  ensure  protection  and  safety  of  persons  with  disabilities  in 
situations  of  risk,  involving  situations  of  armed  conflict,  humanitarian 
emergencies and the occurrence of natural disasters. 
When Mauritius signed the Convention in 2007, a reservation was put on this 
Article  as  at  that  time  no  provision  existed  in  law  for  the  safety  of  persons 
with disabilities in situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies. This has 
now been remedied by the enactment of the National Disaster Risk Reduction 
and Management Act. In fact, section 16 (2) of the Act provides for the safe 
evacuation  of  ‘persons  at  risk’  which  include  persons  with  disabilities. 
Therefore, persons with disabilities are catered for and the reservation may be 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

11 

removed.    In  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management,  steps  will  be  taken  on 
this Article; 
removal of reservation on Article 9.2 (d) concerning accessibility to buildings. 
This Article stipulates that State Parties should, and I quote – 

“Provide in buildings and other facilities open to the public signage in 
Braille and in easy-to-read and understand forms;” 

The Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport has already finalised 
draft  Building  regulations  in  consultation  with  my  Ministry  and  disability 
activists. These regulations provide for universal design requirement in respect 
of  new  buildings  and  buildings  under  major  renovation  works.  Provision  is 
also being made for signage in Braille to become an inescapable requirement. 
As soon as these regulations are promulgated, actions will be initiated for the 
removal of the reservation. 
removal of reservation on Article 24.2 (b) about inclusive education. This 
Article stipulates that State Parties shall ensure that persons with disabilities 
can access an inclusive, quality and free primary education and secondary 
education on an equal basis with others. 

Mauritius has a parallel system in education provision. Historically, it is NGOs which 
have  started  providing  services  to  children  with  disabilities.  Over  time,  this  practice  has 
continued,  so  much  so  that  there  are  still  a  large  number  of  special  schools  being  run  by 
NGOs and to which Government provides a range of assistance. 

With a view to ensuring parity of esteem, since 2006 Mauritius has officially adopted 
a policy of inclusive education, and I am informed that the Ministry of Education and Human 
Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  to 
gradually allow for the integration of children with disabilities in mainstream education, the 
main ones being – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

all new schools are required to be fitted with access facilities such as ramps, 
adapted toilets and so on; 
teachers  are  being  trained  in  Special  Needs  Education  by  the  Mauritius 
Institute of Education; 
14 integrated units have been set up in a number of schools to accommodate 
children with severe disabilities; 

 
(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

12 

assistive devices such as wheelchairs and hearing aids are provided to children 
with disabilities; 
transport costs are refunded by the Disability Unit of the Ministry of Social 
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions; 
in  the  Nine-Year  Schooling  Project,  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human 
Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  is  ensuring  that  the 
project captures properly the element of inclusive education. 

(vii)  At secondary and tertiary levels already, there is a full inclusion of students 
with disabilities. As a result, it is proposed after consultation with the Ministry 
of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research,  to  find  out  whether  the  conditions  are  gathered  for  a  formal 
submission to be made to the UN agency for the removal of this reservation. 

As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, I have to inform the House that, as soon as the 
reservations  are  removed,  Mauritius  will  proceed  with  the  ratification  of  the  Optional 
Protocol, to which we are already a signatory member. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) (iii) of the question, the Government Programme 
2015-2019 spells out Government’s commitment to proceed with a constitutional amendment 
to  remove  any  form  of  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  disability.  Much  ground  has  been 
covered  so  far  and  a  draft  Constitutional  Amendment  Bill  is  nearing  finalisation  in 
consultation with the Attorney General’s Office. In the same breath, consideration is being 
given to the two observations made by the UN Committee of Experts concerning sections 34 
and 43 of the Constitution.  

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development that there have been already several rounds of discussions on support 
to  NGOs  and  in  particular  for  special  needs  education  in  the  context  of  the  Budget  2016-
2017. However, at this stage, it will not be appropriate to announce any measure and their 
respective budgetary provisions in respect of the outcome of these discussions prior to the 
presentation of the Budget. 

I have had consultation with the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
with  regard  to  proposals  of  my  Ministry.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has shown much concern and has been very positive in his approach. So, I can 
assure the House that consideration is being given for support to persons with disabilities in 
the next Budget. 

13 

 
As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that my Ministry has 
been actively working on the draft Disability Bill, which aims at promoting and protecting 
the  rights  of  persons  with  disabilities,  eliminating  discrimination  against  them,  and 
incorporating the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
The Attorney General’s Office has already given its preliminary vetting in respect of the draft 
Disability Bill. 

After official consultations held with Ministries and Departments concerned in May 
and  June  this  year,  the  draft  Disability  Bill  will  shortly  be  submitted  for  its  agreement  in 
principle to Cabinet before the document is shared with a broader spectrum of stakeholders, 
involving  NGOs,  disabled  people  organisations,  disability  activists,  the  Opposition  parties 
and  the  civil  society  at  large.  After  this  process,  the  draft  Bill  will  be  finalised  with  the 
Attorney General’s Office before its introduction in the National Assembly. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  a  lot  of  information 
provided to the House and through us to the country. But, surely, she will agree with me that 
the  tone  which  she  has  adopted  is  very  positive,  very  optimistic,  whereas  the  tone  of  the 
report from the UN is damning. I would use a strong word than ‘damning’, but it is damning. 
So, have the main recommendations - some of which have already been approved from what 
I have just heard - been brought to the attention of Cabinet, and does Cabinet disagree with 
any of the main recommendations made in the UN report? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  the  UN  Committee  is  an  independent  organisation 
which promotes the rights of persons with disabilities in all countries which have signed and 
ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Its mission is to see to it 
that the best mechanism is put in place in all member countries to respond to the needs of 
persons with disabilities. However, we have to understand that each Member State country 
has its own constraints with regard to financial resources.  But, to reply to the hon. Leader of 
the  Opposition,  we  have  not  yet  brought  the  recommendations  of  the  UN  Committee  to 
Cabinet. 

Mr Bérenger: I am a bit surprised that one main criticism and recommendation has 
not  been  mentioned  by  the  hon.  Minister  from  what  I  heard,  and  that  is  employment  of 
disabled people. Can I read paragraph 37 - 

14 

 
“The  Committee  is  concerned  that  the  quota  of  3%  of  the  workforce  composed  of 
persons with disabilities only applies to the private sector and remains inadequately 
enforced.” 

This is very forceful and very negative, very damning, in fact, as I said. 

Can I know from the hon. Minister what measures are going to be taken on this score 
when we remember that, a few days ago, on 28 June, there was PQ No. B/588 and no figures 
were provided at all?  Can the hon. Minister provide us with figures of the actual employment 
of disabled people in the private sector, where it should be 3% by law and in the public sector 
where the law does not provide for it, but, surely, Government must show the good example? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well, private companies are very reluctant to ensure full 
compliance of the quota of 3%. However, a committee on employers have been set up to look 
into  the  matter.    The  committee  has  launched  sensitisation  campaigns.    Sensitisation 
campaigns  are  being  carried  out  twice  monthly  to  give  an  insight  of  the  Training  and 
Employment of Disabled Persons Act to the employers.  At the same time, we are appealing 
to employers to do an effort to employ people with disabilities.  We are also providing them 
with  CVs  of  people  with  disabilities  and  urging  them  to  make  an  effort  to  employ  these 
people.    At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  realise  that  the  quota  of  3%  is  not  abiding  on 
Government.    However,  I  am  working  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Minister  of  Civil 
Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, sustainable Development, and 
Disaster and Beach Management, hon. Alain Wong Yen Cheong, to see to it if Government 
also can make an effort to employ more people with disabilities.  However, we have to admit 
that with regard to employment in the Civil Service, we do not make a distinction with regard 
to people with disabilities and abilities, they are treated equally. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, I am glad to have heard that Government is going to 
withdraw the reservations which we had expressed in the past concerning the Convention.  I 
hope we do not waste time.  I was a bit disturbed by the words used: ‘may be removed’. Then 
the hon. Minister said that action is being taken on the ratification of the additional protocol, 
which allows individuals in the country to make complaints to the Committee.  Can I know 
whether this is going to come at last? I am  glad to hear amendments to those parts of the 
Constitution, but also, what the Committee calls ‘derogatory language’, ‘insulting language’ 
in relation to handicapped people in different pieces of legislation.  I heard the Minister say 

 

15 

that this is being worked upon urgently. But, at least, can we have a date when this additional 
protocol allowing individuals to complain to the Committee will be ratified? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well, 

I 

think  we  will  have 

to  work  on 

the 

recommendations first.  It is only then that we will be able to ratify the protocol. 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, as far as education is concerned, which is my special 

concern right now, can I know whether the hon. Minister has well noted the following – 

“The Committee is concerned about the over reliance of the State party on NGOs to 
provide  specialised  services  to  children  with  disabilities  without  the  necessary 
support, monitoring and regulatory guidance for these NGOs.” 

These are very strong words. 

I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  that  what  is  being  done  for  the  education  of 
 
handicapped children, c’est un scandale.  We should be spending more on the education of 
handicapped children than children who are in good health and we are spending much less.  
Can  I  insist,  in  the  forthcoming  Budget,  that  we  must  increase  both  the  money  going  to 
NGOs, give them the means of doing what Government asks them to do, but also, increase 
the budgetary provisions for inclusive schools? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  I  understand  that,  at  present,  the  budget  of  NGOs 
granted to the Ministry of Education is about Rs60 m. The budget allotted to my Ministry 
with  regard  to  NGOs  is  about  Rs19  m.    About Rs12  m.  is  being  spent  at  the  level  of  my 
Ministry  with  regard  to  NGOs  which  take  care  of  children  with  disabilities.    Our  aim  is 
moving  towards  an  inclusive  education.    It  is  true  to  say  that  our  educational  institutions 
should  be  ready  to  accommodate  children  with  disabilities  in  the  mainstream  education 
system.  I understand that the Ministry of Education is in the process of creating more special 
integrated  units  in  the  mainstream  education  institution  in  an  attempt  to  enabling  children 
with disabilities to benefit for an inclusive education.  We need to succeed in removing the 
disparity  between  children  with  disabilities  and  children  with  abilities  with  regard  to 
education. 

Mr Bérenger: Can  I ask the hon. Minister whether she has had the opportunity of 
discussing two urgent situations with her colleagues, the Minister of Education and Human 
Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, where a recent organisation for autism children, as we know,  has 
been forgotten by everybody until recently?  Now, there is more and more awareness on that 

 

16 

problem of children with autism.  The ONG Autisme Maurice is on the point of closing the 
few schools that it is running and so on.  Ils sont au bout du rouleau.  

Secondly, has she discussed with the Minister of Education and Human Resources, 
Tertiary Education and Scientific Research the transfer of the nine APEIM schools where we 
have 254 children with disabilities?  Those nine schools are supposed to be taken over by le 
Bureau d’Education Catholique.  This has been agreed, and yet, this has been going on since 
2014.  Has she discussed with her colleague to effectively give the required funds, because 
that has being dragging on for two years now? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  First of all, let me say that NGOs play a vital role in the 
promotion  of  social  and  community  development.    Their  activities  are  spread  all  over  the 
island.  They come up to the rescue of people from all walks of life.  Le gouvernement ne 
peut tout faire.  Nous avons besoin de nos partenaires privilégiés tels que les ONG, le secteur 
privé et la société civile.   

Government  appreciates  the  effort  made  by  NGOs  to  contribute  effectively  to  the 
development and well-being of persons with disabilities. That is why we are doing all our 
best  to  strengthen  this  institution.  Indeed  I  have  spoken  to  my  friend,  hon.  Mrs  Dookun-
Luchoomun,  who  is  in  charge  of  Education.    Everything  is  being  done  at  the  level  of  her 
Ministry to see to it that BEC takes over those schools.  

To add, Madam Speaker, at the level of my Ministry, we take care of about 45 NGOs.  
35 NGOs are concerned with children with disabilities. Well, if we have a look at the NGOs 
Audited Report of 2014, one can see that most of the NGOs have a surplus; out of the 35 
NGOs only 9 is in a deficit situation. The rest is doing quite well.  But as has been rightly 
said by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, we have to give all the necessary support to NGOs. 
I fully agree; we are a caring Government; we are doing the needful to give all the necessary 
support to NGOs, but with regard to Autisme Maurice, I have been given to understand that, 
up to now, Autisme Maurice has not made a request for financial assistance to my Ministry. 
Last year, it applied for an ad hoc support.  This has been taken care of, but I do understand 
that financial assistance is being given to Autisme Maurice through the Ministry of Education 
and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research. 

Mr Bérenger: May I ask the hon. Minister whether she does not agree with me that 
what we should do urgently - we are talking about education of handicapped children, of a 
humane  treatment  of  autistic  children;  we  don’t  know  how  many  there  are,  there  are  no 

 

17 

figures - the first thing to do is a full survey, to know how many handicapped children are in 
schools, how many are not receiving any education and how many autistic children we have 
in Mauritius? There are no figures and we need urgently a survey to know what we are really 
dealing with. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, I fully agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 
This is my concern too.  I have discussed this issue with my colleague, hon. Mrs Dookun-
Luchoomun. Well, I think we will have to ask for a survey so that we can know the number 
of autism in Mauritius. As such, we will know what are the concrete actions to be taken for 
their well-being, support and protection. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can have a last one on the last part of my question, the Disability 
Bill. I am sure she is aware that the report is critical of the draft so far; not of the whole draft, 
but parts of the draft, especially they are critical – 

“The Committee recommends that the State party reconsider clause 11 of the draft 
Disability Bill and renounce to the creation of integrated units in schools (...)”. 

And  so  on  and  so  on.  When  finalising  the  Disability  Bill,  are  the  strong  criticisms  of  the 
Committee being taken on board? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I am still working on this issue.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem. 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  Committee  was  very  critical  about 
protection  afforded  to  children  with  disabilities  against  corporal  punishment  and  sexual 
abuse. So, may I know from the hon. Minister what precise measures have been taken by her 
Ministry  to  ensure  protection  of  children  with  disabilities  against  possibility  of  sexual  and 
other form of physical abuse? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  This  is  being  taken  care  of  by  my  colleague,  the  hon. 

Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  With regard to budget provisions for 
NGOs and inclusive schools, I fully understand the reason why the hon. Minister is not able 
to disclose, but would the hon. Minister be able to consider the following.  

18 

 
Insofar  as  Occupational  Therapists  are  concerned,  the  Ministry  of  Education  is 
currently paying a contribution of Rs10,000 a month, whereas the market value for a fully 
qualified full time therapist is Rs20,000 a month and this is a vital service for children to fully 
integrate into society eventually. Can the hon. Minister recommend that this cost be fully met 
by Government so that this vital service does not suffer for small NGOs not being able to 
meet the additional Rs10,000 monthly? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I take note of the suggestion of the hon. Member and 

I will discuss it with my colleague, hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: I am sure the hon. Minister must know that in our National Pensions Act, 
Section 8 says that a person shall be qualified to receive an Invalidity Basic Pension when he 
has reached the age of 15 and is under the age of 60. 

Therefore,  somebody  having  reached  the  age  of  60,  is  not  entitled  to  the  Basic 
Invalidity  Pension.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  particular  section  of  the  law 
should not be reviewed to allow people reaching the age of 60 to continue being paid their 
Invalidity Basic Pension in case that pension is higher than the old age pension? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: At the age of 60, the Basic Invalidity is swapped to Basic 
Retirement pension. However, if I may add there is a disparity with regard to pension paid to 
a  child  with  disabilities  who  is  below  15  and  that  paid  to  a  child  with  disabilities  who  is 
above 15. In fact, as per the National Pension Act, a person is eligible for Basic Invalidity 
Pension only if he has reached the age of 15 and is under the age of 60. But I wish to reassure 
the House that I am not insensitive to the plight of those children.  

In fact, one of the main priorities of this Government is the well-being of vulnerable 
people,  including  children  with  disabilities.  In  December  2015,  we  had  increased  the 
pensions. Children with disabilities, who are below the age of 15, now are being paid only a 
Carer’s  Allowance,  which  we  all  know  is  means  tested  under  the  Social  Aid  Regulations. 
They are each drawing a Carer’s Allowance of about Rs2,972 monthly. Over and above that 
allowance, they are benefitting from an additional allowance of Rs450 if they are bedridden 
and in cases of incontinence, an allowance of Rs450 is being paid.  

In  the  course  of  discussions  held  prior  to  the  forthcoming  Budget,  I  have  made  a 
proposal to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to see to it if children 

 

19 

with disabilities below the age of 15 can benefit from Basic Invalidity Pension. The Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development has taken good note of this suggestion. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  According  to  Article  24  of  the  Convention,  when  it  comes  to 
education, those with disabilities should have the same facilities without discrimination and 
on equal basis with others. The hon. Minister just mentioned that transport is being refunded, 
but is she aware that the transport is being refunded because these children cannot travel by 
bus and they are only refunded the bus transport, not the appropriate transport which they use 
to  go  to  University  or  colleges?    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  she  will  review  the 
refund and make sure that they are refunded the proper cost of the transport and not the bus 
transport which they cannot use? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  We are looking at that too. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Fowdar!  

Mr  Fowdar:    Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  the  criteria  of  3%  for  employment  of 
disabled  persons,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  applies  to  the  State-owned 
companies and parastatal bodies and whether she has checked whether they are complying 
with this 3% criteria? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  No.  

(Interruptions) 

For State-owned companies, yes! 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  To end, can I appeal through the hon. Minister to Government - we 
are  in  a  very  special  situation.    This  year  we  are  celebrating  the  10th  anniversary  of  that 
Convention for the Protection of the Rights of the Disabled.   

Secondly, we have a number of NGOs that are au bout du rouleau, as I said earlier on, 
and thirdly, we’ve just had a damning – with due respect to the hon. Minister who is doing 
her  best  –  UN  report  a  few  months  back.    Can  I,  through  the  hon.  Minister,  appeal  to 
Government that we do something special for specially the education of handicapped children 
in the forthcoming Budget? 

20 

 
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  First of all, let me thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
to have come up with this PNQ because it is the concern of one and all.  I wish to reassure the 
House that our Government is working relentlessly to promote the welfare and well-being of 
people with disabilities.  We are also working towards protecting their rights too.  We have 
the interest of people with disabilities at heart.   We will leave no stone unturned to make our 
society a better place and at the same time do what has to be done so that we can promote the 
rights of persons with disabilities and protect them as much as we can. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over!  The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/715 in 
regard to the ship MV Benita will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Ocean Economy, 
Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands.  PQ No. B/720 in regard to the use 
of  over-the-counter  chemicals  for  the  production  of  highly  dangerous  drugs  will  now  be 
replied by the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life.  PQ Nos. B/713 and B/716 have 
been withdrawn.  Hon. Uteem! 

VEHICLES - FALSIFIED HORSEPOWER CERTIFICATES - ENQUIRY 

(No.  B/712)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recently detected cases 
of  falsified  horsepower  certificates,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of – 

(a) 

persons who have been arrested and/or prosecuted in connection therewith as 
at to date, and  
vehicles which have been seized in connection therewith. 

(b) 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that as at 07 July 2016, 493 cases of falsified horsepower certificates were being enquired 
into by the Police and 37 persons have been arrested and released on bail, so far. 

Out of the 493 cases, 489 are still under enquiry and 4 cases have been referred to the 
DPP for advice. Consequently, no legal proceedings have yet been initiated against any of the 
persons concerned.    

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Police that 27 vehicles had 
initially been secured in connection with these suspected cases of forgery.  Out of these 27 
vehicles - 

 

• 

• 

• 

21 

21 of them have now been returned to the owners upon the advice of the DPP;   

3 of them have been returned to the owners after the completion of the 
necessary examination by the technical experts and are no more required for 
the purpose of evidence, and  

3 vehicles are still under Police custody as the required verification has not yet 
been completed. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, answering to a PQ on 29 March 2016, the hon. Minister 
of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport stated that there were around 3,011 owners of 
vehicles who have voluntarily registered for modification effected on their vehicles without 
the consent of the NTA.  May I ask from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what is the attitude of 
the Police as regards those 3,000 people who voluntarily came and stated that they did not 
comply with the law and asked that their certificates be regularised? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  need  a  specific  question  for  that.    I  don’t  have  the 

information. 

Mr Uteem:  Answering to the PQ again, the hon. Minister stated that on 13 January 
2016, ASP Hector Tuyau started the enquiry.  It has been reported that Mr Tuyau is no longer 
the enquiring officer.  May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has enquired 
with  the  Commissioner of  Police  why  has  the  enquiry  been  taken  away  from  ASP  Hector 
Tuyau? 

The Prime Minister: No, I have not. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House if it 

has been established since when these falsifications have been going on? 

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  this  has  already  been  answered  by  the  hon.  Minister 
concerned,  the  date  at  which  it  was  discovered  and  all  this.    If  the  hon.  Member  puts  a 
specific question, we will get all the information, and then I can answer. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody, last question! 

Mr  Baloomoody:    We  know  from  the  PQ  which  my  colleague,  hon.  Uteem,  just 
mentioned that there were around 3,000 people involved.  Now, are those 492 cases which 
are being investigated among those who came voluntarily?  Where are they from?  Are they 
in the pool of those who came voluntarily? 

 

 

22 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t know whether they came voluntarily, but these 

are the cases which are in the hands of the Police and they are being enquired into. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

SWITZERLAND - MR H. B. – POLICE CONTROL 

(No. B/713) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr H. B., he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  where 
matters stand as to the inquiries carried out in relation thereto following information received 
that the latter had been found in possession of some Rs300m in the course of a control by the 
Police  in  Switzerland,  on  or  about  03  April  2009,including  the  number  of  times  he  has 
travelled to and from Mauritius, since 2006 to date? 

(Withdrawn) 

GOVERNMENT-OWNED CAR – REGISTRATION NUMBER 7824 DC 11 - 

INCIDENT 

(No.  B/714)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.    Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Government  vehicle 
bearing registration number 7824 DC 11, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the Commissioner of Police, information as to if the said vehicle was involved in any incident 
on or about 27 May 2016 and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

who was in control of the said vehicle at the material time;  
to whom the said vehicle was allocated and the capacity in which the said 
person had been allocated therewith, and  
if an independent board of inquiry has been set up to inquire into the 
circumstances of the incident and, if so, indicate where matters stand as to the 
inquiry carried out thereinto. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, as regards parts (a) and (b) of the question, I 
am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  on  27 May  2016  at  around  midnight, 
Government-owned car number 141 RM 11 and bearing Civil Registration Number 7824 DC 

 

23 

11, make BMW, was involved in an incident as the person driving the car at that time was 
victim of a case of larceny with violence. 

I am further informed that the said car is allocated to Mr Tangavel Seerungen, Deputy 
Commissioner  of  Police,  and  at  the  time  of  the  incident,  the  car  was  driven  by  Mr Saven 
Seerungen, son of the Deputy Commissioner of Police. 

Madam  Speaker,  by  virtue  of  his  official  capacity,  Mr  Seerungen  is  entitled  to  a 
chauffeur-driven car for official and private use.  In accordance with the established policy in 
the  Public  Service,  any  Officer  who  is  entitled  to  a  chauffeur-driven  car  for  official  and 
private use,  can  allow up to three other persons to drive the car provided that they hold  a 
valid driving licence  and their names  are officially  communicated to the Commissioner of 
Police.  In the case of Deputy Commissioner of Police Mr Seerungen, according to Police 
records,  the  name  of  his  son,  Saven  Seerungen  has  been  added  to  the  list  of  persons 
authorised to drive his car since 13 August 2015. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
 
that the Rose Hill CID is currently enquiring into the circumstances which led to the incident 
involving the car of Mr Seerugun.   

I am also informed that on 11 July 2016 two persons were arrested and a provisional 
charge of “larceny with violence” has been lodged against them.  They have been remanded 
to Police cell until 18 July 2016. 

The  enquiry  is  in  progress.    Therefore,  the  question  of  setting  up  an  independent 

enquiry does not arise. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, according 
to my information, on that night, all normal Police procedures were flouted and the Police 
Information Room was not informed it was a Government vehicle having been stolen and the 
Police Information Room was not immediately informed. The person who was driving was 
allowed,  later  on,  to  drive  away  with  the  same  car  without  any  prélèvement,  without  any 
Police on the spot doing any expert survey and that, therefore, all normal Police procedures 
were flouted on that evening? 

The Prime Minister: That is not correct, Madam Speaker, because the car was never 

stolen. 

24 

 
Mr Bérenger: The car was never stolen? Well, if that is not a cover-up, I don’t know 
what it is, Madam Speaker! I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister realises that we are dealing 
with an Ag. Commissioner of Police. Did he turn up at the Police Station at Rose Hill on that 
evening? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if he had been informed, first of all, of this immediately, I 
don’t know, but, in any case, if there was any complaint made to the Police, it was not really 
necessary for the Ag. Commissioner of Police to go to that station because there are people 
who are there – well, I have just been informed that after the incident, the car was, if we call 
it ‘stolen, taken away by somebody’, retrieved on the same night. 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, precisely. 

The Prime Minister: Yes, but… 

Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just said it. 

The Prime Minister: But I was given to understand that the car was stolen from the 

place of  Mr Seerugun, that is not correct. 

Mr Bérenger: I never said that. 

The Prime Minister: Well, but I understood that. 

Mr Bérenger: Then the son of an Ag. Commissioner of Police was doing his dirty 
business near the Coin Idéal, he was threatened by somebody with a knife and a lady; I stop 
there. He was driven to a bank and he escaped because there was a Police car going by and 
the man with a cutter drove away with the car, stole the car, Government property, and the 
car was discovered by others and during all this time, nothing happens, the Information Room 
is not alerted and so on. Well, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister told me before that the car was not 
stolen, now it was kind of stolen. Can I know whether we will really look at this cover-up 
which has taken place during that night? 

The Prime Minister: I don’t know what dirty business the Leader of the Opposition 

is talking about. 

He means I must take judicial notice! 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Prime Minister: Yes, but there is so much information that people outside, like 

25 

the Leader of the Opposition, get, but I have not been informed about this. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  mobile  phone  of  the 
gentleman  concerned,  was  stolen,  retrieved  by  the  Police,  handed  back  to  the  person 
concerned without any entry in the Police Books, without any enquiry, nothing, that no case 
of ‘larceny with violence’ was opened, that no ‘cause of threat with offensive weapon’ was 
investigated into. This went on for the whole month, nothing happened for a whole month 
until an article appeared in ‘Le Mauricien’ one month later; ‘the incident’, as we call it, was 
on 25 May and then the things started moving supposedly to cover up even more? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

Order! 

Order, I said! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have said order! Hon. Baloomoody, I am on my feet! Please! Yes, Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

The Prime Minister: It is the same dirty business, Okay! Well, I don’t know when 
Police started enquiry, but what we know is that there has been an enquiry and two persons 
have been arrested in the matter. In any case, I am going to ask the Commissioner of Police to 
personally look into the matter. 

Mr Bérenger: Not to go to Coin Idéal! It is not advisable! 

(Interruptions) 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister says that an enquiry was started and nothing happened 
until a month later, until a Press article appeared in ‘Le Mauricien’ Has, at least, the Rt. hon. 

 

26 

Prime Minister tried to find out why is it more than a month after - as I said, the portable 
phone was retrieved, given back to the owner, no case opened and so on - that there have 
been arrests?  Everybody knows, we know the names of the people concerned, the Police is 
perfectly aware, why has it taken a month to arrest the persons who have been arrested, three 
days ago, and will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister put an end to this cover-up and come out with 
the whole truth? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will ask the Commissioner of Police to have an enquiry. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: I do apologise, but to pick up from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s last 
answer, it is clear that all the answers that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is giving in this House, 
is given to him by the Commissioner of Police himself, and if the Commissioner of Police 
clearly has not given him all the information and being transparent and truthful in the answers 
being  provided  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  how  does  he,  therefore,  expect  the  same 
Commissioner of Police now to enquire when he initially hid all the information from the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  to  whom  the  hon.  Member  thinks  I  am  going  to  seek 

information! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, not from a sitting position! Please! 

Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhagwan:  There  are  three  questions  in  my  question.  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister aware – I am sure that he won’t be aware – the purpose of my question was to have 
a proof. Had it not been for my Parliamentary Question, no action would have been taken by 
the Police until yesterday or Sunday! So, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister enquire, at least, 
why following, not only the Press article, but also my Parliamentary Question, that the Police 
then knowing that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had to reply to the PQ, they had the arrest and 
so on? 

The Prime Minister: Well, they must have been shaken up by that question that was 

put. 

 
Madam Speaker: Last question on this! We’ve spent much time on this question. 

27 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister enquire because that night, Mr T. S. 
was  Ag.  Commissioner  of  Police,  so,  he  landed  everywhere,  he  went  at  Rose  Hill  Police 
Station, Coromandel Police Station, he went on sites and he threatened all the junior Police 
Officers, even those who have just received promotion as sergeant … 

Madam Speaker: No. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam, yes. 

Madam Speaker: What is your question? 

Mr  Bhagwan:  My  question  is  to  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  have  an 
independent enquiry; having the Police to enquire on the Police. This is a case where an Ag. 
Commissioner of Police has been involved… 

(Interruptions) 

Ki to problem? Ki to problem? 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bhagwan: To oulé alle Coin… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, ask your question! 

Mr Bhagwan: This case is a symbolic case, where people must see that there is no 

justice à deux vitesses.  

(Interruptions) 

A case of cover-up! So, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least inform the country?  Because 
this case is commonly known as the Coin Idéal saga. Everyone knows it, within the Police 
Force itself.  It’s about the credibility of the Police Force because the Head is involved. So, 
can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least see to it that there is an independent inquiry? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I hope the Commissioner of Police will use his discretion 

and find somebody - of course, it will be in the Police Force itself - to inquire into. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhuboo! 

TROU FANFARON POLICE STATION - BUILDING 

(No.  B/716)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

 

28 

Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  building 
which used to house the Trou Fanfaron Police Station before the recent relocation of the said 
Police  Station  in  another  building,  he  will  state  if  the  pulling  down  thereof  is  being 
envisaged. 

(Withdrawn) 

PALMA & BASSIN – DRUG RECURRENCE  

(No. B/717) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the regions of Palma and Bassin, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if he 
is aware of the recurrence of drug related problems thereat and, if so, indicate if consideration 
will be given for the setting up of a Police post thereat to ensure the safety and security of the 
inhabitants thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  regions  of  Palma  and  Bassin  fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Quatre  Bornes  Police 
station.  The number of drug cases reported over the last three years for the regions of Palma 
and Bassin are as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

22 cases in the year 2013; 

21 cases in the year 2014; 

(iii) 

29 cases in the year 2015, and 

(iv) 

8 cases during the period January to July 2016. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that it is not envisaged to set up 

a Police post to cover Palma and Bassin for the time being for the following reasons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Police have based themselves on the crime statistics of these regions;  

Quatre  Bornes  Police  Station  already  ensures  permanent  mobile  Police 
presence as part of the hot spot policing strategy at strategic locations; 

combined  patrol  involving  regular  Police,  the  Anti-Drug  Smuggling  Unit, 
Central  Investigation  Division,  Emergency  Response  Service  and  Divisional 
Support Unit are carried out regularly in the regions, and 

 
(iv) 

29 

Field  Intelligence  Officers  (FIO)  are  working  on  the  ground  to  identify  and 
locate  suspected  drug  dealers  to  track  them  down  in  the  region  of  Quatre 
Bornes, including Palma and Bassin regions. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
his answer. One of the criteria for the setting up of a Police station est, entre autres, the rapid 
population  growth,  and  in  the  regions  of  Palma  and  Bassin  there  have  been  three 
morcellements and over 300 new residential plots. There are two universities, namely the one 
from Médine, and there is a school. So, in the light of the population expansion of the region, 
could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see to it that the Commissioner of Police, at least, makes 
provision  in  the  near  future  for  not  a  proper  full-fledged  Police  station  but  rather  a  Police 
post? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the Commissioner of Police has given all the reasons why 
there is no need for the time being to have a Police post there.  I have been given a long list 
here.  Regions covered by Quatre Bornes Police Station are as follows –  

•  Solferino; 
•  Paillotte; 
•  Candos; 
•  La Louise; 
•  Residence Kennedy; 
•  Bassin; 
•  Palma; 
•  Berthaud; 
•  Ollier; 
•  Cité Beau Sejour; 
•  Cité Père Laval; 
•  Old Quatre Bornes; 
•  St Jean; 
•  Belle Rose, and 
•  Sodnac. 

The approximate population of Bassin and Palma are 45,000 and 40,000 respectively. 

The criteria for setting up of a Police station are as hereunder –  

30 

 
•  population size; 
•  area covered; 
•  nearest Police station; 
•  crime rate; 
•  business activities, and 
•  commercial activities. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, next question! 

FRENCH EMBASSY – GUNSHOTS - INQUIRY 

(No. B/718) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the incidents which occurred in the early 
morning  of  30  May  2016  whereby  gunshots  were  fired  in  the  direction  of  the  French 
Embassy and of the Saint George Hotel, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to where matters stand as to the inquiry carried out 
thereinto, indicating the – 

 (a) 

(b) 

names of the persons arrested in connection therewith and if the latter  have 
been released, and  

additional  measures,  if  any,  taken  to  ensure  the  protection  of  foreign 
representations in Mauritius. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that, following the incidents which occurred on 30 May 2016 at Le Saint George Hotel and 
the French Embassy, the CCID has been enquiring into two cases, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Damaging Property at Le Saint Georges Hotel, and 

Gunshot at the French Embassy. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  in  the  course  of  the  enquiries  two  persons  have  been  interviewed  and  allowed  to  go 
thereafter.  The enquiries are ongoing. 

As for part (b) of the question, I am informed that, with a view to enhancing security 

of foreign representations in Mauritius, the following measures have been taken - 

(i) 

Police armed sentry have been posted at some embassies; 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

31 

Police  sentry  is  provided  at  schools  falling  under  the  aegis  of  French 
authorities during school hours; 

round the clock patrols are carried out by regular Police, ERS, CID, SSU and 
other patrolling Units of the Force near the premises of embassies, and 

random vehicle check points are established by the SMF and the SSU in the 
vicinity of embassies. 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  heard  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  replying  that  there  have  been  two 
persons who have been arrested in connection with that case, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether they have been released and whether with his conversation 
with  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  the  Police  still  have  any  hope  to  elucidate  this  matter 
finally? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have just answered they had arrested two suspects, but 

for lack of evidence they were released. I hope they still have hope to find out the accused. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are talking about a very serious matter, 
an  assault  on  a  friendly  embassy.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  answering  to  an  earlier 
parliamentary  question,  stated  in  this  House  that  the  help  of  foreign  authorities  would  be 
sought, for example, to see how we can trace the face of those who wear helmets. So, may I 
know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether, as the Prime Minister, he is satisfied with the 
way the inquiry has been conducted so far? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the 

unmasking exercise has not given the desired result. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  has 
discussed with the Commissioner of Police about the supposed link between this incident and 
the so-called gang du Sud; whether he has discussed with the Commissioner of Police if there 
is any credibility into that or whether it has not been invented juste pour brouiller les pistes? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have discussed this matter with the Commissioner of 
Police and he has assured me that they are doing everything possible to find out who were the 
persons involved in that incident. 

 
 Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

32 

Mr Mohamed: We have heard a lot of things in the press, even internationally, with 
regard  to  this  incident,  which  is  being  described  as  a  very,  very  serious  incident,  and  that 
could really have an effect on the image of our country.  Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
now  confirm  in  this  august  Assembly,  following  the  inquiry  that  has  taken  many,  many 
months now, that this has nothing to do  whatsoever  with any  act of terror or any terrorist 
group whatsoever, and this was a pure, simple exaggeration at the time; this has nothing to do 
with it, and Mauritius is a safe destination? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, so far, we have no evidence, nothing to show that it was 

an act of real terrorism. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  just  mentioned  that,  at  certain 
embassies, there are now armed Police Officers, and at certain private schools as well.  Can I 
ask the hon. Prime Minister whether he will see to it that proper CCTV cameras are placed at 
these spots, especially those Embassies involved and the private foreign schools? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, I think our Police have a programme on this. 

MELROSE - EASTERN HIGH SECURITY PRISON – CONSTRUCTION - 

CONTRACT 

(No.  B/719)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Eastern High Security 
Prison at Melrose, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 
Prisons, information as to the name of the company which had been awarded the contract for 
the construction thereof, indicating the contract value thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Prisons that the contract for the construction of the Eastern High Security Prison at Melrose 
was  awarded  to  the  Beijing  Zhuzong-Hyvec  Partners  Joint  Venture  for  the  sum  of 
Rs1,491,686,781 (VAT inclusive). 

Subsequently,  the  cost  of  the  construction  works  of  the  Prison  was  revised  to 

 
Rs2,134,890,869. 

 
I  wish  to  point  out  that  such  variations  in  the  original  cost  of  major  projects  were 

 
common practice with the former Government. 

33 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, do you have a supplementary question? No! Okay, 

next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

RESIDENCE VALLIJEE - LAW AND ORDER 

(No. B/721)  Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he will state if he has received a petition 
dated 19 May 2016 in regard to the law and order situation in Residence Vallijee, in Port 
Louis  and,  if  so,  will  he,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Police, information as to the actions taken to ensure that law and order is observed thereat. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that a petition, by 
way  of  a  letter  dated  19 May  2016,  was  received  at  my  Office,  with  copy  to  the 
Commissioner  of  Police,  from  inhabitants  of  Residence  Vallijee  complaining  about  anti-
social behaviour by youngsters, some of whom appear to be drug addicts, in the vicinity of 
the public garden and football playground of the locality. 

Following  the  petition,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  took  prompt  action  and  the 
following measures have been put in place with a view to ensuring the safety and security of 
the inhabitants of the region - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

regular foot and mobile patrols by the personnel of the relevant Police Station, 
Divisional Support Unit and Emergency Response Service, thus reinforcing 
Police presence; 

deployment of a CID team to prevent and detect illegal activities; 

monitoring of habitual criminals by way of regular Police Operations (Knock 
and Roar, Bottleneck, Dynamic Hotspot Policing etc.); 

Community Policing Fora at regular intervals with the local community, and 

deployment of Anti-Drug and Smuggling Unit (ADSU) team at the affected 
areas with a view to identifying any suspicious and irregular activities. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  since  that 

petition was sent to the Commissioner of Police, has there been any arrest? 

34 

 
The Prime Minister: Return of cases reported in region of Residence Vallijee from 
01 January 2016 to 06 July 2016 - well, these are cases reported, but I do not know whether 
there have been anybody arrested.  

Well, I am sure there has been no arrest; otherwise I would have got the information 

passed on to me. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised of the following – 

• 

• 

• 

PQ No. B/726 in regard to the installation of a taxi desk at the reception of 
hotels will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
Tourism and External Communications; 
PQ No. B/750 in regard to the ex-cooperative building at Cooperative Street, 
Bois Cheri will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Business, Enterprise 
and Cooperatives, and 
PQ No. B/762 in regard to the wreckage of the ship MV Benita will now be 
replied by the hon. Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands. 

The following Parliamentary Questions have withdrawn: Nos. B/727, B/738, B/739, 

B/740, B/765 and B/766. Hon. Rughoobur! 

STATE INSURANCE COMPANY OF MAURITIUS LTD. - IMMOVABLE 

PROPERTIES - INVESTMENT 

(No. B/725) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether, in regard to the State Insurance Company of Mauritius Ltd., he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the total amount of funds thereof that have 
been invested in immovable properties over the past five years, giving a list of the immovable 
properties, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

amount of funds invested therein, and  

actual and expected annual yield thereof as at to date, indicating the reasons 
for variance thereof, if any.  

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Management  of  SICOM  that 
over the last five years, SICOM has invested in two properties for a total amount of Rs969 m. 
as follows – 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

35 

SICOM Building II of a gross floor area of 9,500 m2 on a portion of land of 
546 m2 situated in Port Louis for an amount of Rs377 m., and 
SICOM Tower with a gross floor area of 13,807 m2 on a portion of land of 
8,096 m2 situated at Ebene.  SICOM Tower was purchased for an amount of 
Rs592 m. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the annual rental derived 

from the two buildings are as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

for SICOM Building II, the rental is Rs24.9 m. per annum, which according to 
the management of SICOM represents a yield of 7% per annum, including the 
capital appreciation element compared to the expected yield of 8%.  
According to management, the variance is mainly due to the fact that the rent 
forecasted or used in the feasibility report was higher than the rent which is 
actually being paid, and 
the space on the ground floor, which was earmarked for commercial use, is 
now being used for office purposes by the Ministry of Civil Service. 

Secondly, in respect of  SICOM Tower the actual rent is Rs55.5 m. per annum and 
again management, after having adjusted for capital appreciation, has come up with a figure 
of total return per annum of around 11% compared to an expected yield of 10.8%. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for his reply. Can I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  former  Board  had  recourse  to  a  tender  exercise  in  the 
purchase of the SICOM Tower in Ebene?  Can he enlighten the House? 

Mr Bhadain: I am informed by the management of SICOM, Madam Speaker, that no 
tender  exercise  was  conducted.    In  fact,  Arushi  Development,  a  company  of  Mr  Rakesh 
Gooljaury approached SICOM for the construction of that building.  

 I am also informed that the company has been paid a total amount of Rs579,788,443 

together with a refundable VAT of Rs87,411,982; these were paid in May and June 2014. 

Mr Rughoobur: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether the amount of Rs592 m. 
which he just mentioned for the SICOM Tower is exclusive of land?  Does the land belong to 
the BPML? 

Mr Bhadain: I don’t have this information specifically, but I would think so because 
it is in Ébène Cybercity, all lands there belong to BPML and I believe that the land has been 
purchased  by  Arushi  Development  before  doing  the  construction.  But,  Madam  Speaker,  I 

 

36 

must say that there are a number of serious anomalies and potential malpractices which have 
been seen in this transaction and I have asked my Ministry to start a good governance review 
on this issue and other issues relating to the affairs of SICOM. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Now that SICOM has invested so much 
money in immovable properties and having around Rs50 m. yearly as rental, that is a profit 
for SICOM. May I know from the hon. Minister - he said last time replying to my PQ that 
there is a reserve of Rs4 billion at SICOM; those are all the profits that are accumulated and 
the Government had invested; so the National Pension Fund - why Government is not getting 
the dividend from SICOM and the National Pension Fund also?  

Mr  Bhadain:  This  is  a  matter  which  will  be  taken  by  the  Board  of  SICOM  with 
management  in  terms  of  dividend  payment.    As  the  hon.  Member  is  aware,  a  company 
chooses to pay dividend when it chooses to pay dividend. That is according to law, but, of 
course, when Government has invested into a company, Government needs to get its returns 
and the Board will look at this issue so that dividends are dully paid to Government as should 
be paid. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  from  replies  obtained,  here,  in  the  National 
Assembly, we were being told that Mr Gooljaury obtained loan from the State Bank and then, 
at the same time, he sold the building to SICOM and obtained money. Can the hon. Minister 
inquire  as  to  whether  all  the  sums,  taken  at  the  State  Bank  and  other  Banks  where 
Government  is  a  shareholder,  have  been  refunded  and,  if  not,  what  will  happen  to  Mr 
Gooljaury with the millions of rupees he has benefitted? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  issues  regarding  SBM  would  not  fall  under  my 

portfolio.  

Madam Speaker: No. 

Mr  Bhadain:  However,  I  have  stated  that  the  good  governance  review  is  being 
conducted  not  only  on  this  issue  but  other  issues  as  well.  I  will  inform  the  House  in  due 
course. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware whether the said portion of 
land, where the SICOM Tower has been constructed, was meant, according to BPML, as a 

 

37 

green space? Can he tell us how comes that Arushi Company Ltd. has acquired this plot of 
land?  Can he also tell us, according to his inquiry, as to who gave this plot of land to Arushi 
Company Ltd.? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, Cabinet has decided that a full review be conducted 
on the activities of  BPML from 2010 to date.  This is ongoing and a number of issues are 
being seen, revealed and, of course, this issue will also form part of the report of the review 
which is being conducted on BPML. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, I have a last supplementary. In fact, based on the 
types  of  decisions  of  the  former  Board,  can  the  hon.  Minister  enlighten  the  House  on  the 
measure that he has taken to ensure that the current Board did not intervene in the day-to-day 
management of SICOM? 

Mr Bhadain: No, not only the current Board but all the Boards of all the parastatal 
bodies,  Cabinet  has  decided  that  there  is  a  clear  demarcation  line  between  what  the 
Chairperson  should  do,  Board  members  should  do,  their  roles  and  responsibilities  and  the 
Chief  Executives  who  basically  run  the  organisation.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Chief 
Executive also should not have a voting power on the Board and in the case of SICOM, I am 
informed that the current Chief Executive actually votes on the Board of SICOM which is 
also not in line with good governance practices.   

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur!  

HOTELS - TAXI DESK 

(No. B/726) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the hotel 
taxi owners, he will state where matters stand as to the request thereof for the installation of a 
taxi desk inside the reception area of the hotels. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to 

Parliamentary Question No. B/726.  

A Ministerial Committee was set up under my chairmanship on 07 September 2015 to 

look into the problems being faced by taxi operators based at hotels.  

Following  wide  consultation  with  various  stakeholders,  on  07  April  2016, 
Government decided, amongst others, that a taxi desk should be set up at existing hotels of 
more than 50 rooms. It was also decided that indicative taxi fares would be displayed at the 

 

38 

reception  area  and  a  voucher  system  would  be  introduced  where  the  meter  taxi  is  not  in 
operation.  The  employee  designated  to  manage  the  taxi  desk  would  be  trained  by  École 
Hôtelière Sir Gaëtan Duval and the Tourism Authority in personal grooming and customer 
care.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Association  des  Hôteliers  et  Restaurateurs  de  l’Ile  Maurice 
(AHRIM)  is  agreeable  to  these  measures  and  has  accordingly  informed  its  members  to 
implement this Government decision. AHRIM has also circulated guidelines to its members 
to assist them in their discussions with taxi drivers.  The Tourism Authority has also issued a 
letter to all hotels concerned requesting them to implement these measures as from 15 June 
2016.  

Madam Speaker, each hotel has its own specificities with respect to space and layout, 
hence,  implementation  of  the  taxi  desk  and  its  location  would  differ  from  hotel  to  hotel. 
Meetings have been held between the Tourism Authority, the National Transport Authority, 
Hotel Management and Taxi Operators to work out the modalities of setting up the taxi desk 
at each hotel.  

Meanwhile, the deadline for the setting up of the taxi desk has been extended to 15 
September 2016 to give hotels ample time to finalise the modalities for setting up of the desk.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  to  be  highlighted  that  the  Tourism  Authority  and  the  École 
Hôtelière Sir Gaetan Duval are presently working on the modalities of training to be provided 
to hotel based taxi operators so that the higher standard of service delivery is maintained. It is 
proposed that the training be carried out on a region wide basis and be conducted in different 
batches of 25 participants. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  thank  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  for  his  reply  and  also  for  the 
deadline fixed for the implementation. I have only one supplementary for the hon. Deputy 
Prime Minister.  Can he see to it as to whether there is any charge because there are some 
hotels where they are claiming a fee for the installation? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  presume  that  some  hotels  will  provide  it  free  of 
charge, others may provide for a reasonable fee which, in my view, should be in line with 
whatever is being charged to any tour operator operating a similar desk. 

39 

 
Mr  Bérenger:  I  heard  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  say  that  L’AHRIM, 
Association des Hôteliers et Restaurateurs de l’Ile Maurice is putting pressure by convincing 
its members to give effect to the decisions taken. At this point in time, are all the big groups 
of hotels or the big hotels members of AHRIM?  

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, Beachcomber joined AHRIM some time ago.  So, 

I think all the big groups are members of AHRIM, if that is the question. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  Is the hon. Deputy Prime Minister aware 
that there has been a complaint from taxi operators in hotels of unfair competition by contract 
car operators and that a lot of hotels do not play the game and have private arrangement with 
the contract cars, and these resident cars end up charging tourists more than the regular taxi 
operators? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: In fact, the Committee that I was asked to chair, looked 
into this matter, but  I would advise the hon. Member that at present there is an injunction 
with  respect  to  exactly  the  same  issue  and,  therefore,  the  particular  matter  is  sub  judice, 
Madam Speaker.  

Mr Jhuboo: Merci, Madame la présidente. Il y a un évènement assez révélateur qui 
s’est produit il y a quelques semaines de cela suite à un touriste qui est parti faire du shopping 
au  Caudan.  Ensuite,  il  a  pris  un  taxi  du  Caudan  et  il  est  retourné  à  son  hôtel  où  on  lui  a 
interdit l’accès à l’hôtel. Pour un cinq étoiles c’est un peu moyen.  

Concernant toutes ces petites incohérences qui existent par rapport à cette juridiction, 
on  pourrait  savoir  du  ministre  qu’est-ce  qui  est  mis  en  place  pour  pâlir  toutes  ces  petites 
incohérences, notamment celle où un taxi étranger ne peut pas rentrer sur les prémices d’un 
hôtel s’il n’y a pas la licence? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam,  it’s  a  misunderstanding,  I  believe  because 
what we dealt with was the prohibition for non-hotel taxis to collect people from hotels, not 
to drop them. So, that is the incoherence that I think the hon. Member is referring to. It is a 
misunderstanding. 

NATIONAL PAY AND PRODUCTIVITY COUNCIL – SURVEYS  

(No. B/727) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

 

40 

Research  whether,  in  regard  to  productivity,  she  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
from the National Pay and Productivity Council, information as to the – 

(a)  

total number of surveys the Council has carried out in relation thereto since 
January 2015 to date, and  

(b)   measures taken for the promotion of a culture thereof in Mauritius. 

(Withdrawn) 

ROAD NETWORK - INVESTMENTS 

(No. B/728) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the road 
network, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road Development Authority, 
a breakdown of the quantum of the annual investments therein since January 2012 to date. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority that 
a  total  investment  of  around  Rs11,615,100,000  including  maintenance  works,  have  been 
made to the road network from the financial year 2012 up to the end of June 2016.  

With your permission, I am tabling detailed information in respect of the list of road 

projects which have been carried out. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:    Madam  Speaker,  there  have  been  several  requests  based  on  the 
nature  of  where  the  coastal  roads  from  Grand  Gaube  to  Pereybère  are  situated.    The  hon. 
Minister is well aware of the condition.  It is in a deplorable state.  Can the hon. Minister 
enlighten the House as to whether it was in the last Budget or in the list which he has tabled, 
and if it was in the list whether it would be taken care of in the coming Budget? 

Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  we  have  made  a  request  for  bypasses  on  a  national 
basis and the coastal road bypass in Cap Malheureux is being taken care of. We have made a 
request to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for the next Budget.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BUSES - SEMI-LOW FLOOR - PURCHASE 

(No. B/729) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the semi-low 

 

41 

floor  buses  received  in  donation  from  China  in  January  2016  and  the  additional  ones 
purchased in 2016 respectively, he will state the - 

costs incurred in relation thereto, and 
(a) 
(b) 
company to which the  contract for the maintenance thereof has been awarded. 
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, concerning part (a) of the question I am informed by the 
National Transport Authority that 20 semi-low floor buses of the Make Yutong were donated 
by  the  Chinese  Authorities  in  January  2016  in  accordance  with  an  agreement  between  the 
Government Republic of Mauritius and the Government People’s Republic of China.   

The cost incurred by the NTC to have other accessories fitted and to have the road 
worthiness of the 20 donated buses assessed by the NTA amounts to Rs1,322,503., that is, 
around Rs66,000 per bus to put them on the road.  

In  addition,  100  semi-low  floor  buses  were  procured  this  year  following  a  tender 
exercise.    The  contract  for  the  procurement,  maintenance  and  other  accessories  of  the  100 
buses has been awarded to ABC Coach Works Ltd. to the tune of Rs405,068,061.40 inclusive 
of VAT. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  maintenance  of  the  20 
donated buses is being carried out by ABC Coach Works Ltd. which is the local Agent for 
Yutong buses in Mauritius.  The cost incurred for maintenance involves only the labour cost 
amounting  Rs2,466,600.  VAT  inclusive  given  that  spare  parts  for  the  maintenance  and 
servicing  of  the  buses,  were  received  free  of  charge  from  the  Chinese  Government.    The 
warranty period of the 20 buses is 18 months or 150,000 kms of operation as from the date of 
delivery whichever is the earlier, which means that for every month the maintenance fee is 
Rs6,850. per bus.   

The maintenance of the 100 fully built semi-low floor buses covers the first 200,000 
kms  of  operation  as  from  the  date  of  commissioning  and  the  cost  thereof  amounts  to 
Rs42,386,240. VAT inclusive for a period of two years.   

The warranty period of the bus is, as I said, two years from the date of commissioning 
of the buses.  During the period of warranty, ABC Coach Works Ltd. shall remedy all the 
defects in design, material and workmanship that the buses may develop under the normal 
use and not attributed to bad driving habit, free of cost.  

It will result to a sum of about Rs17,000 monthly including labour and spare parts for 

a period of two years. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

42 

Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister said that 100 semi-low floor buses 
were  procured  through  tender  and  that  was  awarded  to  ABC  Coach  Works  Ltd.    May  we 
know from the hon. Minister whether the 100 semi-low floor buses were of the same make 
like the 20 Yutong buses given by China, and what is the coincidence of getting 20 buses free 
from  China  and  at  the  same  time,  through  tender,  ABC  Coach  Works  Ltd.  gets  the  same 
company, if the 100 buses are from Yutong? 

Mr Bodha: They are of the same brand, but they are not of the same specification, 
you have slight differences. But the tender exercise was a proper tender exercise carried out 
by the Procurement Board.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:    Has  the  hon.  Minister  been  made  aware  that  these  buses  are  very 
high consumer of energy?  In fact, figures that have come to me is that more than 30 litres per 
day per bus as compared to a normal bus.   

Mr Bodha:  I think we have to study the cost worthiness of the buses. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, this is maybe not directly related to the question, 
but it has to do with what the hon. Minister has just answered.  He has said that at a certain 
point in time the buses were donated to the Government of Mauritius and finally those buses 
were  simply  given  to  the  National  Transport  Corporation.    The  National  Transport 
Corporation  is  one  of  the  public  transport  operators  in  Mauritius.    There  are  many  other 
transport operators.  Isn’t this therefore a violation of the Competition law of Mauritius by 
taking  undue  advantage  of  a  donation  and  giving  it  to  a  competitor  of  other  transport 
companies?   

(Interruptions) 

Because the law does not make provision for transport services as being removed from the 
Act as opposed to other specific issues. 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I don’t think so.  It was a donation of the Government 

of the People’s Republic of China to an institution chosen by the Government of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

43 

 
Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, answering to the question of hon. Mahomed, the hon. 
Minister has said as per cost worthiness.  Is he aware that our old buses - I don’t go for it - 
have a carrying capacity of about 60 whereas for this one, the carrying capacity is only 45 
and they are using about 30 litres of diesel per day? 

Mr Bodha:  The carrying capacity is 45.  We have improved it and they can carry up 

to 60 with standing passengers. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.37 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – MEDICAL OFFICERS - 

RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/730) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the pre-registration and post 
registration  of  doctors,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  is  proposing  to  proceed  with  the 
recruitment thereof in the near future and, if so, indicate when and if not, why not. 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, as far as pre-registration doctors are concerned, the 
answer is yes in the near future. As for post registration of doctors, I am informed that this 
category does not exist. 

Dr. Sorefan: Regarding the post registration what I meant was those who have been 
registered after the pre-qualification, pre-registration. Anyway! Will the hon. Minister give 
assurance to this House that this time for the pre-registration, when they go for recruitment, 
that the interview is done by the PSC and not by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, we are looking at the whole process of 
pre-registration  and  it  is  very  likely  that  there  will  be  an  exam  conducted  before  pre-
registration  so  that  all  those  who  are  successful  at  that  exam  will  move  on  for  the  pre-
registration. It will be conducted by a body of international standing. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Regarding  the  post  registration,  like  I  said,  after  the  pre-registration, 
they  get  registered,  but  there  are  many  who  are  unemployed,  that  what  I  meant  post 

 

44 

registration. Will the hon. Minister consider, if there are vacancies, of course, to recruit those 
medically registered doctors? 

Mr Gayan: The recruitment is for the PSC.  I am afraid it does not depend on the 

Ministry. 

Dr. Joomaye: Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister the number 
of young doctors who are waiting to be recruited as pre-registered doctors and has there been 
an assessment or a survey to assess the capacity of the public hospitals to accommodate these 
doctors? How many can we accommodate right now? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  in  fact,  this  is  one  of  the  major  challenges  of  the  public  health 
system.  Indeed,  the  legacy  we  have  is  that  anybody  who  had  gone  to  study  medicine 
anywhere  would  come  to  Mauritius  and  would  be  recruited  for  pre-registration.  This 
constitutes a heavy burden on the existing facilities in our hospitals because our hospitals are 
not teaching hospitals, and on top of that, we have the nurses, students from other medical 
colleges. So, all this is being looked into and we will be coming with a major policy on all 
these matters. 

Mr Uteem: Last year, there was a PNQ on the recruitment of doctors on contractual 
basis and the hon. Minister mentioned that there is going to be a recruitment by the PSC. May 
I know from the hon. Minister, following the recruitment by the PSC, how many doctors do 
we still have on contractual basis and why have these doctors been kept on contractual basis 
when they are not qualified to be appointed by the PSC in a substantive capacity? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I will need a proper question and then I will provide the answer. 
But, from what I understand, there were some doctors who are on sessional basis, they have 
reached  the  age  when  they  no  longer  can  work  and,  therefore,  they  have  to  be  replaced 
because  there  is  still  a  need  for  that.  But  if  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a  substantive 
question, he will get the reply. 

Dr. Sorefan: Last one, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The hon. Minister said there will be a 
new, call it ‘a reform of exam’ for the pre-registration. Do I take it that the Indian Medical 
Group that was doing the exam, after the 18 months of training in the hospital, that this exam 
will be done before they get recruited? 

Mr Gayan: Well, the PSC will have to select the body that will conduct the exam, but 
it is likely that it will be the National Board of Examiners of India that will be conducting the 
exam. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, last supplementary! 

45 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Sir.  Being given that we have got more than one medical 
college  in  Mauritius,  would  he  consider  to  convert,  at  least,  one  of  our  hospitals  into  a 
teaching hospital? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I am not a doctor, but what I understand is that a teaching hospital 
grows  from  bottom  up  and  cannot  be  imposed  from  top  down.  So,  we  have  to  develop 
something  which  is  purely  Mauritian  and  see  how,  if  we  can  have  one  of  the  hospitals 
converted into a teaching hospital, but this is also being studied. 

ESTHETIC CLINICS - LASER TREATMENT  

(No. B/731) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  cases  of  localised  first, 
second  and  third  degree  burns,  he  will  state  the  number  of  cases  thereof  having  allegedly 
been sustained following laser treatment of skin lesions carried out in esthetic clinics by non-
professionals reported by doctors and patients at the public health institutions, indicating the 
steps that have been or will be taken to prevent the said practice. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  no  case  of  any  type  of  burn 
injury  following  laser  treatment  in  private  has  been  reported  at  the  level  of  our  regional 
hospitals or the Burns Unit at the Victoria Hospital. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  seriously  that  those  who  are  not 
qualified  dermatologists  are  using  laser  beam  to  treat  certain  lesions  of  the  skin,  that  the 
regulation  and  law  be  amended  so  that  only  dermatologists,  who  are  medically  qualified 
doctors,  be  allowed  to  procure  such  equipment  and  those  who  supply  them  should  sell  it 
directly to the doctors so that people who are qualified know how to use it? Because the skin 
is not just a surface, it is a three layer and the sub-skin layer get burnt with laser even, we, 
dental surgeons, they don’t sell it to us for dental treatment unless they give us the training 
how to use it. So, let it be for the safety of patients… 

The Deputy Speaker: Come to the question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:… that they go in that direction. 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, I am informed that currently there are two Health 
Care Units which are licensed by the Ministry under the Private Health Institutions Act. One 
is Centre de Greffe de Cheveux et de Chirurgie Esthétique et Dentaire de l’Océan Indien at 

 

46 

Trou  aux  Biches  and  the  other  one  is  an  international  centre  of  plastic  surgery  at  Floreal. 
There  is  a  third  one  that  has  applied,  but  it  is  still  being  processed.  But,  I  will  certainly 
convey the concern of the hon. Member to my staff. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  in  order  to  regulate  the  use  of  these  types  of 
equipment by non-medicals, last year, the hon. Minister said that the allied professionals and 
Allied Health Professions Bill would be prepared and presented soon, but it was last year and 
up  till  now,  nothing  has  been  done.  I  would  like  to  know  where  things  are  regarding  this 
piece of legislation. 

Mr Gayan: Well, in fact, only yesterday, Mr Deputy Speaker, we finalised the Bill, it 

will go to Cabinet and then it will be brought to the House. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Mahomed! 

VEHICLES (SECOND-HAND) – IMPORTATION & SALE 

(No.  B/732)  Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  and  Port 
Louis Central) asked the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, 
in  regard  to  the  recent  decision  of  Government  to  reconsider  the  conditions  for  the 
importation and the sale of second hand vehicles, he will state if consultations have been held 
with all the stakeholders concerned therewith and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before replying to the question, I would like to 
seek your indulgence and that of the House for taking some few minutes to state some of the 
measures with regard to the importation and sale of second-hand motor vehicles. 

The Deputy Speaker: May I ask how long? 

Mr Gungah: Three to four minutes. 

I shall also table a paper with all the measures afterwards. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that over the past year, I have 
received  numerous  complaints  and  representations  from  the  general  public,  associations  of 
motor car dealers of new as well as second-hand motor vehicles. These were mainly geared 
towards the importation of damaged and accidented vehicles and cases of alleged frauds and 
malpractices in the following main areas – 

(a) Importation of second-hand cars being declared as new; 
(b) Pre-shipment  inspection  certificate  containing  false  and  misleading  information 

and is, therefore, unreliable, untrustworthy and inadequate;  

 

47 

• 
• 

fake auction sheets with false grading, and 
individual purchasers being victims of scrupulous “agents” who extort 
money from them, delay delivery of their vehicles and claim additional 
fees. 

Consequently, in order to address all these issues, I have held consultations with the 
associations of motor vehicle dealers with a view to finding ways and means to strengthen the 
current legislative framework. The associations  have submitted their views, comments and 
proposals, and these have been duly considered. 

Consultations were also held with the following Ministries and Departments – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 

the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development; 
the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport; 
the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster 
and Beach Management; 
the Mauritius Revenue Authority, and 
the National Transport Authority. 

Further  to  the  above  consultations,  more  restrictive  conditions  and  additional 

measures have been introduced, inter alia - 

1) 

2) 

3) 

Age criterion 
With  a  view  to  ensuring  that  second-hand  motor  vehicles  imported  into 
Mauritius are of better and safer conditions, the upper limit age criterion of 
the different categories of vehicles has been amended, while keeping the 
lower limit as it is currently. 

Pre-Shipment Inspection Certificate (PSI) and additional certificates 
and information required 
With  a  view  to  ensuring  more  control  on  existing  and  new  accredited 
agencies as well as to ensure that genuine information are being submitted 
to  my  Ministry,  registered  agencies  which  issue  the  Pre-Shipment 
Inspection  Certificate  will  be  subject  to  more  rigorous  conditions. 
Moreover, importers will have to submit additional certificates, which will 
be crosschecked with the PSI, for example, the roadworthiness certificate 
and the auction grade in the certified auction sheet. 
The auction sheet 

 

4) 

5) 

48 

To address the issue of falsification of auction sheets, importers will have 
to submit a certified true copy of the original auction sheet in the English 
language. 

Agents 
In  addition,  henceforth,  all  importation  and  sale  of  second-hand  motor 
vehicles should be made only through authorised dealers of second-hand 
motor  vehicles,  duly  registered  and  licensed,  and  importation  by 
individuals through “agents” will no longer be allowed. 
New dealers’ license 
With a view to bringing the business of importation and sale of second-
hand motor vehicles to a sound environment, no new dealers’ license will 
be issued for the next two years. 

6)  Warranty 

7) 

The current warranty, which is six months, will be increased to one year 
and  will  include  a  provision  for  the  spare  parts  to  be  covered  by  the 
warranty. 
Garage/After-sales service   
Henceforth, all second-hand motor vehicle dealers will have to show proof 
that  they  own  a  garage  or  are  affiliated  with  a  garage  through  a  written 
agreement to provide for repairs and after-sales service, especially during 
the warranty period. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I wish to highlight that overall  I have received very  good 
feedback from the general public and dealers of second-hand motor vehicles in respect of the 
measures brought by Government. 

Moreover,  at  their  press  conference  on  30  June  2016,  the  Dealers  in  Imported 
Vehicles Association expressed their satisfaction to the measures taken by Government, but 
had some reserves in respect of two issues, namely the age criteria for second-hand cars and, 
secondly,  on  the  coming  into  force  of  the  provision  regarding  submission  of  certified  true 
copy of the auction sheet. 

Taking  into  account  these  representations,  Government  on  01  July  thus  decided  to 

review the upper age limit as follows – 

(a) 

for second-hand cars, the age will remain four years instead of three; 

49 

for second-hand vans, the age will be four years instead of three, and 
for second-hand goods vehicles, the age will be six years instead of five. 

 
(b) 
(c) 
As  regards  the  submission  of  a  certified  true  copy  of  the  original  auction  sheet, 
instead  of  01  July  2016,  same  will  be  applicable  as  from  01  August  2016,  and  all  other 
measures taken by Government on 24 June 2016 will be implemented as such. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  If  there  were  prior  consultations,  why  was  there  a  review  on 

Government’s decision as regards the age of the vehicles? 

Mr Gungah: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Government wanted to make sure that 
all second-hand vehicles that are imported are in very good condition.  We suppose that a car, 
for example, which is less than three years old, is a better one than four years old. But the 
dealers’ problem is that they don’t easily have cars less than three years old in Japan because 
most of the Japanese people sell their cars after three years. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Is the hon. Minister aware that 
there has been a letter circulated to all Members of Parliament and particularly addressed to 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  depicting  the  malaise  hovering 
over  the  industry  following  this  review  in  decision?  They  are  talking  about  blatant 
irregularities.  They  are  talking  about  unbearable  paradox  and  even  threatening  to  sue 
Government. So, what is being done? 

(Interruptions) 

This is the letter.  Is the hon. Minister not aware? 

The Deputy Speaker: Can the hon. Member table the letter? 

Mr Mahomed: I can table the Motor Vehicle Dealers Association’s letter, titled ‘The 
review  of  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  on  the  age  limit  of  imports  of  second-hand  cars  in 
Mauritius  after  having  decided  otherwise  at  Cabinet  meeting  of  last  week.’  I  am  going  to 
table the letter just now. So, what is going to be done to address this malaise hovering over 
the industry? 

Mr  Gungah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  met  the  representatives  of  the  different 
associations.  We had frank discussions and they were happy with whatever Government has 
proposed. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

50 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you.  The  Minister  has  mentioned  that  they  have  to  produce 
several types of certificates. Very  good!   But, most of the time, we see  forged certificates 
landing in Mauritius. Is there any other mechanism that the hon. Minister may consider, for 
example, before selling the car, even if the car has been imported as per all certificates, they 
should go to the fitness centre for an examination, and that this is the final certificate that it is 
a genuine 3-year or 4- year old car which did not have accidents, reconditioned, and then they 
can sell it, and all this at the expense of the importer? 

Mr Gungah: In fact, it is like that now. In the paper that I am going to table, the hon. 

Member will find it there. 

Mr Jhugroo: Suppose a motor vehicle dealer of second-hand cars imports a 3-year 
old vehicle, places the car in his showroom, but could not sell the car before one year. What 
will happen after four years?  What is he going to do with the car? 

Mr Gungah: Well, if he followed the regulations and imported the car at the moment 
he had to import it, that is, where age criterion was respected, so, even if he sells it one year 
after or even two years later, it does not matter. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Mahomed! 

STC - DIESEL – IMPORTATION 

(No. B/733) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard  to  diesel,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State  Trading 
Corporation, information as to the average monthly quantities of importation thereof for the 
years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and since January 2016 to date. 

Mr  Gungah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  State  Trading 
Corporation that the Corporation imports two grades of diesel; one grade of diesel with less 
than  50  ppm  (parts  per  million)  sulphur  (that  was  previously  500  ppm  sulphur  and  it  was 
improved in March 2012 to 50 ppm), which is meant mostly for local automotive purposes 
such as buses, lorries, commercial/goods vehicles and cars/SUVs, and for industrial use. 

The other grade of diesel with less than 2,500 ppm sulphur is destined essentially for 

use as marine bunker fuel. 

 
With your permission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I shall table the information regarding 

51 

the monthly average quantities of imports by the STC for the period 2012 to June 2016. 

Mr Mahomed:  The paper will take some time before reaching me. The first grade of 
diesel, the one that the hon. Minister has explained, is the consumption per month on the rise 
or on the decline? 

Mr Gungah: According to my information, that is, in the Table that the hon. Member 
is going to have, it is more or less stable.  For example, in 2012, an average monthly quantity 
was 17,000 metric tonnes and in 2015, it was 17,063 metric tonnes. 

Mr Mahomed:  From January to June 2016, we see a dramatic drop.  In 2013, for 
example, it was 11,000 metric tonnes per month, but the average monthly for January 2016 is 
almost half, that is, 6,000 metric tonnes per month.  Is there any explanation to this? 

Mr Gungah: The hon. Member is speaking about bunker fuel.  In fact, in 2013, it was 
11,000 metric tonnes and then as from 2014, bunker fuel was liberalised and oil companies 
had the possibility of importing their own bunker, that’s why there is a decrease. At the same 
time, we should consider that the period is from January to June 2016, that is, six months. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Given  that  the  hon.  Minister  is  the  Minister  of  Commerce  and 
Industry, has there been a constat to correlate the declining trend with respect to the level of 
economic activity in the country? 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, when STC sells the petroleum products 
to the oil companies, STC does not have any control on the sale of these petroleum products 
that the petroleum companies do to their clients.  I have tried to gather some information and 
I must say that, in terms of economic activity, there has been an increase in both Mogas and 
gas oil combined together.  There has been an increase because compared to year 2011, it has 
increased by some 10%. 

ELECTRICITY ACT 2005 - PROMULGATION 

(No. B/734) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  the  Electricity  (Amendment)  Act  2005,  he  will  state  the  timeframe  set  for  the 
promulgation  thereof  now  that  it  will  be  possible  for  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority  to 
become  operational  following  the  recent  amendment  brought  to  the  Utility  Regulatory 
Authority Act.  

52 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  speech  on  the  Second 
Reading of the Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill, which was voted on 28 June 
2016, my first priority is now the appointment of the Board of the Authority. I am currently 
working on the proposals which I will submit to the hon. Prime Minister. 

 Once appointed, the Board will be required to recruit a Director in accordance with 
section 14 of the Act and other staff to carry out the extensive functions of the Authority, as 
spelt out in section 6. 

As the proclamation of the Electricity Act 2005 which immediately led to the repeal 
of the existing Electricity Act of 1939, it is my responsibility to ensure that all the conditions 
are satisfied for the Electricity Act 2005 to become effective.  As electricity supply is highly 
sensitive, there should be no situation of legal vacuum.   

My Ministry and the Central Electricity Board are actively working on the necessary 
regulations to be made under the Electricity Act 2005 to set the necessary technical standards 
for electricity supply and distribution. 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL - INCOME & EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/735)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  NIC 
Healthcare Ltd., information as to the – 

(a) amount of funds injected therein since August 2015 to date;  

(b) average monthly income and expenditure thereof, and  

(c) aggregate amount of liabilities and receivables thereof.  

Mr Jugnauth: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the NIC Healthcare Ltd. was incorporated on 
14 August 2015 as a subsidiary of the National Insurance Co. Ltd. and, the management and 
operations  of  the  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  was  transferred  on  25  August  2015  to  NIC 
Healthcare Ltd. 

Concerning part (a) of the question, I am informed that as from August 2015 to 30 
June 2016, the NIC Healthcare Ltd. has injected an amount of Rs196 m. to meet the shortfall 
in operational costs of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital. 

53 

 
Regarding part (b) of the question, I am informed that for the period August 2015 to 
June  2016,  the  average  monthly  income  and  expenditure  of  the  hospital  was  Rs58  m.  and 
Rs77 m. respectively, resulting in an average excess of expenditure over income of Rs19 m.  
However,  a  series  of  corrective  measures  have  improved  the  financial  performance  of  the 
Hospital and, in June 2016, the expenditure exceeded income by some Rs8 m. compared to 
around Rs35 m. in September 2015. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (c) of the question, the aggregate amount 
of liabilities for the NIC Healthcare Ltd. as at 30 June 2016 was Rs256 m.  The aggregate 
amount of receivables as at 30 June 2016 was Rs37.8 m. 

Mr Uteem:  The hon. Minister of Finance has just mentioned that, so far, Rs196 m. 
has been injected in Apollo Bramwell Hospital.  May I know from the hon. Minister where 
that money came from?  How were the funds allocated to NIC Healthcare Ltd.? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I believe that they are loans that have been taken from the bank 

to finance that expenditure. 

Mr Uteem: Answering to a PNQ on 03 May 2016, the Minister for Financial Services 

mentioned that – 

“(…)  A  Sale  and  Purchase  Agreement  (SPA)  is  being  finalised  with  Omega  Ark 
Healthcare Investment Ltd, the preferred bidder at an agreed price of USD 60 million. 
A legal team from Omega Ark is expected to come this week and the signature of the 
SPA is scheduled before the end of this month”. 

Meaning, before the end of the month of May! 

So, may  I know from the hon. Minister of Finance whether this Sale and Purchase 

Agreement has been finalised and the money paid? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, not yet, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, because discussions are still 
ongoing and, hopefully, there will come a time when it will come to a conclusion.  I must say 
we are looking at different options.  One of them was initially that there would be an outright 
sale, but we are looking at the other options that were expressed in the Expression of Interest. 

Mr Uteem: On a supplementary question from the hon. Leader of the Opposition on 
whether a due diligence has been carried out on Omega Ark, the hon. Minister stated that it is 
not  in  his  Ministry,  but  that  we  have  to  ask  this  question  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development.  So, now, I am asking the hon. Minister whether any due diligence 

 

54 

has been carried out on this entity Omega Ark, whether we know who the beneficial owners 
are and whether this company has the funds to acquire the hospital. 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I definitely presume that a due diligence has been carried out by 

the team negotiating with the company. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Replying  to  a  PQ  last  year,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  stated  that 
Apollo Bramwell was employing 21 foreign doctors and they were drawing a salary of Rs11 
m. monthly.  I would like to know if it is still the case nowadays. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  I  would  not  have  the  details  about  whether  the  doctors  how 
many  of  them  are  foreign  doctors.  For  example,  I  know  the    expenditure  with  regard  to 
doctors’  fees,  but  I  am  sure  they  comprise  of  foreign  doctors  and  local  doctors  also.  Of 
course, I can find out how many are foreign and how much expenditure has been incurred 
with regard to the foreign doctors. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, last supplementary! 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development with 
regard to part (c) of the question, there are several suppliers to whom Apollo Bramwell owes 
money for a long, long time and these local suppliers need these funds so that their business 
may  continue  to  operate?  There  is  the  problem  of  cash  flow.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development see to it that these suppliers are as soon as possible paid 
by the hospital? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, with regard to part (c), I have stated that - you mean the amount 

of receivables from ... 

(Interruptions) 

Suppliers!  But  they  would  have  been  paid  because  the  liabilities  are  up  to  Rs256  m. 
according  to  the  information  that  I  have.  Now,  I  don’t  know  if  there  are  other  suppliers 
whereby there is a dispute about the claims. That I would not know, but I can find out if the 
hon. Member can, of course, give me the specific information about which supplier;  I can 
have a look and pass it on certainly to the managing committee. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem, next question! 

 

 

 

55 

OVERSEAS TREATMENT SCHEME - ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  

(No.  B/736)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Overseas 
Treatment Scheme, he will state – 

(a) 

(b)  

the eligibility criteria to benefit thereunder, and  

for each of the years 2014, 2015 and since January 2016 to date, the number of 
applications received for assistance thereunder, indicating the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

number thereof which have been granted, and  

 aggregate amount of funds disbursed thereunder. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  eligibility  criteria  for  patients  to  benefit 

under the Overseas Treatment Scheme are as follows – 

(i) 

Treatment  is  not  available  in  public  hospitals  due  to  lack  of  expertise  and 
equipment, and 

(ii) 

Total household income does not exceed Rs50,000 per month. 

With  regard  to  parts  (b)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  the  required 

information. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  hon.  Minister  has  just 
mentioned that one of the criteria is that the treatment is not available locally in the hospitals. 
What about cases where the treatment is not available in public hospital but in private clinics 
in Mauritius?  Would the patient be eligible for a grant under that scheme, if they are able to 
carry out the treatment in a private clinic in Mauritius? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  the  scheme  deals  with  overseas  treatment.  I  think  that  says 

everything. 

Mr Uteem: The reason why I asked this specifically is that there is a Cabinet decision 
on 15 January 2016, earlier this year, where Cabinet has agreed to the Overseas Treatment 
Scheme being reviewed with a view of enabling a greater number of patients to benefit from 
treatment at greater value and under the scheme, specialists from abroad would be travelling 
to Mauritius to perform local surgery. So, we are not talking about flying the patients out, but 
doctors  coming  in.  That  is  why  I  ask  whether  if  we  have  a  specialist  who  has  flown  to 

 

56 

Mauritius  in  a  private  clinic  whether  the  patient  would  benefit  from  that  scheme  as  was 
decided in Cabinet earlier this year. 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what was, in fact, decided was that instead of 
sending  Mauritian  patients  overseas,  we  will  have  arrangements  with  the  doctors  and 
specialists from India mainly to come and operate on our patients in our hospitals.  

With  regard  to  those  who  have  been  treated  in  private  clinics,  they  are  outside  the 
jurisdiction of the hospitals and, in fact, this scheme is already working. Over the week-end, 
we had quite a number of surgeons coming from India who operated on our patients. I think 
the beauty of the scheme is that for the overseas treatment there were the criteria that had to 
be met. Now, the criteria will not apply because anybody needing treatment will be given the 
treatment in Mauritius by the visiting surgeons, etc. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. One of the criteria stated by the 
hon. Minister is gross income of 50,000 Mauritian rupees, household income. I would like to 
know from the hon. Minister if he would not reconsider this criteria because we all know that 
treatment abroad cost sometimes several hundred thousand rupees, sometimes millions, and 
someone earning Rs75,000 or Rs100,000, it does not make a big difference, usually people 
cannot  afford.  So,  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  would  not  reconsider  this 
decision  and  remove  that  gross  income  criteria  from  people  to  benefit  from  this  Overseas 
Treatment Scheme. 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  just  explained  that,  that  particular 
requirement  of  Rs50,000  household  income  per  month  would  not  be  applicable  when  the 
doctors are coming from overseas to treat these patients. They are not subject to these criteria. 
They are treated like any other patient. 

Dr. Sorefan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, cases of overseas treatment work well more or 
less with chronic cases that doctors say are inoperable in Mauritius, but there are certain cases 
that become very acute like brain surgery that I have mentioned here in this House. Doctors 
poke their hands in the skull and then suddenly see they can’t do it. Can the hon. Minister set 
up a fast track mechanism whereby within two or three days a patient gets all the benefits to 
go abroad to have it done? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, when I was looking at the new policy, I 
saw  that  a  lot  of  the  cases  that  were  going  overseas  were  neurosurgical  cases  and  when  I 

 

57 

started investigating why that was the case, I was informed that we did not have the necessary 
equipment, the hi-tech equipment. So, we made arrangements for the hi-tech equipment to be 
procured and I do not know whether we will be able to do the operations now, but in case we 
can’t, in order to save lives, the patients will be flown overseas, otherwise we will group the 
patients and get someone to come from overseas to operate in Mauritius. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Last  year,  there  was  one  lady  in  my  Constituency,  Mrs  R.  B.  who 
passed away because of gross medical negligence in the hospital and that was the subject of a 
PQ from hon. Dr. Sorefan this year.  

Now, she was deemed not being able to treat in Mauritius and was supposed to go, but 
she was not able to go because she was not well at all. In such cases, even a single case, can 
there be a consideration for the doctors who were supposed to treat her overseas to come over 
for the sake of saving lives? 

Mr Gayan: Yes, the policy works like that. Even if we have to save one life and we 

can get a doctor to come here, we will do it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem, last supplementary! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  welcome  the  initiative  of  the 
Government to fly in a specialist to come to Mauritius. But may I also ask the hon. Minister 
whether there can be State to State or hospital to hospital agreements between Mauritius and 
hospitals elsewhere where a preferential rate can be given to patients who go and carry out 
operations outside of Mauritius? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  understand  the  question  applies  to 
anybody  wishing  to  follow  treatment  overseas.  We  already  have  arrangements  with  some 
hospitals in India where they give us preferential rates.  These are in pursuance of an MoU 
which we have with them, but that is still available to anybody. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

CONVENTION OF THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES - 

COMPLIANCE 

(No.  B/737)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
whether, in regard to the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, she will state 

 

58 

the measures been taken since January 2015 to date to ensure that Mauritius complies with 
the obligations contained therein. 

(Vide reply to PNQ) 

INSURANCE INDUSTRY COMPENSATION FUND - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/738)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Insurance  Industry  Compensation  Fund,  he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Financial  Services  Commission, 
information as to the – 

(a)  

amount of funds injected therein since the date of inception thereof to date;  

(b)  

number of persons who have benefitted therefrom, and  

(c)  

quantum of money payable to the beneficiaries thereof.  

(Withdrawn) 

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH AND INNOVATION SCHEME & UNSOLICITED 

RESEARCH AND INNOVATION SCHEME - PROJECTS 

(No.  B/739)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education 
and  Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Collaborative  Research  and  Innovation 
Scheme and the Unsolicited Research and Innovation Scheme, she will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Mauritius Research Council, information as to the number of projects 
funded thereunder in each case, giving details thereof.  

(Withdrawn) 

NEOTOWN PROJECT 

(No.  B/740)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the Neotown Project, he will state where matters stand 
as to the implementation thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

59 

BANKS - FRAUD TRACKING MECHANISM 

(No. B/741) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
internet fraudsters and the recent cases of phishing reported by banks, he will state - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the fraud tracking mechanism currently in place to avert against such risks;  

if  the  services  of  international  experts  to  advise  on  these  matters  have  been 
enlisted and, if so, indicate the names and profiles of the incumbents thereof 
and, if not, why not, and  

the  actions  being  envisaged  by  his  Ministry  to  protect  the  reputation  of 
Mauritius as a safe and secure place for doing business. 

Mr Sinatambou: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for the information of the House, I wish to 
point  out  that  phishing  refers  to  the  fraudulent  practice  of  sending  emails  portraying 
companies,  usually  reputable  ones,  to  extract  personal  information  such  as  passwords  and 
credit card numbers online with a view to tricking organisations or individuals for monetary 
gains. 

Since  2012  to  date,  56  incidents  of  phishing  have  been  reported  by  banks  to  the 
Mauritian Computer Emergency Response Team known as CERT-MU which is a division of 
the National Computer Board operating under the aegis of my Ministry. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that CERT-MU has developed a 
comprehensive  guideline  for  the  benefit  of  Internet  users  about  precautions  to  be  taken  to 
avoid being victims of phishing.   

The guideline provides technical measures such as the deployment of anti-spam filters 
to prevent users from receiving phishing emails. This guideline is available on the CERT-MU 
website.  I  am  also  informed  that  extensive  sensitisation  campaigns  on  the  precautionary 
measures are also carried out for the benefit of all Internet users. In addition, I am informed 
that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association  have  issued  their  own 
guidelines  to  avert  against  the  risk  of  phishing  for  the  benefit  of  banking  institutions  in 
Mauritius. 

I am also informed that the Bank of Mauritius issued a public notice on its website on 
03 June 2016 cautioning the public and the financial community against phishing attempts 
through fake websites.   

60 

 
With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that it has not been 
necessary  to  enlist  the  services  of  international  experts  so  far.  This  is  because  CERT-MU 
already  collaborates  with  a  number  of  international  organisations  involved  in  resolving 
phishing  attacks.  These  organisations  include  the  Anti-Phishing  Working  Group  (APWG), 
which  is  based  in  San  Francisco,  United  States  and  the  Forum  of  Incident  Response  and 
Security Teams (FIRST) based in North Carolina, United States which regroups public and 
private Computer Emergency Response Teams throughout the world.  

Moreover, Mauritius also gets assistance from the Council of Europe under the global 

action on cybercrime project to fight against cybercrime including phishing. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the 
House that the reputation of Mauritius as a safe and secure place for doing business is well 
entrenched in the digital world. As a matter of fact, we have the ninth best score in the world 
and rank first in Africa on the United Nations Global Cybersecurity Index.  

However,  in  addition  to  the  measures  already  in  place,  my  Ministry  is  currently 
preparing  a  National  Cybercrime  Strategy.  The  Cybercrime  Strategy  will  set  out  the 
Government’s  approach  to  fight  cybercrime  through  improved  law  enforcement  capability 
and effective criminal justice framework and active international engagement. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Can  I  have  an  annual 

breakdown from the hon. Minister of the 56 cases and the monetary amount involved? 

Mr Sinatambou:  Yes, I have those details, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  For this year, 
we have had 6 phishing incidents; for last year, in 2015, there were 13 of them; in 2014: 17; 
in 2013: 9 and in 2012: 11.  So, there is no substantial increase as such from year to year, but 
I only have the number of phishing incidents.  I must say that banks are more or less reluctant 
to disclose amounts if ever there is any because that will decrease their goodwill with their 
clients. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

CARDIAC CENTRE – NEONATAL CARDIOLOGY 

(No.  B/742)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to cases of emergency 
catheterization of neonates, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Trust Fund 

 

61 

for  Specialised  Medical  Care  (Cardiac  Centre),  information  as  to  if  the  Cardiac  Centre  is 
staffed with qualified registered medical specialists to attend thereto and, if so, indicate the 
respective - 

(a) 

(b) 

names, qualifications and experiences thereof, and  

date of recruitment thereof. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  that  emergency  neonatal 
angiography  or  catheterisation  is  an  extremely  uncommon  procedure  and  the  need  for  this 
kind of operation arises once or twice in a decade with a population like we have.   

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care  (Cardiac 
Centre)  has  never  appointed  any  dedicated  specialist  for  neonatal  angiography  or 
catheterisation as the number of such cases is very limited.  Most diagnosis is done at the 
Centre by an experienced team of cardiologists using echocardiography.  Even if a full-time 
specialist or consultant would have been  appointed, he would unlikely be able to continue 
working because of the limited amount of work.  In a country as large as India, they have less 
than 10 full-time experienced specialists in the field of neonatal cardiology.  

Emergency  neonatal  angiography  is  an  extremely,  as  I  have  said,  uncommon 
procedure  and  we  have  had  in  the  past  doctors  from  overseas  who  have  performed  these 
operations on two occasions.  At the Centre, we have an experienced team of cardiologists 
and I will give the names: Dr. Sookur who is an interventional cardiologist; Dr. Beeharry-
Panray, anesthetist and Dr. Basu, cardiac surgeon.  These Specialists have been there since 
2002, 2008, and 2016 respectively.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I know from the hon. Minister how many such cases of newborns 

have been sent to India recently?  

Mr Gayan:  Well, I understand that just a couple of days ago there were two babies 

born with this kind of condition and the process is on to send them to India. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Prior to the termination of contract of Dr Reebye, he was in the team 
performing such type of emergency cases. Since his departure, this Trust Fund is not able to 
perform although they have the equipment and babies are sent to India? 

62 

 
Mr Gayan:  Well, in fact, I did not want to say that, but since the question has been 
asked - in 2007, Dr. Reebye attempted a therapeutic catheterisation, but it was unsuccessful. 
In 2009, the same doctor, in presence of Dr. Agathe, performed the same operation and the 
child passed away. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, ask for permission to stand up! 

Mr Bhagwan:  I am asking. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Now, you are asking! 

Mr Bhagwan: No, I have asked.  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware that 
one newborn baby in our own Constituency of Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière - I won’t give 
the name, it’s family D. of Maingard - was sent to India last week and four days after her 
birth, passed away? We were being made to understand that she could have been treated at 
the Centre where there was equipment, but it was the Ministry’s decision to send the baby 
with a doctor to India and unfortunately she passed away on the plane. 

Mr Gayan:  As I have said, each time this operation has been attempted in Mauritius, 
it was with the help of one Dr. Wojtalik from Poland and Dr. Agathe from Italy.  It has never 
been  performed  only  by  our  own  doctors  and  I  believe  that  in  that  case  all  the  doctors 
concluded that it was best to send the baby to India, but unfortunately these things happen. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I would like to know from the 
hon.  Minister  whether,  now  that  Dr.  Santosh Reebye’s  contract  has  been  terminated,  he  is 
planning  to  send  one  of  the  interventional  cardiologists  working  in  the  Cardiac  Centre  for 
basic training in paediatric interventional cardiology? 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have an ongoing programme for the training 
of the specialists.  Of course, we are identifying the people who will go, but in the meantime, 
as  I have indicated in a reply to the previous question that we have foreign visiting teams 
coming to perform all these operations. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister if a full enquiry could be carried out in 
respect  of  that  baby  Miss  B  of  Maingard  at  Beau  Bassin,  who  passed  away  on  the  plane 
where  there  were  medical  doctors  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life?  We  still 
insist that such type of operations could have been treated in Mauritius if Dr. Reebye was 
there? 

63 

 
Mr Gayan: Well, I will certainly ask my officers to carry out an enquiry, but I am 
sure that when the doctors advised that that particular baby had to travel overseas, they were 
acting in their best professional opinion. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, last supplementary! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether Dr. Reebye was on contract and, 

since when, and whether he was informed that his contract was going to end? 

Mr Gayan: Well, from what I understand, Dr. Reebye had reached the retirement age 
a long time back. He was on contract for a number of years and since last year he had been 
informed  that  his  contract  would  not  be  renewed,  but  he  was  given  a  month-to-month 
contract which was terminated. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, next question, please! 

MAURITIUS TELECOM - BRANDING EXERCISE - EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/743)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius Telecom, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
the  expenditure  incurred  in  respect  of  the  last  branding  exercise  thereof,  giving  details 
thereof. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  the  House  is  well  aware,  Mauritius 
Telecom is a company operating in a competitive business environment. As such, disclosure 
of details relating to the commercial policy of Mauritius Telecom may adversely affect the 
interest of a company. 

I  am  sure  that  the  hon.  Member  will  appreciate  that  the  branding  exercise  of  a 
company  is  an  internal  matter  which  is  part  of  its  commercial  management.  He  will, 
therefore, understand that I am not in a position to disclose the information sought. 

Mr Bhagwan: Is there a representative on the Board of the Mauritius Telecom, if yes, 

who? 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes, there is one representative who is the Ag. Permanent Secretary 

of my Ministry. 

64 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has been made aware by the 
representative  of  the  different  process  for  this  rebranding  and  whether  he,  as  Minister,  is 
aware of the sum paid to the company? 

Mr Sinatambou: No, I am not. But I would like to say, however, that this approach 
towards  non-disclosure  of  information  relating  to  Mauritius  Telecom  is  not  novel  to  this 
Government. In fact, when the hon. Member himself was Minister, I have two parliamentary 
replies, one dated 24 October 2000 and one dated 23 March 2004, when the now Leader of 
the Opposition was respectively Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister of the country, 
where  it  was  on  both  occasions  stipulated  that  Mauritius  Telecom  is  a  private  company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, that the information which is sought, if it relates to 
the  commercial  operation  of  the  company,  could  not  be  disclosed  because  of  its  sensitive 
nature. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  that,  as  Minister  of  Technology, 
Communication  and  Innovation,  and  having  a  representative  of  the  Board,  whether  he  is 
satisfied  that  money  has  been  spent  judiciously,  and  whether  a  Mauritian  company  had 
obtained the contract? 

Mr Sinatambou:  I  am not aware,  although  I must also say that, at the  time of the 
rebranding  exercise,  my  Ag.  Permanent  Secretary  was  not  yet  a  Member  of  the  Board  of 
Directors. However, I am sure that, as one of the most profitable companies of this country, 
money must be well spent at Mauritius Telecom. 

HOTEL PROJECTS - APPLICATIONS 

(No.  B/744)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the hotel projects, he will state – 

(a) 

the  number  of  applications  received  by  his  Ministry  for  the  implementation 
thereof since January 2015 to date, indicating in each case the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

names or the promoters thereof; 

location thereof, and 

(iii) 

number of rooms thereof, and 

(b) 

if approval has been issued for the construction of additional rooms in respect 
of the existing hotels and, if so, give details thereof. 

 
The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, since January 2015 to date, my 

65 

Ministry has received five applications with regard to hotel projects. 

I am tabling information requested for in respect of parts (a) (i), (a) (ii) and (a) (iii) of 

the question. 

As regards part (b) of the question, for the same period, approval has been given for 
three requests for extension and construction of additional rooms in existing hotels, namely: 
Le  Palmiste  for  19  rooms;  Le  Victoria  Resort  for  40  rooms  and  Belle  Mare  Plage  for  21 
rooms. 

Mr Bhagwan: With regard to the construction of new hotels, will the hon. Deputy 
Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  we  can  have  the  regions  mentioned  in  the  list 
where these hotels would be built? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  think  one  has  been  approved,  that  is,  in 
Trianon, Quatre Bornes and the other one is, in fact, in respect to a hotel residence that has 
become  a  hotel  and  that  is  in  Pointe  aux  Canonniers.  The  other  three  have  not  yet  been 
approved. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  the  expected 
number of rooms from foreign construction and if these permits were to be approved, how 
many rooms would Mauritius sustain as at now? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, I think we are wrong to say if the 
permits  would  be  approved.  They  have  not  been  approved.  The  permits  that  have  been 
approved, I think about 150 rooms. The others are still under consideration. But, it is good to 
know  that  if  we  are  to  pursue  our  tourism  development,  last  year  it  was  10%,  increase  in 
arrival this year, probably 10%. We will require additional rooms as from next year, although 
there are probably insufficient rooms in the pipeline. So, we will require something like 600 
rooms a year, at least, over the next three years to achieve maybe even 6% growth from the 
non-arrivals. 

Mr Jhuboo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can we know from the Deputy Prime Minister 
whether a study has ever been carried out by his Ministry on the critical number of tourists 
that we can accommodate for the critical threshold of the industry? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I am not aware whether there has been. Many, many 
years  ago,  one  of  my  predecessors  was  talking  about  that,  but  he  got  wrong  in  terms  of 

 

66 

maximum number of tourists that we can accommodate. But, I must say, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
that  the  objective  of  Government  is  not  just  merely  to  increase  numbers,  but  to  increase 
revenue for tourists and we will really be emphasising that and that was the whole point of 
having the moratorium on hotel openings for the first two years which is now over. The end 
of the moratorium which has been brought forward was to make the point that we need to 
improve quality and revenue per hotel room. 

Mr  Uteem:  Being  given  that  in  Mauritius  we  have  a  limited  number  of  pas 
géométriques  and  because  of  the  infrastructure  constraints,  has  the  Ministry  carried  out  a 
survey and identified spots that can be developed into four star, five star hotels and then, at 
the  second  time,  put  that  on  options  so  that  there  is  a  transparency  in  allocation  of  these 
spots? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  must  emphasise,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  that  my 
Ministry does not allocate land for hotel projects. We can advise, we can give our opinion 
and, of course, we also need to ascertain from the hotel promoter what type of hotel he is 
going to construct, because eventually we will have to give the hotel operation permit, but we 
are never involved in the allocation of land itself, although  I liaise with my colleague, the 
Minister of Housing and Lands. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  linked  to  this  question  of  new  hotel  projects  to 
accommodate the number of tourists which we are expecting in the years to come, has the 
Deputy Prime Minister or his Ministry taken any decision with regard to bungalow complex? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Bungalow  complex  is  an  interesting  question,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker. It depends whether the bungalow complex would be mainly for Mauritians 
or whether it would be a bungalow complex to be rented to foreigners and you would have to 
make that difference. Certainly, for the latter, we will be very much in favour, but for the 
former, I think it is a question that needs to be debated further. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last supplementary! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  may  we  know  from  the  hon.  Deputy  Minister, 
regarding  all-inclusive  tourists,  whether  there  will  be  a  policy  for  new  hotels,  that 
Government comes with a policy to let go this all-inclusive so that other stakeholders take 
part in financial gain out of these tourists coming to the hotels? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, there have been various criticisms 
leveled at all-inclusive hotels, but the mere fact that we are restraining the number of hotel 

 

67 

rooms means that the powers now have been granted back to hotel owners. So, by definition, 
these  all-inclusive  packages  generate  less  revenue.  One  would  hope  that with  the  reduced, 
previously  quite  wild  competition  between  hoteliers  would  cease  and  that  the  all-inclusive 
packages would be reduced in the future because, as I mentioned, there are less hotel rooms 
available. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful, next question! 

CARREAU ACACIA – PIG BREEDING - RELOCATION 

(No. B/745) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to pig breeding, he 
will state if consideration will be given for the relocation of the farms located in the region of 
Carreau Acacia and in the vicinity thereof where activities in relation thereto are carried out, 
in  view  of  the  polluting  nature  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate  when  and  where  will  they  be 
relocated. 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I will reply to this question. 

I am advised that the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security is fully aware of 
the environmental problems associated with pig breeding activities in the region of Carreau 
Acacia and in the vicinity thereof, and measures are being contemplated for the relocation of 
these activities to a suitable site. 

There are around 15 pig breeders operating within residential zones in the regions of 
Carreau  Acacia,  Camp  Carol,  Le  Bouchon  and  Mon  Trésor - Mon Désert,  with  a  current 
headcount of 551 pigs.  

I am further informed that consultations have been held with the breeders concerned 
and relevant authorities to find an acceptable solution to the issue. The consultation process is 
ongoing, and it is expected that a potential site will be identified in the South within the next 
few months for the relocation of the pig breeders. 

Mr Ramful: I know that the Minister is not the substantive Minister, but may I ask 
him if he can inform his colleague Minister that there was a High-Powered Committee that 
was set up on pig farming back in 2001, and in that report it was suggested that if sites are 
going to be earmarked, those sites should be at least about 400 to 500 metres away from the 

 

68 

residence?  So,  in  case  any  site  is  going  to  be  earmarked,  could  that  be  taken  into 
consideration? 

Mr Bholah: Well, from information available, a site has been identified at Le Val to 
the extent of some 83 arpents, which is under the control of Rose Belle Sugar Estate. This 
Ministry is currently seeking relevant clearances from different authorities to determine the 
suitability of the lot for pig breeding activities. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the substantive Minister aware that, with regard to this issue, there 
have been meetings carried out at the CAB of Plaine Magnien, meetings convened by my 
friend, hon. PPS Henry, myself and hon. Dr. Sorefan, wherein decision had been taken not to 
go according to the previous report, as mentioned by hon. Ramful, at Mare Tabac, but to go 
to Le Val?  That Committee, at that specific time, took that decision not to go to a residential 
area like Mare Tabac. 

Mr Bholah: Yes, I… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister, the hon. Member has taken a point of order. Let us listen to his point of order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ramful:  The  hon.  Member  said  that  I  mentioned  the  village  of  Mare  Tabac.  I 
have never mentioned the village of Mare Tabac! Can the hon. Member be asked to withdraw 
this? 

The Deputy Speaker: Sorry, can the hon. Member repeat his point of order? 

Mr Ramful: He said that I have mentioned the village of Mare Tabac. 

The Deputy Speaker: Who said that? 

Mr Jhugroo:  I never said this! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

69 

 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Just  to  clarify,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    According  to  the  report 
mentioned by hon. Ramful, it was mentioned to go to Mare Tabac. Following our decision 
taken, I think, last month, we decided to take this to Le Val.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please reply to the point of order! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Bholah: Of course, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I have gone through the minutes of 
the meetings that had been held, and the Committee resolved that Mare Tabac should not be 
sited for this project, and that is why I said that the latest information available is Le Val. But 
I went further to state that the Ministry of Agro-Industry is seeking relevant clearances from 
different authorities regarding the suitability of this project. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon.  Ramful! 

GRADUATE TRAINING FOR EMPLOYMENT SCHEME – ENROLMENT 

(No. B/746) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Graduate Training for Employment Scheme, she will state 
the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

eligibility criteria to benefit thereunder; 

number of graduates – 

(i) 

enrolled thereunder, indicating the number thereof who have obtained 
another employment thereafter; 

names and addresses of those enrolled thereunder, and  

amount of funds disbursed thereunder as at to date. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in my reply to PQ No. B/491 on 
the Graduate Training for Employment Scheme, I informed the House that the objective of 
the scheme is to enhance the employment prospects of unemployed graduates by providing 
them with skills as per the evolving requirements of the job market. 

As regards to part (a) of the question, the eligibility criteria are – 

(i) 

(ii) 

that beneficiaries should be holders of at least a degree; 

they should be unemployed, and 

 

70 

(iii) 

that they should be registered on the HRDC database for GTES. 

I wish to add that the selection is carried out by respective employers who undertake 

to recruit them after successful completion of the training as per contractual provisions. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the number of graduates as 
at 07 July 2016 having enrolled and currently undergoing training is 76.  I am also advised 
that action has also been initiated for the enrollment of some 157 graduates under the scheme, 
and this exercise will be finalised shortly. 

All  the  graduates,  after  successful  completion  of  their  training  programme,  will  be 

employed by their respective companies having selected them for the course. 

In regard to part (c), I am tabling the respective names and addresses of those already 

enrolled under the GTES. 

As  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  as  at  date,  around  Rs8  m.  have  been  approved  for 

disbursement under this programme. 

Mr Ramful: Would the hon. Minister agree with me that this scheme is not bringing 
the expected results as far as mismatch is concerned, and what does the hon. Minister propose 
to change the situation? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the scheme is there to be 
able to help the unemployed graduates to get employment.  Obviously, there is a database 
that has been registered at the level of the HRDC. These people are contacted, and they are 
then  recruited  by  the  private  sector  wishing  to  take  them  on  board  in  their  respective 
companies. 

However,  we  have  noted  that,  in  spite  of  being  called  a  number  of  times  by  the 
HRDC,  many  supposedly  unemployed  graduates  refuse  to  join  the  scheme.  Some  of  them 
join the scheme and later, on obtaining employment elsewhere, drop the training and go for 
employment. Obviously, this particular scheme is to enhance employability of unemployed 
graduates.  

The issue of mismatch is being dealt with at the level of the training institutions along 
with the industry, and together they are collaborating and trying to up with designs of new 
programmes so as to ensure that the mismatch issue gets reduced. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

71 

 
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. May I know from the hon. Minister 
whether there is any incentive given to employers to recruit, as a matter of priority, people 
who undergo this Graduate Training for Employment Scheme? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the payment for the training is provided by the 
State, and we ask the employers to come and recruit from the lot of unemployed graduates 
that we have. They select the candidates and we send them for training. The training is paid 
by Government and a stipend is also offered to the participants. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister mentioned that after the training the employer 
undertakes  to  employ  these  trainees.  May  I  know  for  how  long  they  are  trained  and  that 
contract of employment is for how long? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have insisted that the 
private  sector,  the  companies  recruiting  the  candidates  do  recruit  them  after  having 
successfully completed the course. Now, those who started the training started it in March 
2015. They have not completed yet, but they are to take all these graduates on board after 
training, after successfully completing the course. 

Mr Baloomoody: We know cases where these people are being exploited.  After the 
training, they undertake to employ these people, but they employ them only for a short term. 
Having benefited for two years of their service as trainees, they employ them for a very short 
term. So, my question is: for how long is that contract of employment? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, we have asked them to recruit them at least for a 
minimum of two years to start with. It will not be in the advantage of any company to take 
time and select people, get them trained, give them training in their institutions or companies 
and then allow them to go. Government is providing the incentive by providing the training, 
by paying for the training, by providing stipend during the training. I do not think that any 
responsible company  will take up trained individuals and then  ask them to go  and replace 
them by untrained individuals. 

YOUTH EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME - ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 

(No. B/747) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to the Youth Employment Programme, he will state the – 

72 

eligibility criteria to benefit thereunder;  

number of young persons;  

(i)  

enrolled thereunder, indicating the number thereof who have obtained 
another employment thereafter;  

names and addresses of those enrolled thereunder, and  

amount of funds disbursed thereunder as at to date.  

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform 
the  House  that  Mauritian  nationals  aged  between  18  and  30  years  duly  registered  at  the 
Employment Information Centres and on the Youth Employment Programme (YEP) database 
are  eligible  to  benefit  from  this  programme.    However,  the  latter  should  have  been 
unemployed for 30 days or more at the time of registration.  

 
 From the start of the programme in January 2013 up to June 2016, there have been 
20,593  registrants  who  met  the  eligibility  criteria  out  of  a  total  number  of  34,604 
registrations.  A total of 14,984 applicants have  been placed under the  YEP in the private 
sector and a further 1,004 applicants have been placed in the public sector.  

Following a tracer study which the Ministry of Labour carried out among 909 private 
sector employers in June 2016, it is estimated that around 44% of those placed under the YEP 
have secured permanent employment. 

As for part (c) of this question, the information will be placed in the Library of the 

House. 

I  am  informed  that,  in  relation  to  part  (d),  an  amount  of  Rs268,531,471  has  been 
disbursed, thereunder, for the period January 2013 up to June 2016.  A sum of Rs21,447,000 
has been disbursed for the YEP in the public service since its implementation in November 
2015. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful, next question! 

PROFESSIONAL REGATTA PIROGUE LEAGUE - EXPENDITURE 

(No. B/748) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the current edition of the Professional Regatta Pirogue League, he will, 

 

73 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Tourism  Promotion  Authority, 
information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the amount of expenditure incurred in relation to the organization thereof as at 
to date, giving a breakdown thereof item-wise, and  

if consideration will be given for a review of the prizes to be offered to the 
participants and to the winners in respect of the next edition thereof. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  believe  that  the  hon. 
Member is referring to the National Regatta Professional League which is an event organised 
since 2015 as part of the Cultural and Sports Tourism Programme of the MTPA with the aim 
to provide on a regular basis a spectacular event for overseas visitors as well as locals. 

I am informed by MTPA that since its introduction last year, 12 regattas have been 

organised so far, as follows – 

• 
• 

nine regattas in 2015 at a total cost of Rs814,212, and 
three regattas as at May this year at a cost of Rs309,464. 

Regarding part (a) of the question, I am tabling the expenditure incurred in respect of 

each event item-wise. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am advised that the first three winners are given 
a price of a symbolic amount and a shield. For edition 2016, in addition to the cash prizes to 
winners,  consideration  will  also  be  given  to  offer  each  participant  a  token  amount  in 
recognition of their participation and to encourage more entries to the event. 

Mr Ramful: Can I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether he is aware that for 
the grand finale that was held on 20 December of last year, the cash price that was proposed 
to the winner was Rs50,000 and the participants were also promised to be given a price of 
Rs10,000?  I have received complaints from the association that had organised that activity 
together with the MTPA, that, apparently, the cash price has not been paid yet. 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  I am not aware of the cash price; it looks quite high, 

but I will look into it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gobin, next question! 

 

 

 

74 

DR. A. G. JEETOO HOSPITAL - AYURVEDIC CLINIC 

(No. B/749) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Region 1 within 
the catchment area of the Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, he will state if consideration will be given 
for the opening of one Ayurvedic clinic thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in my reply to PQ B/183 of 10 March 2015, I 
informed  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  already  providing  Ayurvedic  services  at  the 
following five health institutions, namely – 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

Belvédère Mediclinic; 

L’Escalier Mediclinic; 

SSRN Hospital; 

Victoria Hospital, and 

La Source Ayurvedic Clinic in Flacq. 

As for patients living in health region one, within the catchment area of Dr. Jeetoo 

Hospital, they are already being served by the Ayurvedic clinic of SSRN Hospital. 

I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  has  already  initiated  necessary 
action for the provision of Ayurvedic services at the Mediclinic of Plaine Verte in the near 
future. 

Mr Mahomed: In that same PQ No. B/183, which was from me, the hon. Minister 
said that the Ayurvedic services was to be dispersed at the Plaine Verte Mediclinic as from 
May 2015 and we hear today that it has not materialised yet.  May we know why? 

Mr  Gayan:  The  reason  is  very  simple,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    We  have  14 
Ayurvedic doctors, five of them are employed by the Ministry and the others employed in the 
private sector.  Now, we are trying to see if we can use part of them on a sessional basis to 
service Plaine Verte. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gobin, next question! 

BOIS CHERI - COOPERATIVE STORES SOCIETY - BUILDING 

(No. B/750) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the  Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the ex- cooperative building 

 

75 

situated at Cooperative Street, in Bois Cheri, he will state if consideration will be given for 
the vesting thereof in the District Council of Savanne and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, at the very outset, I would like to inform the House that the building 
referred to in the question belongs to the Bois Cheri Cooperative Stores Society Ltd.  In fact, 
the Cooperative Society currently owns a plot of land to the extent of 15 perches and one 
storey building with a floor area of 1,400 square feet. 

In view of the financial difficulties, the Bois Cheri Cooperative Stores Society Ltd. 

ceased operation in September 2002. 

In May 2009, at the request of the Development Bank of Mauritius Ltd. a notice was 
issued  for  sale  by  levy  against  the  Cooperative  Society  for  non-repayment  of  a  loan 
contracted by the latter. 

However, the Mauritius Consumers Cooperatives Federation Ltd. came to the rescue 

of the Cooperative Society and agreed to settle the debt towards the DBM Ltd. 

In  May  2009,  the  Registrar  of  Cooperative  Societies,  in  accordance  with  section 
47(10)  of  the  Cooperative  Act  2005,  as  amended,  appointed  the  Mauritius  Consumers 
Cooperatives Federation Ltd. as Caretaker Board for a period of 10 years. 

In June 2015, a request was made by the Ministry of Local Government for putting 
the building of the Cooperative Society at the disposal of the District Council of Savanne to 
be used as a Village Council.  The Caretaker Board did not propose to sell the land and the 
building, but instead was agreeable to rent the first floor of the building on such terms and 
conditions to be agreed upon by all parties concerned. 

In November 2015, the Ministry of Local Government was informed accordingly. 

Mr Gobin:  May I know from the Minister, from November 2015 up to now, what 
has happened between the Ministry of Business and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Local 
Government, and whether there has been a coordination meeting involving the Cooperative 
Society, the District Council and other stakeholders?  The reason I am asking this question is 
because  this  building  has  been  unoccupied  and  unutilised  ever  since  2002,  if  I  am  not 
mistaken. 

76 

 
Mr Bholah:  As I stated earlier, there is an agreement, if I can say so, that it may be 
rented to the Ministry of Local Government, but since November 2015 we have not had any 
reply. 

Mr Gobin:  May I know from whom was the reply expected? 

Mr Bholah: Well, I do not have the information, but I presume that the letter has been 

sent to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

BELLE ETOILE - ROADS RESURFACING 

(No. B/751) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
Belle Etoile, in Beau Bassin, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central 
Water Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for a complete resurfacing 
of  the  roads  thereat  following  the  completion  of  the  works  being  carried  out  for  the 
replacement of the water pipes. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, I am informed by the Central Water Authority that as 
at date, two contracts for pipe laying works have been carried out in the region of Belle Etoile 
in Beau Bassin.  

As per wayleave conditions obtained from the Local Authority, the CWA is required 

 
to carry out only trench width reinstatement of the roads. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! Hon. Jahangeer, next question! I am sorry, 

hon. Bhagwan has a supplementary question. Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  have  one  supplementary  on  this  question,  Sir.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-
Prime  Minister,  at  least,  state  whether  he  has  received  representations  with  regard  to  the 
quality of work effected by the contractors of the CWA, post-repairs? Can we know whether 
these  contractors  have  performed  according  to  the  contract  because  the  quality  of  work 
following pipe laying these days laisse à desirer? So, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, at 
least, see with the CWA to review the list of contractors where there have been failures to 
attend to what has been inserted in the contract? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  generally,  I  have  received  certain  complaints  regarding 
these reinstatement works. One of them relates to Wastewater, which has been raised by the 

 

77 

hon. Member himself by way of oral representations in one area of his Constituency. On each 
such occasion,  I  referred the matter to the Authority  concerned in order to make sure that 
proper reinstatement is carried out. 

Mr Bhagwan: If I can say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is not only in my Constituency, 
generally when we go around, we see the reinstatement works effected by contractors of the 
CWA, be it on the main road or be it on the secondary roads, which laisse à desirer; c’est un 
travail de cuit vider. So, we understand that there needs to be some kind of repair! 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know what type it is.  Sometimes, they make trenches on a road where there has been 
concrete asphalt and the repair is done by ordinary macadam. So, there is a real problem. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I don’t think we can generalise. I know, for instance, that in St 

Anne Road, it is as if a Boulevard, but … 

(Interruptions) 

Royal Road, Curepipe and there are some areas where there have been problems and each 
time, as I have said, I have referred the matter to the Authority. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. After having listened to my friend, 
the  hon.  Whip  of  the  Opposition  that  work  is  being  done  as  cuit  vider,  not  now  but since 
many years, would the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, before issuing contracts, consider revisiting 
the  specifications  because  the  cuit  vider  work  carried  out  since  many  years  is  really  a 
problem everywhere in the country?  

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Let  me  just  say,  I  have  looked  at  the  contracts.  The  new 
contracts that are being made contain a two-step condition. First of all, they have to reinstate 
just the width of the trench in order to allow the soil to subside. After  subsidence, after a 
certain period, which is stipulated in the contract, then they have to do the whole width of the 
road. That is what I have seen in one of the new contracts which are being done. I am talking 
of  Wastewater  Authority;  I  will  see  what  is  happening  with  the  Central  Water  Authority. 
Many of these have followed the old type of contracts which now have got to be revisited.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

78 

 
Mr Mahomed: Yes, as regards the finished work post contract, as mentioned by hon. 
Bhagwan, may I suggest that the problem will be taken up at the level of the approval from 
the engineer of the Central Water Authority, that due diligence, that due care be exerted by 
the engineer in certifying the payment because it is issued. Because once payment is made, 
there is no coming back and the work will remain cuit vider in nature ad infinitum. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, of course, there is a problem at that level. We know what is 

the problem at that level…  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Quirin, last supplementary! 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, lors de l’ajournement des travaux parlementaires le 10 
novembre de l’année dernière, j’avais fait état de ce problème juste après les travaux entrepris 
par la CWA à Belle Etoile en particulier. Peut-on savoir si depuis le 10 novembre de l’année 
dernière à ce jour qu’est-ce qui a été fait où est-ce que rien n’a été fait pour remettre en état 
les routes à Belle Etoile en particulier? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  had  given  instructions,  I  will  look  into  it  to  see  why  Belle 
Étoile. I have gone to Belle Étoile because I have travelled in Belle Étoile also and I have 
seen the state of the roads, I have given instructions but we will see what has happened. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

CEB - COMBINED CYCLE GAS TURBINE - BID 

(No.  B/752)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the initial bid launched for the procurement of consultancy services for a Combined 
Cycle Gas Turbine, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to the reasons why it has been cancelled. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  on  26  August 
2015, it issued an open Expression of interest for Consultancy Services for the setting up of 
the CCGT plant at Les Grandes Salines.  

It  received  proposals  from  34  firms,  out  of  which  15  were  shortlisted.  On  27 
November  2015,  it  sent  a  Request  for  Proposal  to  the  shortlisted  firms  and  by  the  closing 
date, 9 proposals were received.  

79 

 
I am informed by the CEB that on the recommendation of the Tender Committee, it 
decided to carry out a fresh bid exercise and, this, for two reasons: One was that a deficiency 
had been noted in the bid documents.  The second reason was that the site had been moved 
from  Les  Salines  to  Fort  George.    The  deficiency  was  that  the  tender  documents  did  not 
specify  the  number  of  bids  which  the  Consultants  were  to  appraise.  As  a  result,  the 
Consultants provided a fixed number of bids which they were to appraise, each Consultant 
providing a different number. This led to the Bid Evaluation Committee to find all the bids 
except  one  to  be  non-responsive.  The  Tender  Committee  ruled  that  on  account  of  this 
deficiency, the exercise should be cancelled and a re-bid exercise conducted.  

The new Request for Proposal was issued on 24 May 2016 and by the closing date of 
22 June 2016, 9 bids were received from the same firms who initially submitted a proposal. 
The bids are being evaluated. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: May I know whether in the new bid the site where this is supposed to 

take place is stipulated, that is, Fort George? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Fort  Victoria,  I  believe.  Yes,  absolutely,  the  new  Request  for 

Proposal is a plant at Fort George, Mauritius. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. One of the terms of reference is for 
this Consultant to carry out a feasibility study to validate the project, the project being one 
which will run on light diesel oil and then be converted subsequently to liquefied natural gas. 
So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  why  are  we  already  going  after  this 
consultancy  and  telling  them  that  we  plan  to  convert  to  liquefied  natural  gas  when  the 
committee set up by his Ministry to evaluate the feasibility of having LNG in Mauritius has 
not even submitted its recommendations? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, we want to take all precautions. For the moment, we have 
not received the recommendations on  LNG. So, we are carrying on on diesel awaiting the 
recommendations  of  LNG.  If  LNG  is  found  to  be  commercially  not  viable,  then  we  will 
continue on diesel. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

80 

 
Mr  Jahangeer:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Is  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister  aware  that  there  was  a  company  selected,  namely  WorleyParsons  by  the  Tender 
Committee and then was ultimately cancelled. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  This is what I have said.  There was one company only that had 

been found to be responsive. Well, the name is WorleyParsons RSA of South Africa. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

CWA - ELECTRONIC WATER METERS - CALIBRATION 

(No.  B/753)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the mechanical water meters, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Central  Water  Authority,  information  as  to  if  the  Authority  is  equipped  for  the  calibration 
thereof, indicating if the implementation of a project for the replacement thereof by electronic 
water meters is being envisaged and, if so, indicate where matters stand in relation thereto. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  CWA  that  it  does  have 
equipment to test mechanical water meters of diameter 15 mm up to 65 mm for accuracy tests 
only.  For calibration of meters, it must have recourse to the Legal Metrology Services.   

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the CWA that it is envisaging a 
pilot  project  for  introducing  automated  meter  reading  for  5,500  customers  and  is  now 
working on the technical details.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

NHDC HOUSING UNITS - HEALTH & SAFETY FACILITIES 

(No.  B/754)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the new NHDC housing units, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the NHDC 
Ltd., information as to if health and safety facilities are provided therein. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC) 
that the new NHDC housing units are of duplex type and of an area of 50m². Each housing 

 

81 

unit consists of a ground plus one structure with an internal staircase. The housing estates are 
provided  with  leisure  and  recreational  facilities  and  green  spaces  to  enhance  the  living 
conditions of the residents.  

Furthermore,  the  NHDC  housing  projects  are  implemented  after  consultations  and 
after  having  obtained  relevant  clearances/permits  from  all  the  Authorities  concerned 
including the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Local Authorities, the Mauritius Fire 
and Rescue Service, the Wastewater Management Authority, the Central Water Authority, the 
Central  Electricity  Board,  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  and  the  Road 
Development Authority. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to reassure the House that all necessary measures are 
taken to provide a safe and healthy environment to the beneficiaries of the NHDC housing 
units. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr  Jahangeer:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    Will  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister consider having a fire extinguisher installed in each of these units in view of a recent 
accident that happened in one of the NHDC apartments - the price is low compared to the 
price of one unit of the housing project - plus a ramp for disabled people to go inside the 
house?  

Mr  Soodhun:    We  are  doing  our  best  instead  of,  as  it  was  in  the  past,  only  one 
bedroom, now, we are coming with two bedrooms.  We hope in the future.  I don’t think I 
have received any complaint about it, but I am sure what the hon. Member is telling is for the 
security of people itself.  I think we are  going to explain to the people of the danger.  We 
might see to it how we can tackle this problem. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Talking about prices, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister give us an 
indication about how much the social housing unit that he has just detailed will cost to the 
buyer?   

Mr Soodhun:  It will cost about Rs400,000.  The house completely is Rs1.2 m. and 

the buyer will have to pay only Rs400,000 within 25 years.   

MAURITIUS JUDO FEDERATION - MANAGING COMMITTEE 

82 

 
(No.  B/755)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Judo, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Mauritius Judo Federation, information as to if a new Managing 
Committee  is  in  place  thereat  since  Thursday  28  June  2016  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 
composition thereof. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in a letter dated 29 June 2016 addressed 
to the President of the Mauritius Judo Federation and copied, among others, to my Ministry, 
Mr Rashid Jhurry, the Vice President of the Federation has apprised parties concerned that, at 
a meeting held on 28 June 2016, there has been a reshuffling of the post of the President of 
the Federation.  Consequently, Mr Rashid Jhurry has been appointed President.  I am tabling 
a copy of the letter dated 29 June 2016 along with the Notes of Meeting of the Managing 
Committee held on 28 June 2016. 

It  is  to  be  pointed  out  that,  at  the  Managing  Committee  of  28  June  2016,  only  7 
members - 4 elected and 3 co-opted were present, whilst the Rule 8(9) of  internal rules of the 
Federation  stipulates  that  the  quorum  of  the  Managing  Committee  to  meet  shall  be  8 
members.   

I am tabling a copy of the internal rules of the Federation as approved by the Registrar 

of Associations.   

It has also been noted that proper procedures have not been followed for the holding 

of the Managing Committee of 28 July 2016.   

The  views  of  the  Registrar  of  Association  have  been  sought  on  the  matter  and 

appropriate action will be initiated in the light of his views.    

I am also circulating a composition of the Managing Committee. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, doit-on déduire par la réponse de l’honorable ministre 
que  son  ministère  ne  reconnait  pas  ce  nouveau  comité  directeur,  c’est-à-dire,  la  nouvelle 
composition du comité directeur de la Fédération de Judo? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir, as  mentioned in Rule 8 subsection 9, 
there should be 8 members to have the Managing Committee and in the committee that was 
held by the Vice President, only 7 members were present and among the 7 members only 4 

 

83 

were elected and 3 co-opted.  That is why the views of the Registrar of Association have been 
sought and in the light of this we will decide.   

Furthermore, I have a letter from the ACNOA dated 21 December 2015, addressed to 

the President which states as follows - 

“Kindly be informed that I have also been directed by General Palenfo, the President 
of the ACNOA, to inform you and your committee that no changes in the presidency 
of the Mauritius Judo Federation will be accepted by the African Judo Union until the 
end  of  the  Summer  Olympic  Games  to  be  held  in  Rio  in  2016.    Failing  which  the 
African Judo Union reserves the right to take appropriate actions against the Mauritius 
Judo Federation.” 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  M.  le  président,  l’honorable  ministre  a  fait  référence  à  une  lettre  de 
l’ACNOA,  qui  comme  nous  le  savons  tous,  est  un  regroupement  des  différents  comités 
olympiques. De ce fait, est-ce que l’honorable ministre peut nous dire s’il trouve normal que 
cette organisation puisse intervenir dans le fonctionnement de la fédération mauricienne de 
Judo ? Comme l’ACNOA n’est pas la Fédération Internationale de Judo ni l’union de Judo 
Africaine,  est-  ce  que  l’ACNOA  a  les  pouvoirs  d’intervenir  dans  le  fonctionnement  de  la 
fédération locale de Judo? 

Mr Sawmynaden : In this case, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the main point is that at the 
Managing Committee which was held, only 7 members were present and the Rule states that 
a minimum of 8 members should be there to have the Managing Committee.  So, let us wait 
for the views of the Registrar of Association. 

Mr Quirin: Si j’ai bien compris, M. le président, l’honorable ministre veut attendre le 
point  de  vue  du  Registrar  of  Association.    Mais  ma  première  question  était :  est-ce  que  le 
ministère des sports - de par ce qui s’est passé, qu’il n’y avait pas le quorum requis stipulé 
par la loi – à ce stade reconnait ou pas la nouvelle composition du comité directeur ?  C’est 
cela que j’aimerai savoir tout d’abord.  

Mr Sawmynaden :  So far that nothing has been in order, we recognise the previous 

committee which was duly and democratically elected. 

Mr  Quirin:    M.  le  président,  est-  ce  que  l’honorable  ministre  est  au  courant  que 
durant ces huit derniers mois, il n’y a eu aucune réunion du comité directeur de la fédération 

 

84 

et que depuis quelque temps cette discipline piétine. Je pense qu’il est grand temps que le 
ministère de la Jeunesse et des Sports se décide à mettre bon ordre au sein de cette fédération, 
au sein de cette discipline. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, that’s what we are doing. So, we will wait. Because one is 
saying that they have been sitting, the other group is saying that they have not been sitting. 
Let the Registrar of Associations come with his views and from there we will take all actions. 
But, we will need to take into consideration that the Olympic Games are just behind the door 
and we have one judo who is being qualified and we don’t want any actions so that she can 
be suspended. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Est-ce  que  le  ministre  serait  d’accord  avec  moi  si  le  président  et  les 
membres de chaque fédération ne fonctionnent pas? C’est leur devoir d’assumer leur propre 
responsabilité et quand le ministère va s’ingérer, on viendra dire que le ministère est en train 
de s’ingérer dans les affaires des fédérations. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Je suis tout à fait d’accord avec le Whip de l’Opposition. Actually, 

at the Ministry… 

Le Whip du gouvernement. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

C’est que the question is always on this side. Actually, he is doing their job. 

Définitivement, le ministère ne s’ingère  pas dans les affaires de la  fédération, mais 

quand il y a des soucis, si, on va voir comment régler le problème. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, time is over! I wish to inform the House that 

PQ B/761, B/764, B/757 and B/758 have been withdrawn! Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

 

 (4.16 p.m.) 

85 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BAI SUPER CASH BACK GOLD & BRAMER ASSET MANAGEMENT LTD. 

– POLICYHOLDERS - REPAYMENT 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr R. Bhadain): Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a statement on repayment effected to 
date to victims of BAI Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management Ltd. As the 
House is aware, the measures put in place by Government have initially safeguarded 135,283 
life insurance policyholders of the ex-BAI and 50,524 depositors who had their money in ex-
Bramer Bank. 

Subsequently,  the  cases  of  Bramer  Asset  Management  Ltd.  and  Super  Cash  Back 
Gold  have  been  dealt  with.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  after  payments  effected  during  the  last 
couple of weeks, the situation is as follows – 

With regard to ‘Bramer Asset Management Ltd’: 

3,177 investors were eligible for repayment and to date 3,152 cases have been finally 
settled. The remaining 25 persons are not in Mauritius and will collect their cheques in due 
course.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  this  brings  finality  to  these  Bramer  Asset  Management  Ltd. 
cases. 

With regard to ‘Super Cash Back Gold’: 

A total of 16,341 policyholders had invested in the SCBG scheme of which 16,287 

are eligible for repayment. 

To date: 

- 

11,222 policyholders with less than Rs1 m. have been fully paid and settled; 
179  persons  have  not  collected  their  cheques  and  will  do  so  in  due  course. 
This, Mr Deputy Speaker, brings finality to 69% of all investments in Super 
Cash Back Gold, which have now been settled. 

As regards policyholders who invested in policies ranging from a sum of Rs1 m. to a 

sum of Rs116 m.: 

- 

2,289 policyholders elected for Option 1, i.e, to have their initial ‘Capital only’ 
repaid  over  five  years  and  1,531  have  been  paid  their  first  20%.  675 

 

- 

- 

86 

policyholders will be paid via bank transfer by tomorrow, bringing the total 
paid to 2,206. The remaining 83 policyholders will be collecting their payment 
in due course upon completion of outstanding formalities. 

With  regard  to  2,064  policyholders  who  elected  for  Option  2  –  i.e.  to  have 
75% of their investments repaid, without deduction of any bonus received and 
they have been paid half immediately and half will be paid in 3 years’ time. 
Out of these 2,064 eligible policyholders, 1,386 have been paid their dues to 
date. An  

additional  139  will  be  paid  by  the  NPFL  via  bank  transfer  by  tomorrow 
bringing the total paid to 1,525. The remaining 539  

policyholders will be collecting their payment in due course upon completion 
of outstanding formalities. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, suspicious cases have been referred to the Financial Intelligence 

Unit for verification of source of funds and the figures are as follows - 

212 suspicious cases of Bramer Asset Management Ltd. and 533 cases of ‘Super Cash 
Back Gold’ were referred for analytical work with regard to source of funds and as at 
date - 

- 

- 

- 

- 

148 cases have been dealt with and referred back to National Property 
Fund Ltd.; 

89 cases of ‘non-residents’ will be referred by the FIU to appropriate 
authorities for further verification work; 

5 identified cases of suspected ‘unexplained wealth’ have been referred 
to the Integrity Reporting Agency, and 

503 cases are being scrutinised and as and when each case is cleared, it 
will be referred back to NPFL for payment to the respective investor 
and/or policyholder. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, I am also informed by the FIU that out of these cases currently 

being scrutinised, several cases have revealed - 

(i) 

suspected  laundering  of  proceeds  derived  from  criminal  activities  including 
breaches of the Dangerous Drug Act, the Copyright Act, and PoCA; 

 
(ii) 

(iii) 

87 

suspected tax evasion, involving under invoicing to avoid import duty under 
the Customs Act; 

suspected  use  of  ‘prête-noms’  and  unexplained  wealth  under  the  Good 
Governance and Integrity Reporting Act. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, the repayment of the policyholders and investors have been done 

as promised by Government. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Protection of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill 

(No. XV of 2016) was read a first time. 

The Deputy Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.24 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.04 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION BILL 

(No. XIV of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 

Commission Bill (No. XIV of 2016). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(5.02 p.m.) 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 
Speaker,  let  me  at  the  outset  make  it  clear  that  we,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  we,  in  the 
MMM, do not agree with that Bill.  It is not that we don’t agree with the contents of the Bill 
because  the  contents  of  the  Bill  are  exactly  what  they  were  when  we  voted  the  Police 
Complaints  Division  under  the  Human  Rights  Act.    What  we  do  not  agree  is  that  there  is 
nothing  new  fundamentally  in  that  Bill.  It  is  mainly  a  desperate  rebranding  exercise; 
rebranding the Police Complaints Division, which was under the Protection of Human Rights 
Act,  into  a  Police  Complaints  Division.  Nothing  new  fundamentally,  nothing  new  to  give 
more credibility to a police complaints watchdog! 

88 

 
In  fact,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  himself,  when  moving  for  the  second  reading, 
when it comes to Part III of the Bill, which regulates both the functions and the procedures 
regarding investigation and are the two most fundamental sections of the Police Complaints 
Act, had this to say -  

“Part III of the Bill regulates the functions and powers of the Commission as well as 
the procedures regarding the conduct of investigations and hearings (…)” 

Conduct of investigations and hearings! 

“(…) which are the same as that of the current Police Complaints Division.” 

So, the fundamental work of that Division remains the same! We are only rebranding 
the name and, of course, it is very sad that we are missing a golden opportunity. Why do I say 
that?    Because  after  two  years  of  running  of  that  Commission,  there  have  been  several 
recommendations by the Human Rights Commission itself with regard to that Division, on 
which I will come later. We should have taken this opportunity to have them on board. 

When we voted the Police Complaints Act, it was based on the Independent Police 
Complaints  Commission  (IPCC)  of  England.  Now,  in  England,  there  are  several  debates 
about that IPCC. There is a debate still going on, and the Government intends to amend the 
IPCC Act to take on board some of the new recommendations in view of their failures and 
also the belief by the public that this institution protects the Police. I will come later on how 
again,  here,  in  our  Police  Complaints  Act  and  this  Police  Complaints  Bill,  it  favours  the 
Police rather than the complainants. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  one  would  have  expected  consultation  when  it  comes  to  that 
Bill, because for the Police to be credible, the watchdog of the Police must be more credible, 
more independent, more transparent, and the public must have confidence in that Complaints 
Commission to have confidence in the Police. But, unfortunately, it would seem, according to 
my information, that there has been no consultation whatsoever with the stakeholders. I know 
for a fact that the  Bar  Council was not  consulted.   I know that the NGOs which  fight for 
human rights were not consulted. And it looks like - because their recommendations have not 
been taken on board - even the Division of the Human Rights Commission was not consulted. 
It is a plain exercise of changing a name.  Just because it was in the manifesto of the alliance 
Government,  they  just  come  and  say,  ‘we  have  now  created  an  independent  Police 
Complaints Commission’! 

89 

 
When  you  look  at  the  list  of  people  who  are  going  to  intervene,  it  is  as  if  we  are 
creating a new institution, a new bebête, when, in fact, it already exists! We are just changing 
the name; just changing the name! I will come in detail to show how, in fact, there is nothing 
new in this Bill. Because we are talking about an important institution; the Police. The Police 
have  a  unique  position  in  society,  with  powers  to  interfere  in  the  life  of  the  public  and 
responsibilities to act independently to uphold law. Inevitably, at times, this places them in a 
position  of  dispute  and  conflict  and  will  lead  to  complaints  by  members  of  the  public.  A 
number of these complaints may allow to allegation of criminal conduct by those who are 
charged with upholding the law. 

So, in view of this power of the Police, they must be accountable for their acts and 
doings and there should be an independent method of accountability. This is particularly true 
today when the image of the Police officers’ actions is the subject of persistent media and 
public scrutiny. Today, we know that the way the Police have acted - I would say honestly - 
in the last few years but more since this Government, has given the Police a very, very bad 
reputation! The respect for the Police today is at its least, to say the most, for their acts and 
doings. I will come to certain cases and we will see. 

We  know  as  a  fact  because  central  to  Police  accountability  is  the  mechanism  for 
investigating complaints. If citizens are to have confidence in the Police Service as a whole, 
they must feel that when they complain about individual instances of Police misconduct, their 
allegation  will  be  investigated  thoroughly,  impartially  and  within  a  time  frame.  The  time 
frame is important, because later I will come to show how the Police are protected under the 
law  and  how,  unfortunately,  this  Bill  does  not  correct  this  protection  that  the  Police  have 
under the law that we have now. 

On the whole, we know that citizens are reluctant to complain about the Police. This 
reluctance could be due to a number of factors. Complaints against the Police have a low rate 
of success. We know that.  We have been asking questions in this House so many times on 
how many Police officers have been prosecuted, how many convictions.  Zero! And we know 
that there are over 500 allegations! We will see the statistics later. But the system itself is 
flawed. The system does not lead to the satisfaction of the citizens. 

So, Madam Speaker, like I said, much has been said over the last decades about Police 
brutality  and  we  have  had  several  Police  complaints.  Previously,  we  had  that  Police 
Complaints  Bureau,  which  was  the  Police  investigating  themselves.  And  we  know  how 

 

90 

Police brutality practice boomed during that period. We know the episode of Raddhoa. We 
know the episode of the MCIT. We should not forget that. It has happened in our country. 
The  case  of  Raddhoa,  the  MCIT,  the  Desmarais couple,  how  they  were  arrested.  Even  Mr 
Cehl  Meeah,  how  he  was  arrested  and  brutalised.  But,  up  to  today,  there  is  nothing,  even 
though we have had all these complaints, because one of the main elements which is not in 
that  Bill  and  about  which  we  have  asked  many  times  is the  protection  that  Police  officers 
have under the Public Officers’ Protection Act, that you cannot sue them after two years. So, 
they can get away with murder after two years! And they do get away with murders too! So, 
there have been many talks about it, and we have always asked to have an independent police 
complaint and we have always asked that the time limit - on which I will come later - of two 
years  to  prosecute  Police  officers,  should  be  withdrawn.  When  we  will  come  to 
compensation, I will come to that again. 

Let  us  come  to  the  Bill  before  this  House  today.  Like  I  said,  this  Bill  replaces  the 
Police Complaints Act. It repeals the Police Complaints Act, which was voted in this House 
in 2012 and came into operation in 2015. The Police Complaints Act is repealed. When we 
compare the two, like I have said, they are the same. But what is more unfortunate - and like I 
said, it is a missed opportunity – is that we have kept the bad elements in the law of 2014. We 
have  repeated  them  although  experience  has  shown  that  they  do  not  work.  They  are  an 
obstacle to the inquiry. Let me refer to section 4, Functions of the Commission – 

“The Commission shall – 

investigate into a complaint made by any person or on his behalf against any 
act, conduct or omission of a police officer in the discharge of his functions 
(…)” 

Now  we  say  that  during  the  investigation,  not  the  hearing,  a  person  may  refuse  to 
answer any question, to provide any information or to produce any article or document which 
will incriminate him. This was in the Police Complaints Act, and we know this was the main 
obstacle  which  the  Commission  had.  It  could  not  inquire  because  the  Police  were  not 
disclosing  documents,  were  not  disclosing  information,  they  were  not  producing  any 
document or any article because they said this would incriminate them. 

But what about this incrimination? Why should the Police have this protection at the 
inquiry level? He may have his right of silence when he comes to the hearing.  This is his 
constitutional right.  But, at the enquiry level, he is not allowed to disclose the information! 

 

91 

When  we  know  the  trend  today  in  the  Court,  the  recent  judgment  of  Mr  Bernard  Maigrot 
states  about  disclosure!    You  should  disclose  all  the  documents.  The  Prosecution  should 
disclose  all  the  documents.    Now,  if  the  Prosecution  does  not  get  documents,  if  that 
Commission does not get documents from the Police or from other institutions, how can they 
conduct the enquiry?  When you look at the statistics, you will see that there are around 258 
enquiries pending in the 2015 Report. How do you expect them to enquire if  you tie their 
hands by telling the person from whom they are going to enquire: ‘You can stay quiet. You 
do not have to produce documents.  You do not have to produce your private diary.  You do 
not have to tell us whether you were with the accused be it in a Police station in Midlands or 
somewhere around or in an abandoned house beating him.  Where you took the accused, you 
do not have to tell us.’  And you expect them to conduct an enquiry fairly! You expect the 
Commission to function!   

In  England,  they  had  that  provision,  but  now,  they  are  using  the  section  on  the 
Terrorism  Act  to  compel  persons  to  come  and  give  evidence  if  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the 
enquiry.    You  have  what  we  call  there,  the  equivalence  of  Terrorism  Act,  which  compels 
people to come and depone at the enquiry.  But here, we are telling these officers: ‘You do 
not have to come. You do not have to cooperate.’  There will be no collaboration whatsoever 
between the Police and that Commission which will lead to any investigation. 

Let us look at the second one. We know that there are institutions which enquire and 
compel us to bring documents.  If tomorrow the MRA wants to assess  you, it tells  you to 
bring all your accounts, accounts of your wife and children, your passport and theirs too and 
you are compelled to do so.  If you do not do so, it is an offence.  Let us take the Labour 
Office.    If  the  Labour  Office  tomorrow  wants  to  prosecute  an  employer,  that  employer  is 
compelled  to  bring  the  books  of  his  worker,  to  bring  documents  showing  his  salaries  and 
details thereof. But, will these documents not incriminate the employer? He might be tried 
before a Court of Law based on the documents produced.  Why should not the Police produce 
these documents when we know, and experience has shown that this has been an obstacle for 
the Commission?  It will be an obstacle again for the Division. Like I said, in England, they 
have the Anti-social Behaviour Crime and Policing Act of 2014, which amends the IPPC Act, 
compelling certain people to come and depone. 

Now, there is the investigation. One of the main problems in the previous law was 
that  the  Commission  cannot  investigate  for  a  complaint  which  takes  place  after  one  year.  
Why  one  year?  Again,  we  know  that  a  lot  of  complaints  have  been  rejected  because  the 

 

92 

complainant has gone there one year after but, very often, you learn about it probably later or 
he has not been advised because, now, we are talking about ‘ti-dimounes’.  We know that the 
majority of these people who are brutalised by the Police do not know their rights and they do 
not know where to go.  But, why give them that protection of one year?  We know that in 
England and in many countries it is any time. I will come to the question of prescription later.  
You can go and make a complaint now, today, in England.  On ‘The Guardian’ there is an 
article  which  mentions  that  the  Police  Complaints  Commission  is  taking  upon  itself  to 
investigate  cases  of  Police  cover-up  in  paedophile  cases  of  30  years  ago.    Here,  your 
complaint must be in writing.  Why can’t the Commission take it upon itself, if there is a 
complaint?  In England, there have been so many riots, especially when we know that the 
minority feels that their rights have been tampered with by the Police. But the Commission 
takes upon itself to investigate, to call the Police officers to bring their books and why did 
they shoot.  Here, it must be a written complaint. 

Another question which is important is the question of identity.  The Division of the 
Human Rights Commission has asked to allow them to identify people.  90% of the Police 
officers in the Police Station do not wear their badge with their name and rank.  They do it on 
purpose, although it is a breach of the law.  I asked a question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister a 
few months ago with regard to same and he said that action will be taken.  On Friday I went 
to a Police station; four out of the six Police officers on duty did not have their badge.  How 
do you want people to identify them?  And we know the practice used by the Police even if 
they think you will identify them: they put cagoules on their face.  We know of the Demarais 
case which was before the Supreme Court.  We know how the couple were taken in a house, 
God knows where in Triolet, beaten up; the Police wore cagoules.  So, how do you identify 
them?    Now,  it  will  be  worst.    If  you  ask  them  where  they  were  that  night,  they  will  not 
answer. If you ask them to bring the occurrence book to see their movements, they will not 
produce.  They have a right not to produce.  What will you enquire? 

Now, let me come to that very important issue of prescription of two years.  You can 
report  an  offence  which  took  place  only  one  year  before.    There  is  no  time  frame  in  the 
previous law and this law with regard to the Independent Commission, how long it should 
take to investigate. After the investigation, the file is sent to the DPP.  Once the file is sent to 
the DPP, God knows how long it will take and when it will come to Court.  What does the 
law say? Section 4 of the Public Officers’ Protection Act 1957  says– 

 
“(1)  Every civil or criminal action, suit, or proceeding, by a person, other than the 

93 

State, for any fact, act or omission, against a – 

(a)  public officer (…); 

We are talking of the Police. 

“(…) shall, under pain of nullity, be instituted within 2 years from the date of 
the fact, act, or omission which has given rise to this action (...).” 

Why should the Police have this protection of two years of the date of the fact?  If he has 
committed a criminal offence, okay, the State will prosecute.  But what if a civilian wants to 
take a civil action? He can’t do that after two years!  How will he know about the outcome of 
the enquiry?  He has reported it, let’s say on the 11th month.  There is no time limit as to how 
long the Commission should take to investigate the case.  By the time he gets to know about 
the findings of the Commission, the two years are over and you cannot prosecute that Police 
officer.  So, why should the Police officer have this protection?  Why can’t this be applied to 
the  Police  Officers  who  breach  their  Standing  Orders?    Because  these  Officers  they  are 
supposed to be acting in the performance of their duty. Now, these Officers they don’t bother 
because even if you manage to prosecute within two years and you win your case, who will 
pay that?  Not the Police Officer!  Taxpayers’ money: you, me, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  We  will  all  contribute  to  pay  the  compensation  to  the 
civilian. 

Why  should  they  have  that  second  protection?  If  tomorrow  we  take  an  insurance 
policy,  your  insurance  policy  has  got  different  clauses  and  in  case  you  breach  one  of  the 
clauses,  your insurance  policy does not apply.  You are personally liable. But if the Police 
Officer  in  his  uniform,  he  beats  people,  he  tortures  people,  he  is  covered.  In  the  case  of 
Desmarais, Government had to pay, taxpayers’ money, it had to pay Rs800,000, I don’t know 
how much. In the case of Kaya: Rs7 m.; Ramlagun: Rs5 m. These Police Officers, have they 
been made liable, have they contributed?  This is why they feel protected; they don’t have to 
say anything to the Commission from beginning to end. They have two years protection from 
the Public Officers Protection Act and in case they have to pay damage, it is not their money. 

So, all these things should be taken into account if truly we want to have a respectable 
Police  Force.  They  have  to  be  accountable  personally;  the  procedure  should  make  them 
accountable in case they breach their regulations, their Standing Orders. 

94 

 
Now, let’s come to the issue which is of much actualité. I will say this one since this 
Government has been in power. Arbitrary arrest! I remember when I addressed the House on 
the Human Rights Bill, on the Police Act, on the Human Rights Bill especially I could not 
understand why the Human Rights Commission took it upon itself saying that they cannot 
investigate  in  cases  of  arbitrary  arrest.  Lodging  of  provisional  charge  just  for  the  sake  of 
lodging provisional charge and you know, at that time, we went to answer that the law does 
not allow them to do it. The Human Rights Commission apparently took it upon itself and the 
law does not allow us to do it. Even this Commission, the Police Complaint Division of the 
Human  Rights  Commission  in  both  reports,  2014  and  2015,  they  made  recommendations, 
they talked about provisional charges but between the lines, they made it clear that they don’t 
have the power. The law does not allow.  We know of the abuse there has been recently with 
regard  to  arbitrary  arrest  by  the  Police,  some  with  political  motive,  some  for  a  personal 
vendetta and some with just the zeal of the Police Officer.  

May I refer to a book - I don’t know whether you will allow me because the author is 
not allowed to be in this House - of Touria Prayag. A recent book made in very interesting 
reading about “Provisional Charges – The untold human stories”. This book makes reference 
only to much publicised cases. We, as Barristers, we know the number of cases where there 
have  been  provisional  charge  lodged  just  to  either  please  the  Authority  or  for  the  Police 
themselves to satisfy their own - this is what she had to say in the forward - 

 “These  are  some  of  the  better  known  cases  documented  here  but  there  are  quite 
certainly  dozens,  may  be  hundreds  of  other  cases  of  anonymous  citizens  being 
generated quite casually every year”.  

Talking about provisional charge – 

“This book is about arbitrary arrest and the abuse of Police through the provisional 
charge practice. The stories are about their fears, their pain, their loss of privacy and, 
most importantly, their humiliation”. 

She said there are many cases which are not in this book but this one deals at least 

with some known cases.  

“They  were  jailed,  humiliated,  stripped  naked  by  the  Police,  had  had  their  most 
intimate  parts  examined,  slept  in  conditions  unfit  for  human  beings  even  before  a 
Court of Law heard the charge against them. It is a book by them, for them and for 
you  to  help  them  obtain  the  justice  they  yearn  for  that  of  ensuring  genuinely 

95 

 
independent institution where the Police and all other arms of the State serve the State 
and  the  People,  not  the  whims  and  fancies  of  the  Government  in  power,  where 
citizens  are  treated  justly  and  equitably  irrespective  of  their  political  leading,  their 
occupation, faith, origins and colour”. 

So,  this  book  makes  a  list,  there  is  a  lot  of  them,  it  is  good  to  say  a  few  of  them 
because I remember the young son of Mr Mahen Utchanah, how he was forced to spend one 
night  in  jail  until  a  provisional  charge  was  lodged  the  next  day.  You  have  the  case  of 
Utchanah, you have the case of so many, the Rawat. The Utchanah was, in fact, the father and 
the son. Shakeel Mohamed himself, the Vikram Bhunjun ... 

(Interruptions) 

Hassam Vayid, Yatemani Gujadhur, Shivananda Poolay Mootien, the  Rawat daughters, all 
these provisional charges have been struck out by the Court of Law. 

(Interruptions) 

It has not happened to you, I hope it does not. But one day if it will happen to you, you will 
know what you are talking about. 

Madam Speaker: You are stretching out, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Having been charged, detained just for political reasons. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, don’t interrupt! 

Mr Baloomoody: Or without committing any offence. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! I am talking to you. Don’t interrupt, please! 

Mr Baloomoody: Tell him not to interrupt me as well, Madam Speaker. So, these are 
the important things which are missing in that law. We should have given the power to that 
Commission  to  investigate  cases  of  arbitrary  arrest  and  abuse  of  provisional  charges.  So, 
what I am saying today is that there is nothing new in this law; nothing new which will help 
the  poor  citizens  to  have  redress.  Madam  Speaker,  as  a  fact,  our  Police  Force  today  is 
becoming more and more powerful and less and less accountable. The Police today is simply 
much too powerful and has been made so powerful by the presumption that they can act with 
impunity with the backing of the Authority. I have just listed many cases of abuse; I have just 

 

96 

shown how this Commission will not redress the situation, will not bring confidence in the 
Police. It is simply a rebranding exercise. It would seem by the way I see the reaction of the 
Member of the Government - some Members I must say.  Especially those who practise at the 
Bar know what I am saying is a fact. It would seem that this Government prefers the status 
quo. 

(Interruptions) 

As it suits their purpose; the status quo today as it is suits their purpose. 

Let me quote an article which appears in ‘The Guardian’ where an MP was asking for the 
powers of the IPP to be reviewed in UK. I quote - 

“The last European country to have a Police Force like ours was Germany in 1993. 
Six years later, Germany’s Police Force had been transformed and the Gestapo was 
terrorising  civilians.    It  should  be  noted  that  nearly  all  the  Gestapo  officers  had 
previously been ordinary policemen.” 

Madam Speaker, I hope that Government will see to it that the new Commission that 
we are having will be independent, accountable, transparent, but more or less will be given 
sufficient  manpower  to  address  the  issue.    But  unfortunately,  as  I  said,  their  powers  are 
limited.  The  most  important  abuse  of  the  Police  will  not  be  investigated  and  will  not  be 
addressed. The fact that the Police have this protection of two years, they will get off scot-
free.  They know that they won’t be tried for murder after two years whilst we, civilians, can 
be tried after two years. 

I rest my case here, Madam Speaker, sad to say that it is a lost opportunity.  We could 
have a very important institution, bringing confidence in that watchdog and most importantly 
bringing confidence in the Police Force whose confidence is at its lowest today. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Gayan! 

(5.36 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan):  Madam Speaker, I 
have been listening very intently to the hon. Member who just spoke before me and, in fact, 
when the Police Complaints Bill was introduced in July 2012, he was the first one also to 
address the House in the name of the Opposition. 

97 

 
The hon. Member has made a lot of section 4 (2) of the Police Complaints Bill which 
gives  to  the  police  the  right  not  to  answer  any  incriminating  questions.  This  is  what  the 
Constitution provides and this is reproduced in clause 5 (2) of the Bill and I quote - 

“A  person  may  refuse  to  answer  any  question,  to  provide  any  information,  or  to 
produce any article or document, which would incriminate him.”  

This  is  pursuant  to  section  10  of  the  Constitution  and  the  hon.  Member  finds  a  lot  to  say 
against that. In 2012, when he spoke on the Police Complaints Bill, he didn’t say a word on 
that particular clause of the Bill. In fact, the hon. Member said and I quote - 

“Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me,  at  the  very  outset,  state  that  on  this  side  of  the 
House, we welcome the three Bills.” 

One of them was this.  If, in fact, it was a problem in 2012, it should have been aired then and 
action taken then or the hon. Member could have introduced an amendment. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Gayan:  So, it is all very well after a couple of years to come and say that this Bill 
is just a question of rebranding. And what has the hon. Member said about rebranding of this 
Bill? In fact, the hon. Member mentioned the United Kingdom where there is no time limit 
for a person to make a complaint against the Police. I have just been checking whether this is 
correct  and  I  see  from  one  of  the  articles  on  the  Internet  what  is  the  time  limit  for 
complaining  about  the  Police.    There  is  no  time  limit  for  making  a  complaint  against  the 
Police. However, it is best to do it as quickly as possible after the incident happened. If you 
complain more than 12 months after the incident, the police may decide not to investigate. 

(Interruptions) 

They decide not to investigate and the reason given is that too much time has passed. If you 
explain  why  it  has  taken  you  this  long  to  complain,  they  may  decide  to  investigate  your 
complaint, however this is not guaranteed. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: So, we have to be balanced. 

 

98 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please, you have already spoken. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:  In fact, the hon. Member also quoted from a book and all the names that 
he gave about the Police using its powers to arrest – arbitrary arrest, we call them - happen to 
be  the  names  who  belong  to  a  particular  political  group  or  political  leaning.  In  fact,  you, 
yourself, Madam Speaker, have been subjected to arbitrary arrest. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please! 

Mr  Gayan:    The  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  hon.  Pravind 
Jugnauth, our colleague, the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports, hon. Soodhun and so many 
others.   

Why doesn’t that particular book mention these cases?  We do not want … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:   Order! 

Mr Gayan:  When … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:  When people come with an agenda, Madam Speaker, at least they should 
disclose the agenda.  Hiding behind a book without disclosing the agenda is not honourable 
and we should, as hon. Members, at least in this House, live up to the high standards that we 
expect of everybody in this House. 

(Interruptions) 

I wanted to say these things because it is very easy, when you are discussing a Bill of this 
nature, to get carried away by all sorts of views about the Police, but the Police happen to be 

 

99 

a very important institution in any country.  Not only in Mauritius, but all over the world the 
Police have a role to play.  As Law Enforcement Authorities, they are there to protect the 
public.  They are there to prevent harm to any person.  They have to enforce the law.  They 
have to be law abiding and, as rightly said by hon. Baloomoody, they are dealing with cases 
which are at times very difficult.  Only last week, in the United States, Madam Speaker, there 
was a case of a Police officer shooting at a black American.  What happened?  There was a 
public outcry.  There were protests and then a black sniper belonging to the US Army shot 
five Police officers.  As I am speaking today, in Dallas, President Obama and President Bush 
are holding a memorial in the names of these five Police officers.  

When  we  are  too  critical  of  Police  officers,  we  run  the  risk  of  creating  a  frame  of 
mind, a mood in the public that may be damaging, not only to the country, to the institution, 
but to society at large. So, this is why I say when we discuss a Bill of this nature, we have to 
be very careful about what we say, how we say it and when we say it.  I do not hold a brief 
for the Police.  In fact, as a practicing barrister, I have seen cases of Police misconduct.  I 
know that it exists, but the big problem that we had in the past and we still have today, is that 
the Police when they have a complaint made against them, they themselves investigate and 
because of the familiarity that exists between Police officers, there is the perception that no 
fair, impartial enquiry can take place.   

In fact, this Bill, Madam Speaker - and we have to congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister for bringing this Bill to the House - is not a new Bill entirely.  In fact, in 1999 the 
Police Complaints Bureau was set up.  It did not work or it did not work in the way that it 
was  planned  to  work  and  then  it  had  to  be  scrapped.    In  2012,  the  Police  Complaints 
Commission  Bill  came and  then  it  entered  into force  in  2013  as  a  Division  of  the  Human 
Rights Commission. That also did not work. In fact, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was 
introducing the Bill, on the Second Reading, he said that as at July 2013, there were 1,741 
complaints and 892 had been transferred from the Police Complaints Bureau and 1,244 cases 
had been set aside. 

It is important that we bear these figures in mind. Any person who has a brush with 
the law or with a Police Officer will immediately have the impression: ‘Let me go and make 
a complaint.’ It is normal, it is natural, because these people think that it is easy to make a 
complaint. In fact, this is why so many cases are set aside and this is why in the Bill, as in the 
previous Bill, there are provisions to set aside vexatious complaints or frivolous complaints. 
But what we need to address, Madam Speaker, is while we expect the Police to uphold the 

 

100 

law, while we expect the Police to live up to the highest standards of their training, we must 
also understand that, at times, the Police may have to use reasonable force for the purposes of 
their duties. In the discharge of their duties, reasonable force, proportionate to the situation, 
has to be exercised. This is why  I believe we are not, in fact, we should not demonise all 
Police officers. That there are complaints,  yes,  but the complaints need to be investigated, 
yes, that the quality of the complaints must be investigated is also important and the person 
making the complaint must be of good faith. He must make the complaint in writing, he must 
say whether there are witnesses and there must also be a situation where the environment is 
there to pursue the complaint as it should be. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  know  that  today  we  have  modern  technology.  In  fact,  in  the 
United  States,  a  lot  of  Police  complaints  have  been  found  to  be  true  because  of  CCTV 
cameras, people filming on their mobile what is happening with the Police Force, and also, in 
Mauritius, this can happen. So the Police know that all these things exist and this, in itself, is 
a deterrent on how the Police are to perform. 

Having said all that, we must also bear in mind that, in some countries, I know in the 
United  States,  a  Police  Officer  is  trained  for  only  about  three  to  four  months.  In  other 
countries, it takes longer. The quality of training of Police Officers is also important. In some 
countries, they take years. In Mauritius, I believe the training process goes on for a long time 
and this is where we need to make sure that we recruit the right people, that the people who 
are  recruited  have  the  necessary  qualifications,  the  training  and  they  should  be  working 
within a structure. But, despite all this, there will be situations where complaints will be made 
against the Police  and  we have to ensure that  we have a system where the complaints  are 
dealt with. This is why this independent body which this Bill proposes to set up, tries to give, 
at least, comfort to the complainant, that there will be a procedure where the complaints will 
be dealt with fairly and without any fear that the Police Officers will be favoured one way or 
the other. 

How the Independent Police Complaints Commission will do it, is by the composition 
of the Police Complaints Commission. Who will be on the Commission? The Chairperson of 
the Commission will be somebody who has served as a Judge of the Supreme Court. That, in 
itself,  gives  confidence  to  the  complainant  and  also  to  the  Police  Officers  in  case  of  the 
vexatious complaints that this particular person, with that background, will be able to deal 
with the complaint in a fair, equitable and impartial manner. Who are the other members of 
the Commission? Clause 3 (4) (b) states – 

101 

 
 “The members, other than the Chairperson, shall be persons having knowledge and 
experience  in  the  field  of  human  rights,  law,  employment,  industrial  relations, 
business  administration,  education,  sociology,  policing,  social  work,  psychology, 
psychiatry, medicine or prison management.” 

So,  it  is  a  broad-based  Commission.  It  is  important  that  this  Commission  be  broad-based 
because we don’t know what is the nature of the complaint. This Commission will be tasked 
with investigating the complaints in an impartial manner so that people have confidence in 
the process. 

Madam Speaker, questions have been asked or have been raised by hon. Baloomoody 
about  this  Commission  as  if  we  are  simply  rebranding  it.  But  the  National  Human  Rights 
Commission had a Division within the Commission to deal with complaints. Now, we are 
setting up an Independent Body, not accountable to anybody. Isn’t that progress? Isn’t this 
something that we are doing in order to ensure that we have a system that is fair, a system 
where everybody can have confidence in the complaints procedure and also that there can be 
no risk of any bias or misjudgment. 

Madam Speaker, we are not alone in a world where this kind of situation arises. We 
all  know  the  case  of  Stephen  Lawrence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  case  of  Stephen 
Lawrence, he was a young man. It was on 11 July in 1993. Stephen Lawrence then aged 18, 
was stabbed to death by two white men while he was waiting for a bus. There was a Police 
investigation in the United Kingdom because they are supposed to be very advanced in these 
things. There was a Police investigation which was tainted. Then, in 1999, there had to be a 
full-fledged enquiry into the murder of that particular young man. In the meantime, the Police 
Officers,  who  were  responsible  for  the  tainted  investigation  inquiry,  had  already  left  the 
Police Force. So, when the Commission of Inquiry reported on the case, they were no longer 
in  the  Police  Force  and  they  could  not  recommend  any  sanctions  against  the  two  Police 
Officers.  It  was  only  in  2012  that  the  two  white  men  were  prosecuted  and  they  were 
convicted  for  the  murder  of  Stephen  Lawrence.  So,  we  will  have  to  live  with  this  kind  of 
situation. But, although we can strive towards perfection, we must ensure that the system that 
is being put in place to look into complaints from the Police Force or about the Police Force, 
is, at least, neutral, that the persons who will be part of the Commission will do an honest job, 
that complaints will be fully investigated and it is also important that we look at the powers 
of the Commission. I am referring to Clause 5 – 

 

“5. 

Powers of Commission 

102 

Subject to subsection (2), the Commission may, in the discharge of its 

(1) 
functions under this Act –  

(a) 

summon any person to appear before it on such date and at such 
time as may be specified in the summons, or require any person 
in writing –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to  answer  any  question  or  provide  any  information 
which 
in 
connection with any investigation; 

the  Commission  considers  necessary 

to  produce  any  article,  or  any  book,  record,  accounts, 
report,  data,  stored  electronically  or  otherwise,  or  any 
other document; 

to verify, or otherwise ascertain by oral examination of 
the  person  making  the  complaint,  any  fact,  matter  or 
document relating to a complaint;” 

It can also visit any Police Station.  

So,  it  is  being  given  all  the  appropriate  powers  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  its 
function. Now, this is going to be a Commission that will have full powers and, in fact, the 
Bill provides for adequate staff and resources to be given to that Commission to carry out its 
investigations. We have no doubt, on this side of the House, that this will be a far better body 
to look into complaints made against the Police than we have had in the past. 

This is why, Madam Speaker, we are very happy, on this side of the House, not to say 
that it is rebranding. It is in fact a brand new institution with full powers to give confidence to 
the public and to any complainant that the complaint will be properly dealt with. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. François! 

(5.55 p.m.) 

103 

 
Mr J. F. François (First Member for Rodrigues): Madam Speaker, I welcome this 
Bill and will intervene after two learned friends, hon. Baloomoody and hon. Gayan, whom I 
shall congratulate for their legal and technical speeches and shared experience as well. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Police  hold  a  unique  position  in  our  society,  with  powers  to 
interfere in the lives of the public and responsibilities to act independently to uphold the rule 
of law. That is basic. However, there is uncertainty as to exactly what are the Police powers 
over the whole range of Police activities, which have resulted in many controversies in our 
court of law through various cases as to their conduct as well. 

It is a fact that our Police Service in maintaining the institution and stability of our 
society is constantly under increasing pressure. After scrutinising this IPCC Bill - not as a 
lawyer; I am not a legal person -, one fundamental insight which I will debate on is the place 
of perception and confidence in our Police Service in the discharge of their duties. 

Madam Speaker, first of all, to build up this confidence, we need a Police Service that 
must be well disciplined, well led, well-trained, well-educated and well paid also. I do hope 
that  the  establishment  of  this  IPCC  Bill  will  lead  to  significant  reduction  of  complaints 
against Police officers. But the question is: how? Shall we call the reported 1,741 complaints 
as alarming, as per statistics mentioned by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? From the statistics I 
have from Rodrigues, there are 71 complaints against Police officers from year 2012 to date. 

Madam Speaker, looking at these statistics, my question is: what are truly the objects 
of our Police Service today? The answer is essentially to prevent, combat, investigate crimes, 
to  maintain  public  order,  to  protect  and  secure  the  inhabitants  of  our  Republic  and  their 
properties  and  to  uphold  and  enforce  the  law.  Rightly  said  by  hon.  Gayan  and  hon. 
Baloomoody. Madam Speaker, to honour same, the Police officers - this is interesting - do 
swear and solemnly affirm under oath, as per section 4 of the Police Act, and I think this is a 
beautiful oath. Allow me to cite this oath, Madam. They – 

“will faithfully execute and perform the duties of (…)” 

Whatever his or her Police grade -  

“(...) Police, and of any other office in the Police Force to which (…)”  

He or She - 

“(…) may be appointed, in the preservation of peace and the prevention and detection 
of all offences, and all other duties as required of them by law (…)” 

 

And it continues -  

104 

“(…) without fear or favour, affection or ill will.” 

This  is  interesting!  But,  despite  this  oath,  Madam  Speaker,  and  also  the  clearly 
defined duties of our Police, there are the so-called brebis galleuses out there. Some abusing 
of their powers, some misbehaving and so on, and this is not the image I would like to see for 
our Police Force and Police Service.  

Madam Speaker, what is sustainably needed today is more in-depth, visible changes 
in Police culture. Police culture! In this respect, a new Police education is the determining 
factor for defining this new Police culture. Here, I have to point out that the idea to transform 
the  Police  Training  School  into  a  full-fledged  Police  Academy  for  continuous  progress 
development of Police officers is most welcome. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  per  the  Police  National  Policing  Strategic  Framework,  it  is 
reported that our Police are ready to respond to the challenges of the 21st century through the 
shift from a Force to a Service, and it is to be noted that one of the six key elements to the 
shift  of  community  policing  is  to  achieving  a  human  rights  compliant  organisation  as  per 
requirements  of  international  police  reform  trend.  Madam  Speaker,  international  human 
rights law requires that an individual must have access to an effective remedy to an alleged 
violation of his or her human rights. 

I have often come across cases where Police officers, while performing their duties, to 
keep  us  safe  -  I  recognise  that  -  faced  unwarranted  public  attitudes  and  comments.  And, 
again,  my  question  is: why  is  this  perception  towards  them,  and  how  do  we  get  rid  of  it? 
Madam Speaker, this is where the IPCC Bill again is important. It is an advancement in our 
constitutional protection and rights of each and every citizen. It will provide an independent 
platform  to  properly  investigate  complaints  of  abuse  of  power,  allegations  and  reports  of 
Police brutality. I will not go into details. I will leave that for my learned friends. 

It will build public confidence again in the Force whilst at the same time reinforcing 
Government’s commitment to ensure that the most vulnerable in our society are not abused 
by the Police. The message should be clear and unambiguous to them that instances of abuse 
of power and torture will not be tolerated in our Police Service. 

Madam Speaker, about three months ago, I called into a Police Station in Rodrigues, 
in the late hours, following a phone call from a member of the public that Police officers have 
refused to take a statement from them following an incident between two parties. Further to 

 

105 

their failure to respond to record their statement, a person protested against their conduct and 
thereafter he was detained on an alleged count of rogue and vagabond. I was shocked by how 
two  detainees  in  the  Police  cells  were  challenging  verbally  the  misconduct  of  the  Police 
officers. I was myself astonished by their conduct and attitude where I complained in writing 
against the two officers following their humiliating, unacceptable and disgraceful action and 
improper conduct. 

Madam Speaker, the main problem there is that, at times, Police Stations are being 
managed by Police Constables as Officer in Charge of shifts. This has a bearing on the proper 
running of these stations. Another case that I would like to cite, Madam Speaker, refers to an 
alleged case of Police brutality in Rodrigues a few years back against a minor, a 14-year old 
boy. He was provisionally charged for having stolen a large sum of money from a person.  
The  young  boy  was  then  taken  away  from  his  home  by  the  Police  officers  for  further 
questioning.    According  to  the  youngster,  he  was  tortured  by  the  Police  officers  in  an 
oppressive manner for confession. 

Madam  Speaker,  from  this  case,  I  have  observed  that  the  weakness  of  our  Police 

system is that many citizens are not familiar with Police Complaints Procedures.  

I agree. 

(Interruptions) 

In addition, our Police service needs to make progress in the use of IT security, full-
fledged CCTV in all Police stations, and I have to say any contravention or interviews by any 
Police shall be  video recorded, which may be used in civil or criminal  proceedings  as per 
section 15 of the Bill - Use of evidence. This shall also give rise for the introduction of a New 
Police and Criminal Evidence Bill. 

Madam  Speaker,  another  common  public  perception,  which  is  of  great  point  of 
concern to me, is that our Police service is viewed as a political tool, though, I don’t concur 
to that. Our citizen must be in a position to publicly approve that our Police management is 
free from political grip.  However, in our society today, there is this general acceptance that 
the Police service contains Police officers who are closely associated with one or two regimes 
X, Y or Z.  This undermines the philosophy and values of our Police service. These officers 
are  generally  viewed  as  a  potential  obstacle  to  the  reform  process  of  Government.  I  say 
Government  and  it  could  be  any  Government.  Madam  Speaker,  my  question  is:  will  these 
officers be up to task once they have been tagged with such unfortunate label? 

106 

 
We  are  all  aware  of  certain  situation  where  Police  officers  constantly  faced  critics; 
some usually  call for an early retirement or face punitive  transfer.  I remember seeing new 
Police officers on duty in Rodrigues.  When asked who these new officers are, generally the 
reply was that ‘fek gagne tranfert punitif.” Madam Speaker, I will be very happy to witness 
that any posting of any Police officers of whatever grades it might be, to Rodrigues, not to 
suffer the impression of punitive transfer. 

Madam Speaker, the point I want to make here, is that, it is high time for our Republic 
to fully engage in the process of  depoliticisation of our Police Force. This is where section 
3(2) of the Bill describes that – 

“The Commission (…)” 

And this is correct. 

“(…) shall not, in the discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers be 
subject to the direction or control of any person or Authority”.   

A  complainant  must  believe  that  his  complaint  is  worth  pursuing  without  political 
interference. 

Coming to discipline, Madam Speaker, with the introduction of this Bill, Government 
will certainly be looking at the discipline that prevails in our Police service, especially breach 
of  Standing  Orders,  as  rightly  pointed  out  also  by  hon.  Baloomoody.  I  am  conscious  that 
discipline  differs  from  complaint  procedures,  which,  in  fact,  remains  a  matter  for  the 
Commissioner  of  Police.  But,  certainly,  the  integrity  of  the  Police  service  depends  on  the 
honesty and discipline of its officers, in the exercise of their duties.  

Madam Speaker, section 16 of the Bill deals with Completion of investigation. I am 

not quite sure how the Bill will deal with the release of information back to a complainant on 
an interest of justice imperative. Madam Speaker, we also forget sometimes that a Police 
Complaints Body is also a body to which Police officers themselves have recourse of action 
for wrongs done to them. I believe that the Complaints Commission in the discharge of its 
functions, as per section 4 of the Bill, will guarantee the right morale of our competent Police 
officers and it is not adversely affected.  In a progressive vision of Police reform and from 
safeguards as per section 23 of the Bill, I consider this Bill as a Protection to Police officers, 
from false allegations or vexatious subject-matter, as officers also have an equal right to a fair 
hearing, representation and due process. 

107 

 
Madam Speaker, it is a fact also that our Police service lacks manpower. That is the 
real situation and it is no secret. The actual strength of our Police service is around 12,000 
Police officers, including 511 serving in Rodrigues and out the 51, I think, 6 are interdicted.  
It is a small amount, but it raises question in my mind regarding the interdiction of Police 
officers.  

There  is  a  shift  system  in  the  service,  because  of  manpower  shortage.  Madam 
Speaker,  the  shortage  in  manpower,  however,  must  be  judged  by  the  number  of  Police 
officers  who  are  on  duty  at  any  given  point  in  time.  For  example,  in  Rodrigues,  from  the 
strength  of  511  officers,  there  are  6  shifts  of  about  5  officers  in  one  Police  station,  which 
gives you an indication of the lack of manpower.  This shortage undermines their functions, 
thus leading to frustrations at times. 

 Madam Speaker, to conclude, in repealing the Police Complaints Act by this IPCC, 
we  are  sending  a  clear  message  that  the  new  body  will  not  just  focus  on  independent 
investigating complaints, but its emphasis will also be on developing a strong and advice to 
address and eliminate Police misconducts as per section 4(c). 

Madam Speaker, our Republic needs an outstanding and professional Police service 
that responds to human rights and will not unnecessarily target law-abiding Police officers 
who operate within the law. This IPCC Bill will balance the rights of the individuals and the 
rights of the Police officers. 

In that context, I congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing this Bill, 

 Madam Speaker, I thank you for your kind attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

(6.12 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): Madam Speaker, I think hon. Baloomoody has been thinking of much brands. Last 
few years, I shall say, the last decade much as the Rolex and the Austin, he thinks that this 
serious piece of law is also a piece of branding and rebranding.   

In fact, talking about that, I refer to question B/619 asked by hon. Baloomoody in this 
very  House  about  the  proposal  of  setting  up  of  An  Independent  Police  Complaint 
Commission as mentioned in the Presidential Address in the Government Programme. When 
he asked where matters stand, hon. Baloomoody was quite happy with the answer of Rt. hon. 

 

108 

Prime  Minister  who  stated  exactly  what  has  been  done  in  the  Bill,  that  is,  the  Attorney-
General office was to review - and that was the reply of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at the 
time  -  the  existing  legislation  with  a  view  to  converting  police  complaints  division  of  the 
National  Human  Rights  Commission  into  a  fully-fledged  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission as already initiated in the Government Programme 2015/2019.   

At that time, no other question, no supplementary was asked.  It was not rebranding at 
that time. The hon. Member of the House was quite happy with it.  Today, when we put it 
into reality, he call it rebranding.  This is not a Rolex.  This is not an Austin.  This is a serious 
piece of law.  This piece of law shows the commitment of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
restore confidence.  Remember we have talked about it.  Restore the confidence of the public 
into  the  police  institution.    We  have  to  restore  that  balance  and  that  does  not  happen 
overnight.  This is what the Bill is striving to do.   

At the very outset, the Bill says what it means and it means what it says. At clause 3, 

when it talks about the Chairperson, it says that – 

“The chairperson shall be a person who has – 

(i) 

(ii) 

served as a Judge of the Supreme Court; 

served as a Magistrate for not less than 10 years; 

(iii) 

been a law practitioner for not less than 10 years; or 

(iv) 

served as a Magistrate and has been a law practitioner for an aggregate 
period of not less than 10 years”. 

This is independence, this is the business and this is the seriousness that is meant by the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister as he has always been.  

Systems  for  dealing  with  complaints  against  the  Police  do  not  happen  by  chance, 
Madam Speaker and it is rarely  created by design. Now, we are at that post. Although, as 
stated by Sir Robert Peel, what he had famously said in the past was that – 

“The Police are the public and the public are the Police”. 

and yet there has been when one looks at historical development, for instance, in the UK, in 
the States, there has been a lack of enthusiasm to give too much power to independent Bodies 
whose function is to oversee the very own law enforcement arm. This has been the case and 
that is why when one looks, for instance, at the United Kingdom, we see it is only after 150 

 

109 

years’  operation  of  the  Metropolitan  Police  since  1829  that  in  1977  a  Police  Complaints 
Board was established and even then it lacked the independence that was required. Then, in 
1985, the Board was replaced by the Police Complaints Authority, even then it lacked the 
independence and impartiality that is required and this led to various incidents such as the 
Tomlinson disaster and the Brixton riots. All these have led to the Independent Complaints 
Commission in 2004.  

So, things do not happen overnight, things do not just happen because we say they 
must happen, they happen because we work towards them to happen. In truth, what we’ve 
had in Mauritius, indeed we had the Kaya and the Ramlagun incidents, we had so many and 
one is one far too many. All this has dented the public confidence in the Police and when a 
complaint  against  a  policeman  is  dealt  by  another  policeman,  albeit  by  a  senior  or 
independent Police as has been the case by the Police Complaints Bureau as it was set up in 
the past, this does not give confidence to the public because what happens is that to start with 
the person, the complainant does not get feedback about what has been happening. He does 
not  know,  he  gives  a  unilateral  statement  to  the  Police  and  then  he  does  not  know  what 
happens, he does not know how the DPP has exercised his powers and what is the outcome of 
the inquiry. This has been the case in the past.  There are many counsels in the House who 
can  testify.  We  have,  on  so  many  occasions,  accompanied  people,  assisted  them  to  make 
complaints  and  the  outcome  is  zero.  You  have  voir  dire  and  you  summon  the  Police 
Complaints Bureau, again the result is zero and you do not even know where matters stand. 
We have always stood in the dark, but this has changed now and this is on the way of being 
changing.  

That is why we have the Independent Commission Bill which is coming to change all 
that and to restore that confidence. We have had, of course, the investigation of complaints 
through the Human Rights Commission as has been explained by hon. Gayan but, once more, 
it does not have enough bite and that is the reason why the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister, as he 
said  rightly,  that  the  independence  is  coming  and  what  reinforces  the  confidence  as  the 
independence of this Commission, is when we look at the proposed amendment that is going 
to  come  at  Committee  Stage,  what  it  talks  about  is  that,  under  clause  17,  the  proposed 
amendment on prosecution of offences – 

“The Commission may designate an officer to swear an information and that officer 
may conduct without prejudice to the powers of the DPP under the Constitution the 
prosecution of an offence committed by a Police officer.” 

110 

 
What does that do? What does that do is that it brings us similar online to offences 
under the MRA Act, under the PoCA where what you have is an independent officer, not a 
Police officer, but an independent officer of the Commission because we are talking about 
inquiry  upon  the  Police  but  not  by  the  Police.  So,  therefore  you  have  again  the  vision  of 
independence;  the  independent  officer  coming  and  swearing  the  charge,  the  information 
before the Court. So, once more, this proposed amendment will give even more meaning to 
what is meant by ‘independence’.  

In  truth,  Police  officers  can,  as  has  been  said  by  Lord  Condon,  the  former 

Metropolitan Police Commissioner, he has rightly stated that – 

“Police officers can intervene in people’s lives in a way that alters those lives for ever 
- for good or for evil. It is vital that the investigation process against police officers 
enjoys  maximum  public  support  and  confidence.  Nothing  short  of  a  completely 
independent complaints commission will assuage public concern about the integrity 
and thoroughness of the complaints process”. 

Now, when we look at this Bill, what it does, it deals with the reality as it is, what I 
mean by that is when we look at clause 4 - Functions of Commission and subsection (a) of 
clause 4, is that the Commission may not investigate proprio motu, it will need to have - 

“(...) any complaint made by any person or on his behalf against any act, conduct or 
omission of Police officer in the discharge of his functions (...)” 

That is the first limb.  

Then, you have the second limb where he can – 

“(...) investigate ...” 

Proprio motu – 

“(...) into the cause of the death of a person who died whilst the person was in police 
custody or as a result of police action.” 

And he can go even further, he can – 

“(...) advise on ways in which any police misconduct may be addressed and 
eliminated.” 

And he can go even further to – 

“promote better relations between the public and the Police”.  

 
The very much needed required action right now to put into reality, into realisation of 

111 

our Government policy and the Government vision. 

So, what this Act will do, especially clause 4 subsection (c), is that it will go further 
beyond the actual complaint against physical violence, etc. because Police complaints, Police 
misconduct could be not only  criminal, it can be civil, it can be,  for instance, disciplinary 
offences, it can be corruption offences, etc., which this Bill will allow the Commissioner to 
actually investigate into, whether or not the complaint has been referred as such, it gives wide 
powers. 

I, therefore, would, most humbly, urge the Commissioner, when the commission is set 
up, to deal with it in a grievance focussed way. That is not to be tied down by red tapism, but 
actually to focus on the outcome. This will boost confidence; this will boost people’s belief in 
the  system,  in  the  Commission.  When  you  are  not  process  focussed,  you  are  not  system 
focussed, but you look at finding a solution - because at the end of the day the public places 
its trust in the Police. We want, to some extent, restore what Mary Poppins had, as a best 
friend, the Police officer, the bobby on the beat. We have lost that vision, but we do want to 
restore that vision. Only then the country will feel safe and will breathe as it should. Only 
then the rate of criminality will come down. It is not just by saying we need to do this, we 
need to do that, but we need to foster and we need to empower the Police officers and give 
them confidence, but, at the same time, we need to tell them: ‘yes, you must use your powers 
as  you should rightfully within  your limits’, but, at the same time, we should also tell the 
public there will be no abuse. We are going back to that Mary Poppins best friend with time 
and this Bill will allow us to go some length to that way. There needs to be transparency.  
Transparency is the key in this boosting confidence exercise because, at the end of the day, 
when I used to go, as a former practising barrister, I can say and I’m sure I will be supported 
by many Members of this House.  

When we go to the Police Complaints Bureau, when we go to the National Human 
Rights Commission, what we would want to know is what is going to happen,  what would be 
the outcome and how can this help the person. In fact, this is a Commission that is going to 
be set up specifically for this purpose.  It would be specialised in this kind of investigation 
with the relevant powers as set out under clause 5, giving the Commission wide powers, of 
course within limits, within the bounds of the Constitution.    

112 

 
Much has been said about the right to self-incrimination, that the Police officer may 
not  give  evidence  because  a  person  may  refuse  to  answer  any  question,  to  provide  any 
information or to produce any article or document which would incriminate him.  Does that 
mean it gives the Police officer the right to go and destroy that document that can be used 
against him?  No, because these documents form part of the record.  We are talking about 
public  documents.    We  must  not  lure  this  House  and  say:  ‘yes’  because  there  is  the  right 
against self-incrimination which is provided for in the Constitution.  Let us not forget that.   

It is provided for at section 10 (7) of the Constitution.  So, that is his constitutional 
right.  If we do not put this clause here, the lawyers are the first ones to go to the Court of 
Human Rights and challenge the powers and any findings of that Commission saying that it is 
anti-constitutional. So, do not lure this House by arguments which are futile and which go 
against  the  Constitution,  unless  we  come  with  an  amendment  of  human  rights,  of  our 
constitutional rights.  But now, what we are talking about is the powers of the Commission to 
investigate within the bounds of the Constitution.  We are a State which acts and operates 
within  the  Constitution.    We  cannot  go  outside  that  and  we  must  not  forget  that  we  are  a 
democracy.  We have fought to become a democracy and we must remain a democracy.  If 
we remove such rights, what is going to happen?  You cannot allow people to come and do 
what  they  want  and  then  on  the  other  hand  you  trampled  on  the  rights  of  the  poor  Police 
officer  because  he  has  rights.    A  Police  officer  who  is  subject  to  investigation  under  the 
Commission is like any other person who is charged with an offence.  That person has his 
human rights.  That person has his constitutional rights which have to be respected. That is 
important!   

Now to go back, I have talked about Independence.  I have also said that the powers 
of the Commission is wide subject to, of course, such parameters as compelling the person to 
answer questions or provide any information which the Commission considers necessary in 
connection  with  any  investigation  once  summoned  before  the  Commission;  produce  any 
article or any book, record, accounts, report, data stored electronically or otherwise, or any 
other document; to verify, or otherwise ascertain by oral examination of the person making 
the complaint, in fact testing the evidence; visiting any police station, prison or other place of 
detention for the purpose of an investigation under this Act; where it considers appropriate, 
work in cooperation or consultation with any person or body, whether public or private in 
regard to that investigation. 

 
Now,  if  one  goes  further,  one  will  see  the  powers  of  the  investigator  within  that 

113 

Commission. It allows the investigator to - 

“(i) 

take all lawful measures which a police officer may take under the Police Act 
or any other enactment for the detection of an offence, except arrest a person; 

(ii)  

record a statement under warning from any person;  

(iii)  

enter  and  search  any  premises  occupied  or  used  by  the  Police  Force  or  any 
other public body in that capacity;  

(iv)  

inspect any document or other thing on the premises;” 

Meaning any diary book, - which my learned friend, hon. Baloomoody, was worried about - 
any  document  about  his  movement,  the  diary  book,  the  OB  Book  and  all  these  can  be 
inspectable  and  will  be  laid  because  that  investigator  can  take  copies  of  such  documents 
which  copies  of  documents  will  be  made  admissible  as  provided  under  the  Independent 
Police Complaints Commission Bill.  

To sum up, I will say, Madam Speaker, this Bill has all that it needs.  It renders the 
Commission  simple,  accessible  and  fundamentally  fair.    It  is,  in  fact,  an  effective  Police 
Complaints System.  The need to operate in a culture that is not defensive about complaints 
against the Police, but recognises them, deals with them and gives them the attention that it 
requires.  In fact, it should be something considered as a valuable feedback for any system 
because at the end of the day we will gage how our Police officers are performing their duties 
without abuse of their authorities through that Commission.  It must work on the basis and 
assumption  that  the  complainant  must  have  made  his  complaint  in  good  faith  and  seek  to 
address the root of that public dissatisfaction.  It should also recognise that there will be, as in 
all cases, abuse  and there may be malicious or vexatious complaints and that Commission 
should be able to deal with it with the robusity that it will be given.   

We have the faith that is required within that Commission which is going to be set up 
and  what  the  IPCC  Bill  does  is  that  it  creates  the  legislative  framework  for  setting  up  a 
system where all reasonable men, that is, the public and the Police will have confidence in it.  
The  framework  of  the  IPCC  defines  clearly  the  roles  of  all  those  involved  and  it  sets 
parameters dealing with the complaints, that is, the Commissioner, the investigator  and all 
other staff and it shows that the commitment is there to empower and give the resource that is 
required for those persons who are charged with responsibilities. 

114 

 
I have just talked about a dog with no teeth and with no bite, but here we have it all.  
We not only have a dog which can bark, but also one which can bite.  So, I will say those 
who  are  going  to  abuse  their  authorities:  Watch  out,  the  Ombudsman  is  coming  and  this 
Government means business! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Mrs Selvon ! 

(6.31 p.m.) 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) :  Madame  la 
présidente,  l’Article  4  (b)  au  chapitre  intitulé  "Functions  of  the  Commission",  de 
l’Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill, évoque les décès en cellule policière.  

Madame  la  présidente,  il  existe  un  registre  des  décès  publié  et  mis  à  jour 
régulièrement par le parti politique Lalit depuis le décès en cellule en 1999 du fondateur du 
genre musical seggae, Kaya. Ce registre démontre qu’il y a eu 62 décès en cellule policière de 
1979  à  2015,  en  36  ans.  Ce  parti  a  créé  le  Mouvement  Justice  et  fait  beaucoup  de 
propositions concrètes contre toutes les formes de brutalité policière, laquelle comprennent, 
selon Lalit, des séances de torture dans plusieurs cas.  

Le  travail  de  fourmi  de  ces  militants  politiques  en  association  avec  d’autres 
organisations,  témoigne  la  gravité  du  fléau  qu’est  la  brutalité  policière  qui  a  mené  à  de  si 
nombreux décès de personnes sous responsabilité policière, avec un taux de pas loin de deux 
décès par an. Or, Madame la présidente, un seul décès est de trop. Je recommande la lecture 
des études et observations de Lalit publiées depuis 1999. Il faut aussi comprendre qu’un seul 
décès peut mener ce pays tout entier au bord du précipice comme il y a eu 16 ans, suivant la 
mort de Kaya. 

Bien sûr, il ne faut pas mettre tous les policiers dans le même panier. Mais il faudrait 
que  le  gouvernement  et  les  partis  politiques  parlementaires  s’occupent  avec  efficacité  et 
compétence du problème. Il faudrait aussi - tous les avocats seront d’accord - procurer aux 
policiers accusés, des moyens de se défendre comme, par exemple, des règlements, en sus de 
ce projet de loi, leur permettant de faire appel immédiatement, à n’importe quelle heure du 
jour et de la nuit, à un médecin, un psychiatre ou un psychologue qualifié, le moindrement 
qu’ils constatent qu’un détenu en cellule policière montre des signes de grand malaise ou des 
tendances suicidaires. 

115 

 
De  nombreuses  personnes  accusées  font  des  allégations  de  brutalité  policière  à  la 
légère  surtout  pour  ce  qui  est  des  conditions  dans  lesquelles  ces  aveux  ont  été  faits.  Nous 
avons aujourd’hui suffisamment d’équipements électroniques pour facilement enregistrer les 
conditions dans lesquelles les dépositions sont faites. Mais, soit dit en passant, il est un fait 
que la plupart des dépositions sont faites comme cela se faisait au 19ème siècle alors que dans 
un pays qui se proclame une cyber-île au reste du monde, les dépositions devraient être faites 
sur ordinateur comme dans les pays avancés.  

Nous  votons  aujourd’hui  un  projet  qui  s’est  fait  attendre  pendant  de  trop  longues 
années.  Même  le  Police  Complaints  Act  de  2012,  sous  l’ancien  gouvernement,  n’a  pas  pu 
résoudre le très grave problème de multiples décès en cellule policière. L’honorable Premier 
ministre mérite donc toutes nos félicitations pour cette nouvelle loi qui remplace le Police 
Complaints Act. 

Les leçons qu’il fallait apprendre de l’affaire Kaya ne l’ont pas été pour ce qui est des 
manières d’arrêter des gens qui, au départ, sont foncièrement  pacifiques et désarmés. Je suis 
certaine qu’avec la nouvelle loi, la brutalité policière aura tendance à disparaître. 

Mais  je  vais  demander  au  Premier  ministre  de  continuer  sur  la  bonne  voie  qui  est 
d’imposer  d’autres  paramètres  sévères,  en  marge  de  la  nouvelle  loi,  en  ce  qui  concerne  la 
manière, souvent excessivement brutale, d’arrêter des gens avant de les envoyer en détention.  

En référence à l’Article 4 (a) du projet de loi, l’IPCC peut, à l’exception des crimes 

financiers, je cite – 

“(a) 

investigate  into  any  complaint  made  by  any  person  (…)  against  any  act, 
conduct or omission of a police officer in the discharge of his functions(…)” 

Mais dans le cas d’une arrestation arbitraire, que se passe-t-il, du fait que la loi parle de ‘any 
act (…) of a police officer in the discharge of his functions’ ? Est-ce que le Premier ministre a 
voulu  faire  d’une  pierre  deux  coups  pour  mettre  fin  aux  arrestations  arbitraires  ou 
excessivement brutales ? 

Le  dictionnaire  Larousse  définit  le  terme  ‘arrestation  arbitraire’  comme  une 

arrestation, je cite – 

«Qui dépend de la volonté, du bon plaisir de quelqu'un et intervient en violation de la 
loi ou de la justice.» 

 

116 

Je  laisse  le  soin  au  Premier  ministre  d’expliquer  en  plus  de  détails  le  rôle  de  l’IPCC  par 
rapport  aux  possibles  plaintes  contre  la  manière  dont  la  police  fait  des  arrestations  qui 
pourraient s’avérer arbitraires et abusives et faire l’objet de plaintes logées par des victimes 
présumées de ces actes, et leurs avocats! 

Toujours  est-il,  qu’en  Grande  Bretagne,  les  actions  de  la  police  sur  les  routes  sont 
aussi sujettes à des plaintes. En ce moment, l’IPCC en Angleterre enquête dans le cas d’un 
jeune homme de 19 ans tué dans un accident de la route lors d’une course-poursuite par des 
voitures policières. Les circonstances d’une arrestation doivent nécessairement faire l’objet 
de l’IPCC, à mon avis. 

J’en  viens  maintenant  à l’importance  du  projet  de  loi  pour  le  grand  public  et  de  la 
nécessité,  comme  dans  toutes  les  démocraties  modernes,  de  faciliter  l’accès  du  plus  grand 
nombre de personnes aux services qu’assurera la nouvelle commission, dont le nom est le 
même que sa contrepartie en Angleterre sous le Police Reform Act de 2002. 

Il faudra une campagne moderne d’information du public sur ce nouveau service par 
le biais des divers médias. Il faudra, comme en Grande Bretagne, en utilisant, entre autres, 
l’Internet,  un  "Guide  to  the  Police  Complaints"  et  des  ‘downloadable  forms’  à  remplir  et 
envoyer  à  l’IPCC  électroniquement  par  les  présumées  victimes.  Celles-ci  peuvent  ainsi 
donner  avis  de  plainte  urgente  et  préalable  à  une  déclaration  en  personne  au  bureau  de 
l’IPCC.  

La Commission aura eu le temps de mieux préparer le dossier avant même l’arrivée 
dans ses locaux de la victime présumée. Des facilités d’accès devraient être disponibles aux 
personnes détenues par la police pour loger une plainte.  

Il est intéressant de savoir dans quel cas et contexte on peut faire une plainte à l’IPCC 

en Grande Bretagne, pays dont est inspiré le nom de la future IPCC mauricienne. Je cite – 

“You can make a complaint if you have experienced inappropriate behaviour from a 
Police  ofﬁcer,  member  of  Police  staff  or  contractor  working  for  the  police.  For 
instance, if you felt they were rude or aggressive in their treatment of you.” 

Le public est aussi avisé de ce qui suit en Grande Bretagne – et c’est très important, je citerai 
ici l’IPCC britannique qui publie un document détaillé pour le public sur la manière de faire 
une plainte. Ce document intitulé "A Guide to the Police Complaints System" précise – 

117 

 
“Police forces are expected to take all complaints seriously, to listen to you and to act 
in  a  fair  and  balanced  way  to  seek  to  put  things  right(...)  There  is  also  a  link  to 
detailed information if you need it.” 

Mais il est clair que l’IPCC devrait elle-même produire de tels documents pour l’information 
tant de la police que du grand public.  

Enfin, Madame la présidente, je suis tout à fait d’accord avec l’Article 3 (4) (a) de la 
nouvelle  loi  qui  prévoit  la  nomination  soit  d’un  ex-juge  de  la  Cour  suprême,  soit  d’un 
magistrat ou un autre juriste de carrière pour diriger la Commission. J’accueille également 
l’Article 3 (4) (5) (b) de la loi qui dit ceci – 

“The Prime Minister shall, before tendering advice to the President (…) consult the 
Leader of the Opposition.” 

Cela indique une manière de faire digne d’une vraie démocratie parlementaire.  

Madame la présidente, honorables membres de la Chambre, je voterai volontiers en 

faveur du projet de loi et je vous remercie ainsi que la Chambre de m’avoir écoutée. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sinatambou! 

(6.40 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation 

(Mr  E. 
Sinatambou):  Madam  Speaker,  allow  me,  first  of  all,  to  congratulate  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  for  bringing  before  this  august  Assembly,  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission Bill which provides for the establishment of the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission  which  has  as  main  object  to  investigate  into  complaints  made  against  Police 
Officers in the discharge of their functions. 

May I also, Madam Speaker, at the outset, express my regret and my sense of sadness 
that the MMM has decided not to agree with this Bill. I am of the view, Madam Speaker, that 
the Members, who are sitting on that side of the House, are missing a golden opportunity to 
help our country, to help our citizens and, in  fact, to help our Police Force. Just like they 
missed a golden opportunity when they failed to vote in favour of the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill, again, they are missing a great appointment with history. 

What are we speaking about? We are speaking about the duties of the Police. If you 
go back to the Police Act, we know that the Police has the duty to preserve peace, has the 
duty to detect  and prevent crime, but then the law goes on to say  ‘without fear or  favour, 

 

118 

affection  or  ill  will’.  The  preservation  of  peace,  the  detection  and  prevention  of  crime  are 
objective  elements,  but  then  come  four  subjective  elements  which  require  actually  the 
intervention of watch dogs. Those four subjective elements are: fear, favour, affection or ill 
will. 

That is why I am convinced that those who actually are stating that there is nothing 
new fundamentally with this Bill, are wrong. They are wrong because, first of all, we realise 
that  this  Bill  actually  consolidates  a  third  tier  of  accountability  in  the  effective 
implementation of law and order in this country.  We all know, especially lawyers, that the 
first tier of protection, which is given to the public by controlling Police Officers, is to be 
found in what we call ‘The Police Standing Orders’ and also in what is known as the ‘Police 
Instruction Book’ . There are a series of rules there, which actually if complied with, would 
make a virtually perfect Police Force.   

I recall that, about 25 years ago, I used to have a Police Instructions Book, and you 
know, it said things like ‘Every single Police officer must address every member of the public 
in a very polite manner.’ This is how detailed it was. That is the first-tier of protection which 
the public has. 

The second-tier is actually provided by the courts. We all know, among lawyers, the 
voir dire, how, if a statement is actually obtained in an improper and/or unlawful manner, it is 
to be rejected by the courts. Furthermore, the courts, whenever any misdeed is revealed, has 
powers to actually take Police officers to task. But what has experience shown? Experience 
has shown that despite the two-tiers of protection which are provided to the public, this is still 
not sufficient. 

It is acknowledged that the Police Force has an overwhelming number of members 
who actually do their job perfectly. But there is, unfortunately, a small number of officers 
who do not do what they should do, and this is where this Bill comes into play. 

I  have  heard  one  of  the  previous  speakers  virtually  demonising  the  Police  and 
demonising  this  Government,  trying  to  make  the  amalgam  that  any  single  misdeed  by  the 
Police is actually the result of Government’s action, interference or pressure. That is false! 
This is totally false and should not be said because when you have immunity it does not mean 
that  you  have  to  be  irresponsible.  This  is  false  and  irresponsible!  It  is  also  improper  to 
demonise the Police because the Police, to a large extent, do a wonderful job. 

119 

 
In fact, those who know me know that I am one of the very critical members of the 
Police Force when they act wrongly. But, I, here, before this august Assembly, acknowledge 
that Police officers in this country do a great job, and I do hope that no one on the other side 
of the House tries to demean the Police Force or tries to demonise them because that, to me, 
would be anti-patriotic. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Police  have  even  expressed,  in  its  mission  statement,  that  it 
wishes to be a human rights compliant organisation. Here, we must again congratulate the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister because when he comes forward with this Bill, he is actually ensuring 
that,  through  this  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission,  we  actually  have  a  human 
rights compliant Police Force just like the mission statement of the Force itself stipulates. 

Here,  I  must  again,  Madam  Speaker,  express  my  disagreement  with  some  of  the 
statements  which  were  made  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  especially  when  it  comes  to 
clause  5  of  the  Bill.    Indeed,  my  hon.  friend  Baloomoody  stated  that  it  was  so  wrong  for 
Government to have in clause 5, sub clause (2), a statement whereby a person may refuse to 
answer any question which tends to incriminate him or her. 

In  fact,  this  is  the  state of  the  law!    This  is  actually  the  constitutional  right  of  any 

single person… 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! It is a constitutional right of every single citizen of this country to refuse to answer 
any question or do anything which may incriminate; even before being accused, you have the 
right to remain silent if something that you are going to say is going to incriminate you. That 
is the constitutional right which is written in our Constitution. 

However, - and that is where I am convinced that the hon. Member is wrong - if there 
are incriminating data, records, documents or articles, we have clause 12 of the Bill. Clause 
12  of  the  Bill  actually  involves  the  powers  of  an  investigator  who  has  the  right  to  search 
premises and indeed to secure any incriminating data, article, document or any such evidence. 
So,  it  is  quite  the  right  of  any  person,  under  clause  5  (2),  to  actually  refuse  to  give  any 
statement or produce any document, etc., which might incriminate the person. But the powers 
of  investigator  contained  in  clause  12  actually  allow  the  Commission,  through  its 
investigators, to get a search warrant from a Magistrate and do what it can lawfully do and 
secure  any  such  material  or  document.  Therefore,  I  would  respectfully  submit,  Madam 
Speaker, that the hon. Member is not right when he actually tries to say that if you tell the 

 

120 

Police to bring their occurrence book, they have the right not to produce it. Well, if they don’t 
produce it, we can go and take it from them. That is what the law states. 

I  was  also  quite  surprised  that  one  of  the  hon.  Members  made  a  great  deal  of  the 
Public Officers’ Protection Act of 1957.  One may be against the two-year time bar which is 
afforded to any public officer, not only to a Police officer but to any public officer. But this 
Bill is not the place to take it. This is not something which falls within the purview of the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission. This is something which should come, if at all, 
under an amendment to the Public Officers’ Protection Act of 1957. 

May  I  also  take  this  opportunity,  Madam  Speaker,  to  mention  something  which 
concerns the three-tiers of protection.  Let me say something which I thought I should say 
here because it involves a few anecdotes which happened this year. One of them is a young 
woman who has been, shall I say, thrown out of the conjugal home by her husband and he 
assaults her. The young lady goes back to her mother’s place at Terre Rouge, and she goes at 
Terre Rouge Police Station to make a statement against her husband for the assault. They tell 
her, “Well, you were punched in the face, but it happened at Rivière du Rempart, you must 
go to Rivière du Rempart.” So, she has to leave Terre Rouge on that night to go to Rivière du 
Rempart, and when she reaches there, she is told, “Where did he punch you?” He punched 
her whilst she was coming to work in Port Louis. So, they tell her on that night that it could 
not be in Rivière du Rempart either, where she used to live, she has to go to Pope Hennessy 
Police Station. 

So, there she goes on the next day, at 8 o’clock. And the anecdote says that while she 
was there at 8 o’clock, she was only looked after by a Police officer to take a statement at 
10.30. In the meantime, another lady came and said to the Police officer at the Police Station, 
“Sir, mo voisin ine zette ene seau dilo lor mwa.” So, she is coming to also give a statement 
for an assault. And the Police officer told her, “B si ou voisin ine zette ene seau dilo lor ou, b 
prend ene serviette sui ou.” 

In the meantime, the young lady who has been assaulted by her husband says: ‘But, 
when are you going to look after me?’ That happened at 10.30, and while her statement is 
being taken the Police officer goes and takes an apple, comes and eats and then writes the 
statement.  So,  we  will  have  to  be  well-advised  as  to  the  degree  of  gravity  of  complaints, 
because what may be perceived as being vexatious or frivolous may not be for the person 
who has actually come to that Police station to give that statement.  I believe that, again, it is 
on the subjective elements that a lot will depend.   

 

 

121 

The  credibility  which  the  Commission  will  have  in  the  median  to  long-term  will 
depend on the level of success with which it addresses complaints.  I believe that for those 
who are not happy with the current situation, it is because the degree of success with which 
complaints have been addressed or solved has not been to their satisfaction. It is not that the 
Police  Complaints  Division  would  have  been  per  se  wrong.    It  is  not  that  the  Police 
Complaints Division within the Human Rights Commission was the wrong institution.  It is 
because  the  level  of  success  with  which  complaints  have  actually  been  addressed  has  not 
been to their satisfaction.   

Here, I must say one thing, Madam Speaker.  If we look at clause 4  (a) – 

“(…), the Commissioner shall – 

(a) 

Investigate into any complaint made by (…) against any act, conduct 
or omission of a Police officer (…)” 

If the Commission wants to investigate an arbitrary arrest, this clause allows it to do so. If 
ever someone wishes to actually challenge a provisional charge, this clause, in my respect for 
submission  to  this  House,  would  allow  the  Commission  to  do  so.    One  cannot  blame  the 
Government if a Commission does not actually fulfil its duties or discharge its functions by 
its  strict  interpretation  of  a  piece  of  law.    The  law  clearly  says  that  the  Commission  can 
investigate any act, any conduct, any omission of a Police officer.   

In my respect for submission to this august Assembly, Madam Speaker, this Bill not 

only has to be commended, it should actually be voted with unanimity.   

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

(6.58 p.m.) 

Hon. G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau  Bassin & Petite Rivière): Madam 
Speaker, I rise today to speak in support of the Independent Police Complaints Commission 
Bill.  This  Bill  essentially  establishes  the  office  of  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission. 

 
This Bill is important for the people of Mauritius. It is important to get the structures 
and  processes  right  regarding  scrutiny  of  Police,  natural  justice  and  fairness  and  the 
protection of the public. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Member, can you speak a bit louder so that everybody can 

122 

understand? 

Mr Lepoigneur: Madam Speaker, an effective Police complaints system needs to be 
simple,  accessible  and  fundamentally  fair.  It  needs  to  operate  with  a  culture  that  is  not 
defensive about complaints, but recognises them as a valuable feedback. It must be capable of 
distinguishing serious misconduct from the vast number of complaints that deal with quality 
of  service,  minor  misconduct  and  poor  performance.  It  should  assume  that  nearly  all 
complaints are made in good faith and seek to address the root cause of public dissatisfaction. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill is to rectify the inadequacies of the former Government’s 
model. Under the old regime, the Police Complaints Act 2012 provided for the setting-up of 
the  Police  Complaints  Division,  within  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission  for  the 
investigation of complaints made against members of the Police Force. It did not provide for 
an  independent  body.  But  this  Bill  proposes  a  full-fledged  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission presided over by a former Judge of the Supreme Court and one of its striking 
features is that ‘No serving Police officer shall form part of the staff of the Commission’. The 
Commission is an independent body that must be able to effectively identify and investigate 
Police misconduct and the public deserves to have absolute confidence in the professionalism 
of the Police. 

The Bill also proposes to establish a regime which has the following functions – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

investigate  into  any  complaint  made  by  any  person  or  on  his  behalf  against 
any  act,  conduct,  or  omission  of  the  Police  officers  in  the  discharge  of  his 
functions; 

investigate into the cause of death of a person who died when the person was 
in Police custody or as a result of police action; 

advise  on  ways  where  any  Police  misconduct  may  be  addressed  and 
eliminated, and 

(iv) 

promote better relation between the public and the Police. 

Madam Speaker, one of the features of the Bill is reflected in clause 2, and I quote – 

“A hearing may be held in public or in private or partly in public and partly in 
private, as the Commission may determine.” 

 

123 

It is significant commitment from the Government that hearings may be held in public when 
it  is  determined  by  the  Commission  would  be  in  the  public  interest.  Public  hearings  are 
essential  for  public  confidence.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  mischief  of  this  Bill  is  to  enhance 
Police accountability and put the onus on the Police to act in a manner conducive to good 
governance and put an end to misconduct within the Police Force and, to that end, no fellow 
Police officers can investigate his own peers. 

The  people  of  Mauritius  must  have  entire  confidence  in  the  Police  Force,  which  is 
based  upon  trust  and  integrity  to  serve  the  people  of  Mauritius;  a  Police  Force  which  can 
effectively deliver the basic services of upholding law and order when treating the individuals 
with  due  respect.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  this  Bill  also  proposes  to  promote  better 
relations between the public and the Police - perhaps through a regime of education. 

The Government has today delivered one of its key electoral promises. It involves in a 
fundamental shift in the Mauritian integrity regime. One of the  great tests of true political 
leadership is integrity, that is, the integrity to be open, honest and accountable and, of course, 
the  integrity  to  keep  electoral  promises.    A  good  Government  is  one  which  is  capable  of 
building resilient, effective and long-lasting institutions.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  centrepiece  of  this  Government  Programme  for  Government 
integrity is the establishment of an independent Commission in accordance with international 
norms, and a Commission which is truly independent. 

One of the Government promises was to ‘clean’ or ‘rid’ Mauritius of corruption and 
bad  practices.  It  is  a  clear  electoral  mandate  and  it  involves  a  fundamental  shift  in  the 
Mauritian integrity regime. This Government is delivering the most far-reaching reforms to 
the integrity systems in Mauritius. We have witnessed the enactment of the Good Governance 
and Integrity Act. 

This  Bill  represents  the  next  step  in  the  process  of  delivering  the  Government’s 
ongoing integrity reforms. This Bill will ensure a better Police Force and will give confidence 
to any complainant that he or she will have a fair hearing. 

I believe this Bill is a strong investigatory body that has the teeth it needs to deal with 

Police misconduct in Mauritius. It is an excellent Bill, which I will be happy to vote. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

(7.04 p.m.) 

124 

 
Mrs D. Boygah (Second Member for Vieux Grand Port & Rose Belle): Madam 
Speaker, this House bears witness, this Government is setting records straight in many fields. 
Many  legislation  addressing  numerous  issues  have  been  voted.    The  recent  Domestic 
Violence Act is a vivid example of the seriousness with which this Government is dealing 
with ills which have been plaguing our society for years now. 

Madam  Speaker,  today  with  the  presentation  of  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission Bill, another scourge of our society is targeted for remedial actions. People in 
different  spheres  have  been  complaining  about  violence  and  malpractices  perpetrated  by 
some members of our Police Force. Complaints in a recent past against the MCIT abound.  

What  is  appealing,  Madam  Speaker,  concerning  this  Commission  is  that  it  will 
comprise of three distinct divisions each headed by a Deputy Chairperson with its own staff. 

Each of these divisions will address one particular issue - 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Human Rights Division which will deal with complaints where people feel 
their rights have been violated; 

Police Complaints Division, very suggestive of its object, and 

National  Preventive  Mechanism  Division,  which  will  work  towards 
prevention and education. 

I  wish  to  point  out,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this  Bill  should  not  be  viewed  as  one  to 
deter  the  Police  Force  from  carrying  out  its  duties.  It  addresses  only  those  very  few  who 
misuse  in  a  shameful  manner  the  power  of  their  uniforms.  Nevertheless,  it  should  not  be 
overlooked  that  many  accused  brand  the  weapon  of  Police  beating  or  any  other  sort  of 
violence or corruption in an attempt to defend themselves.  

Madam Speaker, with this new Bill, it will henceforth be up to the Independent Police 

Complaints Commission to inquire, establish and surface the truth. 

The vast majority of our Police Force is doing superbly well, Madam Speaker. I wish, 
therefore, to address my sincere appreciation for their excellent job. So many cases of bank 
looters, murder, and rape are being solved in hours within they have been committed. Yet, 
there  exists  a  profound  perception,  rightly  or  wrongly  so,  that  the  Police  violence  and 
malpractices  are  prevalent  in  our  Police  Force.  Police  is  accused  of  extracting  confession 
from innocent persons through the use of illegal methods, mostly physical violence. Many 
have lost their lives whilst being in custody. The State is confronted with numerous cases of 

 

125 

claims of compensation. Millions of rupees are  due to the  families of persons deceased in 
Police custody. Enough of these, Madam Speaker! The Commission shall act as a deterrent 
against such malpractices. 

Madam Speaker, as matters stand, complaints by presumed victims of Police violence 
are being dealt with by the Police Complaints Division of the Police Force. Police inquiring 
upon the police is for sure in an uncomfortable situation, giving rise to a non-confidence in 
the Police Complaints Division and a pronounced perception of cover-up in many cases. It is 
a paradox that Police is being called to investigate upon Police and hence finds itself in a 
position of judge and party at the same time. Again, Madam Speaker, the setting up of the 
Commission acting in complete independence will wipe away this perception.  

Madam Speaker, replying to hon. Baloomoody regarding what he said backing of the 
Authority, I wish to remind the hon. Member that we are all aware, Madam Speaker, that a 
Unit  at  the  Line  Barracks  was  perceived  as  acting  under  the  order  of  someone  above  the 
Commissioner of Police in the past. Many opponents of the then Government were victims of 
this Unit. No complainant aggrieved and persecuted as he or she might have been, was given 
positive  response  of  their  legitimate  complaints.  Such  complaints  were  cast  aside  and 
considered as spate. Now, with the setting up of the Independent Commission, accountable to 
none Madam Speaker, no interference will be possible. An Independent Commission under 
the Chairmanship of a respectable Chairperson will remain aloof of political indifference. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  prime  duty  of  the  Police  is  to  uphold  law  and  order  in  the 
country.  Everything  should  be  done  to  provide  the  Police  Force  with  the  proper  tools, 
adequate  formation  and  high-tech  equipment  and  proper  encouragement  to  enable  these 
officers to fulfil the mission set up by the Police Force. Therefore, I maintain and reaffirm, 
Madam Speaker, my statement that this Commission is not being set up to punish members of 
the Police Force, but to establish the truth in the complaints made by members of the public 
against the Police. 

Madame la présidente, je suis convaincue que cette commission va aider à redorer le 
blason  de  la  force  policière  quand  je  crois  qu’il  y  a  une  grossière  exagération  dans  des 
nombreuses plaintes d’abus à l’encontre de la force policière. La police est le bouc émissaire 
tout  trouvé  par  certains  hommes  de  loi  qui  utilisent  cette  excuse,  désormais  célèbre,  pour 
défendre  leurs  clients.  J’ose  espérer  que  la  commission  sera  impitoyable  compte  ceux  qui 

 

126 

éclaboussent  l’image  de  notre  force  policière  par  des  allégations  frivoles  et  non  fondées, 
Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker, I note with a certain apprehension that section 11 (6) of the Police 
Complaints Commission Act has been maintained in clause 13 (6) of the Independent Police 
Complaints Commission Bill. I quote – 

“A person may, at a hearing, refuse to give any evidence, to produce any document, 
or to provide any information which would incriminate him.” 

Madam Speaker, I am fully aware that this section is in line with the provisions of our 
Constitution regarding the famous sacrosanct notion of « Droit au Silence », yet, I apprehend 
that  the  suspects  may  abusively  brand  this  section  to  escape  from  giving  explanations  or 
evidence,  thus  rendering  the  Commission  ineffective  mainly  during  the  hearings.  I  hope, 
Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Commission  is  adequately  empowered  to  deal  with  persons  who 
take undue advantage of this section. 

Madam Speaker, prevention is better than cure. I note with utmost satisfaction that a 
National  Preventive  Mechanism  Division  has  been  set  up  within  this  Commission.  This 
Division  has  a  decisive  role  to  play  in  curbing  the  number  of  cases  of  complaints  against 
Police violence and malpractices. This Division has the mission to devise any such measures 
to initiate such actions that will keep Police officers from wrongdoings. It is called upon to 
broaden  its  “champ  d’action”,  Madam  Speaker  so  as  to  include  the  public  at  large.  This 
Division can eventually  help to sensitise the population in many fields relating to law and 
order and related issues. I understand, Madam Speaker, that the ICAC is doing an excellent 
job in that field. 

Madam Speaker,  I  request that this particular Division starts its function by widely 
publicising the objects of this commission. It is a fact that most of our people are unaware of 
their  elementary  rights  and  duties  as  responsible  citizens  of  this  country.  This  unusual 
situation  has  shaped  in  a  negative  manner  the  mindset  of  most  of  our  past  and  present 
generations. Once the mind is set, it becomes nearly impossible, Madam Speaker, to expect 
for a 180 degree change. I aver that the National Preventive Mechanism Division targets the 
youth in schools, colleges and universities. It should broaden its avenues and not restrict itself 
to Police officers only.  

Madam Speaker, I appeal to the National Preventive Mechanism Division to come up 
with the periodical pamphlets or booklets containing highlights of various legislations like, 

 

127 

for  example,  the  Domestic  Violence  Act,  the  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission 
Bill and also other measures taken by the Government.  These pamphlets could be distributed 
in schools and colleges to sensitise our youth, so far unaware and unconcerned by the positive 
changes brought by this Government for the betterment of our society. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  complaints  against  Police  are  concerned,  I  am  of  the 
opinion that video recording of statements of all suspects should come in force as soon as 
possible.    This  will  certainly  help  to  curb  the  number  of  cases  of  Police  complaints  and 
malpractices.    The  recordings  should  indicate  the  date,  time,  place,  and  an  oral  statement 
from the suspects as to their state of mind and willingness to give their statements voluntarily 
prior to and during video recording. 

Madam Speaker, to sum up, I would congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to bring 
this Bill to the House and I hereby wish to voice my plea that a woman be appointed as the 
Chairperson of this Commission and as one of the three Divisional Deputy Chairperson.  This 
is in line with the Government policy of enhancing the status of woman.   

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Abbas Mamode! 

(7.16 p.m.) 

Mr S. Abbas Mamode (Fourth Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East): Merci, Madame la présidente.  Le mot ‘police’ vient du latin ‘politia’ qui, lui-même 
trouve  son  origine  dans  le  grec,  lequel  dérive  du  mot  ‘polis’.    En  vieux français,  ‘pollice’ 
signifiait ‘gouvernement’.  Au fil des années, le mot s’est limité à la gestion d’une cité pour 
acquérir son sens actuel d’organe, de règle et de mission permettant d’assurer le maintien  et 
le rétablissement de l’ordre public. 

Madam  Speaker,  trust  is  essential  if  the  Police  are  to  receive  information  from  the 
public which helps them to detect and combat crime. It is also essential to enable the public to 
feel at ease, to seek the assistance and protection of Police officers wherever necessary. 

The  Police  have  significant  powers  to  intervene  in  our  lives  when  they  believe  we 
need  to  be  prevented  from  harming  ourselves  or  others  or  from  committing  acts  of 
criminality. 

128 

 
Their powers are such that there are even circumstances in which a Police officer may 
lawfully take a life.  We live in a multicultural and multiracial country where it is of cardinal 
principle that everyone should be treated with justice, fairness and equity. 

The  essence  behind  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  is  the  promotion  and 
protection of human rights in Mauritius and the role is to allow enjoyment of the inherent 
rights of the citizens.  Nobody is above the law and no one can use the law in a way or the 
other  to  protect  himself  from  committing  a  crime.    Even,  we,  hon.  Members  of  this 
Assembly, are not above the law. The Police, the Court and the penal institutions form part of 
the criminal justice system.  However, the Police play a vital role to maintain law, order and 
stability for the citizens of the country and foreigners. 

In addition, the authority exercised by them cannot be absolute and there is a crying 
need to impose mechanism, measures of checks  and balances on them to prevent eventual 
abuse  of  power.  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  not  rebranding.    Nous  nous  sommes  en  train  de 
changer.    Cette  loi  sera  une  loi  où  il  y  aura  une  institution  indépendante  to  prevent  an 
eventual abuse of power, because there is eventual abuse of power. I am against the death 
penalty because the Police ne sont pas infaillible, occasionally, they can make errors and it 
would not be in the interest of the country to have innocent people to pay and be sent to the 
gallows as a result of Police errors.   

Being independent reflects the principle of separation of powers. There  shall be no 

overlapping and potential risk of conflicts. 

With the advance of globalisation, people are more aware of the situation. As a matter 
of fact, Police play a significant role in every facet of life regarding socio-economic, political 
and environmental issues which increase the heavy workload of the Police. 

With  regard  to  other  countries,  the  Police  Force  is  induced  in  specific  duties  to 

enhance stability, peace and welfare of the citizens of the society. 

In  line  with  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  the  introduction  of  the 
Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  Bill  is  considered  to  be  a  landmark,  Madam 
Speaker,  to  secure  and  maintain  public  confidence  in  the  complaints  system  for  the 
betterment of the society as a whole.  

The  Commission  is  an  independent  body  which  will  comprise  of  either  a  Judge,  a 

Magistrate or a law practitioner to better ensure the smooth running of the activities. 

 
The goals of the Commission are- 

129 

• 

• 
• 

To investigate into complaints made against Police officers in the discharge of 
their  functions,  other  than  complaints  of  acts  of  corruption,  light  bribery 
among others. 
To promote better relations between the public and the Police. 
To  advise  on  ways  in  which  any  Police  misconduct  may  be  addressed  and 
eliminated. 

In  the  light  of  the  above,  it  is  not  logic  for  the  Police  Complaints  Division  to 
investigate into complaints made against Police officers in the discharge of their functions, 
other than complaints of corruption or money laundering offences. 

Sadly,  there  is  a  risk  that  our  current  law  regarding  police  complaints  may  contain 
loopholes and might slip through situations. For example, recently the case of Iqbal who has 
been  tortured  to  death,  raised  a  lot  of  speculations  in  the  society.    Such  situation  impels 
people to lose confidence in the Police and which in return brings a negative impact on the 
socio-economic development of the country. 

Another  example,  Madam  Speaker,  recently,  we  learned  from  the  radio  and 
newspapers, the incident that has occurred in the Court of USA regarding abusive powers of 
the Police over the black community.  Such situations enable people to lose confidence in the 
Criminal Justice System. 

In  this  regard,  this  Bill  will  shape  the  Police  accountability,  fundamental  shift  in 

Police nature to promote effectiveness and restore the confidence of the public. 

To conclude, I seize this opportunity to thank the actual Commissioner of Police and 
his team for their good job.  They are doing a very good job.  In line with the Government 
Programme 2015-2019, I would like to express my appreciation and gratitude towards the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  and  other  hon.  Members  of  this  Assembly  to  come  forward  with  the 
introduction of this new Bill that will enable the public to be more confident in the complaint 
system which will be more accessible. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(7.24 p.m.) 

130 

 
Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): I 
was quite amused, Madam Speaker, when I heard my friend, hon. Abbas-Mamode, who hails 
from the same constituency as I do, when he started out by defining the source of the word 
‘Police’ and how he said that in the old days ‘Police’, ‘Politia’ in latin is another word for 
Government, and in other words, Police meant Government in the old days. I was about to 
say jokingly, ‘Well,  I mean maybe the old days have come back. Now, ‘days Police’ also 
means Government. But I am sure this is not what he meant, that’s not the allusion he was 
trying to make. Anyway! But what is interesting is, having heard all people addressed this 
debate. All hon. Members addressed debate… 

Madam Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Mr Mohamed: Correct! You are right! 

I have noted that a lot of words have been spoken, such as the ones spoken by some 
Ministers in Government today, saying it is sad that certain hon. Members of the Opposition 
have a point of view supposedly trying to demean or in any way  give  a bad reputation or 
darken the name of the Police Force. This has never been the intention of the Opposition, far 
from it. 

When I hear Members of Government speak on this particular piece of legislation, it 
reminds me of a situation which should stop happening in our country. It is not possible! And 
there, I take responsibility because I also belong to a party that was once upon a time when it 
was recently in Government. It is not possible for Members of Government to believe that 
everything that Government does is correct. So, I like when I hear the Chief Whip admitting 
that Government does wrong things. 

Now,  the  fact  is  when  we  listen  to  hon.  Members,  Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Minister 
Sinatambou said a few things just now, he said he was saddened.  I, myself, am more than 
saddened when I hear the tone and tenor of the debate when it comes to the Government side. 
I  think  when  we  have  to  remove  emotions  from  this  whole  subject,  we  have  to  remove 
political  appartenance  from  this  whole  subject  and  not  be  blinded.  We  have  to  have  the 
courage of admitting a few things. 

Hon. Baloomoody has referred to a book on arbitrary arrests. Maybe the book does 
not talk about all arbitrary arrests that have occurred in this country for many, many years, 
then we would not have a handbook, we would have to walk with volumes and volumes and 
volumes. Because fact is, as hon. Mrs Selvon - who is not here now - rightly said arbitrary 

 

131 

arrest is not the domain of this present Government because it has happened under previous 
regimes  as  well.  Fact!  I  here  look  at  the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports.  Has  he  been 
arbitrarily arrested? Let me say it loud and clear. Yes, I believe he was victim of arbitrary 
arrest. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I believe he was victim of arbitrary arrest. In those days, people then in the Opposition 
were quick enough to blame Government. It is the Government who has done it. And here, 
today,  I hear hon. Sinatambou saying: ‘we should not go as quick en besogne, saying that 
Government is responsible.’ But, in those days, the Members in the Opposition were quick 
enough to say Government is responsible. But, I am taking it upon myself and saying: yes, 
there have been arbitrary arrests. Hon. Pravind Jugnauth! I remember a time when I was in 
the Republic of France on holidays in December reading the news and seeing the manner in 
which he was apprehended and arrested. His liberty was curtailed. I say it out loud, for me, 
this was an arbitrary arrest. 

So, as far as I am concerned, the problem we face as a society when it comes to arrest, 
since this is what we are dealing with, we are talking about mainly the wrong that Police do 
when they arbitrarily arrest citizens of this country, foreigners as well, it is not something that 
has to do between 2015 and 2016. It has happened before 2015. It has happened as far back, 
if I am to think, to people who are known. This book does not talk about all arbitrary arrests 
of people who are well-known. As I said, it does not talk about the hon. Ministers who are in 
Government  today.  It  does  not  talk  about  hon.  Sir  Gaëtan  Duval  as  he  was  then,  when  I 
believe he was arbitrarily arrested. Therefore, there are serious issues that we have to face. 
People have been victims of arbitrary arrests. 

Now, if we are to believe, as legislators, that this piece of legislation is the solution to 
our  problems,  I  humbly  disagree.  We  should  be  able  to  have  respect  for  my  views  even 
though  we  are  not  on  the  same  wavelength.  So,  I  shall  explain  why  I  humbly  disagree.  I 
believe that Government has done a formidable job - a formidable job! - when it comes to 
this Bill as far as the copy and paste exercise is done. Formidable! Copy and paste exercise! It 
suffices us to simply hold the two Bills up in our hands and look at it. Look at it! We don’t 
even have to go through a computer to come and tell them to find the words that are similar. 
To the naked eye, we find the naked truth. This is a copy and paste exercise. 

132 

 
When I hear hon. Members of Government say with conviction that this is now a new 
piece of legislation that changes the whole game, that changes the whole reality and that now 
we will have what we have been longing for, for so many years, this independent body that 
shall now come to protect us from the abuse of Police. How does this piece of legislation, 
Madam  Speaker,  become  new?  I  say  it  in  all  humility:  how  does  this  piece  of  legislation 
become  a  new  piece  of  legislation  that  changes  the  game?  I  have  analysed  it.  I  humbly 
request all hon. Members, Madam Speaker, to look at it dispassionately. 

The title itself talks about the Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill. The 
difference between the previous Bill that was presented in Parliament in 2012, are two words: 
‘independent’,  ‘commission’.    The  only  difference  are  two  words:  ‘independent’  and 
‘commission’. When one looks at the arrangement of the sections, the section arrangements 
are exactly the same when it comes to preliminary section, when it comes to the Part II, when 
it comes to Part III ‘Investigations’, when it comes to Part IV, it is exactly the same.  It is 
exactly the same and  I  speak here en connaissance de  cause  as a lawyer.  It is exactly the 
same. 

The only difference, Madam Speaker, is the following - the only difference, it is here 
Part IV ‘Miscellaneous’. The only difference with regard to Part IV, is what? Is because this 
new  Independent Police Complaints Commission is the body corporate  and because it is a 
body  corporate,  you  need,  therefore,  by  law  to  address  accountability  issues  and  bring  in 
clauses that have to deal with the issue of it being a body corporate because in the old law, it 
was not a body corporate. If this makes the whole difference in trying to come to give us the 
solution to our headache, then I never thought it was so simple. Of course, it is not simple! Of 
course, it is not easy to come up with solutions! But, here, Madam Speaker, we have chosen 
to walk a very easy line which is to simply copy and paste, with the exception of removing 
the word ‘Division’ and replacing it by the word ‘Commission’ and to make it independent, 
we have not changed anything dans le fond, we have simply changed one word and brought 
in the word ‘Independent’. Alleluia! 

We  have  found  the  light,  we  have  found  the  way  of  so  calling  it  ‘independent’. 
Madam Speaker, this was not help because the fact remains. Hon. Mrs Selvon earlier stated 
something which, unfortunately, I do not agree with her and I respectfully say why I don’t 
agree  with  her.    I  don’t  agree  with  her  when  she  says  or  gives  the  impression  that  this 
legislation that is being presented by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister today is the legislation that 

 

133 

addresses or gives powers to this particular independent body to investigate into deaths while 
people are in detention. 

Is this the first time that this exists? No!  It is the impression that hon. Selvon gives by 
congratulating the actual Government and saying this is the first time! This is the impression 
she gives. But when I look at the previous legislation, it is exactly what exists here; that the 
powers  of  the  Division was  precisely  to  look  into  situations  where,  in  custody,  people  are 
found to lose their life. This exists. It is a copy and paste exercise. Maybe the hon. Member 
has not gone as far as to look at the previous legislation or maybe the hon. Member did not go 
as far as to understand the previous legislation, but I think it is important for us to realise 
when hon. Abbas Mamode says, “now, we have come up with an independent institution”, 
the word ‘independent’ does not make it independent! Because, in the previous institution, 
the Chairman was independent! In the previous institution, the members were independent! 
In the previous institution, there was no power of arrest!  In this institution, the Bill proposes, 
it has no power of arrest! What makes it independent? 

With regard to the qualifications of the Chairperson, what makes it so different as to 
make it better? Nothing! The qualifications of the members, what makes it today so different 
that makes it better? Nothing! What is the difference between the two Bills, their operation? I 
am not making a procès d’intention -  I have almost finished, as  I promised. The intention 
maybe of Government is also to find a solution. The intention of Government is surely to find 
a solution to the problem. But I humbly say here that I do not believe that this is the solution, 
not even closely. 

Now, people will say, “well, it was your Government that came up with the previous 
legislation. You were Minister then.” Yes, I was. And let me put it out right. When finally 
this was put into practice, when we found how it worked, Madam Speaker - I would like the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister to acknowledge that here I am not in any way criticising his work 
and his intention. I have no right to even in any way doubt his intention to bring a piece of 
legislation that will be a solution in the long term. I have no right to doubt that. What I am 
saying here is it has not worked what we did in 2012 because they were badly staffed. They 
did  not  have  all  the  powers  that  they  should  have  had.  They  did  not  deal  with  the  Police 
powers  as  investigators  as  they  should,  as  reminded  to  me  earlier  on  by  hon.  Ramful. 
Therefore, in this particular case as well, we go and end up with the same situation. 

134 

 
What I would propose, to conclude, is the following: there should be constitutional 
amendments,  whereby  you  have  independent  body  that  also  has  powers  of  arrest,  Madam 
Speaker. Because in this particular case, we all remember the scenario recently - and I will 
not mention names -, where ICAC tries to arrest but the Commissioner of Police says, “Wait, 
I will have to reflect.” In this scenario, it is the same thing. A Police does wrong, they have to 
have an arrest, they cannot because the Commissioner of Police is the person who detains this 
power of arrest. Imagine it is the Commissioner of Police himself who is being investigated, 
imagine  the  people  around  him,  after  what  we  have  heard  this  morning,  are  being 
investigated,  and  they  do  not  proceed  to  arrest  because  they  detain  that  power!  We  are, 
therefore, going to end up avec un bouledogue sans dents, in spite of the good intention or 
intentions of one and all. 

This is my humble suggestion that, yes, we are trying to fight this on a common front, 
all of us looking in the right direction, but we do not necessarily have the solution here. For 
sure,  it  is  not.  Therefore,  when  hon.  Minister  Sinatambou  says  that  we  are  missing  an 
opportunity, I gladly miss opportunities to vote a copy and paste and sometimes a cutting and 
pasting  exercise,  as  provided  here  to  the  innocent  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.  I  put  it  very 
simply: to the innocent Rt. hon. Prime Minister. I am of the view that he is being wrongly 
directed here in spite of all his experience and goodwill which he has. I believe that we could 
have looked at this piece of legislation differently, be ingenious and be bold, come up with 
constitutional amendments. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Government have the majority 
for that, you can claim it and we will stand by you if you do it - to come and say that this 
body should be totally independent and even have powers of arrest, if need be. Then, it does 
not play along the rules of the Commissioner of Police whose Force is being investigated. 

Now, yes, let me say it again, to conclude, there have been arbitrary arrests along the 
years, not only under one regime, but under many regimes. There have and it should stop. 
Secondly, we should ensure that when we mean independent, we  give it its independence, 
and  once  and  for  all  Opposition  and  Government  should  look  in  the  right  direction  in  the 
interest of the citizens and put politics and politicking aside. We can do it, Madam Speaker, 
and my humble request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister respectfully is that this legislation, if 
he looks at it very carefully, in all the experience that he has at the Bar, he will realise, I am 
sure, that this is not what he himself would have wanted deep down. 

Thank you. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

135 

(7.40 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to 
welcome  the  Independent  Police  Complaints Commission  Bill  2016  which,  when  adopted, 
will be repealing the Police Complaints Act 2012. 

I  will  indeed  stick  myself  to  the  provisions  of  the  Bill.  The  Police  Complaints 
Division was set up by an amendment to the Protection of Human Rights Act 1998 in 2012.  
It was set up as a Division of the National Human Rights Commission and was established 
for the better investigation of complaints against members of the Police Force. 

While  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  1998  catered  comprehensively  for  the 
operation  of  the  Human  Rights  Division  of  the  National  Human  Rights  Commission,  the 
amendment  to  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  1998  only  made  provisions  for  the 
establishment, composition and appointment of members of the Police Complaints Division. 
The amendment to the Protection of Human Rights Act 1998 did not as such make provisions 
for  the  functioning,  the  powers  and  mode  of  operation  of  the  Police  Complaints  Division. 
Thus, came the Police Complaints Act 2012 to complement the amendments to the Protection 
of Human Rights Act 1998. 

With  the  coming  into  force  of  the  Police  Complaints  Act  2012,  the  Complaints 
Investigation  Bureau  of  the  Police  Force  that  existed  was  duly  replaced  by  the  Police 
Complaints  Division.  The  Police  Complaints  Act  2012  was  intended  to  address  all  those 
matters that were deemed important to ensure the smooth running of the Police Complaints 
Division in line with its statutory mission. 

However, certain of the provisions of the Police Complaints Act 2012 did not provide 
a clear and confident picture of the operation of the Police complaints system. For instance, 
section 3 (2) of the Police Complaints Act 2012 would refer us to section 3 of the Protection 
of the Human Rights Act 1998 for the composition of the Police Complaints Division. This 
would mean that the two legislative provisions had to be considered as the framework for the 
operation of the Police Complaints Division. 

The Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill 2016 is really insightful. This 
Bill not only provides for the repeal of the Police Complaints Act 2012, but at the same time 
provides, under section 26, for consequential amendments to the Protection of Human Rights 

 

136 

Act  1998,  amongst  others.  Under  clause  3  of  the  Bill,  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 
Commission is established and its composition is extensively and clearly set out. 

Furthermore,  while  the  Police  Complaints  Act  2012,  under  its  section  7,  barely 
provides  for  the  staffing  of  the  Police  Complaints  Division,  the  Bill  on  its  part  gives  due 
consideration to the proper staffing of such an important institution. Indeed, we are concerned 
with a statutory institution, which will be dealing with the grievances of the general public. 

Clause 7, therefore, of the Bill rightly provides for the appointment of a Secretary to 
the Independent Police Complaints Commission, the procedure for such appointment and the 
duties of the Secretary. 

Clause 8 of the Bill goes further to provide for the appointment of public officers to 
assist the Independent Police Complaints Commission in its mission.  It equally caters for the 
transfer,  promotion  or  secondment  of  officers  in  the  public  service  to  any  office  in  the 
Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission.    This  clause  also  empowers  the  Independent 
Police  Complaints  Commission  to  employ  on  contractual  basis  such  suitable  qualified 
persons as may be necessary for the proper discharge of the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission functions. 

Lastly, on this aspect there is a new provision with regard to the delegation of powers 
and function of the Secretary.  As such, clause 9 of the Bill entitles the Secretary to delegate 
his  powers  and  functions  to  such  other  designated  officer  with  the  approval  of  the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission. 

Now,  all  these  provisions  concerning  the  staffing  of  the  Independent  Police 
Complaints  Commission  are,  indeed,  essential  when  we  consider  the  significance  of  the 
mission of the institution that is being set up under the present Bill.  It is apposite to note that 
section 7 of the Police Complaints Act 2012, the provision for staffing was quite vague.  The 
said section simply provides, I quote –  

“7. Staff of Division  

(1)  (…), the Commission shall provide the Division with adequate staff and 

facilities for the proper discharge of its functions”. 

Every hon. Member here, today, will agree with me that lack of clarity leads automatically to 
loss of resources, which is a direct blow to competence.   

137 

 
 
Madam Speaker, the point I want to make is that by making precise provisions on the 
staffing and the powers of the officers, this Bill has outdone the Police Complaints Act 2012. 
I am now confident that staffing and related issues will not be a clock in the performance and 
progress wheel of the Independent Police Complaints Commission.   

That  being  said,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  also  like  to  refer  to  clause  18  which 
imposes  a  duty  of  confidentiality  on  the  members  and  officers  of  the  Independent  Police 
Complaints Commission.  It is tweet that wrongful and illegal disclosure of information leads 
to unprecedent prejudice to the aggrieved party.  We are promoting the establishment of an 
Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  and  it  is  a  sine  qua  non  condition  that  the 
members and officers who form part and parcel of this institution be diligent and dedicated to 
their functions.  This would ensure that justice is meted out in all cases.  

The Police Complaints Act 2012 did not contemplate to provide for such an essential 
duty.    However,  this  Bill  has  not  only  found  the  need  to  incorporate  the  duty  of 
confidentiality  into  its  enactment,  but  has  also  under  its  clause  18(2)  incriminated  any 
contravention by any member or officer of this sacred duty.  Any member or officer who will 
contravene this duty of confidentiality will commit a criminal offence and, on conviction, he 
will  be  liable  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  Rs50,000  and  to  an  imprisonment  for  a  term  not 
exceeding  one  year.  This  criminal  sanction  would,  undoubtedly,  be  additional  to  any 
disciplinary  action  that  might  be  taken  against  the  member  or  officer  concerned.    Such  a 
stringent  approach  to  the  investigation  of  complaints  from  the  public  will  reflect  the 
seriousness and, if I may say, dedication of the institution. Madam Speaker, accountability 
and transparency guarantee fairness and justice.   

The Independent Police Complaints Commission will be under a legal obligation to 
submit an annual report which will be laid before the Assembly.  This is not provided for 
under  the  Police  Complaints  Act  2012.    This  new  provision  will  enable  this  House  to 
appreciate the achievements of the Independent Police Complaints Commission annually.  It 
will also provide an opportunity to this House to assess the effectiveness of the Independent 
Police  Complaints  Commission.    The  House  will  thus  be  able  to  recommend  future 
amendments to the law to boost up the performance of the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission where and if the need is felt in the future. 

There  is  also  the  possibility  of  providing  in  regulations  for  a  prescribed  form  for 
recording of complaints.  The Bill entitles the Minister to make regulations.  This power will 

 

138 

enable the Minister to make even more detailed provisions.  The Bill when passed together 
with  such  regulations  would  be  the  correct  legal  framework  that  would  guarantee  the 
successful handling of complaints against Police officers.  I am of the humble opinion that, 
with the coming into force of the Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill, the public 
will have a comprehensive piece of enactment which sets out in-depth both the procedural 
and the substantive aspect of the complaint system.   

I would, thus, applaud this Bill for its insight and clarity.  I would also applaud this 
Bill for its future contribution in the promotion of consistency, predictability and confidence 
in the complaints system. This Bill when enacted will form part of our justice system.  We 
will then be able to pride ourselves on our endeavour to assist the public in all fairness and 
transparency.    It  is  also  worth  noting  that  England  and  Wales  is  also  equipped  with  an 
Independent Police Complaints Commission which was set up under the Police Reform Act 
2002.    The  Commission  started  operating  back  in  2004.    It  was  thought  that  a  robust 
complaint  system  with  an  independent  element  would  be  a  crucial  part  of  the  public 
accountability of the Police to act as a check on the exercise of their powers.  I am pleased 
that, although late, Mauritius is following the steps of England and Wales. 

I must say that the first thing that has captivated my attention in this Bill was the word 
‘independent.’  This Bill creates an independent institution, which will not only be seen to do 
justice  but  which  will  actually  do  justice  to  complainants.    Chapter  2  of  the  Constitution 
provides for the protection of the human rights of the citizens of Mauritius.  These human 
rights also incorporate the right of the citizen to have his complaint against a member of the 
Police Force investigated on a timely and fair basis.  This would, therefore, enable him to 
obtain an effective remedy which would in turn promote the confidence in the justice, legal 
and constitutional system of the country.  Such is the purpose of this Bill. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I, therefore, fully support the adoption of this Bill.  

I command, and thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing forward this Bill. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Toussaint! 

Mr Toussaint: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mrs Boygah rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

139 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 19 July 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTERS RAISED 

(7.53 p.m.) 

BAR MEMBER - MR K. T.  – PRESS INTERVIEW 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam Speaker, I would like to address an issue to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. 
Attorney-General, who is not in attendance, unfortunately.  I am sure that his hon. colleagues 
will pass on the message to him. 

In a recent interview given to the press by a member of the Bar - should I basically, 
for the sake of rectitude, called him Mr K. T.  He has given an interview in a paper recently, 
Madam Speaker, and that interview was published in ‘Week-End’ newspaper on 03 July. It is 
entitled: ‘Je suis un nominé politique compétent.’ 

In that particular interview - this is addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister since it is 
very,  very  important  -  there  have  been  serious  allegations  with  regard  to  the  Solicitor 
General.  That is a very important position in our system of Government. Serious allegations 
and allusions made against the Solicitor General and, if I am not mistaken, even the office of 
the  Solicitor  General  in  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  portrayed  and  stated  in  this 
interview. Whatever has been stated is with regard to this lawyer being shocked to discover 
that the FIU was paying on a monthly basis the Solicitor General in his own name, as though 
making  it  that  the  Solicitor  General  quémande  du  travail  de  la  part  du  FIU  and  also 
addressing the issue as to whether lawyers from the public service they have the right or not 
to work as lawyers for other Bodies. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself would recall that he 
himself as from 1983 and even in the 1990s when he was still Prime Minister had given this 
dispensation through the President of the Republic to allow lawyers from the public service to 
work since they have been doing so in all legality. 

So, the serious allegations made in the press here, I humbly request the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister to humbly request the hon. Attorney General to come up with a statement at least, or 

 

140 

to come up with a communiqué to reassert the confidence of Government and the Republic of 
Mauritius  in  the  office  of  the  Solicitor  General  and  the  Solicitor  General  and  his  officers 
because this undermines the confidence in the Solicitor General’s Office et les agissements 
which are really given a bad image here. This is being circulated not only in printed press, 
Madam Speaker, but it has also gone as far as online documents all over and knowing that the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been very respectuous of institutions and has always said how it 
is and how he has experienced at the Bar, he, himself, having been many, many years there, I 
humbly,  once  again,  request  that  the  Attorney  General  sets  records  straight  through  the 
intervention of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  true  that  Barristers  working  in 
Government were allowed to work, not to undertake any work but only in parastatal bodies 
and  Government  companies.  In  fact,  I  have  read  the  interview  myself  and  the  Solicitor 
General saw me on this, but I advised him that if he believes there is an offence, go and make 
a declaration at the Police, let the Police inquire. I hope he has done so.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

TRANQUEBAR - SQUATTERS 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  have  a  matter  to  raise  which  concerns  the  Vice-Prime  Minister, 
Minister of Housing and Lands, who is not here but I hope one of his colleagues will transmit 
it.  

That is in relation to the squatters of the Tranquebar region. The Minister of Social 
Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  is  in  the  House.    On  30  November  2015,  the 
Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  together  with  the  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and 
Economic Empowerment, proceeded to allocation of lots to 56 squatters of Tranquebar and 
when that was done, it was stated, and I quote – 

“The housing units have already been constructed and infrastructural works already 
completed. The Letter of Intent will be issued as soon as possible to enable them – the 
squatters – to make application to obtain electricity and water connection”. 

That was an official press release and that was done on 30 November 2015. We are now in 
July. So, may I ask the hon. Minister to look into the matter and to see to it that all these 

 

141 

people who have been promised an accommodation, a unit in, I think, Pointe-aux-Sables, be 
given their Letter of Intent. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun): In fact, Madam Speaker, I am aware of this issue and I know that the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands is working on all the formalities so that all 
contracts could be delivered to those persons and I’ll surely convey the message and try to 
see how the matter can be expedited.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

POPE HENNESSY STREET & COLONEL MAINGARD STREET, BEAU 

BASSIN – DRAIN WORKS 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, my complaint is addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport.  So,  je  me  fais  le  porte-parole  des  habitants  de  la  région  de  Maingard,  Beau 
Bassin. There have been some works allocated to one particular contractor concerning drain 
works along Pope Hennessy Street and then continuation to Colonel Maingard Street. But, 
unfortunately, since one month work has started and the contractor has left the site with all 
his  plastic  buntings,  which  is  causing  a  lot  of  inconvenience  to  the  general  public  of  the 
regions. Especially this is a region where you have members of the École des Aveugles who 
reside in the region and have to attend the Centre Loïs Lagesse. So, can I ask my good friend 
if he can rapidly direct the RDA to do the needful so that at least work may continue and then 
be completed? 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 

Madam Speaker, I have already referred the matter to the RDA for urgent action. 

 DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – CONSUMPTION 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie and Poudre D’or): Madam 
Speaker,  I  have  a  special  request  for  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  based  on  the  issue  of 
synthetic drugs.  

Only a few weeks back, I raised the case of a young gentleman who hanged himself.  
He was living at Cap Malheureux.  That was a suspected case of consumption of synthetic 
drugs.  

142 

 
Madam Speaker, I have a second case of another young gentleman of 23 years of age 
who again on the suspected case of consumption of synthetic drugs, got himself hanged once 
again; he was residing at Goodlands.  

I have also got requests from the PTA of Friendship College (Boys)  and (Girls) of 
Goodlands  and  Adolphe  de  Plevitz  SSS  at  Grand’  Baie  where  there  have  been  suspected 
cases of consumption of synthetic drugs by children between 10 and 16  years of age. The 
situation for me is becoming alarming in the north… 

(Interruptions) 

...  in  my  Constituency  where  I  have  personally  met  and  discussed  with  NGOs  and  many 
representatives of socio-cultural organisations.  

According to reports, the situation is dramatic in other regions of the country as well. 

(Interruptions) 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has never made any compromise on the issue of drug control. 
His personal commitment and dedication to the cause of the victims of drugs can never be 
sufficiently acclaimed. I make an appeal to him to please look into the possibility at least of 
setting up – I did propose this last year - a National Commission on Prevention of Drugs and 
Substance Abuse which might be attached to the Prime Minister’s Office. I know that there is 
presently the Harm Reduction Unit at the level of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life.  
They can work together but that is my request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  

Thank you very much. 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am sorry, I don’t appreciate that sort of request because 
we know, it is known today to everybody that very young boys and girls are manufacturing 
their own synthetic drug and they do it in their own house where they live with their own 
parents. I can’t have Police everywhere in every house to keep control of this synthetic drug. 
I have always been saying this is the responsibility of parents and the hon. Member should 
sensitise instead the parents that they should take up their responsibilities and then, of course, 
I have already suggested that at school, teachers also should sensitise these children, warn 
them  of  what  will  be  the  ultimate  consequences  of  consuming  such  drugs,  and  once  the 
children are aware of what will happen to them, I am sure they will keep away from these 
drugs. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

143 

MARE TABAC RIVER - DREDGING WORKS 

Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker.  I  have  an  issue  concerning  dredging  works  which  are  being  carried  out 
along the river Mare Tabac and it is an issue which is under the responsibility of the Minister 
of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development, and Disaster and Beach Management.  

I  have  received  complaints  from  the  inhabitants  that  those  dredging  works  are  not 
being  carried  out  properly  and  they  are  concerned  that  if  there  is  another  flooding,  there 
might be the same problem again. So, may I make a request to the hon. Minister to please 
send his officers to supervise the work? 

Madam Speaker: This is for the hon. Minister of Environment. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong): Madam Speaker, in fact, hon. Henry talked to me about this problem 
and I have already asked my officers to do the necessary and to have a complete report given 
to me as soon as possible. 

At 8.07 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 19 July 2016 at 

11.30 a.m.  

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

SHIP MV BENITA – SALVAGE OPERATION - EXPENDITURE 

(No. B/715) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the ship MV Benita, he will 
state the costs incurred by Government as at to date, giving a breakdown thereof following 
the reported engine breakdown thereof, the loss of the two anchors thereof and that it had 
gone off Le Bouchon.  

144 

 
Reply (Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 
Outer Islands): The costs incurred to date in regard to the ship MV Benita is approximately 
Rs13 m., sum which will be passed over to London P & I Club.   

Mr Ian Carter, Claims Executive from the London P & I Club, who was in Mauritius 
from  07  to  10 July  2016  has  informed  that  his organisation  is  committed  to  the  refloating 
operation of M/V Benita and to the pollution clean-up operations.   

The main expenditure incurred in the salvage operation is for the Police Helicopter 
Squadron for providing helicopter services.  Here is some of the current expenditure incurred 
by the different stakeholders as at date. 

The details of expenditure incurred to-date by the relevant stakeholders in regard to 

MV/Benita are approximately as follows - 

(i)  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 

Outer Islands - 
•  Fisheries Division 

 

Staff and Administrative Costs: Rs92,000 

•  Shipping Division 

Staff and Administrative Costs: Rs340,000 

 
(ii) Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 

Management - 

Staff and Administrative Costs: Rs308,000 

 
(iii)  Mauritius Ports Authority (MPA): 
Provision of 300 mts of boom: Rs2m.  
 
(iv) Mauritius Revenue Authority -  
 

(Customs) 
Staff and Administrative Costs: Rs344,000 

 

 

 

 

          

(v) Mauritius Oceanography Institute - 

•  Fieldworks (Offshore Current Pattern  Survey and Sediment Sampling) 
•  The field work performed so far by MOI staff icw the grounding of MV 

Benita amounts to Rs65,000 approximately.  

(vi) Meteorological Services - 
 
(vii) Police Helicopter Squadron - 

Staff and Administrative Costs: Rs15,000 

 
 

 

145 

Human Resources/Equipment/Logistics: Rs8.5 m. 

 

(viii) National Coast Guard - 

Human Resources/Equipment/Logistics: Rs1.2 m   

Gross Total estimated costs incurred as at to date Rs13 m. 

 

POLICE OFFICERS – DISCIPLINARY ORDERLY ROOM – COUNSEL 

REPRESENTATION 

(No. B/722) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers who are 
called upon to appear before the Disciplinary Orderly Room, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if measures will be taken 
to ensure that they are allowed to be represented by Counsel of their choice thereat. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that disciplinary proceedings in 
the  Mauritius  Police  Force  are  governed  by  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission 
(DFSC) Regulations 1997 and the Police Standing Orders No. 21. 

Internal disciplinary proceedings are governed by the Police Standing Orders No. 21 
in which there is no provision for Police Officers to be represented by Legal Counsels or by 
persons outside the Police Force during hearings before the Disciplinary Orderly Room.  

However,  a  Police  Officer  may,  under  the  same  Standing  Orders,  request  a 
Superintendent or an Assistant Superintendent of Police to defend him before the Disciplined 
Orderly Room, if he so wishes. 

On  the  other  hand,  for  cases  which  are  referred  to  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service 
Commission, Legal Counsels may appear for Police Officers before the Disciplinary Board 
set up by the Commission.  

As  the  disciplinary  proceedings  before  the  Disciplinary  Orderly  Room  are 
proceedings  internal  to  the  Police,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  does  not  envisage  making 
provisions  in  the  Standing  Orders  to  allow  Police  Officers  to  be  represented  by  Legal 
Counsels who are persons outside the Police Force. 

PORT – POLICE STATION 

(No. B/723) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

 

146 

Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  port,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

if he is aware that three areas thereof are uncontrolled and, if so, indicate if 
urgent remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto, and 
the  number  of  vacancies  that  presently  exist  at  the  Police  Station  found 
thereat,  grade-wise,  indicating  if  the  buildings  housing  same  and  the  Port 
Police Headquarters are in derelict states and, if so, indicate if consideration 
will  be  given  for  the  construction  of  new  and  modern  ones  in  replacement 
thereof. 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that the Port is a restricted area divided into nine zones which are controlled by Police. 
Out  of  the  nine  zones,  three  zones,  namely  the  Taylor  Smith  Co.  Ltd,  Froid  des 
Mascareignes  and  Mauritius  Freeport  Development  premises  are  covered  only  by  Police 
Mobile Patrols.  Arrangements have now been made for Police Sentry to be placed on these 
sites  round  the  clock.    In  addition,  these  three  zones  are  provided  with  CCTV  camera 
surveillance and private security services on a 24-hour basis. 

Moreover, the Police, ADSU and Officers of the Mauritius Ports Authority carry out 
regular  joint  patrols  on  the  landside  whereas  the  National  Coast  Guard  monitors  the 
movement of people and boats on the seaside.  

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that with a view to maintaining 
order and ensuring security within the Port area, Police have jointly with the Mauritius Port 
Authority, the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd and the Mauritius Revenue Authority put in 
place the following measures - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

(vi) 

surveillance through some 100 CCTV cameras installed by the Mauritius Ports 
Authority at strategic locations in the Port; 
frequent  foot  and  mobile  patrols  by  Police  to  monitor  the  movements  of 
persons and vehicles;  
vehicle stop and check operations;  
security checks by Police Officers at specific points of entry; 
a  24/7  hotline  at  the  Operations  Room  of  Port  Police  for  coordinating  and 
monitoring of patrols;  
daily coordination with private security companies operating within the Port 
area;  

 
(vii) 

(viii) 

147 

sharing  of  information  and  problem  solving  through  the  National  Maritime 
Harbour Security Committee which is chaired by a Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, and 
the  Cargo  Handling  Corporation  Ltd  is  proceeding  with  the  installation  of 
some 200 additional CCTV Cameras to cover its whole premises. 

 
I am also informed that the Mauritius Ports Authority is in the process of appointing 
an International Consultant to review the present security set up for the whole port area and 
recommend measures to enhance security with the provisions of the International Ship and 
Port Security Code.  The Consultant will also be required to update the existing Port Security 
Plan, review the Draft Port Security Regulations and recommend measures to upgrade access 
control over private quays. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that some 131 Officers are posted at the Port Police Station and presently there is no vacant 
post thereat.  Consideration would be given to increase the manpower in future, if the need 
arises. 

In regard to part (c) of the question I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that 
the Port Police Station and Port Police Headquarters are housed in two buildings which are 
owned and regularly maintained by the Mauritius Port Authority.  

However, in the context of the development of a Master Plan for the Port area by the 
Mauritius  Ports  Authority,  provision  will  be  made  for  a  new  building  to  accommodate  a 
Police Station. 

BUSES – PASSENGERS – EMBARKMENT & DISEMBARKMENT 

(No. B/724) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the buses which embark and 
disembark passengers outside bus stops thereby potentially  causing traffic congestions  and 
hazards to the passengers and to the other road users, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  number  of    contraventions 
booked  in  relation  thereto  over  the  past  two  years,  division-wise,  indicating  if  additional 
measures will be taken to address the issue. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the offence of alighting and 
picking  up  passengers  outside  a  bus  stop  is  a  breach  of  Regulations  114  (a)  of  the  Road 

 

148 

Traffic (Construction and Use of Vehicles) Regulations 2010.  The penalty for this offence is 
a fine not exceeding Rs10,000. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that as from January 2014 to 
10 July 2016, the Police have established 256 contraventions against bus drivers for the said 
offence, as follows - 

Metropolitan (North) 

Metropolitan (South) 

Northern 

Southern 

Central 

Western 

Eastern 

 53 

 3 

 
   4 

 3 

 8 

 120 

 65 

In  addition  to  the  existing  procedures  for  ensuring  the  safety  and  security  of 
passengers  and  other  road  users,  the  Police  have  also  taken  a  number  of  initiatives  with a 
view to further enhancing those security measures, namely - 

bus  companies  are  being  informed  of  the  contraventions  established  against 
bus drivers working in their companies; 
Police  have  put  in  place  a  toll  free  hotline  service  on  phone  number  148, 
inviting members of the public to report drivers committing breaches of the 
Road Traffic Regulations for immediate Police actions; 
Police Officers are deployed at bus stands and specific bus stops during peak 
hours  to  ensure  safety  of  passengers  including  schoolchildren  and  elderly 
persons, and  
a  Traffic  Enforcement  Squad  has  been  set  up  at  the  Traffic  Branch  for 
enforcement of the Road Traffic Regulations. 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

 

MAURITIUS PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE - SUSPENDED 

PLAYERS  

(No.  B/756)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to football, he will, for the benefit 

 

149 

of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Professional  League  Limited  (MPFL)  and  the 
Mauritius Football Association – 

(a) information as to the reasons for the suspension of  

(i)  four players of the Association Sportive de Quatre Bornes, and  
(ii) seven players of the Grande Rivière Sud Est Wanderers, and 

(b) copy of the Rules and Regulations of the Mauritius Professional League and the 

contract between the suspended players and the Clubs/MPFL and table same. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Mauritius Professional Football League (MPFL) that 
only 2 players of the Association Sportive de Quatre Bornes and 7 players of Grande Rivière 
Sud Est Wanderers have been suspended as all of them were involved in non-official football 
matches without prior approval of MPFL.  Participation in non-official football matches is 
against Rule 12 of the Barclays Mauritius Premier League (BMPL) competition.  This Rule 
stipulates that – 

“No player once licensed by the MFA to participate in the PFL tournament 
is allowed to play for any other team in any competition/friendly match whatsoever 
except  for  the  Mauritius  National  Team.  Transgressing  this  rule  will  lead  to  a 
suspension of up to 2 years.” 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  both  the  Rules  and 
Regulations  of  the  Mauritius  Professional  Football  League  and  a  model  of  the  contract 
between a professional player of the MPFL and his respective club as well as the Mauritius 
Football Association. 

ST BRANDON ISLAND - REVENUE 

(No. B/757) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the St Brandon Island, he will state the total amount of revenue derived 
therefrom in terms of tax, and fishing rights, since January 2015 to date. 

(Withdrawn) 

 
 

ILE AUX BENITIERS - LEASE 

(No. B/758) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to Ile aux Benitiers, 
he will state – 

150 

 
(a) the status of the actual lease thereof; 
(b) where matters stand as to the proposed implementation of a hotel project thereat, 

and  

(c) if he proposes to take measures for a comprehensive co-management thereof.  

 

(Withdrawn)  

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST - HOUSING UNITS - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/759)  Mrs  D.  Selvon    (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to 
Constituency No.1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the NHDC Ltd., information as to the number of housing units – 

(a) constructed thereat since January 2015 to date; 
(b) delivered to the constituents thereof since January 2015 to date, and  
(c) projected for construction thereat and to be delivered to the constituents thereof 

within the next three years.  

Reply: I am informed by the National Housing Development Co Ltd (NHDC) that 24 
social housing units have been constructed in Constituency Number one, more specifically, at 
Pointe aux Sables since January 2015.  

In regard to part (b) of the question, the 24 housing units were allocated to the eligible 

applicants in June 2016. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply to 
Parliamentary Question No. B/559 of 07 June 2016 whereby I indicated that there is scarcity 
of suitable plots of State land in Constituency Number one. Hence, eligible applicants in the 
region are being considered by the NHDC for housing projects in the nearby localities such 
as in Calebasses, Baie du Tombeau, Gros Cailloux and Chebel. 

 

DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – CONSUMPTION 

(No.  B/761)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the synthetic 
drugs, he will state the measures taken by his Ministry to – 

(a) curb the consumption thereof and  
(b)  create awareness regarding the potential threats to the health of the users thereof. 
 

 

 

151 

(Withdrawn) 

SHIP MV BENITA - WRECKAGE 

(No.  B/762)  Dr.  Z  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in 
regard to the wreckage  of the ship MV  Benita  on the Southern Coast,  he will state  where 
matters stand as to the progress of the repairs thereof. 

Reply (Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 
Outer Islands): Upon arrival the Five Oceans Salvage team carried a damage assessment of 
the vessel.  The damage assessment report and a preliminary salvage plan were submitted to 
the crisis committee on the grounding of the M/V Benita chaired by my Ministry on 19 June 
2016. 
 
The  damage  assessment  report  revealed  that  3  cargo  holds  are  breached  and  2  are 
intact. Ballast tanks No 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5 port and starboard and bottom fuel tanks No 2 & 3 are 
also breached. 
Pumping operations are still ongoing.  To date, fuel oil and lubricating oil have been pumped 
in 159 cubitanks out of which 150 have been airlifted ashore and transported to Virgin Oil 
(Mtius)  Ltd  for  treatment.    A  total  amount  of  113  tons  of  fuel  oil  and  19,100  litres  of 
lubricating oil have been transferred. 
 
A platform has been built on Ilot Brocus where skimming and cleaning operations are 
ongoing. The operation is being conducted by SWIRE Emergency Response team assisted by 
members of the Special Mobile Force and Fishermen from Le Bouchon. Four (4) cubitanks of 
oily sludge have been recuperated. 
 
Four  explosive  tests  on  rocks  have  been  carried  out  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Special  Mobile  Force  by  Mr.  G  de  Marsh  from  DEMEX  Inc  on  05  July  2016  at  Gamma 
Materials rock quarry at Gaulettes Serrés, Saint-Julien D’Hotman. The tests were conducted 
to determine whether the explosive method, if used to break the rock in cargo hold No 5 of 
M/V Benita, would achieve breakage of the target material. 
 
Underwater Vehicle has been used to assess the damages in cargo hold No 5.  
In off lagoon current survey has been conducted by the Mauritius Oceanography Institute, the 
objective of which was to characterize surface current pattern in the region near the casualty 

A team consisting of Five Oceans’ and GIPM divers together with a Remote Operated 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

152 

 

 

 

 

A  Bathymetric  survey  has  also  been  conducted  in  sea  area  around  and  behind  the 

in  order  to  evaluate  potential  zone  prone  to  oil  spill  from  the  casualty  along  the  southern 
coast. 
 
vessel by D.A.Y Marine ltd in preparation for the refloating operation. 
44 water samples and sediment samples have been taken for analysis. The Analysis is being 
conducted by QuantiLAB. 
 
An  Ecological  Survey  Plan  and  Biota  Sampling  Plan  have  been  prepared  by  the 
Fisheries Division and the Ministry  of  Environment in collaboration with the  International 
Tanker Owners Pollution Federation (ITOPF) expert to determine the damages to the marine 
ecosystems from the oil spill emanated from the grounding of MV Benita. The survey has 
started on Monday 11 July. 
 
Following a diving survey carried out on 7 July 2016 and new information obtained, 
Salvors are confident that they might be successful  to swing the vessel and get the rock out 
of cargo hold No5, thus not having to explode the rock. Preparations are underway on the 
vessel for the conduct of this operation towards the end of this week. Should this operation be 
unsuccessful, Salvors have indicated that they would need to use explosives to break the rock 
in cargo hold No 5 of M/V Benita before any refloating attempt. 

 

CITÉ RICHELIEU – HOUSING ESTATE - REINSTATEMENT 

(No. B/763) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether he will state if he has 
received a petition from the inhabitants of Cité Richelieu of Petite Rivière in respect of the 
deplorable  state  of  the  houses  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  his  Ministry  proposes  to  take 
actions in relation thereto for the reinstatement thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that, in March and April 2016, my Ministry has received seven 
individual representations from inhabitants of Cité Richelieu in respect of the state of their 
houses. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  550  housing  units  at  Cité  Richelieu  were 
constructed in the 1960’s by the ex-Central Housing Authority under the Cyclone Housing 
Scheme.   

In line with the “Right to Buy” policy introduced by Government in 1989 to empower 
families  to  take  full  responsibility  of  their  property,  all  the  houses  have  been  sold  at  a 
nominal  price  of  Rs500  per  unit  to  the  tenants  who  are  now  full-fledged  owners  of  their 
housing unit.  

153 

 
Following the representations of the inhabitants, officers of my Ministry have effected 
site visits whereby it has been observed that most of the inhabitants have already upgraded 
their housing units and carried out extensions, either laterally or vertically.  

The inhabitants were informed of the various Government schemes available for the 

upgrading of their housing units such as - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the grant for the casting of roof slabs and the grant for the purchase of building 
materials which can be obtained at the NHDC; 
the  housing  loan  scheme  at  low  interest  rate  available  at  the  level  of  the 
Mauritius Housing Company Ltd, and  
provision of building materials by the National Empowerment Foundation.  

 

HOSPITALS – PARKING FACILITIES 

(No.B/764)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the hospital premises, 
he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  patients  and  the  relatives  and 
visitors thereof when attending thereto regarding the circulation and parking facilities thereat 
and, if so, indicate if consideration will be given for the advisability of reviewing the policy 
regarding parking facilities and introducing paid parking thereat. 

(Withdrawn) 

PUMP ROAD, ROCHE BOIS - AUCTION SALES - SECURITY 

(No.  B/765)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Local Government whether he will state if he is aware of the 
precarious security situation at Pump Road, in Roche Bois, during the early morning auction 
sales of vegetables and fruits and, if so, indicate the measures taken by his Ministry to ensure 
the safety of the stakeholders thereof, especially, that of the planters. 

(Withdrawn) 

SICOM - SENIOR MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEES & BOARD DIRECTORS 

- BENEFITS 

(No. B/766) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether, in regard to the senior management employees and Board Directors of the SICOM 
Group, the SICOM Financial Services and the SICOM Insurance Limited in post since 2011 
to date, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list thereof, indicating in 
each case the – 

154 

 
(a) posts occupied;  
(b) areas of responsibility; 
 (c) salaries, allowances and fringe benefits drawn, and  
(d) details of the bonuses paid. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

COMMERCIAL BANKS - CHARGES 

(No. B/767) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether  he  will  state  if  he  is 
aware  of  the  charges  imposed  by  commercial  banks,  including  regarding  the  debit/credit 
cards at different point of sales and, if so, indicate if consideration will be given for a review 
thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that, as a matter of policy, the Bank of Mauritius does not fix 
the rates charged by commercial banks. The Central Bank has allowed the market forces to 
determine the rates, fees, charges and commissions, including charges on debit/credit cards, 
at  different  point  of  sales  in  view  of  the  status  of  Mauritius  as  an  International  Financial 
Centre.  

On 03 October 2008, the Central Bank issued instructions to all commercial banks to 
upload their schedule of fees and charges on their respective websites to ensure that banks 
maintain  transparency  and  offer  their  customers  a  choice  in  selection  of  the  best  option. 
Commercial banks are also required to upload and update these fees on the Central Bank’s 
website. 

Although the schedule of fees and levies charged by commercial banks is decided by 
individual banks, the Central Bank has the right to intervene if fees and charges prescribed by 
commercial banks are perceived to be usurious, excessive, arbitrary or prejudicial to public 
interest. 

I have discussed the question of fees, charges and commissions with the Governor of 
the Bank.  The Governor of the Bank has agreed to take up the issue at his next quarterly 
Banking Committee Meeting this August. He will exhort bankers to review their stand with 
regard to the fees, charges and commissions. 

Moreover, I am informed that the Bank of Mauritius has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Competition Commission of Mauritius for the latter to examine fees, 
charges  and  commissions  on  payment  cards  (credit  and  debit  cards)  to  ensure  that 
commercial banks do not abuse of their positions to the detriment of their clients. 

155 

 
In addition, the Bank of Mauritius has become a member of Finconet in May 2016. 
This organisation, sponsored by the OECD, looks into the various aspects of protection of 
consumers of financial services. The objective of the Central Bank is to align its regulations 
on consumer protection with international best practices. 

 

 

 

