No. 10 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD)  

(UNRE VISE D)  

 

FIRST  SESSION  

 

TUESDAY 31 MAY 2016  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTE NTS  

 

PAPERS LAID 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

E.S.E (2015-2016) of 2016 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

     (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 

 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  

KCMG, QC  

Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

SC 

Utilities 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

 

International Trade 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Empowerment 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms  

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

 

 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 

Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 

Cheong, MSK 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

Disaster and Beach Management 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Clerk Assistant 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 

RRA) 

Hansard Editor 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 10 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 31 May 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

  The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 

A.    Office of the Speaker  ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

The Second Report of the Standing Orders Committee. 

B.    Prime Minister’s Office,  Ministry for Rodrigues and National Development 

Unit ‒ 

(a)  Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills. (In Original) – 

(i) 

The  Anti-Personnel  Mines  and  Cluster  Munitions  (Prohibition) 

Bill (No. VII of 2016);  and 

(ii) 

The  Protection  from  Domestic  Violence  (Amendment)  Bill  (No. 

IX of 2016). 

(b) 

The  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  (Consumer  Protection)  (Maximum 

Price)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  (Rodrigues  Regional 

Assembly) No. 1 of 2016) 

C.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

The  Consumer  Protection  (Price  and  Supplies  Control)  (Amendment  of 

Schedules)  

(No. 2) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 115 of 2016) 

D.    Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions ‒ 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statement  of  the  

Non-Governmental  Organisation  Trust  Fund  for  the  year  ended  31  December 

2014.  

(In Original) 

 

 

 

 

8 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the following Bills were read a first time – 

(a) 

The Anti-Personnel Mines and Cluster Munitions (Prohibition) Bill (No. VIII 

of 2016) 

(b) 

The Protection from Domestic Violence (Amendment) Bill (No. IX of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

Second Reading 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(No. VII of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 

Speaker, I move that the Supplementary Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. VII of 2016) be 

read a second time. 

The  Bill  provides  for  the  appropriation  of  an  additional  sum  of  four  billion  and  one 

hundred  million  rupees  (Rs4,100  m.)  in  respect  of  services  of  Government  for  the  current 

fiscal year 2015-2016.  

Madam Speaker, regarding supplementary expenditure incurred during the six-month 

Budget  period  January  2015  to  June  2015,  I  will  come  forward  with  a  Supplementary 

Appropriation  Bill  and  an  Estimates  of  Supplementary  Expenditure  (ESE)  before  30  June 

2016. 

A  final  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  and  Estimates  of  Supplementary 

Expenditure will be introduced at  a later stage to cover all the excess  expenditure for fiscal 

year July 2015 to June 2016. 

Therefore,  today,  I  am  introducing  a  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  mainly  to 

make provision for the payment of PRB during the fiscal  year 2015-2016 for which there is 

no specific item of expenditure in the Estimates 2015-2016 and consequently no funds were 

appropriated. 

Opportunity  is  also  being  taken  to  seek  Parliamentary  appropriation  for  three  other 

items of expenditure, namely, the Basic Retirement Pension, Equity investment in MauBank 

Holdings Ltd, and the cost of holding Municipal Council elections. 

I will now give out the details on each of them. 

First, an amount of Rs1.4 billion is required for meeting the cost of implementation of 

the 2016 PRB Report for the six-month period from 01 January to 30 June 2016. 

As the House is aware, in March 2016, Government approved the implementation of 

the recommendations of the PRB Report in toto. 

 

10 

This  month, all officers  who have signed the option  form  would have  received their 

new PRB salary as well as the PRB arrears due to them for the months of January to April. 

The  House  will  also  note  that  only  seven  officers  have  not  opted  for  the  new  PRB 

Report. 

For practical reasons, the supplementary provision required for the first six months is 

being appropriated under the Vote Centrally Managed Expenses of Government. It would be 

reallocated to Basic Salary and other relevant items under other Votes of Expenditure to cater 

for  employees  in  the  Civil  Service,  Local  Government,  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  and 

other Parastatal Bodies covered by PRB. 

The House will note that implementation of the PRB Report, inclusive of the end-of-

year bonus is costing some Rs3 billion annually to Government. An amount of Rs1.4 billion 

is required for the first six months, as the end-of-year bonus will be paid in the second half of 

the year. 

Second,  an  additional  amount  of  Rs1  billion  is  required  for  meeting  the  payment  of 

basic retirement pension up to the end of the current fiscal year. 

In the 2015/16 Budget, a provision of Rs12.1 billion was made for payment of basic 

retirement pension. An amount of Rs11 billion has already been paid out from July 2015 to 

April 2016. A further sum of Rs2.1 billion is expected to be disbursed for the months of May 

and June 2016. Thus, an additional amount of Rs1 billion will be required for the fiscal year 

2015/2016. 

The need for the additional Rs1 billion is mainly due to a combination of two factors: 

(i) 

an increase in expenditure of Rs285 m. as a result of the increase of Rs250 

in the monthly old age pension, and 

(ii) 

an under-provision of Rs715 m. for financial year 2015/2016. 

Concerning  the  under-provision  of  Rs715  m.,  at  the  time  of  the  budget  preparation 

exercise, I am told that in early 2015, budgetary provision for the Ministry of Social Security 

was  made  on  the  basis  that  certain  pension  reform  measures  would  be  implemented  in  the 

course of the year based on a study that was carried out by the IMF. 

However, the IMF submitted its report on Pension Reform in Mauritius entitled: Fair 

and Fast Balancing Social Protection and Fiscal Sustainability. They submitted that report in 

 

11 

fact, only in June 2015 and therefore the reform measures could not be taken on board in the 

2015/16 Budget Speech. This explains, therefore, the under-provision of Rs715 m.  

Third, as the House is aware, in the reply to PQ B/277 of 26 April 2016, it was stated 

that  Government  had  made  a  total  equity  investment  of  3  billion  and  53  million  rupees 

(Rs3.053 billion) in NCB, MPCB, and MauBank Holdings Ltd as follows – 

(i) 

during the Six-Month Budget period beginning (January to June 2015) to the 

former National Commercial Bank Ltd – 

• On 13 April 2015: Rs200 m.;  

• On 30 June 2015: Rs500 m. 

(ii)  former MPCB Ltd – 

• On 30th June 2015: Rs753 m.  

(B) During the Twelve-Month Budget period (July 2015 to June 2016) 

(ii)  MauBank Holdings Ltd – 

• On 29 October 2015: Rs300 m.  

• On 13 January 2016: Rs1.3 billion  

The  House  may  note  that  the  equity  investments  were  made  in  two  budget  periods,  hence 

requiring two separate Supplementary Appropriation Bills.  

Finally, a provision of Rs100 m. to cater for expenses incurred for the holding of the 

Municipal  Council  Elections  on  14  June  2015.  No  provision  was  made  for  that  purpose  as 

decision to  hold  the election was taken after the  presentation  of the  Budget  in  March 2015, 

whereas the writ of elections was issued on 04 May 2015.  

Madam  Speaker,  to  sum  up,  although  we  are  appropriating  an  additional  amount  of 

Rs4.1  billion,  we  are  confident  that  we  would  be  able  to  contain  Government  expenditure 

within the aggregate authorised limit of Rs92 billion as we would be having under-spending 

and savings under some other Votes of Expenditure. The revised expenditure figures will be 

published in the forthcoming Budget document.  

With these remarks, Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 

(11.42 a.m.) 

12 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 

Speaker, the International Monetary Fund in its Staff Report for 2015 Article IV Consultation 

at paragraph 33 has the following to say and I quote –  

“The  limited  involvement  of  Parliament,  beyond  voting  the  annual  budget,  weakens 

the  accountability  of  the  budgetary  process  and  prevents  an  assessment  of  fiscal 

strategies to contain public indebtedness.” 

So,  once  again,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  being  asked  to  vote  items  of  expenditure 

outside the Budget which have already been incurred, so we are put before un fait accompli. I 

have listened carefully to the new hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and 

he mentioned that the additional amount that we are being asked to vote will not impact on 

the overall expenditure that had been budgeted, yet he fails to say anything about public debt. 

The  impact  which  additional  expenditures  have  -  the  type  of  expenditures  that  are  being 

incurred today, that we are going to vote - on public debt. Already the International Monetary 

Fund has sound the alarm.  Public debt has deteriorated in 2015. 

Answering to a Parliamentary Question that I asked, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who 

was  also  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  tabled  a  list  of  the  ratio  of 

public debt to GDP. For 2013 it was 60%, 2014 it was 61.6%, June 2015 it was 63.8% and 

for  June  2016,  the  revised  estimate  was  65%.  65%!  This  is  what  has  been  tabled  in  the 

National Assembly. And, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister goes on to explain why there has been a 

deterioration,  for  example,  there  has  been  issue  of  new  Government  securities,  borrowing 

requirements and lower  GDP because our GDP has depreciated and we have not been able to 

achieve the 5.3% growth that was predicted by the former Minister of Finance.  

But what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister failed to mention was the two factors which the 

International Monetary Fund pinpoint as a result of the deterioration of our public debt and I 

quote –  

“Nonetheless,  public debt  continued to  increase (by more than 2 percent  of GDP, to 

63.7  percent  at  end-2015),  reflecting  the  government’s  intervention  in  the  financial 

sector—1.3 percent of GDP, due to capital injections in two ailing banks (0.4 percent 

of  GDP  in  total)  and  a  line  of  credit  to  refund  policyholders  of  single  premium 

products issued by BAI (…)” 

 

13 

The  two  ailing  banks  that  were  referred  to  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  are  the 

National  Commercial  Bank  and  the  Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank  which  have  now 

been merged into MauBank Ltd. The same MauBank Ltd. for which today there is an item of 

vote of Rs1.6 billion. I will come to that later on, Madam Speaker. 

Of  course,  we  are  not  against  all  the  items  of  expenditure  which  are  required  to  be 

approved today. If we take it in turn, Rs100 m. to pay for Municipal Council Elections, that 

was  not  budgeted,  that  was  not  foreseen  in  March,  so  we  do  not  have  any  problem  with  it. 

The  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions:  National 

Pensions funds, we asked to vote additional fees for that.  In fact, we are fully in support of 

this measure. You will recall, Madam Speaker, that during the debates in December last year 

on  the  Additional  Remuneration  Bill  2015,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  stated  and  I 

quote –  

“I  listened  carefully  and  I  say  again  I  find  it  shocking  that  the  hon.  Minister  of 

Finance is not present. There has not been any mention of what is going to happen to 

the pensionnés, veuves, orphelins, handicapés. Those at the bottom part of the salaries 

ladder  have  been  granted  Rs250  up  to  Rs10,000.  We  know  how  much  les  veuves, 

pensionnés, orphelins, handicapés earn, much less than Rs10,000 and yet not a word 

from the hon. Minister of Finance, not a word from the hon. Minister of Labour as to 

what is going to happen to les pensionnés, veuves, orphelins, handicapés and so on. It 

is shocking. » 

And  I  have  to  admit  to  the  credit  of  the  former  hon.  Minister  of  Finance,  when  he 

replied, this is what he said –  

« Est-ce que nous avons les moyens d’absorber un coût - et je vous donne les chiffres 

-  une  augmentation  donc  des  pensions  de  vieillesse,  de  veuves,  d’orphelins  et  des 

handicapés par R 250 à partir du 1er janvier coûtera à l’État R 748,475,000. » 

And he goes on to say - 

« Ça  va  coûter  cher.  Je  dois  informer  la  Chambre  que  nous  avons  pris  la  décision 

d’augmenter la pension de vieillesse, des  veuves et des orphelins par R 250 à partir 

de janvier 2016. » 

 

14 

So,  it  is  following  the  remark  made  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  that  this  Rs250 

pension had been extended to les veuves, les orphelins et les pensionnés.  Today, this is one 

of the items that we are asked to vote, Madam Speaker. 

The third item that we are asked to vote relates to the increase of salary as a result of 

PRB.  Now, the hon. Minister does not mention whether the amount that we are asked to vote 

would  include  also  the  proposed  increase  in  salary  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  the 

Ministers, the MPs for which, up to now, we are not even aware.  There are figures that have 

come  out  in  the  press,  and  various  parties  have  commented  on  these  figures.    So,  we  are 

waiting to,  at  least,  have an indication what  would  be the figures of the  PRB for Ministers, 

MPs and so on and so forth. 

The  big  chunk  that  we  are  required  to  vote  today,  Madam  Speaker,  relates  to 

MauBank. It is very important, Madam Speaker, that, before this House makes an informed 

decision  about  whether  or  not  to  approve  the  Rs1.6  billion  under  the  heading  of  MauBank, 

we remind ourselves what this Maubank was supposed to do and what, in fact, this MauBank 

is now doing, so that we can have an informed decision whether we should keep on putting 

good money after bad money. 

Madam Speaker, the starting point would be the Budget speech of the former Minister 

of Finance last year, 2015/2016, at paragraph 33.  This is what he said – 

“First,  I  am  launching  the  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Bank  -  SME  Bank  -  to 

provide  seed  capital  to  entrepreneurs  without  any  need  for  personal  guarantee.  As  I 

have said on several occasions, an amount of Rs10 billion  will be made available to 

the Bank over the next five years, starting with a share capital of Rs200 million and a 

line of credit of Rs2 billion from Government for its first year of operation (…).” 

So, what was announced, voted and approved in this House last year, was the setting up of an 

SME  Bank  with  Rs10  billion.    The  first  year,  there  was  a  budget  of  Rs2  billion  plus  seed 

capital of Rs200 m.  However, soon after the Budget, there was an unexpected event, and that 

was the revocation of the banking licence of Bramer Bank on 02 April 2015.  I am not going 

to go in detail about why it was revoked, who was responsible or how it was handled.  Suffice 

to  say  that,  at  the  time  of  the  revocation  of  the  banking  licence  of  Bramer  Bank,  assurance 

was given that public funds would not be used to bail out the BAI Group, including Bramer 

Bank.    Yet,  Madam  Speaker,  on  08  September  2015,  answering  to  my  question  about  the 

 

15 

setting  up  of  this  SME  Bank,  which  was  announced  in  the  Budget,  this  is  what  the  then 

Minister of Finance answered – 

“Madam  Speaker,  after  wide consultations, it was found that creating  a new bank,  a 

dedicated SME Bank, was not the right solution given that Government already owns 

the  Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank  and  the  National  Commercial  Bank  Ltd. 

with all the infrastructure and facilities to service the SME sector.  

In this context, Government has found it more appropriate to merge these two banks 

under which there will be, among others, a dedicated SME Banking Department. This 

will  allow  SME  banking  activities  and  services  to  be  embedded  in  a  stronger 

institution with much larger asset base, bigger market share and broader spectrum of 

products and services. 

Accordingly, Government has incorporated a wholly owned company under the name 

of MauBank Holdings Ltd. on 03 September 2015 (…).” 

So,  when  pressed  with  questions  from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  especially,  and  I 

quote – 

“What is going to happen to those toxic loans?” 

Toxic loans given by Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank. This is what the former Minister 

said – 

“No.  In  fact,  as  with  the  National  Commercial  Bank,  we  helped  to  eliminate  all  the 

toxic assets from Bramer and NCB was, therefore, set up without the toxic assets; the 

same  thing  is  with  MPCB.  The  Rs1.7  billion,  which  have  been  lost  through  loans 

given to petits copains, will not be written off.  It is being transferred to a new agency 

which  is  not  the  DBM  and  which  will  ensure  that  money  which  has  been  borrowed 

will have to be paid by law.” 

And then he goes on and reinstates why we have this MauBank, and I quote – 

“The  mission  of  the  bank,  as  far  as  the  SMEs  are  concerned,  is  within  a  channel  to 

small investors, the Rs2 billion earmarked in the Budget each year.” 

So, clearly, by September 2015, MauBank had replaced the SME Bank that was announced, 

and  this  Rs2  billion  was  supposed  to  be  fuelled  through  MauBank  again  to  help  Small  and 

 

16 

Medium Enterprises and, as pointed out by the Minister of Finance, no toxic asset was being 

transferred to MauBank. 

Then,  at  the  official  launch  of  the  bank  in  September,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance 

reportedly said – 

“R 4.4 milliards, c’est la somme qui a été injectée pour augmenter le  capital base et 

viabiliser la MauBank. » 

R 4.4 milliards! That is what we were informed in the press. 

In  November  2015,  answering  to  a  question  from  hon.  Ramano  about  what  is 

happening  to  the  toxic  assets  that  have  been  transferred  to  MauBank  and  which  were  not 

supposed to be transferred to MauBank, this is what the then Minister of Finance replied – 

“Madam  Speaker,  the  merger  of  those  two  banks  is  a  major  challenge  because  both 

the  MPCB  and  the  ex-Bramer  were,  in  the  past,  not  managed  according  to  good 

banking  practices  and  without  elements  of  good  corporate  governance  and 

transparency (…).” 

Then, again pressed with questions from the hon. Leader of the Opposition, he stated – 

“We  have  already  injected  a  total  of  Rs1.7  billion  in  both  banks,  and  we  will  inject 

Rs2 billion more, bringing the total to Rs3.7 billion (…).” 

Following  my  supplementary  question,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  gave  a  breakdown; 

Rs700 m. have been injected in the National Commercial Bank (normally known as Bramer 

Bank) and above Rs1 billion has been injected in MPCB. 

So,  in  November,  we  have  details  about  how  much  money  has  gone  into  that  bank, 

and we still think that it is an SME Bank.  In January 2015, the then Minister of Finance does 

a press conference.  At the press conference, which is reported on the official website of the 

Ministry  of  Finance,  -  on  the  website  of  the  Government  of  Mauritius  -  this  is  how  the 

conference is described – 

“MauBank will be the spearhead of the new impetus that Government wants to bring 

to  the  SME  sector  in  line  with  the  vision  of  making  this  sector  the  backbone  of  the 

economy  and  transform  Mauritius  into  a  nation  d’entrepreneurs,  as  enunciated  in 

 

17 

Budget 2015/2016, whereby an amount of Rs10 billion has been provided to the bank 

over a period of five years as part of the project.” 

In  the  press  conference,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  further 

underlined that – 

“MauBank,  which  is  also  catering  for  entrepreneurs,  will  provide  the  vital 

requirement needed to start a business, namely funding, the main constraint faced by 

many.” 

Again, in January, he stressed that the aim of MauBank is to provide funding to SMEs, and as 

if that was not enough, to make doubly sure the same hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo called 

another press  conference, only two weeks later,  on 20 January, this time together with  hon. 

Minister Bholah to  stress  the role of  MauBank. Again,  the hon. Minister of Finance talked 

about une nation d’entrepreneur. This is what is attributed to hon. Minister Bholah – 

 

“For  his  part,  the  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprises  and  Cooperatives,  Mr 

Soomilduth Bholah, elaborated on the eligibility criteria under the SME Development 

Scheme”. 

So, again in January, very consistent, MauBank is replacing the SME bank, the fund 

that we have already put in the bank will be used for the Small and Medium Enterprises and 

this company does not have toxic assets. On 12 April of this year, with regard to a PQ put by 

me about how much disbursement have been given to SMEs, the shocking answer from the 

replacing  Minister  -  because  hon.  Minister  Bholah  was  not  in  the  House  -  the  Minister  of 

Agro-Industry and Food Security, hon. Seeruttun, stated, with  regard to part (b), that is, the 

quantum of financing provided to orders of SME certificates – 

“I am informed that some Rs74 m. have been earmarked for the financing of 

20 projects”. 

So, Rs74 m. have been earmarked, not disbursed! We were not happy with this answer, but 

since the hon. Minister was not here, again the same question about how much disbursement 

there was for the SMEs, put this time by my colleague hon. Ameer Meea on 03 May. This is 

what the substantive Minister, hon. Bholah stated – 

 

18 

“(...)  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development has released an amount of Rs135 m. to MauBank to provide 

financial assistance to SMEs (...)” 

Rs135 m. have been released!   They have already injected above Rs3 billion, but only Rs135 

m. have been released by MauBank! And, he goes on – 

“I  am  further  informed  that  to  date  MauBank  has  received  20  such 

applications from MyBiz, the SME One-Stop shop, for financial assistance for a total 

amount  of  Rs74  m.  under  the  MauBank  SME  Financing  Scheme.  Two  of  these 

applications for loan for an amount of Rs4.2 m. have already been approved and funds 

are being released”.  

So,  not  even  these  Rs4.2  m.  also  had  been  released  by  the  beginning  of  this  month, 

and  we  are  talking  about  the  SMEs,  we  are  talking  about  nation  d’entrepreneur,    about  the 

backbone of the  economy,   about  having put  more than Rs3.7 billion in  that MauBank. So, 

Madam  Speaker,  the  question  which  is  on  everybody’s  lips,  is:  ‘What  happened  to  this 

money’? Now, I am going to quote what hon. Minister Bholah said in an interview.  We are 

not  talking  about  the  Opposition;  we  are  talking  about  the  substantive  Minister,  when  he  is 

asked – 

“Vous avez été dans l’incapacité de répondre à une question sur la MauBank 

au Parlement lors de la séance du 3 mai.». 

As I have just mentioned. 

“ Qu’est-ce qui explique cela? 

This is what the hon. Minister answered – 

“Pour  comprendre  ma  réaction,  il  faut  remonter  à  la  séance  du  12  avril, 

portant sur une question relative au montant déboursé par la MauBank en faveur des 

petites  et  moyennes  entreprises.    N’étant  pas  au  pays  lors  de  la  séance  du  12  avril, 

c’est mon collègue Mahen Seeruttun qui est intervenu à ma place et il avait répondu 

que, depuis que la MauBank est en opération,  il n’y a eu aucun déboursement pour 

les PMEs”. 

Trois semaines plus tard, la même question revient et rien n’a changé. 

 

 

 He goes on – 

19 

“Qu’est-ce qui  explique  selon vous le fait  que la MauBank n’a rien décaissé 

pour les PMEs? 

Réponse – 

“Je  n’ai  pas  de  réponse.  Manifestement  il  y  a  un  problème  quelque  part car 

les initiatives n’arrivent pas à aboutir. » 

 C’est-à-dire, cela n’aboutit pas au décaissement des fonds.  

Question - 

 

“Vous étiez surpris de ne pas avoir la SME Bank”? 

Réponse – 

 

“Evidemment.” 

Question - 

“En  avez-vous  discuté  avec  qui  de  droit,  en  l’occurrence  le  Premier 

ministre”? 

Réponse – 

“Je n’en ai pas senti l’utilité car on avait dit que la MauBank allait répondre 

aux besoins financiers des PMEs. On m’avait même promis une branche par district 

au service des PMEs, par la suite le gouvernement est venu avec de nouveau scheme 

assez restrictif”. 

Question - 

“Est-ce que selon vous la MauBank ne sert pas les intérêts des PMEs ?” 

Réponse – 

“Ce n’est pas à moi de le dire”. 

Donc, déçu un peu, surtout que le gouvernement a l’ambition de payer ... 

 

20 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Uteem,  you  can  refer  to  these,  but  you  cannot  quote 

extensively on this issue. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the reason I have pointed that out, because for me it is 

un cri du coeur. The hon. Minister is the one who has to face all these SMEs who have been 

promised Rs2 billion, which have already been voted in this House. Rs2 billion plus Rs200 

m.,  seed  capital!  So,  they  are  here,  they  are  asking  for  money  and  we  are  told,  week  after 

week, that there is no disbursement. This is  why, and  I totally understand the hon. Minister 

responsible  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  for  not  understanding  where  the  money  is 

going.  And the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in answer to a question on 26 April, has confirmed –  

 “Last year, Government has invested an amount of Rs1.05 billion and Rs700 

m.  in  the  former  Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank  Ltd  and  the  former  National 

Commercial Bank Ltd, respectively”.  

So,  in  total,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  last  month  told  us  that  we  have  already 

injected  more  than  Rs3  billion  in  MauBank.    And  zero  for  SMEs!  Hon.  Bhagwan  asked  a 

question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who was then Minister of Finance, about toxic loans 

and, in particular, to loan granted to Mr R. G. - I will come to Mr R. G later. This is what the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister said – 

“I am informed by MauBank Ltd that, as at 01 April 2016, out of Rs1.7 billion 

of toxic loans, some Rs337 m. have been recovered (...)” 

Rs1.7  billion  of  toxic  loans  in  MauBank!  And  we  know  that  in  September,  the  former 

Minister  of  Finance,  answering  specifically  to  a  question  from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition, stated that no toxic loans would be transferred to MauBank, and now we are told 

that Rs1.7 billion of toxic loans are now being serviced by MauBank, and out of these Rs1.7 

billion, only Rs337 m.  have been repaid.  So, there is  still about  Rs1.3 billion  of toxic asset 

and we are being asked to put taxpayers’ money to help those toxic assets.  

Madam Speaker, we need to be consistent with ourselves. Is this an SME bank or not? 

If it is not, then where is the money going? That is the question! We have already put about 

Rs3 billion in this bank. Where is all the money going, if money is not being used to pay the 

SME sectors? I am grateful to MauBank for having entered an injunction case in Court. I am 

not going to talk about the merit of the case. I am not going to talk about anything which is 

 

21 

sub judice. We are just going to quote certain figures which are referred to in that affidavit, 

which are going to chill a lot of people.  

 

 

Paragraph 31 - 

“MauBank avers that Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 - Fashion Style, Designer Labels, Jack 

International  and  Pro-Fashion  Ltd.  have  defaulted  the  above-described  banking 

facilities and are, as at 19 May 2016, indebted to it in the sum of Rs564,959,802.54.” 

And  we  are  talking  about  four  companies  which  are  related  to  Respondent  No.  15,  Mr 

Doomeswarsing Gooljaury, the new blue-eyed boy of this Government. So, Rs564 m. owed 

to it, and the affidavit makes extremely interesting reading, Madam Speaker.  We are told that 

as far back as October 2015, these companies had defaulted. These companies had defaulted 

as  far  back  as  October  2015.  They  owed  more  than  Rs500  m.  and  what  did  MauBank  do? 

You know, what they did, Madam Speaker? This is even more shocking. What did they do? 

In  November  2015,  MauBank  granted  Rs32  m.  additional  loan  to  the  company  led  by 

Gooljaury, Rs32 m. additional loan. SME - zero, Mr Gooljaury - Rs32 m. in addition to the 

already Rs550 m. plus he owed. Then, April 2016, he is still defaulting, he is still not paying. 

What  does  MauBank  do?  Again,  another  additional  loan,  Rs16  m.  loan  in  April  2016,  last 

month,  and  today,  we  are  talking  about  one  client  who  owes  more  than  Rs565  m.  to 

MauBank  and  the  Government  expects  taxpayers  to  come  and  approve  and  finance  this 

MauBank.  We  have  already  injected  Rs3  billion,  we  need  to  put  more  money,  why?  To 

service the toxic assets, why, because this Government is having a new policy towards those 

who  defaulted  against  under  the  previous  banks  and  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development  -  I  am  glad  that  there  is  a  new  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development  because he will have time to  look into  this matter, because  he would find out 

that the example of Mr Gooljaury is not unique. Today, there are re-evaluations being carried 

out; people who are not able to  service their loan are having their collateral  re-evaluated so 

that  they  can  get  additional  financing  and  the  thing,  Madam  Speaker,  is  going  from  bad  to 

worse.  

MyBiz, guidelines for SME Development Scheme, MauBank SME finance scheme as 

follows:  there  would  be  interest  rate  at  3.4%,  no  personal  guarantee.  So,  now  MauBank  is 

going  to  help  SME  giving  them  preferential  rate,  3.5%.  That  is  the  only  official  brochure. 

And, who is going to benefit from this? SME? Who is going to benefit from the largesse de 

MauBank?  Only  last  week,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  press  of  25  mai  2016,  we  are  informed 

 

22 

that  Mauricoast,  the  company  of  Mr  Barbara,  the  husband  of  PPS  Mrs  Boygah,  who  has 

obtained a Government lease in Poudre d’Or to do the Barachois, according to the report, he 

had  the  nerve  to  serve  a  notice,  mise  en  demeure,  on  SMEDA,  because  SMEDA  was  not 

giving him the SME Development Scheme certificate so that he can get a loan of over Rs20 

m. from MauBank at preferential rate of 3.4%. Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  how  can  we  be  answerable  to  the  people  out  there,  be 

answerable  to  the  people  who  cannot  make  ends  meet?    How  can  we  come  and  tell  these 

people  that:  yes,  today  after  having  voted  Rs2  billion  for  an  SME  bank,  we  are  adding 

another  Rs1.6  billion  in  MauBank?  So,  Madam  Speaker,  I  know  that  the  hon.  Minister  of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development  will  be  busy  with  the  Budget,  but  I  will  urge  him  to 

come and have a revised look into that MauBank because otherwise taxpayers will keep on 

footing the Bill for many years to come. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! 

(12.13 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade 

(Mr  S.  Lutchmeenaraidoo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  being  given  the  privilege  of  speaking 

after the hon. Minister of Finance and  Economic Development.  It  impressed me.    I had the 

impression,  at  one  time,  that  it  was  the  maiden  speech  of  hon.  Jugnauth  and  I  am  quite 

pleased  to  be  given  this  opportunity  of  explaining  the  background  to  this  ESE  and,  more 

specially, over MauBank itself.  

Before going to the main issue of MauBank, I would like to correct the hon. Member, 

hon. Uteem, on the basis of calculation of debt. You have been using the calculation of public 

debt as defined by international norms while we have been committed since 2008 to reduce 

the  national  debt  to  50%  of  GDP.  And,  in  fact,  it  is  true;  it  is  a  fact  that  since  2008,  the 

national debt has never been reduced by the former Government. They were given six years 

to  fulfil  their  commitment  of  2008,  nothing  was  done.  So,  as  at  2000,  December  14,  the 

national debt was still at 54.2% and it is a fact also that the national debt has increased for the 

 

23 

past two years, namely because we have had to intervene on what we would call a black swan 

event, that was the BAI collapse. We had, in the course of action, to allow for payment of the 

promises we made to those who lost their money in the Super Cash Back Gold deal; we had 

to provide for a line of credit from the Bank of Mauritius of more than Rs3 billion; this has 

been  integrated  in  the  national  debt.  There  was  no  way  out  of  it.  We  had  to  fulfil  our 

commitment  with  those  who  lost  their  savings.  So,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  issued  a  line  of 

credit of Rs3.5 billion.  This came to increase, naturally, the national debt.  

And,  number  two,  since  we  are  speaking  of  debt  also,  to  understand  the  MauBank 

issue,  and  this  is  well  beyond  politics,  because  we  were  in  a  situation  that  was  dramatic.  It 

was  not  one  bank  that  was  collapsing,  two  banks  were  collapsing:  one,  Bramer  Bank  was 

collapsing  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  MPCB  also  had  collapsed  because  of  incredibly  high 

level of dubious loans made by the previous Government. We have to be very clear on this.  

We inherited an MPCB that was heavily indebted and that was also heavily with NPL, non-

performing loans, because of direct political intervention in these banks on lending. So, this is 

what we inherited.  On one side the BAI and Bramer with, and, on the other side, MPCB that 

was  collapsing,  two  banks.  The  two  banks,  now,  we  have  what  we  define  as  the  Cash 

Adequacy  Ratio  (CAR),  any  bank  in  Mauritius  to  survive  as  a  bank  must  have  a  Cash 

Adequacy  Ratio  of  10  minimum.  The  Cash  Adequacy  Ratio  of  Bramer  and  of  MPCB  had 

gone to less than 3%. So, there was no chance that those two banks could survive.  

Now,  I  put  the  question  to  the  House,  we  are  Mauritians,  we  are  facing  a  dramatic 

situation led by the collapse of BAI and we had in the process to maintain public confidence 

and  that  was  not  easy  because  at  that  same  time,  not  only  there  was  the  Bramer  Bank 

collapse, but there was also the MPCB.  

Now, if I had allowed those two banks to collapse - and I want the Opposition to follow 

me on this issue – there was a risk of systemic action, reaction on the financial sector.  The 

Bank of Mauritius was aware that we could not, as a small island, digest the collapse of two 

banks without creating the systemic crisis.  I never spoke about it, but a Minister of Finance 

has to deal with realities that we could not - in a situation where we were dealing, absorbing 

already, the BAI crisis - allow two financial institutes to collapse in this country.   

This was the first reason which put Government to think what is next.  What is next is 

that we have two banks also which had 750 employees.  People can say this is not much.  I 

say:   “each employee in  a bank, in  any institution in  Mauritius  is  for me sacred.”   A job  is 

 

24 

sacred! I have never fiddled with it.  Now, at a time when we could not create new jobs, I was 

on the point of saying that we are in a phase of jobless growth.  There is growth, but there is 

not  employment  creation.    So,  in  a  period  where  there  is  no  employment  creation,    the 

minimum  we  could  do  was,  to  protect  employment.    We  could  not  add  to  this  level  of 

unemployment  more  people  losing  their  jobs.    That  was  the  second  issue  which  the 

Government  could  not  ignore.    We  were  in  face  of  750  employees  who  would  have  been 

sacked  if  we  had  closed  down  those  two  banks.    You  might  say  that  this  is  being  too 

humanitarian.    I  say  no!    They  are  professionals.    I  have  met  them.    I  have  met  the  people 

from  Bramer  Bank  and  from  MPCB.  Quite  a  large  number  of  them  are  high  calibre 

professionals  whom  the  country  would  have  lost  if  we  had  allowed  those  two  banks  to 

collapse.  So, this is number two; the second issue on which I had to deal with. 

The  third  issue,  those  two  banks  represent  640,000  customers;  more  than  50%  of  the 

total  number  of  customers  in  Mauritius.    Could  we  afford  to  deal  640,000  customers  that 

overnight  are  being  told  that  their  bank  is  closing  down?  Just  imagine  the  psychological 

effect  on  the  population  if  we  had  allowed  this  to  happen.  640,000  customers!  Therefore, 

firstly, there was a question of employment, 750.  Secondly, the question of customers who 

had  trusted  those  two  banks  through  the  postal  system  and  banks;  they  had  trusted  those 

institutions.  Thirdly,  as  I  said,  there  was  a  risk  of  a  systemic  financial  crisis  happening  in 

Mauritius at that time; these were things which were too heavy to deal with. 

So, the first thing we had to do was to take a decision. Do we continue injecting funds 

in  Bramer;  do  we  continue  injecting  funds  in  MPCB  -  and  there  I  would  agree  with  my 

colleague,  hon.  Uteem  -  when  we  know  the  risks;  where  we  will  spend  our  life  cashing 

money in  those two institutions because they are  two lossmaking institutions and their cash 

adequacy  ratio  was  well  below  what  a  bank  should  have.    It  was  at  that  moment,  when  we 

had  those  major  issues  not  to  ignore;  employment;  640,000  customers;  systemic  risks,  that 

the project that was announced in the Budget, a bank for SMEs came out.  

I  was  personally  convinced  that  we  need  a  bank  that  is  specialised  in  SMEs.  At  the 

same time, I cannot ignore one thing that all financial institutions created by Government in 

the past had all collapsed because there has been too much intervention.  So, we promised an 

SME  bank  on  one  side,  on  the  other  side  I  was  faced  with  two  collapsing  banks.  I  took  on 

myself  this  important  decision  of  saying:  “let  us  go  for  a  merge,  a  merger  operation  in  a 

Westminster  style.  Get  two  banks  that  are  collapsing  together,  inject  funds,  increase  their 

CAR to 10 and trust them”. I think there is something which I have learned in my whole life, 

 

25 

it is to trust people.  I trust my people. I trust officers. Confidence is the basis on which we 

have development. The first miracle was based on what?  It was based on confidence.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  This trust was very important in the sense that we had to be 

able to create in the country a situation where there are those two banks. It was  a risk and I 

agree  with  hon. Mohamed that his  Government  would never have done it.  They killed this 

economy.  They  killed  the  banking  sector  and  the  protectors  whom  the  hon.  Member  is 

mentioning  are  all  members  who  have  been  protected  by  the  former  Government.  So,  we 

have  nothing  here  to  say  or  to  be  ashamed  of.  We  inherited  their  damn  shit!  And  the  hon. 

Member  is  here  now  sitting  there.  We  did  our  best  to  get  out  of  this  shit.    This  is  what  we 

have to understand. We are Government, we are here to govern and we govern the right way. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Minister,  please,  don’t  use  the  word  ‘shit’.    It  is 

unparliamentary! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I remove the ‘shit’. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Withdraw the word!  

Don’t remove it, withdraw the word! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, it is for the hon. Member to say!  It is for me to decide.  Okay! 

Don’t be ironical, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  So,  Madam  Speaker,  we  flushed  out  this  word,  thank  you.  

Let me continue on the basis of what led to the merger.  This is the first thing we have done 

here. And if we would like to refer to some other banks, Lloyds Bank is a typical case of a 

huge  banking  sector  in  UK  that  collapsed  in  2008  and  public  funds  were  used  to  bail  out 

 

26 

Lloyds Bank and also the Royal Bank of Scotland. Today, eight  years afterwards, no one in 

UK  could  regret  that  Government  injected  funds  to  save  those  two  banks  because  Lloyds 

Bank has come back to profitability and the Minister of Finance of UK recently sold 6% of 

the shares of Lloyds and recouped all the investment they made there.   

(Interruptions) 

So, this is an example I am saying. Why? Because there are times where we have to take risk 

in national interest.  And I say again: “there was no other way out”. If we had left those two 

institutions  continuing,  we  would  have  had  to  spoon-feed  them  all  the  time.    The  merging 

process  was  based  on  one  thing;  we  merged  the  staff.    We  merged  the  administration.   We 

merged  the  IT  system  of  both  banks  and  we  give  the  bank  a  strong  management  that  can 

never underestimate the fact that Government recruited one of the best CEOs in the country.  

Mr Nagarajan, the CEO of MauBank is one of the best CEOs of this country and I am very 

proud  that  he  accepted  to  leave  Standard  Bank  and  join  us.  So,  we  needed  a  strong 

management  and  it  is  through  him  that  we  said:    “Let  us  go  for  the  merger”.  Merging  two 

lame  ducks,  injecting  money  there  and  get  it  to  work.    I  can  tell  you  one  thing:    “I  am 

confident today.  MauBank is number three at national level.  This bank, in five years, will be 

the number two bank in Mauritius.”  I tell this to you!  Not only this!  In three years we will 

be in a position to sell part of the shareholding of MauBank and recoup Government what we 

had invested there to save employment, to save those banks.  That was done! 

As far as SMEs are concerned, since the hon. Uteem spoke a lot about SMEs and at 

time  he  is  quite  right,  because  there  is  a  difference  between  what  we  intend  and  what 

happened also.  Because when there was the change in Government, we said and rightly so, 

because we did it before: “Ile Maurice, nation d’entrepreneurs.  This nation can take on its 

back the responsibility of the future”.  We did it in 1983 to 1990.  It worked beautifully.  This 

time again we said: “We are going to expand on the project of SMEs”.   

I have to say one thing that getting a project of this magnitude working within a new 

institution, having the Ministry of Industry which has done  a huge job there and getting the 

whole thing together takes time. I have to admit it. Getting the SME project off the ground, 

we  have  had  some  teething  problems,  but  the  project  is  now  on,  which  means  that  MyBiz 

which  is  a  very  new  concept,  a  one-stop  shop  for  the  small  entrepreneurs,  is  working  very 

well. 

 

27 

On the other side, the arm of MyBiz is MauBank, which is the largest player already 

among SMEs. You should know that 27% of the portfolio of MauBank is  allotted to SMEs 

which is the highest in Mauritius. So, this is a bank that has the vocation and the capacity of 

doing  it.  Yes,  I  agree  with  me  that  we  are  late  with  the  SME  Project  and  I  say  also  that, 

probably,  one  of  the  reasons  which  created  the  situation  was  that  we  have  been  dealing  in 

selection with crisis. This Government has been a crisis management Government quite a few 

times. We had to  deal  with BAI. People can say  whatever they like.  In Trinidad-Tobago, it 

nearly led to the fall of the Government. It led to a massive loss of Rs95 billion taken away 

by the Government there just to compensate those who have lost their money. So, we had to 

deal with a major crisis and the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, who is here, was the one who gave 

instructions and decided on the whole thing, and rightly so. 

I  think  we  took  the  right  decisions  there,  but  they  are  painful  decisions.  I  think  the 

House will understand and the nation also, that we went through painful decision-making. I 

never  thought,  because  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance,  within  a  few  months,  having  to  deal 

with  the  crisis  of  a  magnitude  that  can  create  a  systemic  risk,  socially  and  financially.  And 

yet,  we  did  it.  We  didn’t  do  it  in  the  most  perfect  way,  –  no  one  is  perfect  –  but  in  crisis 

management,  when  you  have  to  behave  like  a  pompier  every  day,  all  weeks  through,  then 

there are side reactions. I would say that the delay we have on the SME sector is also due to 

the  fact  that  this  Government  has  been  dealing  with  an  incredible  strength  on  successive 

crises: BAI, now we speak of MauBank, by itself is a challenge. 

Merging two banks is not easy.  I am sure the Opposition will move with me on this 

issue. You can’t merge two dead ducks and get them to live unless you inject money. But, to 

inject money, then you need to have faith in it and this is what we had, we had faith. Public 

funds have been used - this is true - to set up a bank that has saved 750 employees, that has 

saved 640,000 account holders and that has saved the country. And looking back, I would say 

that we saved this country from a financial crisis of an incredible magnitude. And, I can say it 

today, again, that we saved this country from a social crisis of an incredible magnitude. Just 

imagine all those dozens of thousands of people who lost overnight all their money! Had we 

not managed this crisis, they would have been in the street! There would have been blood! 

I told this to the Leader of the Opposition also. I say, when we are dealing with crisis 

management  at  national  level,  la  nation  avant  tout!  Country  before  all!  I  need  to  say  one 

thing  today  that  hon.  Bérenger  did  the  right  thing  also.  He  did  not  create  a  situation  which 

 

28 

could have created a drama in this country.  It is against this background that we have, today, 

to speak of MauBank, within the context of a crisis which was so serious. 

I  hope,  Madam  Speaker,  that  I  have  added  a  few  elements  to  the  discussion,  today, 

that can make it less dispassionate and allow us to  vote an ESE  which is something  qui est 

banal. All Governments, all the time, passent des ESEs. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(12.33 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 

Madam Speaker, I would like to start out by agreeing with the previous orator that it is true, I 

recall during the previous Government and even the one between 2005-2010, each and every 

time  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  stood  up  -  and  I  see  here  two 

former Ministers of Finance under the previous regimes - they stood up to come up with the 

Supplementary Appropriation Bill, they always had to deal with the Opposition standing up 

and saying: ‘Well, I mean this is unfair! You are putting us before un fait accompli, you have 

already spent the money and it is only now that you are coming to seek our permission.’ 

I recall when hon. Pravind Jugnauth was Minister of Finance, if I am not mistaken, it 

was another Member of the Opposition who stood up and made a long exposé with regard to 

the technical issues as to whether, legally speaking, it was in order or not. But, where I agree 

with  the previous orator  is  that it is  something that  all Governments  do and it is  something 

that  is  in  our  tradition,  parliamentary  or  otherwise,  and  it  has  at  no  time  been  challenged 

legally. This  is  as much  as where  I stop  as far  as my  agreement with  the  previous orator is 

concerned. 

Let  me  immediately,  since  this  is  a  debate  on  this  particular  Bill  that  is  being 

presented and this clash of ideas that must be encouraged in this Parliament should go forth. 

It  is,  therefore,  necessary  for  me  to  answer  what  the  previous  orator  said,  when  he  tried  to 

make a comparison with, following what hon. Uteem said having used public funds when, in 

actual  fact,  he  is  very  economical  with  words,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  when  it  comes  to 

explaining  how  come  at  the  beginning  of  this  whole  process  of  destruction  that  the 

Government  he  belongs  to  embarked  upon.  How  come  he  had  come  publicly  and  made 

promises that not a penny of public funds would be injected in this whole process! That is a 

 

29 

promise! Now, am I to take it that those promises were made very lightly? Is that the reason 

why hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo could not keep his word? 

But then, again, when I listened to him, he immediately jumps forward and holds on 

for security by holding on to the tailcoat of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister by saying: “Well, we 

were given instructions by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, and rightly so, that was the decision 

of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.” He seeks this protection of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in his 

words when he says it was the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that gave that. But, what he fails to tell 

us  is  those  were  promises  that  were  made  by  himself  as  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development,  that  they  would  not  use  a  penny  of  public  funds  into  this  process. 

So, as I was saying, was it because those promises were made only pour la gallerie? Was it 

because  those  promises  were  made  because  there  were  no  proper  calculations  made  by  the 

able officers of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the consultants that 

were  helping  Government  in  those  days?  No,  I  do  not  think  so!  Because  I  believe  that  this 

was  made  only  to  satisfy  public  opinion.  But  it  was  not  done  after  careful  thought  and  this 

was, in other words, a badly engineered plan that was concocted and that cannot in any way 

be compared, as he has just tried to do with the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Bank. 

True! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, it is not simply because he comes here and says to this Assembly: “Well, public 

funds were used in the case of the Royal Bank of Scotland!” In the case of the Royal Bank of 

Scotland, first: can he please tell us at what particular stage did the Government in the United 

Kingdom pull or revoke the banking licence of that bank? When? In the case of Lloyds Bank, 

was the banking licence pulled away? 

Did you have interventions by Police officers in the United Kingdom going to try to 

get someone who was the Chairman of the bank to sign a document giving away everything 

for one Pound Sterling? Did this happen in the case of the Royal Bank of Scotland and in the 

case of Lloyds Bank? No, that never happened! But, why, therefore, does he compare it with 

the Royal Bank of Scotland? Why does he compare it with the Lloyds Bank? Because that is 

his only salvation to try to come and drown the fish! He believes that he is going to talk about 

whatever happened in the BAI situation in Trinidad and Tobago giving the impression that it 

is  the  same  group  when  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Giving  the  impression  it  is  the  same 

 

30 

scenario,  the  same  promoters,  the  same  supposed  culprits  when  the  culprits  were  not  there, 

but there in Government! 

This  is  amazing!  You  have  a  former  Minister  of  Finance.  Let  me  start  with  this  as 

well, let us not forget we are dealing here and I cannot lay the blame at the feet of the now 

Minister  of  Finance  because  he  has  to  deal  with  the  mess.  He  has  to  deal  with  the  serious 

mess. What is this mess? We come with a Government proposing a new miracle and what is 

the  miracle  solution  of  this  Government?  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  with  his  beautiful 

team, let us live a romantic period of the 1983 with hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo by his 

side,  going  to  give  us  economic  miracles  and  going  to  give  us  what,  most  importantly, 

discipline in our finances. Discipline in our finances!  

Less  than  one  any  half  years  later,  Madam  Speaker,  the  first  Minister  of  Finance  of 

this new Government has gone. We have had a second one, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir 

Anerood Jugnauth, he is also gone. We have a third one… 

 (Interruptions) 

He  is  here!  But,  in  the  meantime  we  have  had  a  Budget  presented  to  show  this  financial 

miracle  that  we  were  going  to  create  by  the  former  Minister  of  Finance.  Budget!  Then  we 

have had a second Budget  because on  a  vu que  ça ne marchait pas,  ça  ne prenait pas. We 

had Vision 2030… 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  hon.  Mohamed,  please  don’t  enlarge  the  debate.  We  are 

debating the ESE, right… 

(Interruptions) 

He  spoke  in  the  context  of  the  ESE  because  there  is  an  item  on  the  Budget  concerning  the 

MauBank so that I would ask you to restrict yourself to the parameters of the ESE. 

Mr  Mohamed:  So,  I  am  coming  to  the  MauBank  and  that  is  precisely  what  I  am 

showing  that  basically  with  regard  to  the  MauBank  we  have  had  a  situation  that  has  been 

dealt with from the very outset with one Minister of Finance, then we have gone to a second 

Minister of Finance and now we are dealing with a third Minister of Finance! Basically, why 

it is important that I talk about that is because this whole debate was enlarged by the previous 

orator.  He  has  said,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  reason  why  with  regard  to  what  was  planned 

and  what  could  not  be  therefore  realised,  because  whatever  you  plan  does  not  necessarily 

 

31 

come  true,  he  has  explained  that  we  have  had  to  deal  with  the  BAI  affair.  He  has  said  we 

have  had  to  deal  with  situations  that  caused  deficits  through  this  injection  of  more  than  a 

billion rupees. He said it. So, let me, therefore, say in response to what he has said. 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I would tell you once again that when 

the  previous  orator  intervened,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  intervened  in  the  context  of  what  is 

on the ESE today, that is the MauBank and that you will have to restrict yourself within the 

parameters of the ESE today. You will have all the leeway to intervene in the Budget speech. 

You will have all the leeway to intervene. I will not be able then to interrupt you. But, today 

you have to intervene within the parameters of the ESE. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wait  for  your  ruling  again.  If  I  am  not  mistaken, 

hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  talked  about  definition  of  public  debt.  He  talked  about  what 

happened ever since 2008 by previous governments not managing to bring down public debt 

in spite of statutory obligations. Am  I, therefore, allowed to talk about this as well since he 

mentioned it and you did not stop him? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: On a point of order… 

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I replied to an issue that was taken up by hon. Uteem. 

Madam Speaker: That’s it. 

Mr Mohamed: But, I am sorry Standing Orders say what…. 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I did not intervene, I did not interrupt 

hon. Uteem because whatever he said, he had put it in the context of the ESE.  That is why 

hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo had to reply to what he said. Now, they did not enlarge the debate as 

you are doing! I have told you and this is my ruling. You will have ample time to debate on 

this  when  the  Budget  comes.  I  will  give  you  ample  time  to  debate  on  this.  But,  for  today, 

please come to the ESE and within the parameters of the ESE. 

Mr Mohamed: However, having listened to your ruling and in line with the particular 

piece of legislation that is being brought before this Parliament and in response to what hon. 

Lutchmeenaraidoo  said  about  the  definition  of  public  debt,  I  also  would  like  to  add  and 

 

32 

basically  state  in  this  august  Assembly  that  I  do  not  agree  with  his  observations.  I  do  not 

agree  with  the  observations  that  he  made  in  line  with  his  interpretation  of  what  history 

dictates because his interpretation is hiding a very important truth. What truth is it hiding? It 

is that he talks about since 2008 no Government has been able to bring down public debt. Let 

me  tell  him  not  to  forget  that  those  governments  that  he  is  pointing  the  finger  towards  had 

two Ministers of Finance, one of whom is sitting next to him on his right! And this is what he 

said when he said no government has managed to bring it down that public debt, he is at the 

same time not  even trying to hide the fact  that  he has just attacked the  Minister of  Finance 

sitting on his right who was Minister of Finance at a certain stage in 2010. When he looks at 

his figures, public debt to GDP was brought down when hon. Pravind Jugnauth was Minister 

of Finance under the previous regime. It was brought down. That is a fact. So, now that I say 

that, I am sure I can go on talking because that is the truth. 

Madam Speaker: Now, don’t be ironical hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

You can’t be ironical about any ruling which I give. I draw your attention to this! 

(Interruptions) 

Right? You will not be ironical and I will not tolerate you to be ironical, please! 

Mr Mohamed: I never tried to use any irony. I thought it was very funny what I said, 

but if… 

Madam Speaker believes that it was irony, I do apologise. That was not my intention. 

(Interruptions) 

But, responding to something else… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

…what he has hidden from the facts in his attempt to drown the fish, the previous orator… 

(Interruptions) 

 

33 

He has talked about 2008, but why does he need then to tell us, why is it that all reports in 

those days and history, since he likes talking about history, why does he not refer to the fact 

that as from 2008, why does not he talk about the Euro crisis? Why does not he talk about the 

triple shock that our economy was facing as from those particular moments in history? Why 

does  not  he  talk  about  commodity  prices  on  the  increase?  Why  does  he  not  talk  about  oil 

prices, not as it is now at around 50 US Dollars the barrel, we are talking about above 100 US 

Dollars? Those are issues that he had to bring to the attention of this august Assembly when 

he  laid  with  such  ease  the  blame  of  this  supposed  deficit,  debt,  at  the  feet  of  the  former 

regime. 

What is an undeniable fact is the following: when you look at the figures with regard 

to debt, they have increased. Call a spade a spade or call it by any name you wish, you cannot 

therefore  go  into  semantics  in  going  into  what  definition  that  particular  standard  is  or  what 

definition statute says, what  definition the law says. The fact  is  ever since this Government 

has come into power, the public debt has increased! That is undeniable! 

Now, each and every time I hear Ministers of this particular Government keep on and 

on  saying  that  the  responsibility  for  that  debt  referred  to  by  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  is  the 

fault of the previous Government. Each and every time, but… 

When you ask them… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: … to, at least, not only say how it is the fault, but, at least, come and 

establish documents here, showing us how it is the fault, they don’t do it! They simply say, ‘It 

is the fault of the previous regime.’ Full stop! The reason why they cannot come and establish 

it - because somewhere, some place, what they seem to forget … 

(Interruptions) 

He will not be able to kiss my hand to keep me quiet today. Oh, no! 

He is a good kisser. 

(Interruptions) 

 

34 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Mohamed: I do not do that.  He seems to be good at it. 

As far as I am concerned, Madam Speaker, what is important, is the following.  Why 

is it that they do not come and explain what they say?  It is easy to come and just pinpoint 

and say, ‘Well, you know, it is the previous regime.’ Soon it is going to be two years, and this 

Government is going to go on and say, ‘It is the previous regime; it is the previous regime!’  

They do that in order to  hide the inability of this Government to show what they promised: 

fiscal responsibility.  What do statistics show us?  That, as from 2015 onwards, as properly 

explained  by  hon.  Uteem,  the  forecast  for  2016  clearly  shows  that  we  have  gone  as  far  as 

almost 65% as far as debt is concerned.  65%!  What was it when we were in Government?  

59%!  Below the figure of 60.  How come, therefore, the previous regime is still responsible 

for what they have done?  They have made their bed; they have to sleep in it.  They cannot 

keep  on  running  away  from  responsibility  and  trying  to  look  into  the  figures  in  a  different 

manner. 

As I said, the actual hon. Minister of Finance has to deal with a serious mess. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Rs1.6  billion  debt,  that’s  the  previous  regime  as  well!    That  is  basically  what  the 

previous regime decided; to drop it in there! What they forget once again is that the previous 

Government  had  two  Ministers  of  Finance  and  both  of  them  are  in  the  actual  Government.  

The majority of the time that the previous Government was in power, it had as Ministers of 

Finance hon. X. L. Duval and hon. Jugnauth. 

Now,  if  this  is  the  argument  that  they  are  putting  forward,  that  it  is  the  previous 

regime  that  was  responsible,  therefore,  they  are  showing  the  finger  of  blame  both  to  hon. 

Jugnauth and hon. X L. Duval.  But is this what they are saying or whether they are going to 

say  Dr.  Ramgoolam?  But  Dr.  Ramgoolam  was  Minister  of  Finance  for  a  few  months,  and 

now they say it was his fault!   It is a Government that has promised a lot.  It is a Government 

that has promised miracles.  But what it has shown is, in fact, fiscal irresponsibility.  What it 

has  shown  is,  in  fact,  promises  that  it  has  made  in  press  conferences,  in  explanations  in 

 

35 

interviews  with  regard  to  MauBank.    It  has  kept  on  making  promises,  but  at  no  time  have 

they managed to keep those promises. 

I remember an article of hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo. I was looking at that, and I think it 

is important that we talk about that. Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo  giving an interview as soon as 

MauBank  was  created,  following  the  fusion.    He  talked  about  the  difficulty  in  putting  two 

banks together.  Wasn’t it hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo who stood up very happily and smiling in 

front  of the press  as Minister of  Finance  and saying that there is  a bank from  Dubai  that is 

interested to take over MauBank? It is a secret for no one that, all of a sudden, there was big 

news  that  there  is  a  bank  from  Dubai,  a  financial  institution,  which  wanted  to  work  with 

MauBank.  Therefore, he went on to say that MauBank can be the No. 2 bank in Mauritius.  

He  started  with  No.  3  while  at  the  same  time  saying  that  it  can  be  the  second  bank  of  the 

Republic  of  Mauritius.    How  does  he  do  that?    On  the  strength  of  money  from  taxpayers, 

which he promised he would not put in there. 

But, today, what is the situation of MauBank?  The same MauBank that the same hon. 

Minister of Finance, as he was then, promised could be No. 2 in Mauritius, is on the verge of 

a  crash.    That  is  what  it  is  today.    That  is  the  truth.    This  bank  is  not  performing  as  it  is.  

When we speak to staff members of MauBank today, they are all jittery.  They are all afraid.  

They are all scared for their position. 

Let us ask the question:  How many people have been fired from MauBank in the past 

year?    He  talks  about  the  difficulty  of  putting  two  banks  together  and  the  jobs  that  he  has 

saved.  But  what  he does not  go on to say is  how many of those people that he supposedly 

thinks he has saved, have been fired ever since this supposedly saving tactics that he has tried 

to implement. I have known and I have met those people who have lost their jobs, who once 

upon a time had a secure position.  Because of the mismanagement of the BAI affair by this 

Government, they have lost their jobs, but only for a short time that they had a job.  They do 

not have a job anymore because they were forced out.  So, it is very simple and very easy!  It 

is only a courageous Government that can look at things in the eyes and say, ‘Yes, we have 

done wrong somewhere.  We thought we could deliver, but we really overshot it.’   But then, 

it  is  not  a  courageous  Government  that  looks  back  in  the  rear  view  mirror  and  keeps  on 

refusing to take responsibility for its own shortcomings. 

Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo talks about trust.  He says he trusts people. It is he, himself, 

who revealed to the public … It is important when you talk about fiscal discipline.  For there 

 

36 

to be some stability in the Government, it is important for us to know and investors out there 

seeing that there is some sort of stability and there is no backbiting and infighting.  It is he, 

himself,  who  gave  us,  in  broad  day  light,  the  truth  about  another  colleague  of  his,  he  says, 

wanting  to  take  his  position  as  Minister  of  Finance.  That  is  stability  for  this  Government.  

That is the truth!  Stability! 

Madam Speaker: Once again, hon. Mohamed, you are going outside the parameters 

of  the  debate!    I  have  drawn  your  attention  several  times  that  you  cannot  go  outside  the 

parameters  of  the  E.S.E.    Each  and  every  time  you  are  going  outside  the  parameters  of  the 

debate.  Please come back to the E.S.E! 

Mr  Mohamed:  He  talked  about  the  responsibility  of  the  former  Government  with 

regard to a dead duck.  He talks about dead ducks.  I would like to leave this in the thought of 

this actual Government.  It is all easy to look down memory lane.  Previous Government is to 

blame.  Why doesn’t he  come and tell  us what  was the level  of toxic loans when Mr Krish 

Lutchmeenaraidoo,  who  was  in  charge  of  that  particular  institution,  left?    It  is  so  easy  to 

blame other people whom he does not know or does not care about!  It is so easy for him to 

just point a figure in a very verbose manner, as though to impress the members of the press 

and the public!  But the truth is: why doesn’t he come with actual facts?  What was the toxic 

debt of that particular institution at the time when another Lutchmeenaraidoo was at the head 

of  it?    Tell  us  that!    Then,  he  will  tell  us  whether  he  is  responsible  as  a  Minister  and  as  a 

member of this Government. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam  Speaker:  You  have  mentioned  somebody  else.    I  have  told  hon.  Members 

that they cannot make accusations or allegations against any person who is not represented in 

this august Assembly. 

I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 12.59 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.33 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Please be seated. Hon. Rutnah! 

 

37 

Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  and  Rivière  du  Rempart):  Thank  you, 

Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, when we speak about Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 

we  always  refer  to  the  public  purse,  we  refer  to  public  funds  and  it  is  not  unusual  for  any 

Government,  not  only  in  Mauritius,  but  any  Government  in  the  world  to  bring  such 

legislation in  order to  meet  expenses. And when we are criticised of putting the Opposition 

before un fait accompli, that is not proper to say. There is no fait accompli. because by virtue 

of Section 105 (3) of our Constitution – 

“Governments are allowed constitutionally to bring such legislation in order to ensure 

that  explanations  are  given  in  Parliament  as  regarding  expenses  that  have  been 

incurred”. 

Madam Speaker, what we have today is the Government, in particular, the Chancellor 

of Exchequer, that is, the hon. Minister of Finance who is coming with a Bill, thereby asking 

the House to vote an extra sum of money which is required in order to meet the budget that 

has  been  used  insofar  as,  firstly,  the  Office  of  the  Electoral  Commissioner,  the  Ministry  of 

Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, and two items that are centrally 

managed  expenses  of  Government  and  initiatives  of  Government  respectively.  Everybody 

who has stood up from the Opposition side has simply attacked public debts and MauBank. 

No  one  has  really  spoken  about  the  recurrent  expenses  in  relation  to  the  Electoral 

Commissioner. We know now from the Finance Minister that the sum spent on the Office of 

Electoral Commissioner relates to the local election, that is, the municipal elections that took 

place. And what the Government did, in fact, unlike the previous Government dithering about 

bringing the local  elections, there ought  to  have been a Court case first  to  force the  Labour 

Government  to  give  local  elections  and  to  bring  democratic  process  in  our  Municipals  and 

District Councils. So, this sum that has been allocated, in fact, reflects the reinforcement of 

democratic process by a democratic Government.  

In  relation  to  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 

Institutions,  we  heard  that  retirement  pension  had  to  be  paid  to  our  old  age  pensioners.  I 

would like to remind the House that when we were campaigning, we said that we are going to 

increase the pension from Rs3,000 odds to Rs5,000 and the Opposition parties, firstly, other 

than criticising it blatantly, they were asking rhetorically where is this money going to come 

from.  How  are  we  going  to  pay  these  old  people?  But,  eventually,  the  money  was  found 

through hard work, through calculation, through dedication.  The money was found and the 

 

38 

old age pensioners, people who are less able and widows got from the social security what we 

promised to them. Last year, they got another increase of Rs250. These are all to bring what 

we call social stability and it is justified.  

Insofar as the next item ‘Centrally Managed Expenses of Government’ is concerned, 

it relates to PRB. As night follows days, every five years we have the PRB Report and when 

the PRB Report comes, we have to allocate a sum of money in order to meet the expenses for 

the  PRB  and  these  are  money  from  the  public  purse  which  are  used  efficiently,  effectively 

with transparency in the name of good governance, which this Government is all about.  

Now,  I  would  like  to  come  to  the  issues  raised  by  my  friend  hon.  Uteem  about 

MauBank and public debts, and which were also raised by hon. Shakeel Mohamed.  Let me 

deal with the public debts first. Public debts increased when the Labour Government was in 

power.    Why?  The  people  of  Mauritius  will  never  forget  the  extravagance  of  the  last 

Government  in  relation  to,  for  example,  project  like  Bagatelle  dam  where  the  budget  was 

inflated to such an extent that no one would believe that a project which initially was valued 

at ‘X’ amount, eventually would be spent ‘XXX’ amount, and yet not completed. This is one. 

We are also talking about ring roads; we are talking about identity cards ... 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah,  please!  I  would  allow  you  some  leeway,  but  then 

don’t go extensively into these debates. As I have pointed out to hon. Shakeel Mohamed, you 

will have the opportunity of dealing with these issues during Budget debates. 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I am just referring to a 

few examples that demonstrate how figures were inflated. For example, I will quote what was 

said  during  the  debates  on  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  2013  by  the  then 

spokesperson of the MMM, hon. Kee Chong Li Kwong Wing.   

For example, he said - 

“Mr Speaker, Sir, how many times have we seen extension and renewal of contracts 

or  award  of  new  contracts  to  the  same  defaulting  contractors,  the  same  non-

performing  contractors  without  enforcing  the  conditions  of  the  contract  and  without 

enforcing the terms of payment according to the bid documents.” 

He goes on and he says - 

 

39 

“(…) why do we come back to the House every year to vote persistent  expenditures 

resulting from continuous cost overruns as if it is business as usual (…)”. 

And he goes on - 

“If we look at the Terre Rouge/Verdun-Trianon link road, Mr Speaker, Sir, (…)”. 

No, I am quoting this, 

(Interruptions) 

“(…) 24.5 km of roads have been built. It was estimated to cost Rs2.2 billion and after 

an extension time of ten months, it was scheduled to be completed in July 2013. It was 

just opened last week and it has cost almost twice the amount, that is, Rs4.2 billion; 

twice as much.” 

Furthermore - 

“Mr Speaker, Sir, on the Riche Terre/Jin Fei road, on the Caudan flyover, on the Ring 

Road lot 1, on the Bagatelle/Valentina link road and so many other road projects. All 

of them without fail, have made cost overruns.” 

So, this was said during the course of the debate of the then Labour Government in power on 

10 December 2013.  

Madam Speaker, any Budget is an estimate and an estimate is for the future. We don’t 

live in the future. We don’t go back to the future; we cannot accurately predict how much it 

will cost when we inherit a Government that technically was on the brink of collapse. Why? 

Because of all these overruns that the then hon. Kee Chong Li Kwong Wing referred to, and 

that is why there are variances, but the variances should be fair, reasonable and accurate, and 

we should be able to come and justify those variances.  

Now, in  relation  to  public debt  and now  coming to  MauBank, my very  good  friend, 

my  colistier,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  whatever  reply  he  has  given,  he  has  explained  to  the 

House  in  a  very  simple  manner  how  the  MauBank  was  created,  how  jobs  were  salvaged. 

Now, I will not go into big details about it. If there is anyone here from the Opposition to say 

what  alternatives they would  have proposed when the saga of the BAI suddenly erupted on 

the face of this Government, what they would have done, they have not suggested anything, 

what  they  would  have  done  with  the  Bramer  Bank,  what  they  would  have  done  with  the 

MPCB.  The  then  Minister  of  Finance  saved  640,000  people’s  money,  he  saved  so  many 

employments.  Government  could  have  said:  ‘well,  this  is  BAI,  people  who  have  invested 

 

40 

money in a bank does not belong to us, we have nothing to do with it’, and then what would 

have  happened?  Domino  effect  on  our  financial  institution  and  our  financial  sector!    Then, 

the country would have collapsed. Instead of saying: ‘Hail Macbeth!’, ‘Hail Vishnu!’, like a 

man  full  with  the  milk  of  human  kindness,  you  saved  so  many  jobs  and  you  saved  our 

financial institution, you saved our image from those who were trying to tarnish it’, what do 

they do? They come and criticise! To criticise is very easy, but to deal with the matter there 

and then is  difficult; to  save so many jobs,  to  save the savings of 640,000 customers in  the 

bank  is  a  difficult  decision  to  make.    And  bear  in  mind,  earlier  on,  I  heard  some  criticisms 

against the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! But, of course, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has an upper 

hand  on  everything;  of  course  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  makes  the  decision!    Why? 

Because we have inherited the Westminster system of Government, the Prime Minister sits in 

the  Cabinet,  he  is  in  control,  he  is  the  main  man,  he  decides  and  he  gives  guidance,  he 

advises, he takes the ship to its destination. So, of course! 

(Interruptions) 

He is not a part-time Prime Minister; he is not a Prime Minister who is sitting with his cigar 

and watching shows. He is  not like that. He is  a hard worker; he has been able to  save this 

country from those who were trying to bring it to the brink of suicide. 

Madam Speaker: Bring it back to the bank! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.    Coming  back  to  it,  let  me  now  deal  with  the 

process  of  self-destruction,  ‘his  Government  took  part’,  he  said,  was  this  a  process  of  self-

destruction to save 640,000 jobs in this country? Was it a process of self-destruction to save 

two  banking  institutions?  No!  It  was  a  process  to  align  our  banking  services  so  that  people 

who have invested their money are not going to lose and to bring back confidence that people 

expected of this Government.  

And  then,  ‘it  is  a  concocted  badly  engineered  plan’.  Saving  640,000  jobs  is  a  badly 

engineered plan that has been concocted? Reference was made to the Lloyds Bank and to the 

Royal Bank of Scotland.  My friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed gave the impression that Lloyds 

Bank  and  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland  were  also  involved  in  the  same  kind  of  scam  that  was 

involved the BAI group.  No! That was not the situation! Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds 

Bank, they faced economic problems because of the  recession, but,  of course, because they 

 

41 

were not involved in criminal activities, that’s why there were no Police interventions. Here, 

in the BAI, we had criminals operating and now, hiding in France. 

Madam Speaker: Now, … 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order.  Would he, please, withdraw that, because there 

has been no tribunal and no court of law which has convicted any person in this matter? So, 

could  he,  please,  withdraw  that?    And  make  allegations  against  third  parties!  Could  he 

withdraw that? He can’t say criminal activities by persons. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  he  is  not  imputing  motives.  Please,  sit 

down! He is not imputing motives to anybody. If he does so, you can rely on me to stop him. 

Mr Rutnah: I am grateful, Madam Speaker, and if I may continue. 

(Interruptions) 

So, there was no salvation, there was no only salvation to drown the fish.  In fact, there were 

actions to save our banks, our people, our country and those who were going to lose their jobs 

in this country as a result of very bad public administration process that was going on during 

the days of the Labour party in power.  

Madam  Speaker,  I will urge upon everybody in  this House today  -  at  least  from  our 

side, because we know the criticisms that we  get from  the Opposition  side  - to  support  this 

Appropriation  Bill  so  that  our  Minister  of  Finance  will  be  able  to  effectively  manage  the 

economy of this country and he has the blessing of the population to go ahead with the proper 

management  of  finance  of  this  country,  and  on  this  note,  Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  so 

much. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

(2.48 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 

(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, I am going to restrict my intervention to the fourth item 

is  Schedule  [Section  2]  of  the  Bill,  Estimates  of  supplementary  expenditure,  with  regard  to 

Vote/Sub-Head  28-1:  Centrally  Managed  Initiatives  of  Government  where  a  sum  of  Rs1.6 

billion is being appropriated.   

 

42 

The  then  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  stated  to  the 

House that Rs1.6 billion represents capital injection in MauBank Holdings Ltd. made on 29 

October 2015 and 13 January 2016.  These sums were provided to MauBank Holdings Ltd to 

invest  Rs300m.  in  MPCB  and  Rs1.3  billion  in MauBank  Ltd.    In  all  transparency,  the  hon. 

Minister Finance and Economic Development has also stated to the House that an amount of 

Rs1,453 billion had also been used for investment during the six months’ period January to 

June  2015,  that  is,  Rs700  m.  in  National  Commercial  Bank  and  Rs753m.  in  former  MPCB 

Ltd.    In  this  regard,  the  hon.  Minister  has  stated  to  the  House  that  a  further  Supplementary 

Appropriation  Bill  and  an  Estimates  of  Supplementary  Expenditure  will  be  brought  before 

this House before 30 June 2016.  

Madam Speaker, just by looking at our Supreme Law, Chapter X of our Constitution 

deals with Finance and Section 105 subsection 3(b) provides –  

“(3)  Where in any financial year it is found - 

(a) 

(b) 

(…); 

that  any  money  that  has  been  expended  (…)  for  a  purpose  for 

which  no  amount  has  been  appropriated  by  the  appropriation 

law,  

a  supplementary  estimate  showing  the  sums  required  or  spent  shall  be  laid 

before  the  Assembly  and  the  heads  of  expenditure  shall  be  included  in  a 

supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  introduced  in  the  Assembly  to  provide  for 

the appropriation of those sums (…)” 

So basically, Madam  Speaker,  you  can  appropriate such sums which are  required or 

spent if it is for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation 

Law.  Now,  the  obvious  question  with  regard  to  the  Rs1.6  billion  invested  in  MPCB  and 

MauBank  Ltd.  via  MauBank  Holdings  Ltd.  is,  of  course:  where  did  the  money  come  from 

and  what  is  the  relevant  empowering  section  of  the  law  which  allows  for  this?    And  the 

answer to that lies in Section 104 of the Constitution which provides and I quote –  

 “Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund or other public funds”   

Section 104 (3) specifically provides and I quote –  

 “No  money  shall  be  withdrawn  from  the  Consolidated  Fund  except  in  the 

manner prescribed.” 

 

43 

Which  then  takes  us  to  the  empowering  statute,  that  is,  Section  6  of  the Finance  and  Audit 

Act 1982 which provides and I quote –  

 “The  Minister  may,  by  warrant  under  his  hand,  authorise  the  issue  of  an 

advance from the Consolidated Fund.” 

And the law provides  five distinct situations.  In  the present case, the  relevant  section being 

Section 6 subsection 1(d) and I quote -  

 “to  or  on  behalf  of  any  other  person,  where  the  advance  is  required  in  the 

public interest” 

So, Madam Speaker, Rs1.6 billion was invested in MauBank Holdings Ltd. by way of other 

advances  from  Consolidated  Fund  under  Section  6(1)(d)  of  the  Finance  and  Audit  Act  by 

warrant  under  the  hand  of  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  who 

decided that this advance of Rs1.6 billion was required in the public interest.  

Now,  this  is  a  decision  which  had  been  taken  and  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development  has  explained  to  this  House  in  no  uncertain  terms  as  to  why  those 

two  failing  banks  had  to  be  brought  together  to  create  MauBank  and  basically,  the  most 

important rationale was in terms of saving jobs because the new Government which has come 

into power could not afford a situation where two banks would have failed and people would 

have lost their jobs.  The economy would not have been able to absorb that at that moment in 

time and a responsible Government had to do something about it. Now, the then Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development chose to go down one route. Be that as it may, we are 

now in a situation where we have to move forward with that. 

Now, was the then hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development right to issue 

that  warrant  under  his  hand  under  Section  6  of  the  Finance  and  Audit  Act  because  in  the 

public  interest  those  funds  had  to  be  injected  in  MauBank?  It  takes  me  then  to  what  the 

Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  had  to  say  about  why  Bramer  Bank’s  licence  had  to  be 

withdrawn and he publicly stated in an interview to ‘l’Express’ – 

 “A study of the monthly balance sheets of the defunct Bramer Bank reveals that 

it did occasionally suffer from serious liquidity problems before 2015.” 

And goes on to ask –  

 “Did  Government  –  previous  Government  -  try  to  bail  out  the  Bramer  Bank 

from time to time in the past by other means (…)” 

 

44 

What  were  those  other  means?  By  placing  additional  public  sector  deposits  into  that  bank. 

This  is  what  was  happening,  Madam  Speaker.    What  was  happening  was,  instead  of 

Government  coming  and  addressing  a  situation  where  Bramer  Bank  had  already  failed  and 

had  huge  liquidity  problems,  they  were  getting  Governmental  institutions  to  go  and  place 

huge deposits  into Bramer  Bank to  bail it out.   That  is  what  the  Labour Party  was doing  at 

that  time.    This  is  what  we  inherited  and  this  is  why  we  come  to  the  public  interest  issue 

which  gives  rise  to  the  warrant  issued  to  take  Rs1.6  billion  and  put  it  into  MauBank.  The 

Governor of the Central Bank went on to ask – 

 “Why did defunct Bramer Bank borrow so much from the BoM (…)” 

Because Bramer Bank had borrowed from the Central Bank also. 

 (…) that it no longer had any eligible collateral left for further borrowings?” 

Had  borrowed  so  much  from  the  Central  Bank,  that  they  could  not  borrow  any  more, 

interbank lending! No other banks would have lent to them.  That was the situation.  That was 

the reality; I heard hon. Shakeel Mohamed before.  Maybe the hon. Member does not have all 

the facts, but this is the situation when we came in in December 2014; people wanted change 

and we looked at the situation.  This is what it was and the Central bank had to act.  This is 

the truth.  Now, he goes on to say and this is very important Madam Speaker – 

 “Why  did  the  BoM  lend  US  dollar  to  defunct  Bramer  Bank  against  rupee 

collateral?” 

Now, can you imagine, the Central Bank of a country lending in US dollar to a commercial 

bank against collateral security in rupee?  This happened under the previous regime.  This is 

what led to the situation.  And when we look at what is being appropriated today, we have to 

understand the context and we have to understand where things were.  It is just good to come 

and state things which are not accurate like hon. Shakeel Mohamed has been doing, but there 

is only one truth.   

Now,  these  are  questions  suggesting  that  defunct  Bramer  Bank  badly  needed  a 

balance sheet repair.  That is what it needed; a balance sheet repair since long before 2015. 

And where is this balance sheet repair being conducted today?  It is in MauBank and this is 

why  we  are  here.  We  are  repairing  the  balance  sheet  of  two  banks  which  have  failed  and 

which  have  been  aggregated  into  one  and  now  we  have  to  go  and  make  that  work;  not  by 

choice, but by obligation because there are people working in those banks.  There are people 

 

45 

who have deposits in those banks.  What would have been the alternative anyway?  I ask the 

question now.   

What should we have done? Let those banks fail!  Let people go on the road and then 

what!    Deal  with  a  social  crisis!  And,  of  course,  not  to  forget  that  Bramer  Bank  was  at  the 

epicentre of this whole BAI scam!  My friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed does not like it when 

we  say  ‘criminals’,  but  these  are  not  criminals.    These  are  people  who  should  have  been 

hanged for what they did to this country. 

Madam Speaker:  No. Hon. Bhadain, please withdraw these words.  It is indecorous 

of this House to use this sort of language! Please, withdraw! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain:  Okay. 

Madam Speaker:  No, not okay! Please, withdraw! 

Mr Bhadain:  I withdraw the word ‘hanged’ and replace it by ‘flushed’. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    No,  hon.  Bhadain.    You  have  to  use  a  language  which  is  not 

against the decorum of this House.  Please, if you withdraw, you withdraw it unconditionally. 

Mr Bhadain:  I do, Madam Speaker.  But  I would stress  that people in  this country 

must  realise  what  the  situation  was;  how  it  has  been  created;  by  whom  it  has  been  created; 

what were going to be the consequences if actions were not taken and it is all easy to come 

and  say:  “this  should  not  have  been  done  or  that  should  have  been  done  in  a  different 

manner”. But, at the material time, when tough decisions had to be taken, those decisions had 

to be taken and today we are moving forward.  We are leaving a crisis behind.  This is what 

this  Government  has  done.    I  go  back  to  the  Central  Bank  because  this  is  very  important, 

Madam  Speaker  and  it  explains  everything  which  has  been  discussed  in  this  House  today. 

The Governor of the Central Bank stated – 

 “After  all,  at  the  time  of  the  revocation  of  the  banking  license  public  sector 

bodies had deposits amounting to over Rs2.0 billion”  

That  was  in  Bramer  Bank  which  was  still  there.  I  know  that  for  a  fact,  because  SICOM, 

which  holds  under  my  portfolio  as  a  Minister,  had  Rs800  m.  in  Bramer  Bank  at  the  time 

when  it  was  revoked.  All  this  nonsense  which  has  been  spoken  about  in  terms  of  the 

 

46 

Government  creating  this  whole  problem,  it  is  complete  nonsense.  Rs2  billion  was  there. 

SICOM  had  Rs800  m.  in  there.  And  he  goes  on  to  say:  defunct  Bramer  Bank  should  have 

resolved the deposit  concentration problem rather than relying on it for its survival  because 

that’s  what  a  responsible  bank  does.  You  can’t  have  all  your  eggs  in  one  basket.  All  the 

public sector investment into Bramer Bank amounted to about 33%. 

When  you  get  money  so  easily  -  when  Mr  Rawat  has  a  problem,  he  goes  to  Mr 

Ramgoolam,  then  you  have  investment  into  Bramer  Bank  and  33%  is  public  sector  money 

which is going into that. The lending, on the other side, when  you are taking that money to 

lend, that is also being done in an irresponsible manner. This is the situation which brings the 

bank into that precarious situation. It is because you are getting money easily. Whenever you 

have a liquidity problem, you go to your friend and you get money into your bank, and then, 

when  the  money  comes  in,  you  take  it,  you  give  it  to  your  friends  again.  What  is  going  to 

happen? This is what happened. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! Your comments are unwarranted! 

Mr Bhadain: I will give one example, Madam Speaker, which has never happened in 

a Mauritian context and I hope will never happen again, because it caused so much pain and 

suffering to so many people. The Governor of the Central Bank says – 

“Without  being  uselessly  argumentative,  commentators  should  ask  the  honest 

question  as  to  why,  for  instance,  did  the  BoM  –  Mr  Bheenick  there  at  that  time  – 

approve the purchase of Rs1.7 billion hire purchase debts of Courts?” 

Why does a Commercial Bank, Bramer Bank purchased Rs1.7 billion from Courts which is a 

related party and the Governor of the Central  Bank, Mr Bheenick, allowing that to happen? 

This  is  what  brought  the  bank’s  downfall.  Because,  today,  that  Rs1.7  billion  sitting  on  that 

balance  sheet  has  to  be  sorted  out.  When  the  Special  Administrators  and  the  Receiver-

Managers are working, where are they going to get back Rs1.7 billion from now? It is sitting 

as an asset on the balance sheet. Government has to come in and do something about it. There 

is no other option. We have to understand reality and then understand why things are being 

done, in what way they are being done and then you can criticise as much as you want. But 

criticise on facts, criticise on things which are real, don’t just invent things. 

For instance, my hon. friend, Shakeel Mohamed, mentioned public sector debt. I just 

asked the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to provide some figures on public 

 

47 

sector  debt.  When  I  look  at  2012,  it  was  based  on  international  definitions:  57.9%;  2013: 

60%; 2014: 61.6%. But, it is true that national debt has increased under the Labour Party. He 

also  says  that  there  were  Ministers  of  Finance  from  other  parties.  But,  they  have  been  in 

power for nine years. For six years, Mr Sithanen and Mr Ramgoolam have been Ministers of 

Finance out of nine and he is coming and saying that putting his problems onto other people’s 

head now. 

Now, he mentioned Mr Gooljaury. Hon. Uteem mentioned that Rs30 m. has been put 

by MauBank into that. I just got some figures. In 2007, the exposure of Mr Gooljaury and his 

companies  towards  the  then  MPCB,  Rs140  m.;  2010:  Rs242  m.;  2012:  Rs420  m.;  2014: 

Rs515 m. And now, you are saying that there is Rs500 m. of debt in MPCB! Mr Goooljaury! 

But who did that? 

(Interruptions) 

Who did that? The figures speak for themselves. Now, the other thing I would like… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, these are real figures I am talking about. If there is a 

forensic  investigation  which  is  conducted  as  to  where  this  money  has  gone,  you  would  go 

back to the coffers of Mr Ramgoolam in Riverwalk and you would go all the way to Italy to 

Mrs Soornack. 

That’s the truth! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  going  back  to  the  national  debt  figures,  my  friend, 

hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  explained  that  there  were  numerous  factors  as  to  why  debt  had 

increased.  And  then,  he  said  that  we  don’t  talk  about  oil  prices,  commodity  prices  and  so 

many  things  which  happened  at  international  level  and  blamed  everything  in  international 

context.  That’s  what  they  used  to  do.  But,  the  truth  is  what?  Hon.  Rutnah  has  said  it,  the 

Terre Rouge-Verdun project. Didn’t that increase national debt? I have got the  figures here. 

 

48 

Now, for the Terre Rouge-Verdun project, the contract value was Rs2.1 billion, it went up to 

Rs4 billion. Did that not increase national debt? The airport: Rs8 billion went all the way up 

to Rs13 billion. Did that not increase national debt? If we look at Bagatelle Dam: Rs6 billion. 

All these things, where are they today? 

Now this is… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr Bhadain: This is the absolute truth! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions! 

Mr Bhadain: When we look at the Ring Road… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please don’t interrupt the hon. Minister! 

Mr Bhadain: The Ring Road Project: Rs1.6 billion. We add up all those figures: Ring 

Road, Terre Rouge-Verdun… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Hon. Jhugroo, Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain:  All  these projects,  Madam  Speaker, were  capital  projects.  Money  had 

been  spent,  the  national  debt  has  gone  up  and  they  were  not  revenue  generating  projects. 

They have not contributed to any increase in gross domestic product. The GDP debt ratio has 

suffered because of - he used the words ‘fiscal irresponsibility’ - total mismanagement. Total 

mismanagement by a Government which did not know what it was doing, why it was doing 

it, how much to spend and then, at the end of the day,  left a huge debt situation for the new 

Government to sort out when they came in. This is why national debt went up. 

I  may  not  agree  on  many  issues  with  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development, but there are certain facts where he did not go wrong also and we have got to 

 

49 

accept that. He had decisions to make and those decisions were made.  I want to rectify one 

thing though. It was said earlier that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had given instructions with 

relation to the revocation of the licence of Bramer Bank. This is certainly not true! Certainly 

not true! The decision was taken by the Central Bank, the Board of Governors of the Central 

Bank. 

That’s the absolute truth! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

No crosstalking! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  when  we  look  at  the  situation  of  MauBank  today,  it 

has returned to a profitable situation. Deposits are being received. The bank is working. Jobs 

have  been  safeguarded.  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  mentioned,  we  all  heard  him,  that  people 

have lost jobs. We have to stop misleading the population, misleading this House, because I 

have got the figures here. 

I have got the figures here! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I have got the fact of what I am saying. On a point of order, he should 

withdraw. He can’t say I have misled the House when I did not. And if he wants to do it, the 

Standing Order says that he must come with a specific motion; he does not do it like that. 

Mr Bhadain: I have got figures to… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down! Hon. Bhadain, did you say that the hon. Member 

misled the House. 

Did you say so? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  didn’t  finish  my  sentence.  I  said  he  misled  the 

population and the House… 

(Interruptions) 

 

Let me finish! 

50 

(Interruptions) 

Let me finish! And I was going to say why. Because when he stated… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, please… 

Mr Bhadain: Let me finish… 

Let me say why! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: ……please sit down. When I am on my feet, you sit down! 

Hon. Bhadain… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhadain, I asked you whether you said that hon. Shakeel Mohamed misled the House. 

Did you say so? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  had  not  finished  my  sentence.  I  started  by  saying 

that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: So, what did you say? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: And I said… 

Madam Speaker: So, what did you say? 

Mr Bhadain: And I said so because I will say why and if I am allowed to say why. 

 

51 

Madam Speaker: I have asked you whether you said that he misled the House? Did 

you say so? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I did, Madam Speaker. Yes. 

Madam Speaker: If you said so, then withdraw it! 

Mr Bhadain: I will… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I will rephrase by saying, did hon. Shakeel Mohamed mislead the House by saying… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  did  you  say  he  misled  the  House?  If  you  said  he  misled  the 

House, you have to withdraw it. 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I did. 

Madam Speaker: But, just withdraw it! 

Hon. Rutnah! What is it? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

When I am on my feet you have to be silent! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhadain, please! There is nothing dishonourable in saying that you are withdrawing if 

you truly  said  that he misled the House. Just  withdraw this sentence and  you may continue 

with your debate. 

Mr Bhadain: I withdraw that sentence… 

Madam Speaker: Calmly! 

 

52 

Mr  Bhadain:  And  I  will  state  that  what  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  has  stated  to  this 

House is wrong because the figures… 

They don’t want me to say why! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, but hon. Bhadain, if you said it before, you have to withdraw 

it, then you continue! 

(Interruptions) 

You have to withdraw. If you said he misled the House, then you have to withdraw it! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: I have already said that, Madam Speaker, I have already said that I am 

withdrawing. 

Madam Speaker: No, I did not hear! 

I did not hear! 

Hon. Bhadain, you talk to me! 

Hon. Bhadain! 

Hon. Bhadain, I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And when I am on my feet you have to be silent! 

(Interruptions) 

 

53 

I  have  told  you  that  if  you  said,  you  withdraw  it  first  and  then  you  continue.  You  don’t 

engage in conversation with the Opposition! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  said  I  withdraw  the  sentence  that  hon.  Shakeel 

Mohamed  misled  the  House,  but  I  am  saying  again  that  the  figures  -  what  he  stated  to  the 

House - are incorrect! 

(Interruptions) 

And I am saying why they are incorrect! If I may be allowed to say why. 

Madam Speaker: That is better! That is better! 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. So, he stated that people had lost their jobs in MauBank. So many 

people have lost their jobs in MauBank. Now, I can tell the House, Madam Speaker, that as at 

September 2015 taking both MPCB and the National Commercial Bank together the number 

of employees… 

2015… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, don’t interrupt him!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: I am coming to that! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  you  had  the  opportunity  of  intervening, 

now don’t interrupt him! Allow him to proceed with his speech! 

You don’t have to help him! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

54 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is still in that mood 

with the Labour Party! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, allow the debates to go on calmly, dispassionately! 

Please proceed! 

Order! 

Order, please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! Allow him to proceed calmly with his speech… 

Allow…  

Okay, that is a good sign!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

That is a good sign, okay. Please, proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, … 

(Interruptions) 

 

… this is a clear case of wishful thinking, Madam Speaker. 

55 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, going back to the figures… 

(Interruptions) 

…let  me  finish  now.  Madam  Speaker,  going  back  to  the  figures,  MPCB  and  NCB  together 

had  700  employees  in  September  2015.  In  December  2015  they  had  685  employees  and  in 

May  2016 they had 662  employees. The reason,  as to  why 38 persons have left,  is  because 

they  have  moved  on  to  better  jobs  and  most  of  these  people  were  in  the  sales  department 

because in a bank you have good salesmen whom other banks try to recruit and people who 

are in the IT department. There has been no layoff of employees! And, what this Government 

set  out  to  do  has  been  achieved;  those  jobs  have  been  saved  and  this  is  why  Government 

decided to  go ahead with  the course of  action that it did,  same thing for  BAI, 4,200 people 

employed in the BAI Group, 3,900 people still working today. Now, these are facts, Madam 

Speaker.  Despite  everything  you  would  hear  saying  the  contrary  it  is  simply  not  the  truth. 

Simply not the truth! 

Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

… when we go back to what hon. Reza Uteem has been saying in relation to the SME sector, 

I agree with him. I definitely agree with him that much more should have been done for the 

SME  sector  and  this  Government  will  rectify  that.  The  new  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development in the coming Budget, I am sure, will have special attention for the 

SME  sector  and  we  are  going  to  catch  up  on  the  time  which  has  been  lost  with  the  SME 

sector. 

With regard to the funds which have been invested in MauBank, Rs1.6 billion is being 

appropriated today, a further Rs1.4 billion would be appropriated in the next Supplementary 

Appropriation  Bill  which  is  going  to  be  brought  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development. But, then, Madam Speaker, I think Government also will have to be 

very careful in terms of what happens next. Because if MauBank is a profitable organisation 

and it is generating the required level of profit, such as the appropriate capital adequacy level, 

it is fine you can carry on, but if not, then a decision will have to be taken as to whether to 

 

56 

open  up  the  share  capital  of  MauBank  so  that  Government  can  get  investors  to  come  and 

invest so that Government can recoup such sum of money which has been invested. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(3.16 p.m.) 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  going  to 

speak on the Budget deficit and on the public debt as both will be impacted by the sums that 

we are asked upon to approve in this Supplementary Budget.  

I  understand  -  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  give  absolute  figures,  I  did  not 

hear  him  give  figures  as  per  a  percentage  of  GDP,  but  maybe  he  will  do  that  later  on.  It  is 

good that he confirms that as far as I am concerned, from the information I have, is that the 

Budget  deficit  is  under  control  and  even  after  the  sums  that  we  are  called  upon  to  approve 

today, we will stay  at  about  3.5% of GDP. 3.5% of GDP,  from  what  I understand  again,  is 

what has been agreed as guidelines with the International Monetary Fund and it is not bad in 

terms of Budget deficit.  

My  point  is  exactly  what  I  said  a  year  ago  when  last  year’s  Budget  was  approved. 

Today,  I  say  that  even  more  forcefully,  that  is,  that  the  Budget  deficit  is  under  control  at 

around 3.5%, but at the expense of Government capital expenditure. The Government capital 

expenditure  in  the  last  Budget  and  since  then,  even  more,  has  been  cut  down  drastically  to 

allow the Budget  deficit to  stay  at  around 3.5%. And, what  has been the result? Everything 

has a price in life. What has been the result?  

This  cutting  down  of  public  investment  from  Government  side  is,  according  to  me, 

the main reason why GDP growth is stuck at below 4%.  There is a new Minister of Finance.  

It is not easy to get out of that trap.  It is not easy at all.  Let us look la vérité en face.  The 

Budget  deficit  is  under  control  even  with  the  additional  expenditure  that  we  will  approve 

today,  according to  my information  - not  around  3.5%  -, but  at  the expense of Government 

capital  projects.    I  am  not  talking  about  the  parastatals  and  so  on.    That  will  be  on  another 

occasion  when  we  will  discuss  at  Budget  time.  But,  right  now,  the  Budget  deficit  is  being 

kept  under  control  because  the  capital  expenditure  by  Government  has  been  curtailed 

 

57 

drastically. That is the main reason - according to me and every good economist that thinks 

about it - we are stuck under 4% GDP growth every year.  That is on the Budget deficit. 

Now  I move to  the public debt.   Because if  I  am  cool  about  the public deficit,  I am 

certainly not cool at all and again the new Minister of Finance should look very carefully at 

figures.    We  are  already  in  trouble  and,  if  we  are  not  careful,  we  will  be  in  very  serious 

trouble  as  far  as  the  public  debt  is  concerned,  especially  the  sums  that  we  are  being  asked 

upon to approve in the case of MauBank, Madam Speaker. 

I  am  not  interested  to  spend  the  whole  of  this  mandate  arguing  that  the  previous 

Government  did  that wrong, the present  one has added to  the wrongdoing and so on.   I  am 

interested to look at what has happened.  What is admitted by the IMF, by the World Bank, 

by everybody, the accepted level of public debt is 60%.  When we go above 60%, alarm bells 

start  ringing.    That  is  the  accepted  barème.    We  went  over  the  60%  figure  in  2014,  that  is, 

before  the  general  elections,  our  public  debt  had  already  gone  over  60%.    I  am  using  the 

accepted international  definition.   I do not  think  anybody takes very seriously the ‘Made in 

Mauritius’ definition of our public debt  for the purposes of a law that was voted.  That is a 

waste of time.  Let us use the accepted international definition.  If I am not mistaken, Minister 

Lutchmeenaraidoo  used  this ‘Made in  Mauritius’ definition whereas the  present  Minister of 

Finance has used the internationally accepted IMF definition.  

The targets in the  case of public debt have completely missed and with  what we are 

going to approve today, we are moving more and more into trouble. Need I remind the House 

that when the last Budget was proposed at the beginning of last year - a year ago - we had just 

gone over the 60% of GDP threshold.  So, in the Budget, the target was to bring public debt 

down to 58.6%.  The figures have been circulated a week ago by the then of Finance, the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister, and instead of going down to 58.6%, in June 2016, we have gone right 

up to 65%.  These are official figures circulated by the then Minister of Finance.  So, we have 

missed the target completely in terms of public debt, Madam Speaker. 

Today, we are going to increase further the public debt through the additional billions 

that we are being asked to put into MauBank.  I have to go back.  I am tired. I suppose he has 

disappeared  for  good  reason.  I  am  fed  up  hearing  things  that  are  not  true,  one  way  or  the 

other.  What is the impression that is being given by hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo today and even 

more by hon. Bhadain?  That it was all planned, that before the Bramer Bank banking licence 

was  revoked,  everything  was  planned  and  so  on;  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  under  the  new 

 

58 

Governor, was doing its job and had to act.  Let us look at the truth.  On 02 April, last year, 

when the banking licence of Bramer Bank was revoked, the House was sitting.  I had a diner 

and so  I left.  So,  I was  at  a friend’s place  and hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  -  probably  he has a 

better memory than me - phoned me around 8.00 p.m. or 9.00 p.m. I did not ask him to phone 

me.  I just listened.  I did not say a word.  He phoned me and told me that he had been asked 

by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to keep me informed, as Leader of the Opposition, ‘ki nou pe 

revoke’ the banking licence of Bramer Bank. 

Keep cool! 

(Interruptions) 

I  remember  the  exact  words,  and  I  find  that  unacceptable.    By  that  time,  we  had 

reached 10.00 p.m., and all these gentlemen on the present Board were standing by there to 

revoke.  That is the truth.  That is the simple truth.  It is not blah-blah-ing! He told me that the 

State Bank of Mauritius is going to take over and there is no problem. Now, we want to give 

the  impression  that  it  was  all  planned.    That  is  bloody  rubbish!    I  know  that  it  is 

unparliamentary.  Rubbish!  That is the truth.  Ça a été all the way la fuite en avant !  The Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister  remembers  la  montée  ‘s’  before  Ferodo  brakes  -  never  start  something 

that you cannot stop! As a child, whenever I used to take the bus, I would look at the Ferodo 

brakes - never start something that you cannot stop. This is the way how it started. 

Then, there was improvisation as they went along.  There was what we call in French 

une fuite en avant.  SICOM was going to take the pension side! It was not going to be superb.  

State Bank takes on the banking side!   They behaved - both Ministers Lutchmeenaraidoo and 

Bhadain,  and  it  is  very  dangerous  -  as  if  those  public  companies  or  corporations  are  their 

property.    They  had  decided  that  State  Bank  was  going  to  take  over  Bramer  Bank  and  that 

SICOM was going to take over the pension side.  It is madness!  But it is a frame of mind; a 

very dangerous frame of mind.  That is how it all started. 

It is a sad in a way, because the present Minister of Finance has inherited a mess that 

is not of his doing.  But we have a problem with MauBank, with the public debt; the way we 

are going! 

Talking about the MauBank, I have not brought the copy of the Budget Speech.  You 

cannot  keep  on  fooling  people  like  that.    But  the  very  words  used  by  the  then  Minister  of 

Finance are stuck in my mind.  I will try to quote exactly.  He said, “We are going to have an 

 

59 

SME  Bank  for  SMEs  which  will  be  a  one-stop  shop,  that  is,  processing  requests,  giving 

money in one go.” 

Then,  it  was  done  away  with.  The  Bramer  Bank  passed  on  to  the  National 

Commercial  Bank  and  that  being  a  mess,  was  joined  with  another  mess,  the  Post  Office 

Cooperative  Bank.  C’est  la  fuite  en  avant!  There  is  no  other  word!  Finally,  all  this  was 

merged  in  a  new  bank,  MauBank,  because  one  after  the  other  was  failing.  We  are  going  to 

keep on pouring billions like that! We poured billions in the National Commercial Bank and 

then  in  MauBank  -  we  have  the  figures  in  front  of  us.  Today,  we  are  being  asked  to  pour 

billions again. What we have is not even a one-stop shop. If I had the Budget Speech, I would 

quote word for word. It was going to be a one-stop shop, the SME bank. As I said, processing 

of requests and once the requests are approved, the same institution gives the money, under 

guarantee, but even then, without personal guarantee. Again, it was a dream in paradise!  

Now, these poor SME people will go to MyBiz and follow all the procedures. When 

they  finish  with  the  procedures  at  MyBiz,  then  they  go  to  MauBank  and  they  start  all  over 

again.  Then,  they  have  to  convince.  No!  That  is  why  it  is  not  surprising,  but  from  what  I 

understand, not  a rupee  has been disbursed to  date. Approved  yes, scheduled  yes, but  not  a 

rupee has been disbursed to date and it is shameful; it is not even a one-stop mini shop. You 

do half of the work with MyBiz, then you go to the MauBank and try to get the money from 

them.    I  can  understand  why  the  Minister  responsible  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  is 

not happy, Madam Speaker.  

 (Interruptions) 

It’s the truth! I listened to him. He knows the problems of the Small and Medium Enterprises. 

In many countries, the malheur of Governments and of Parties that either are populist or want 

to be popular with everybody, including France these days, is that we promise everything, we 

do everything and we don’t stop to look at the real economy, how it works when you land up 

in trouble; but, at least,  he spoke the correct words to insist on the problems that the SMEs 

are meeting with and that we must not increase their problems, Madam Speaker.  

I  am  very  worried  also.  We  want  to  project  the  image  of  a  country  where  you  do 

genuine business,  un état de droit and so on. But can’t we stop and realise how unhealthy it 

is the way the present Minister Bhadain - I plead with the new Minister of Finance: Don’t go 

that way. But the previous Minister of Finance had the same attitude, pumping MauBank and 

 

60 

pumping  the  National  Insurance  Company  with  our  money,  with  public  money.  Is  that  fair 

competition? Is that a modern economy functioning in that way?  

It’s  awfully  unfair  competition  and  in  a  way  it’s  sadistic.  You  use  public  money  to 

build  up  MauBank  and  NIC  and  then  you  pressurise  SICOM  to  buy  into  NIC,  their  direct 

competitor! A normal business! We are doing ourselves a lot of harm. It is unhealthy, it is not 

a normal economic modern situation and it should stop. Now, we are dans la galère. I am not 

saying  that  we  just  drop  -  rame  et  la  galère  coule.  No!  But  we  can’t  go  on  like  that, 

pretending that we are a modern economy, un état de droit, fair competition and then we use 

public money to build up two entities. Especially hon. Minister Bhadain, he has worked out 

figures,  he  has  been  trying  to  get  foreign  firms  to  buy  shares  in  the  National  Insurance 

Companies.  Zéro! And he plans to leave the BAI saga behind us; he plans to sell in the future 

shares  in  MauBank.  For  the  moment,  we  are  pouring  money  into  that,  but  he  plans  to  sell 

shares in MauBank to repay the BAI people. Very, very unhealthy! I hope, once Budget Time 

is  over,  the  new  Minister  of  Finance  will  think  about  what  we  are  doing,  the  way  we  are 

going  and  how  bad  it  is.  The  way  this  whole  BAI  issue  saga  was  handled  is  very  bad  for 

investment mood, for foreign investors’ confidence and so on. But we are moving from bad 

to worse. Therefore, I hope that he does find time to look at that very, very seriously. I would 

like, on that issue, to ask the new Minister of Finance to give us the total figure, since the last 

elections, of how many billions have been poured into the National Commercial Bank, then 

MauBank, and including Mauritius Post Office and Cooperative Bank.  I think la population 

a droit à la vérité, the billions that have been invested, public funds that have been invested 

in this Bramer Bank post BAI mess, Madam Speaker. 

In  a  few  minutes  I  will  come  to  the  future  of  our  public  debt  and  I  am  very,  very 

worried, Madam Speaker.  

(Interruptions) 

But it is very unhealthy.  I have heard and I agree fully; I have heard with strong criticism the 

way  Governor  Bheenick  used  to  run  the  Central  Bank.  The  way  political  consideration 

entered such issues. Rightly so! But we should all agree that it is not the role of the Central 

Bank to lend again public money, deposits and so on.  Rs3.5 billion have gone into the public 

debt!  When  is  this  going  to  be  repaid?  It  was  supposed  to  have  been  for  a  given  period  of 

time,  already  behind  us.    Now,  we  are  not  told  when  and  it  is  not  the  normal  role  of  the 

 

61 

Central Bank to lend that kind of money for that purpose. So, we are entitled to know when 

those Rs3.5 billion will be repaid.  

I  am  going  to  put  another  question  to  the  new  Minister  of  Finance.  Am  I  right  in 

saying  that  billions  of  rupees  from  those  special  funds  that,  at  least,  the  former  Minister  of 

Finance,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  said  will  close  all  these  –  we  use  to  call  them  Sithanen 

special funds - except the Build Mauritius Fund, the Lottery Fund. Lottery in the sense that 

prices of petroleum products crash, but instead of bringing them, as they should have been in 

Mauritius,  down  reasonably,  they  were  kept  where  they  were  and  billions  taken  out  of  the 

pockets  of  consumers.    I  am  asking  the  new  Minister  of  Finance:  Am  I  right  in  saying  that 

billions  have  been  taken  out  of  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  to  keep  the  public  debt  under 

control? Encore une fois, la population a droit à la vérité. I will ask another question to the 

new Minister of Finance, which hon. Minister Bhadain did not reply to.  

This year, billions of debentures are supposed to be issued to the clients of Super Cash 

Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management.  Billions!  And I asked: ‘will this go into raising 

our public debt by so much?’ No answer! I think we have the right to be told the truth. If we 

have found a way that it will not go - although Government guarantee is there - I think it will 

go into the public debt.  And will it go in  one  go? Because it is  supposed to  be spread over 

five years, but will the debentures be out now and then, repaid over five years? I am saying 

all  that  because,  today,  we  are  approving  billions  that  will  add  to  our  public  debt,  Madam 

Speaker,  and  I  must  say,  I  asked  that  question  on  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  when  billions 

were taken out of the pockets of consumers, it was with the purpose mainly of replacement of 

very  old  water  pipes.  Give  us  the  figures  over  the  last  year,  give  us  the  figures  how  much 

money has really gone into replacement of used pipes!  And instead of that, my information, 

as I said, is that billions have gone into repayment of public debt because we are increasing 

the  public  debt  on  this  side  with  the  MauBank  sum  that  is  being  approved  now,  Madam 

Speaker. So, I am very worried about that.   

The budget deficit is under control so far. I am  not that worried, but the truth is that 

the  budget  deficit  is  being  kept  under  control  at  the  expense  of  capital  expenditure  on 

Government side and this is impacting directly on the rate of GDP  growth which is staying 

below 4%, but  on the increasing public debt and what  we  can foresee on the horizon,  I  am 

very worried.  

 

62 

And  that  brings  me  -  and  I  will  end  on  that  note  -  to  Moody’s  and  our  public  debt. 

Moody’s  will  have  certainly  paid  very  close  attention  to  the  figures  circulated  last  week  or 

the  week  before  by  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime  Minister,  on  how  much  the  public  sector  debt,  calculé  à  la  FMI,  calculé  by 

international  norms  has,  therefore,  reached  65%.  That  brings  me  to  the  latest  document 

produced by Moody’s. As we know, we have a very good rating Baa1 by Moody’s. I am very 

concerned - and they are very concerned, Moody’s - of the continuing deteriorating situation 

of public debt.  In May, that is this month, Moody’s came out with a paper called “Mauritius 

Tax  Treaty  Amendments  with  India  are  credit  negative”.  Again,  what  is  the  use  of  fooling 

ourselves, of not looking at the truth? Let me quote what Moody’s has said in that note of 16 

May 2016 under the title “Mauritius Tax Treaty Amendments with India are credit negative”, 

that  is,  the  Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreement  that  we  have  finalised  with  India,  and  I 

quote Moody’s - 

“The taxation agreement  is  credit  negative  for  Mauritius  because  its  financial  centre 

will be a less attractive platform for investing in India than it used to be."  

“We - that is Moody’s - estimate that a curtailment of new investment flows through 

Mauritius would cause a deterioration in the balance of payments equal to 1 percent-2 

percent  of GDP annually,  and  consequently  put  pressure  on  Mauritian  foreign 

exchange reserves.”  

And they add, 

“However, a sharper shift in investor sentiment would have more dire consequences."  

I don’t want to be a prophète de malheur, but the situation is serious, the public debt 

has reached 65%, we will have the occasion when budget time comes to come back on that in 

a larger picture, but for today what I wish whilst we are asked to vote billions for MauBank 

again, it is my duty to express my grave concern, even more than Moody’s, at the continuing 

public  debt  deterioration  and  I  would  advise  the  new  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development to look at all this very objectively, it is not his doing, but look at all this very 

objectively at the time when you are preparing your first Budget after many years. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jugnauth! 

(3.44 p.m.) 

 

63 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  First  of  all,  let  me  thank  all  hon. 

Members who have taken the floor to intervene on this Bill. A lot has been said even though I 

have, initially in my speech, tried to limit myself to the Bill itself and I do not propose to go 

outside the scope of this Bill. Otherwise, from both sides, I must say, there have been a lot of 

comments that will surely be taken up during Budget time when the Budget is soon going to 

be presented, otherwise we will never finish. It is going to be a debate on the economy.  

Let  me  respond  to  a  few  things  which  have  been  mentioned,  first,  by  hon.  Uteem 

where  he  has  mentioned  that  ‘this  is  being  done  outside  the  Budget  et  c’est  comme  un  fait 

accompli  qu’on  met  devant  la  Chambre’.  I  think  this  has  been  replied  by  hon.  Bhadain 

extensively where the law, the Constitution of Mauritius, the Finance and Audit Act already 

provides  for  Supplementary  Appropriation  and  it  has  been  like  that  for  years  and  years.  I 

mean, we cannot  prepare a Budget,  we cannot  provide exactly the amount  of money that  is 

going to be spent not only for the items that have been mentioned in the Budget, but also on 

many occasions through different Governments, there are unpredicted, unexpected situations 

which justify that Government deals with that situation and on many occasions, consequently, 

has to spend public funds in order to remedy or try to remedy, whether we succeed or not is 

another  matter,  but  we  have  to  face  the  situation,  and  this  has  been  happening,  as  I  say, 

through this Government when my colleague, the former Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development, myself now, the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development also, 

hon.  Paul  Bérenger,  who  has  been  presenting  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bills  and, 

therefore,  there  is  nothing  new  to  it.  But  I  grant  the  fact  that  the  sums  that  are  being 

appropriated are subject to debate, are subject to each and everybody’s opinion.  

The second issue which was raised was the impact on public debt. Now, I don’t want 

to go into a debate, and, as I said, in the Budget, we are going to look at all this seriously, of 

course.  Because,  they  are  very  important  economic  indicators  and  we  should  see  to  it  that 

whatever we do, we do not jeopardise the future of this country. But whatever we do also, at 

the same time, we should see to it that we are able to prepare the country for the future.  

I  have  already  stated  in  my  speech  that  the  Rs4.1  billion that  we  are  being  asked  to 

appropriate today, at least, we are confident that it will be within the authorised limit that was 

voted in the Budget, that is, Rs92 billion because there has been underspending and there are 

going  to  be  savings  also;  underspending,  of  course,  with  regard  to  a  number  of  capital 

projects.    Of  course,  I  don’t  believe  that  any  Government  would  be  happy  when  there  is 

underspending  on  capital  projects  because  the  intention  of  Government  is  to  try  to  achieve 

 

64 

and to realise as much as we can in terms of capital projects so that these will serve us and 

will have a definite impact on growth in the future.  But again, this is not new!  I mean, I have 

tried  to  go  through  past  Budgets  and  looked  at  the  figures.  There  have  been  a  number  of 

occasions, different Governments, where the amount that has been voted for capital projects, 

unfortunately, at times may be it has been a huge sum, at other times maybe there has been a 

lesser sum, but still there have been underspending.   

So, therefore, if we are contained within the sum that this Parliament has voted, Rs92 

billion,  I  believe  that  therefore  it  will  not  have  a  different  or  a  major  impact  on  the  public 

debt.  But, on the percentage of public debt as to GDP, of course, we are concerned.  We have 

to see to it that it is being contained.  I seize this opportunity to reply to the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition who has said that there has been a decrease in capital expenditure.  Again, this is 

a  vicious  circle  where  we  are  today.  We  should  try  not  to  increase  public  debt  on  the  one 

hand.  On the other hand, through the vision of this Government, we want to invest further in 

infrastructure and so many other projects. Where will we get the money?  We have to borrow.  

Whether it is foreign borrowing or it is local borrowing, it is still going to account an impact 

on the percentage of the debt as to GDP. So, Government now is in a situation where we have 

to think very, very hard. There are a number of projects that we want to finance and we also 

want to see how much private investment we can have in order to prepare the country for the 

future.   

The issue that was raised again by hon. Uteem is the PRB; whether it includes salary 

of  Ministers  and  MPs  and  so  on.    Well,  I  must  say  that,  first  of  all,  PRB  is  with  regard  to 

salary of civil servants, public officers.  There is a Bill which eventually, if there is approval 

from  Government,  is  for  an  increase.  Again  increase  is  not  salary;  it  is  with  regard  to 

allowances because Ministers draw allowances.  I can’t recall  but it is something to do with 

allowances of Members of Parliament.   It is a bill that will have to be presented and that is 

totally different from PRB and, of course, Budget allocation will have to be made for that. 

With regard to SMEs, now again I think hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo has replied 

to that.  I agree with what has been said partly. First of all, the SME sector is a very difficult 

sector. I had been Minister of Finance and I am today also, it is a very, very difficult  sector 

because they need to get access to finance - one of the factors and very often it becomes an 

obstacle for them.  We have a duty and a responsibility also because we are managing public 

funds, we can’t just dish out money just for the sake of saying:  “Look, so many millions and 

billions have been given to  SMEs”. But  we need to  look  at the end result.  How many will 

succeed, will survive and will bring an addition to the wealth of this country?  

 

65 

Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, like another hon. Member also, has said that we would wish 

probably not only to have done more, but also, I would say, we would have succeeded more 

in terms of the SME sector. But then we have to put things in their right perspective also.  We 

should not give a, I would say, deformed picture when we speak, particularly with reference 

to MauBank.  Because what is the truth?  It is a fact that there has been a scheme which was 

put  in  place.    The  scheme  is  the  SME  Development  Certificate  Scheme  that  was  targeting 

new  projects  and  start  up  with  MyBiz.  It  has  not  given  so  far  the  desired  result,  but,  as  a 

matter of fact, I have been provided with figures. Out of total advances, total loans given by 

MauBank, the SME sector amounts to 27% of the total loans.  I see that entities with turnover 

between Rs50 m.to Rs100 m. amount to about 14% of advances.  So, we should not try to, at 

least, depict a picture where there has been as if one scheme and also because it has not given 

the expected result, therefore MauBank is not doing enough for the SME sector. We all want 

any  other  bank  or  financial  institution  to  be  able  to  do  much  more  than  that  not  only 

MauBank. 

There is something which I didn’t want to comment, but then I think I have to react to 

that because hon. Uteem said:  “Look at the case of Mr D. G. who has debts at MauBank and 

who is now the blue-eyed boy of this Government’.  I mean, as far as I am concerned, he is 

not  my  blue-eyed  boy  anyway,  but  I  think  hon.  Bhadain  has  replied,  I  mean,  he  has  given 

figures.   

I don’t want to give any figure because this is confidential information, whoever it is. 

I could well have given figures, for example, for the former Prime Minister also who had an 

account  in  Bramer,  but  I  don’t  want  to  go  into  that.  Whoever  it  is,  whenever  they  have  an 

account with the bank, it is private, confidential information, but we can, of course, comment. 

If there has been mismanagement, yes, we can say so. 

The level of loan does not date back from as if December 2014. We have just heard 

how  much  it  came  to  till  December  2014.  When  we  look  at  the  situation  that  we  have 

inherited with regard to  the MPCB  - we are talking about capital adequacy ratio  - I think it 

was  found  that  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  MPCB  was  not  only  zero  per  cent,  it  was 

negative. Can you imagine it was already falling foul of the regulations in the banking sector! 

Again, I don’t want to go on a debate with regard to what kind of mismanagement there was 

and the excessive level of non-performing loans, but I think this can be really summed up by 

the  report  that  was  conducted  by  Ernst  and  Young,  which  concluded  that  the  bank  was 

technically  insolvent,  both  in  terms  of  the  Banking  Act  and  the  Companies  Act  and  the 

 

66 

Shareholders Investment was, in fact, completely wiped out and equity was negative at Rs596 

m. 

For Bramer Bank, the problems that were faced  - again, I don’t want to repeat  what 

my colleague, hon. Bhadain, has said, but we should not forget one thing. We can have each 

one his opinion on the way that this was being managed, but the truth is, - and I hope that we 

all agree with that – and rightly so, it was raised. In fact, I can recall, for the first time in this 

very House, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, when he asked a PNQ and he commented to 

say  that  the  BAI  is  a  Ponzi  Scheme.  And,  we  know  how  this  has  been  tolerated  by  the 

previous Government. But, are we, as a new Government, just to as if – if I can say, mange 

pistache  guet  cinema  –  keep  a  watch  and  say:  “Look,  let  it  go  on!”  Let  it  grow  to  such  an 

extent  that  when  it  blows,  the  whole  economy  will  be  destabilised.  I  think  that  is  the  main 

issue. 

As I say, we can agree to disagree on the way how this crisis was being managed. The 

Opposition will have its way, we will have our way, but we could not, when, especially, the 

IMF  has  rung  the  alarm  bell.  As  I  say,  rightly  so,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  raised 

that  issue  in  Parliament.  But,  here  again,  we  are  in  a  situation  where  we  have  those  two 

banks,  the  MPCB  for  real  mismanagement  and  the  Bramer  Bank  with  all  this  interrelated 

parties connections.  

The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  just  said:  “Well,  shall  we  keep  on  pumping 

public funds!”  It has already been replied by other Members, by hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo and 

hon.  Bhadain,  with  regard  to  the  issue  of  employment,  the  number  of  customers  at  both 

banks.  If we had done nothing, we would have, I would say, condemned both institutions to 

close  down.  Apart  from  the  consequences  on  the  economy,  but  with  regard  to  employment 

and with regard to all those people who had their deposits at the banks, it would have been a 

total  failure,  total  loss,  and  then,  some  people  would  be  saying  that  this  Government  is 

irresponsible, has done nothing and was just lying idle and so on. 

There  has  been  criticism  as  to  whether  we  are  going  to  put  money.  What  is  the 

alternative if we don’t put  money  now?  I  agree that  we have to  see to  it  that money  that is 

being  put  is  not  money  that  is  being  just  pumped  in;  it  is  being  put  as  equity.  Of  course,  I 

would  wish  that  we  all  want  that  the  bank  succeeds,  as  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  has  said. 

Eventually, we are able. I believe it is not for Government to run a private bank. We will see 

 

67 

whether  the  private  sector  in  the  future  will  be  interested.  There  can  be  investment  in  that 

bank, but let us all work towards, at least, the success of MauBank. 

Hon. Mohamed, I am a bit surprised when he questioned, he said:  the Supplementary 

Appropriation Bill, the way we are doing, is it legal? But, again… 

(Interruptions) 

You said whether it is legal. It is legal. Okay! I agree, again, that if there are ways and means 

of  improving  the  system  so  that  there  is  more  accountability,  more  transparency  and  that 

more people are able to participate in a debate where we are using public funds, let us say we 

are open to that. 

Again,  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  want  to  go  into  number  of  issues,  important  issues, 

yes, which have been raised, but which are not directly related to the Bill. We will have time 

to  debate  and  discuss  lengthily  on  that,  but  let  me  respond  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition. He has asked how much money has been injected so far. Well, I have replied to 

that.  In fact,  when  I made my speech for Second Reading,  I chose to  give all the figures in 

transparency. I said that Government had so far injected a total equity investment of Rs3.053 

billion in NCB, MPCB and MauBank Holdings Ltd.  

I  have  given  the  details  also  that  in  NCB  in  April  2015  there  was  an  injection  of 

Rs200 m. In June 2015 there was an injection of Rs500 m. and in the former MPCB Ltd. in 

June 2015, Rs753 m. and then in MauBank - this is in fact the provision we are voting today - 

in October 2015, Rs300 m. and January 2016, Rs1.3 billion. 

A last remark, maybe, with regard again to the hon. Leader of the Opposition. He has 

mentioned about Moody’s, well we should all be at least satisfied that Moody’s have kept our 

rating at a stable level of Baa1. Of course, we take note of the remarks of Moody’s just like 

those institutions like the IMF and the World Bank and we should do whatever we can either 

to be able to keep that rating or, of course, try to improve on that.  

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  end  by  saying  that  this  exercise  again  is 

something  which  is  not  unusual  and  I  said  I  will  be  coming  because  there  is  also  a 

Supplementary  Appropriation  which  requires  the  approval  of  Parliament  with  regard  to 

expenditure  which  has  been  incurred  -  and  I  have  given  the  detail  -  from  January  to  June 

2015. 

Thank you.  

68 

 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

ESTIMATES OF SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE (2015-2016) OF 2016 

Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner was called. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Chairperson,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  if  we  could  have  a 

breakdown of the fees? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I can circulate because we have the - 

  Returning Officer - 30 officers paid Rs1,018,500;  

  Deputy Returning Officer – 11 officers paid Rs297,000;  

  Senior Presiding Officer – 110 officers paid Rs1,900,250;  

  Senior Presiding Officer – 195 officers paid Rs2,408,250;  

  Presiding Officer - 1476 officers paid Rs11,808,000; 

  Poll/Ballot  Box/  Directing  Clerk  –  3767  officers  and  the  amount  spent  is 

Rs13,665,375; 

  Caretaker/Labourer – 488 and the amount spent is Rs1,110,200; 

  Police  Officials,  all  grades  –  6183  officers  and  the  amount  spent  is 

Rs65,000,000, and 

  Officers working on Counting Day – I don’t have the number of officers, 

but  the  amount  that  has  been  spent  is  Rs2,878,075.  So,  making  a  total 

amount of Rs100,075,650. 

Vote  1-5  Office  of  the  Electoral  Commissioner  (Rs100  m.)  was  on  question  put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 22-1 Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions was 

called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

 

69 

Mr Baloomoody: The sum includes; with effect from 01 January 2016 and a higher 

number of beneficiaries – may we know the exact number of higher beneficiaries? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  May  I  answer?  So,  the  number  has  been  increased  from 

187,320 to 193,985, there are some 6,665 more beneficiaries. 

Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Rs1,000,000,000) was on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government (Rs1,400,000,000) was called 

and agreed to. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: But it is over! 

(Interruptions) 

It is over, I asked the question before and you did not… 

No! 

You should as a … 

No, let me explain! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let me explain! As a matter of procedure… 

One minute, as a matter of… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

It is Vote 27-1. Hon. Ameer Meea, it is vote 27-1. As a matter of procedure, I asked the first 

question and then you had ample time. I looked around, nobody stood up and that is why then 

I  put  the  question  and  I  had  already  put  the  question  as  to  whether  it  stands  part  of  the 

schedule. So, then it is over!  

 

70 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  take  a  point  of  order?  If  you  go  through  past  decisions  of 

Speakers, the rigidity that we can have on other occasions does not hold at Committee Stage. 

There  have  been  plenty  of  rulings  on  that  and  I  have,  with  my  experience,  often  a  point  is 

recommitted.  So,  we  are  not  insisting  in  that  case,  but  then,  I  don’t  think  we  should  be  as 

rigid if you go to the past rulings by Speakers. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, but then I wish to remind hon. 

Members that they cannot take all their time. I give them ample time. I looked around to see 

whether  anyone  had  any  question.  The  hon.  Member  did  not  stand  up.  I  have  given  ample 

time! 

(Interruptions) 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government was called. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Yes, now hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Yes, thank you. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he can table a 

list of the composition of the Board of MauBank? 

Mr Jugnauth: Yes, I can circulate later on. I don’t have the list with me. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No other question?  

(Interruptions) 

Vote  28-1  Centrally  Managed  Initiatives  of  Government  (Rs1,600,000,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. VII OF 2016) 

The Schedule was agreed to. 

Clauses 1 and 2 were called and agreed to. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill was agreed to. 

 

71 

E.S.E.  (2015-2016)  of  2016  and  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  (2015-2016)  Bill 

(No. VII of 2016) were agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

(4.20 p.m.) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

FRENCH EMBASSY & ST GEORGE HOTEL - INCIDENTS 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to 

make a statement out of turn. 

Madam Speaker, I strongly condemn the incidents that occurred in the early morning 

of Monday 30 May in Port Louis. 

According  to  the  Police,  gunshots  of  small  calibre  were  fired  in  the  direction  of  the 

French  Embassy  and  St  George  Hotel.  Moreover,  graffiti  were  found  on  the  walls  in  the 

vicinity of the incidents. 

There  has  been  neither  any  victim  nor  any  injured.  Only  slight  damage  on  the  two 

buildings has been noted. 

I  wish  to  assure  the  House  and  the  public  at  large  that  Mauritius  remains  a  country 

where  peace  and  security  prevail  and 

that 

these 

incidents  should  not  be  given 

disproportionate interpretations. 

The Police are conducting its investigation in order to identify the offenders, and they 

will  definitely  be  found  out.  I  hope  so.  Additional  measures  have  also  been  taken  for  the 

maintenance of law and order. 

I wish to assure the House that I will not allow anybody to play with the stability and 

harmony prevailing in our country. 

I warn all lawbreakers, defaulters or mischief players from any quarters that they will 

be dealt with, in the most serious and severe manner. 

Thank  you,  once  again,  Madam  Speaker  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  make  this 

statement. 

 

72 

Mr Bérenger: Can I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in conveying our sympathy to 

the French authorities and our condemnation of what has taken place. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 07 June 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. I understand hon. Uteem, hon. Ameer 

Meea and hon. Ganoo have adjournment matters. 

(4.23 p.m.) 

 

MATTERS RAISED 

VALLÉE PITOT - DRAINS 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 

Speaker, I raise an issue which concerns the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Land and 

Housing as well as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

It  relates  to  the  conditions  of  the  people  in  Vallée  Pitot,  more  precisely  in  Alma 

Street,  l’Oiseau  Vert  Street  and  Orient  Street.    Last  year,  I  asked  a  question.    There  was 

landslide and houses had been damaged. 

Now that the Government has decided to realign the Ring Road tracé, I would like to 

ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  -  that  concerns  the  NDU  -  if  he  could  see  to  it  that  the 

works that had been stopped be continued and the appropriate canal  works be done, so that 

these  people  be  spared  whenever  there  is  heavy  rainfall?  As  a  result  of  the  works  having 

stopped, all the water now is channelled into the houses of these people. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, I can assure the hon. Member that I will take up the matter  with NDU. In 

fact, the hon. Member is right to say that now we have the diversion of the Ring Road.  We 

are going to take into consideration the suggestion given. 

(4.24 p.m.) 

PLAINE VERTE – TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

 

73 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East): The issue I am raising today is in relation to the traffic that we are having at Route des 

Pamplemousses  and  the  junction  at  Route  Militaire.    So,  it  relates  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister. 

The traffic is getting very dense there because with time the population who lives in 

Vallée des Prêtres, Ste  Croix, Cité  La Cure,  Paul  Toureau and everywhere around this area 

has increased.  Today, the traffic, especially in the evening, is really crazy and I, myself, have 

raised  this  issue  in  the  House  several  times.    So,  I  appeal  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to 

transmit  the  request  to  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to,  at  least,  place  a  policeman  in  the 

evening, every day, especially on week days, because people take 30 minutes from the centre 

of Plaine Verte to go to Vallée des Prêtres when normally it takes only five minutes. 

So,  I  appeal  again  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  transmit  the  message  to  the 

Commissioner of Police. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Of  course,  the  population  has  increased,  but  vehicles  also  are 

increasing. This is the problem that we are facing.  I will convey this to the Commissioner of 

Police and ask him to see that somebody is posted there. 

 

DR. JEETOO HOSPITAL - CHILD  DEATH - ALLEGED MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madame la présidente, 

le  ministre  de  la  Santé  n’est  pas  présent,  mais  je  suis  sûr  qu’il  y  a  un  autre  ministre  qui  le 

remplace,  parce  que  je  vais  soulever  une  question  de  négligence  médicale  alléguée  qui  a 

causé la mort d’une fillette de six ans à Bambous, dans ma circonscription, pendant le week-

end. 

Donc,  le  vendredi  27,  cette  petite  fille,  Anaëlle,  qui  souffrait  déjà  des  problèmes 

cardiaques depuis sa naissance, a commencé à avoir des problèmes de respiration, de toux et 

de vomissements. Donc, ses parents l’ont transportée tout de suite à l’hôpital du Nord, où elle 

suivait un traitement au Cardiac Unit. Mais, malheureusement, son état détériorait en route, 

et donc les parents et le chauffeur qui conduisait la voiture ont  téléphoné au SAMU tout de 

suite pour que le SAMU puisse prendre le relais. 

Malheureusement,  d’après  ce  que  disent  les  parents,  le  préposé  du  SAMU  leur  a  dit 

que ce n’était  pas possible et  leur a conseillé d’aller à l’hôpital  Dr. Jeetoo,  à Port  Louis,  ce 

 

74 

qu’ils  ont  fait.  Arrivée  à  l’hôpital  Dr.  Jeetoo  à  Port  Louis,  un  médecin  a  commencé  à  lui 

donner  un  traitement  et  a  réalisé  que  la  fille  était  déjà  une  patiente  au  Cardiac  Unit.  Sa 

situation  détériorait  tellement  qu’elle  a  été  mise  sous  respiration  artificielle,  mais  elle  n’a 

jamais été transférée au Cardiac Unit. Aux petites heures, samedi matin, elle est décédée. 

Pourquoi  la fille n’a jamais  été transférée au  Cardiac Unit ? Pourquoi  le SAMU n’a 

pas pu répondre à l’appel ? Les parents crient à la négligence médicale, parce qu’elle suivait 

déjà un traitement au Cardiac Unit. Elle était un cardiac patient. 

Donc,  je  demande  au  ministre  concerné  qui  fait  la  suppléance,  de  bien  vouloir 

demander  au  ministère  de  faire  une  enquête  dans  cette  affaire-là  pour  répondre  aux  parents 

qui, je crois, ont déjà demandé au ministère d’ouvrir une enquête. 

Donc,  en  tant  que  député  de  la  région,  je  demande  au  ministre,    très  humblement, 

d’ouvrir  une  enquête  pour  pouvoir  répondre  à  toutes  les  questions  des  parents  qui  sont 

meurtris par le décès de cette petite fille. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Premièrement, Madame 

la présidente, je voudrais sympathiser avec la famille de la petite fille. 

I will definitely look into the matter and ask for an enquiry to be carried out. 

CITÉ LA CURE,  JAMATKHANA – PLOT OF LAND 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis  East): 

Madam  Speaker,  the  first  issue  I  would  like  to  raise  is  directed  to  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

Minister, Minister of Housing and Land.  

It is with regard to an organisation that sent him a letter some time in the beginning of 

this month. It is an organisation that is situated in Cité La Cure that has made an application 

ever since 2014 for a place which is commonly known as a Jamatkhana, in order for them to 

see to it whether they could obtain a portion of land because the number of devotees has kept 

on increasing.  

I will be grateful if the hon.Vice-Prime Minister could give some special attention to 

this particular letter as this would greatly help other people in the locality in Constituency No. 

4.  

Thank you. 

 

75 

MOTORWAYS/ HIGHWAYS – LITTER 

The  second  issue  is  directed  to  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructrure  and  Public 

Transport, hon. Bodha. Madam Speaker, all of us have realised that the highways/motorways 

or  carriageways  where  we  have  a  central  reservation  and  the  two  other  pieces  of  grass  or 

vegetation on the sides, be it on both sides of the highways. They always have a lot of grass, 

not  only  overgrown  vegetation  in  terms  of  grass  but  even  when  they  are  mode,  the  issue  is 

that if there are plastic bottles,  plastic paper, paper or  garbage which  are found there, they 

just remain there.  

This morning I myself called the RDA and I have asked them why is it that these were 

not  removed.  Basically,  the  answer  I  got  was  very  straight,  simple  and  direct:  We  are 

grasscutters, not scavengers. So, maybe, this is a question which needs to be addressed very 

urgently and I am sure it is a very simple issue.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  such  an  eyesore  and  it  is  not  in  any  way  helping  the  country 

when there is overgrown vegetation in the middle, and I hear just simply because a contract 

has  to  be  given  to  a  company  soon  and  that  is  why  it  is  not  being  done.  At  the  same  time, 

when the grass is removed, you have a lot of plastic rubbish there littered on the ground that 

you can see very clearly. I will be very grateful if this could be looked into because this is a 

matter, I am sure, one could really address together. It is not a political issue, it is a question  

of cleanliness and the image of the country. 

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Miniser  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, I will ask my hon. friend to give me the letter and then we are going to look 

into it. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): I will 

certainly, Madam Speaker, look into the matter and I will see how we can work together with 

the Ministry of Environment. 

PAILLES - WATER SUPPLY  

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for Grand River North West and Port Louis 

West):  If  I  can  make  a  request  to  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and 

 

76 

Public  Utilities.    Actually,  the  water  supply  at  Pailles  is  very  irregular  and  it  is  causing 

tremendous hardship to the inhabitants. 

I  am  requesting  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  to  look  into  the  matter,  especially  as 

next  week  the  fasting  month  of  Ramadan  will  start  and  the  inhabitants  need  a  much  much 

better supply of water in the region of Pailles. So, can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to 

intervene urgently.  

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): It is being looked into.  

At 4.34 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 07 June 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

