 

 

 

No. 28 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 17 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

MOTION 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 28 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 17 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 10.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

7 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY - CONSIDERATION OF VOTE ITEMS  

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  before  we  proceed  with  the  resumption  of  the 
Committee of Supply, I have to inform the House that I will not accept questions on policy 
matters. 

Furthermore, for an optimum use of time, I will request hon. Members to put short 
and precise questions and request hon. Ministers also to be short and precise in their answers. 

I also have to remind hon. Members that both Whips have agreed on the allocation of 
time  in  respect  of  each  vote  item.  Flexibility  will  as  usual  be  exercised,  as  and  when 
necessary,  but  I  appeal  to  all  hon.  Members  to  collaborate  for  the  smooth  running  of  the 
exercise. 

PUBLIC BILL 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 

(NO. XVII of 2016) 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

Vote 7-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Page 161, Madam Chairperson, in relation to the opening of an 

Embassy in Saudi Arabia… 

The Chairperson: Page 160 first. As usual, page by page. 

 

Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

8 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  Main  Achievement  for  FY  2015/16,  I  see  that  there  is  an 
Agreement for the setting up of a Joint Commission and a General Framework Agreement 
signed with Madagascar. May we know the composition of that Commission and when was 
the last time that Commission sat? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The decision was taken in March 2016 for the setting up of a 
Joint Commission between Madagascar and Mauritius. We are in the process of processing 
the whole file; it will take some time. 

Mr Uteem: Under Strategic Direction 2016-2019, mention is made for the opening of 
new Embassies - in the plural - but in the Key Action, there is one Embassy in Saudi Arabia 
that is scheduled to be opened. So, may I know from the hon. Minister where are we going to 
have the other Embassies mentioned in the Strategic Direction? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, thanks for the question. We have taken the decision to 
go ahead with the opening of the Embassy in Jeddah. As present, in the Budget, we have two 
items  of  expenditure  in  connection  with  the  opening  of  Embassies  and  Consular 
representatives. We have one, which is the Embassy in Saudi Arabia, and the second one is 
the opening in Reunion Island of a Consul general.  Both are being processed. 

Mr Ameer  Meea:  Page 160, under Main Achievement, Visa Exemption Agreement 
signed  with  Russia,  Ghana,  Indonesia  and  UAE.  As  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware,  we  have 
discussed  this  issue  in  the  House  in  relation  to  visa  exemption  for  United  Arab  Emirates.  
Only Government Officials, and this, on official mission, are exempted for visa in UAE. So, 
can I ask the hon. Minister where are matters regarding all Mauritians to be exempted visa to 
Dubai, the more so that the UAE people don’t need visa to come to Mauritius? 

The Chairperson: Hon. Member, you are asking a question which relates mostly to 

policy. Where is the related cost aspect in it? Can you tell me? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It’s a process. With UAE, it is a process. The first one has 
been that officials on mission with a diplomatic passport will be exempted from the payment 
of entrance visa, but we are in the process of discussions with the authorities to ensure that 
gradually all Mauritians be exempted from the payment of visa. 

9 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Page 161, Promotion of Investment in Strategic Markets – Number of 
Counsellors (Economic  Matters) recruited: 7. Can we have the names of the persons who 
have been recruited, the process of recruitment, and where they have been posted? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well,  I thank the Member for putting a question, because 
this  relates  to  the  economic  diplomacy,  as  announced  in  the  programme  of  Government 
Lepep. On top of this, it relates to our new economic diplomacy strategy, which involves, in 
fact, that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will, in the course of time,  within the next three 
years,  have  a  new  department,  which  will  be  made  up  of  economic  and  trade  counsellors. 
But,  in  the  process,  it  takes  time.  Therefore,  in-between,  we  are  going  to  recruit  under 
contract seven economic and trade advisers that will be posted in the most important markets 
for Mauritius. As to the process, the procedure for the selection of those people, since those 
are contracts, they don’t go through PSC. Therefore, we are planning to set up a Committee 
that will comprise of No. 1, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, No. 2, Board of Investment and 
No. 3, the other organisations which will be involved in the implementation of the measure. 
We won’t forget to put on the board of selection also a representative of Build Mauritius, to 
ensure total transparency when it comes to selection. 

Mr Jhuboo: Concerning the opening of the new Embassy in Riyadh, can we have the 

cost attributed to the opening of the Embassy? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, that would be too early. We have proposed an item in 
the Budget for this; but that’s too early to say. I must say here that it will all depend on the 
Saudi Authorities and on the confirmation that they are going to put at our disposal buildings 
and other facilities. These have been promised and we are waiting for a formal letter from the 
Foreign Affairs Ministry of Saudi Arabia to ensure, therefore, that the Mauritius Embassy in 
Jeddah  and  the  consular  representative  in  Riyadh  will  both  have  the  premises  put  at  our 
disposal by the Government. Therefore, this is an item which we don’t yet know in terms of 
cost. 

Since the hon. Member set up the question of Saudi Arabia and, I am sure, that there 
are  many  hon.  Members  who  would  like  to  be  informed  as  to  what  is  happening,  we  are 
opening an embassy in Saudi Arabia plus a consular representative in Riyadh. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister,  I am sorry to interrupt.  I just said that questions 

have to be short and precise and that replies also should be short and precise. Please! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Okay! I tried to pre-empt, thank you. 

10 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page,  submission  of  the  First  African  Peer  Review 
Mechanism Country Progress Report, can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is prepared to 
lay a copy of this report in the Assembly? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  May  I  seek  your  guidance,  Madam  Chairperson?  Whenever  a  hon. 
Member ask any question with regard to the strategic note, he has to relate it to a vote item, 
so that we may know what are the questions that are being asked with regard to the Estimates. 
So, may I seek your guidance on that? 

The Chairperson: Thank you, hon. Minister. I just said that whatever question has to 
be asked, and this is why I made an announcement right at the beginning that your questions, 
should  not  relate  to  policy  matters.  This  is  the  first  thing.  The  second  thing  is  that  your 
question should be related to the cost aspect of the estimates and that is why I just asked hon. 
Ameer Meea how his question was related to the cost aspect of it. But, the Minister chose to 
reply. I can’t ask the Minister not to reply if he wishes to, but I ask hon. Members to ask 
questions related to the cost aspect. 

Mr Baloomoody: Let us go to the next page then. So, item 21110 – Minister. Can I 
ask the hon. Minister whether he is prepared to lay the report of the African Peer Review 
Mechanism on the Table? 

The Chairperson: To which Item are you referring, is it under item 21110? 

Mr Baloomoody: Item 21110.001 – Basic Salary, Minister. 

The Chairperson: The salary of the Minister has nothing to do… 

Mr Baloomoody: It is a general item. I am asking the Minister whether he is prepared 

to lay on the Table a report which his Ministry has prepared. 

The Chairperson: Okay, this is either yes or no. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  don’t  mind  answering.  The  hon.  Member  is 
referring, in fact, to the first African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) that was approved a 
long  time  back  in  2003  and  whereby  countries  in  the  African  region  need  to  share 
information and to cooperate. So, we are supposed to submit a country report on the whole 
issue. The report is coming out in December 2016. 

The Chairperson: Okay. Page 162! Hon. Uteem!  

11 

 
Mr  Uteem:    On  page  162,  under  item  21110  –  Ambassador  (Roving).    There  is 
provision for one Roving Ambassador. In the past we had an African Roving Ambassador, so 
may we know from the hon. Minister where that Ambassador will be roving to? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  there  is  provision  for  the  nomination  of  two  roving 

Ambassadors. This has not yet been filled.  

Mr Baloomoody: Same question with regard to the Non-Resident Ambassador. There 
is supposed to be one Non-Resident Ambassador. May we know who is that person and for 
which country he is supposed to supervise? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  roving  ambassador,  Mr  Doomun,  resigned  from 
employment with effect from 09 June 2014. There has been no nomination since. As for the 
Non-Resident Ambassador also the post is vacant. 

The Chairperson: Okay. Page 163! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  In  relation to Extra Assistance under item .005, last  year it was 
Rs1.6 m. and now it is Rs5.4 m.; there has been a massive increase. May we know the reason 
of such an increase and also the details of this amount? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The increase is due to two items –  

(i) 
(ii) 

To PRB, and 
For the payment of the three advisers who followed me from the Ministry of 
Finance, namely Mrs Jugmohun, Mr Roopun and Mr Lochun. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan do you have a question? Is it of a general nature 

or is it related to one item of expenditure? 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, it is not of a general nature, but there is no vote 
item  regarding  Russia  where  we  have  a  private  agency  promoting  tourism  to  Mauritius.  I 
don’t see any item for this. Is this still going on in Russia? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I would think this question relates more to tourism than to 

our Ministry. 

The Chairperson: It is a question of Policy, hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

Mr Uteem: At page 162, under  Item 21110.001 - Basic Salary Ambassador where 
there is going to be an increase from 17 to 24.  May we know from the hon. Minister where 
will the additional seven ambassadors be located? 

12 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: We have 17 Ambassadors in post, 15 on a contract basis and 
2  Career  Ambassadors.  There  are  7  vacancies;  5  vacancies  for  Career  Ambassadors  and  3 
former  Ambassadors  retired  from  service,  namely  Ambassadors  Curé,  Soborun  and 
Servansingh. I don’t know whether I have replied to your question. 

(Interruptions) 

Maybe the hon. Member is referring to the fact that one Ambassador from Pretoria resigned 
as  he  becomes  Vice-President  and  he  has  been  replaced;  we  are  in  the  process  of  going 
through the procedures. 

Mr Ameer Meea: In relation to Ambassador, obviously, the sum has increased from 
Rs21 m. to Rs30 m.. I will link my question to the key performance indicator to the opening 
of an Embassy in Riyadh and a Consulate in Jeddah. On this side of the House, of course, we 
are  totally  for  this  opening.    But,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  rationale  behind 
opening an Embassy plus a consulate in Jeddah? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  would  think  that  this  is  a  Policy  matter,  Madam 

Chairperson. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: On the same page, item 22030 – Rent.  We find that there has been 

a tremendous increase in rent, from … 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Order, please! 

Mr Baloomoody: There has been a tremendous increase from Rs137 m. to Rs164 m. 

may we know which premises we are talking about? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, as far as renting of office is concerned the Ministry is 
occupying  one  building,  Behlem  Ltd.  at  Sir  William  Newton  Street  with  a  total  rent  of 
Rs1,916,247. There is also the question of renting more space on the 8th floor, which is under 
discussion now. The Ministry is also occupying 5,138 sq. ft in Fooks House and we are also 
occupying 3,100 ft.² in Moorgate House.  

Dr. Joomaye: On the same page, under item 22090 Security, we can see that there is 
an increase in the Budget from Rs4.8 m. to Rs7 m.  Can we know what is the purpose of this 
increase in the budget for security? 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: For item 22900 Other Goods and Services … 

13 

Madam Chairperson:  No, it is Security, hon. Minister, item 22090! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  item  has  increased  from  Rs4.8  m.  to  Rs7  m.  I  must 
remind the hon. Member that the Estimates for 2015/2016 was Rs7 m. and was underspent.  
Therefore, the Rs7 m. relates to the provision for security services in Embassies, increase in 
the price of the services and security services will be provided also in other Embassies. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    May  I  come  back  to  the  issue  of  Rent.  The  hon.  Minister  just 
informed  us  that  they  are  negotiating  to  take  another  floor  in  the  building.  I  do  not  know 
which building.  Can I know which procurement procedure is being used and whether there 
will be tender? What will be the cost of that additional floor per square metre or feet, I do not 
know? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  do  not  have  the  information.  I  would  not  mind 

circulating it later on. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 164, there is another item 21110.005 Extra Assistance. It 
is the second time that this item is appearing under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional 
Integration and International Trade for Rs4.5 m.  May we have the details? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: What is the question, sorry? 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under item 21110.005 Extra Assistance.  It is the second time that 

we have this item and an amount of Rs4.5 m. is budgeted.  May we have the details? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  This  is  in  connection  with  the  recruitment  of  seven 

Economic and Trade Counsellors. 

Mr Bhagwan: Under item 26310.058 SADC and Affiliated Institutions,we are being 
asked to vote Rs83 m. compared to Rs56 m.  Can we know what are the affiliated institutions 
and whether a list can be circulated?  Can the Minister give some details? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: This item covers the Indian Ocean Secretariat and also our 
commitments  to  SADC.    It  is  mandatory  contribution  to  SADC  regular  budget,  only  part 
payment was effected in the year 2015/2016. 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Minister,  you  have  been  asked,  if  you  do  not  mind,  to 
circulate the list of affiliated institutions.  If you have got the list of affiliated institutions, you 
can circulate. 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Okay.  Thank you.  The affiliated institutions are the SADC 

14 

Plant Genetic Resources Centre based in Zambia. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: If the list is long, you can circulate! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It is done. 

Mr Jhuboo: Under item 31112.408 Upgrading of Chanceries, could we know from 
the hon. Minister or maybe he could circulate the information concerning the Chanceries that 
will be upgraded and renovated, please? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  this  also  involves  a  long  reply.  I  will  circulate  the 

reply. 

Mr  Mahomed:  With  regard  to  item  22900  Commonwealth  Climate  Finance  Skills 
Hub, there is a huge increase from last year to this year from Rs217,000 to Rs4.5 m. May we 
know why is there such an increase and where is the hub being operated from? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, this is the provision which is being made for setting 
up in Mauritius, in fact, a Commonwealth Climate Finance Skills Hub and we have made a 
provision for Rs4.5 m. for the opening of this in Mauritius. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under Capital Expenditure, items 31112 Construction of Chancery and 
staff  residence  (Addis  Ababa)  and  31112  Upgrading  of  Chanceries,  there  is  an  amount  of 
Rs123 m. voted.  Can we know whether there will be tender in their respective countries, and 
if the contracts have been awarded? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, it is a long time decision taken by the Government to 
ensure  that  we  buy  more  and  more  our  Chanceries  abroad.    We  have  presently  seven 
Chanceries  which  belong  to  Mauritius.  The  question  is  whether  procedures  are  being 
followed. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has, in fact, employed under contract one person 
who ensures that all those contracts follow normal procedures. 

Mr Rughoobur: Under item 31112.408 Upgrading of Chanceries, may I know from 
the hon. Minister the mode of procurement for these upgrading works in these Chanceries, 
please? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: That is a good question.  May I circulate the answer, please? 

15 

 
Mr Uteem: On page 165, under item 31112 Non-Residential Building, Renovation of 
Government  Building  at  Guy  Forget  Street,  Quatre  Bornes,  can  I  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister what use is made of that building in Quatre Bornes? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The office will be allocated to the Commonwealth Climate 

Finance Skills Hub.  

The Chairperson: Sorry! We have already exceeded the allotted time.  We have got 
two more pages to go. So, if you do not have many questions on the two other pages, then I 
can allow one more question. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  problem  is  that  the  Minister  does  not  answer  the  questions.  
There was a specific question where matter stands with regard to the Addis Ababa Chancery.  
From my information, I know we have acquired land and the land is being bared for many 
years. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The Government is going ahead with the construction of the 
Chancery and as far as I can remember, provision of Rs50 m. has been made in the Budget 
for the construction.  But this was delayed.  Therefore, the same provision existed in the last 
budget also.  

Mr Uteem: With respect to item 31122 Acquisition/Upgrading of Other Machinery 
and Equipment for next year, there is a four-time increase in the budget.  So, may I know 
from the hon. Minister what machinery and equipment are we referring to? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Here again, we have the same issue.  In the Estimates for 
2015/2016, there was a provision for Rs13 m. underspending and it came to Rs13 m. It is the 
provision  for  acquisition,  renewal  of  household  items  for  residences  of  home-based  staff 
posted in Embassies, and Counsellors.  It is also due to the increase for the opening of new 
Embassies and Consulates and recruitment of Economic Counsellors. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Item 31122.799, Acquisition/Upgrading of Other Machinery and 

Equipment, last year it was Rs3.3 m., this year it is Rs13 m. 

The  Chairperson:    The  hon.  Minister  has  just  replied  to  this  question!    Hon. 

Baloomoody! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order, please! 

16 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody:  International Trade, item 21110.001 - Director, Trade Policy. May 

I know whether we have a Director now, and if so who is that gentleman or lady? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The post is vacant with effect from 13 of May 2016, upon 
the retirement of Mr Bangla.  The Deputy Director, Mr Boodhoo, assigned duties of the post. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Item 22120 – Fees, there is an amount Rs3.5 m. budgeted.  May 

we know the details of these fees? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Those are fees for Chairman and Members of Boards, DTC, 
BEC and  for training of staff  - Rs315,000. The  decrease is due to the fact that last  year’s 
provision included fees for the drawing up of the Millenium Development Goal Report. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On the same page, again we have a tremendous increase of more 

than Rs2 m. for rent, item 22030.  May we know why this increase? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, the increase is from Rs137,087,000 to Rs164,342,000. 
It is for rental of building and parking for the Ministry at Newton Tower- Rs15.2 m.; and 
rental for Embassies – Rs149.142 m. 

Mr Baloomoody: We are talking about International Trade, we are not talking about 
Embassies.  There is an increase in rent of about Rs2 m. The hon. Minister does not answer 
questions.  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    Provision  for  the  rental  of  building  and  parking  slots  at 
Fook House and Moorgate. The increase is due to relocation of the industrial property office 
and renting of additional office space. 

Vote 7-1 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 

(Rs1,194,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On page 169, with regard to the Smart 
Youth  Programmes,  can  we  know  if  this  item  is  related  to  page  175,  item  22900.951  (e) 
Youth Programmes, where a sum of Rs2 m. has been earmarked?  Is it related, and if not, can 
we have some details such as the starting date and the total cost of the programmes? 

 
Mr Sawmynaden:  Increase of the budget is due for expenses; increase of activities 

17 

falling under the implementation of the Smart Youth Project. 

Mr Jhuboo:  Item 22030- Rent, there is an increase from Rs9 m. to Rs16 m.  Can we 

have the details of that provision, please? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    Actually  for  the  last  year,  it  was  only  part  of  year  and  it  is 
regarding the rent payable for the 7th and the 8th floors which amounts to Rs1,309,804 for a 
total area of 24,760 m2. Rs35,000 is also payable in respect of 10 parking slots. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page171,  item  22030  Rent.    There  has  been  a  substantial 

increase from Rs9 m. to Rs16 m. 

May we know the space area… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have not finished!  May we know the floor area that is being occupied for this item until 
when the bail expires? 

(Interruptions) 

The  Chairperson:    Can  we  take  the  next  question  in  the  meantime!    Hon.  Dr. 

Joomaye! 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Rent for three years! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Item  22900.955  Gender  Mainstreaming.  There  is  a  provision  of 

Rs200,000.  Can we have some details on how this amount under this item will be spent? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The amount of Rs200,000 is meant to cater for conducting gender 
analysis and evaluation of the services offered by the Ministry of Youth and Sports as well as 
the analysis of its policies, programmes and plan of action with a view to achieving gender 
equality. This is in line  with the Government objective to increase efforts to attain  gender 
equality.    It  is  noted  that  Mauritius  ranks  at  the 120th  position  out  of  145  countries  of  the 
Global Gender Gap Index 2015. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 21110.010  Service to Mauritius Programme.  May I know from the 
hon. Minister what is the criteria for eligibility under that Service to Mauritius Programme 
and how many people would be enrolled under that programme? 

 
The Chairperson:  You can circulate it if you don’t have it. 

18 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Actually, it is written here payment to salary, but I will circulate 

all the information. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On page 172, there is no provision made for the Sports Medical 

Officer.  May we know why? Item 21110.001 Sports Medical Officer. 

The Chairperson: Can we take the question of hon. Quirin in the meantime! 

Mr  Quirin:    Item  21111.002  Travelling  and  Transport,  an  amount  of  Rs9  m.  has 

been earmarked for 2016/2017.  Can we have a breakdown of this sum, please? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    It  is  a  grant  for  the  transportation  of  athletes.  For  the  Sports 

Medical Officer, it is on a sessional basis. 

(Interruptions) 

No! We don’t have one on a permanent basis. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 173, item 005 – Extra Assistance, there is an amount of 

Rs12.5 m.  May we have the details and a breakdown of this figure? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Payment  of  salaries  to  advisers  on  contract,  sessional  coaching 

fees and extra duty allowance. I will circulate all the information. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Item 21110 – Coach. Concerning the coach, there has been 10 new 
coaches that have been appointed, from 19 to 29. Can we know for which discipline they 
have been appointed? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will circulate all the information regarding the coach. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Under item 22900.939 - Indian Ocean Island Games, an amount of Rs13 
m. has been earmarked for this financial year. Can we know when and how this sum is going 
to be disbursed? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will circulate the information, it is better. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 
Dr. Joomaye: On the same paragraph, item 22900.953 - Anti-Doping Activities, there 
is a sum of Rs1 m. voted. Can we  know how this money would be spent and on which items? 

19 

Mr Sawmynaden: Anti-Doping Activities, it is a long answer. Does the hon. Member 

want me to circulate it? 

It is better to circulate it. There are three pages. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: You can just answer briefly and then you circulate.  

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, it is the constitution of the NADO Board members, the 

functions and the amount paid to have the test done abroad. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Under item 28211.064 - Sports Federations, we are being asked to vote 

Rs67 m. Can the hon. Minister circulate a list showing the expenses for each federation? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Okay, I will circulate the information. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 173, item 26313.45 – Mauritius Sports Council. It is not a 
question of policy, Madam Chairperson, because from this vote, members of the Board of the 
Sports Council are being paid a stipend. I raised the issue of somebody who was on bail and 
who  was  supposed  to  be  thrown  away  from  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council.  From  the 
information I have gathered, that guy is still a member of Mauritius Sports Council. Can the 
hon. Minister give the assurance to the House that we are not voting money here to pay that 
individual, who is still a member of the Mauritius Sports Council? He should not have been a 
Member of the Mauritius Sports Council despite the assurance given by the hon. Minister. 

Mr Sawmynaden: He has already resigned from the Council. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I have got the information. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 26313.094 – Trust Fund for Excellence in Sports, we 
have been budgeting Rs15 m, may we have a list of the beneficiaries, how much they have 
received for the last financial year and how much has been spent? 

20 

 
Mr  Sawmynaden:  I  have  the  list,  but  I  don’t  have  the  list  of  those  who  got  the 
scholarship. The Trust Fund grants financial assistance in the form of scholarship to eligible 
candidates,  namely  athletes  who  have  performed  well  at  the  national,  regional  and 
international level. I will get the list and then I will circulate it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: In relation to the same question as my friend, hon. Bhagwan, concerning 
the Mauritius Sports Council, there is a sum of Rs26.2 m. earmarked for this financial year. 
Can we have a breakdown of this amount? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Does the hon. Member want to know about the grant allocated? 

(Interruptions) 

The  increase  in  the  grant  is  due  to  the  implementation  of  the  PRB  2016  salary,  cost  and 
maintenance. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Under  item  22900.008  -  Medals,  Prizes  and  Rewards,  may  we  know 

from the hon. Minister whether this is on a yearly basis for certain items? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, it is done by procurement. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  On  the  same  page,  under  item  28217  -  Expense  Not  Elsewhere 

Specified, Rs500,000 has been earmarked. May we have some details about this expense? 

Mr Sawmynaden: It is with regard to insurance to athletes travelling abroad. 

The Chairperson: Page 174. 

(Interruptions) 

I draw hon. Members’ attention to the fact that we have got two minutes left for the allotted 
time and we have got three pages more to go. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  the  last  item  of  page  173, 
item 31113 Reconstruction of St François Xavier Stadium, may I ask the hon. Minister why 
nothing has been budgeted this year, the more so that this stadium is not covered and has no 
lighting for matches to be played at night, and that this stadium is the one where we have got 
the largest number of spectators? 

 
Mr  Sawmynaden:  Since  this  stadium  will  be  used  for  the  Indian  Ocean  Island 

21 

Games, it will be part of that Budget. 

The Chairperson: Page 174. Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Under item 31113.406 – Lighting of training grounds, would the hon. 
Minister kindly circulate a list of all the training grounds where lighting is being provided 
for? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Okay, I have the list, I will circulate it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under the same item Upgrading of Sports Infrastructure with respect to 
Fencing, turfing and waterproofing, may we have a list of the places where the turfing and 
waterproofing would be carried out? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, I have the full list. For the waterproofing work, it will be at 
the Rivière du Rempart Youth Centre, the Serge Alfred swimming pool, the Brisée Verdière 
Youth  Centre  and  the  Floreal  Youth  Centre.    The  detection  of  leakage  treatment  of  same, 
removal  of  damaged  fencing,  replacement  of  metal  structures,  supply  and  fixing  of  new 
galvanised fencing and replacement of turf where required. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: On that same item others - basic sports facilities around the island for 
which we are exceptionally voting Rs15 m. as compared to Rs2.4 m. last year, may we know 
what does it covers and which sports facilities are concerned here? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Which item is it? 

The Chairperson: Same item, .406 Others - basic sports facilities around the island. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  they  are  minor  works  to  be  executed  in  the  schools. 
With the new policy that we have put, all sports infrastructures in Government schools will 
be opened to the public. We have some minor works to be carried out in major schools so that 
it can be opened to the public. 

Mr  Ramful:  On  the  same  item,  Madam  Chairperson,  Upgrading  of  Sports 
Infrastructure provision is made for Harry Latour Stadium.  Can the hon. Minister give us 
details about the works that are to be carried out and would that include the construction of a 
gradin as well? 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, the construction has already started. The hon. Member 

22 

should have seen it in his constituency and it will be delivered soon. 

Actually, it is nearly to be completed. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  item  Upgrading  of  Stadiums,  several  stadiums  are 
mentioned and a total of Rs6 m. has been budgeted only for the design and tender and then no 
provision is made for the subsequent years for renovation. So, may I know what is the use of 
doing a design and tender this year and then there is no money allocated for any work in these 
stadiums in the following years? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  upgrading  and  renovation  works  will  be  undertaken  in  the 

subsequent financial years in few of the IOIG Games in 2019. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  175  under  Smart  Youth  Programmes  there  is  an  item 
Youth Parliament and a sum of Rs500,000 has been budgeted.  May we know what is this 
youth Parliament and may we have some details on this project? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  Youth  Parliament  is  an  educational  programme  which  will 
bring  together  young  people  from  all  over  the  country  to  discuss  on  current  topics  in  a 
parliamentary  setting.  The  Youth  Parliament  aims  at  strengthening  the  roots  of  democracy 
and imparting citizenship education. 

This  program  comprises  amongst  others  group  discussions  and  role-playing 
techniques essential for the development of young people. The Youth Parliament would be a 
regular event involving around hundred young people in each cohort. Training of participants 
Rs150,000,  equipment  and  materials  Rs100,000,  participation  in  international  forum 
Rs250,000. Age range is 16 to 17. 

Mr Uteem: Same item code 22900 – (e) Youth Programmes, there is a sum of Rs2 m. 

budgeted. So, may I know what youth programmes are we talking about here? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Sum of Rs200,000 to each of the ten regions, eight districts plus 
Upper and Lower Plaines Wilhems to implement programmes in line with the strategic areas 
of  the  National  Youth  Policy,  informal  education,  employment  and  employability, 
entrepreneurship, recreational activities, wellness and attitude. Ten regions, Rs200,000 each.   

Mr Mahomed: On that same item - National Youth Volunteer Scheme, may we have 

some details on this for which we are being asked to vote Rs2 m. for this year? 

23 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: The National Youth Volunteer Scheme promotes, celebrates and 
facilitates volunteering projects in the Republic of Mauritius. The scheme operates with the 
conviction  that  our  young  people  can  fulfil  their  potential  through  volunteering  and  that 
volunteering can change our world for the better. 

The  National  Young  Volunteer  Scheme  pledges  to  uphold  on  fundamental  values 
including  empathy  and 
solidarity.  Administration  and  management  Rs500,000, 
communication and publicity Rs425,000, project lire ek ecrire Creole Rs150,000, solidarity 
team un live un cadeau Rs25,000, environment and food security team Rs100,000, training of 
national youth volunteers Rs800,000. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Item  .005  -  Extra  Assistance  where  there  is  a  sum  of  Rs4  m. 

budgeted. May we have the details? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Payment of salary to advisers on contract basis, sessional code - I 

will circulate, I mentioned that before. 

Mr  Uteem:  Page  176,  under  item  28211  -  Youth  Clubs,  may  I  know  which  youth 

clubs are going to receive the sum of Rs50,000? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will get the information for you. Recent statistics compiled show 
that there are actually 529  youth clubs. The National Youth Council through the Dynamic 
Youth Project is training young people to form youth clubs. 13 new youth clubs associations 
have been created through this project. 

Mr Rughoobur: Item 31112.407 – (a) Anse La Raie Youth Training Centre for the 
upgrading, may I know if the tender documents have been prepared or the contract has been 
awarded? May I know the status, please? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  The  project  consists  of  upgrading  of  two  dormitories  including 

MNE works and furniture. Actually, it is now that we are going to launch the tender. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Item  28211.044  -  concerning  the  provision  of  Rs100,000  for  Girls 

Guide, could the hon. Minister enlighten us on that? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sawmynaden: It is grants to girls guides, there is nothing more. 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Chairperson: No, excuse me! Excuse me! The hon. Member did  not ask for 

24 

more information on girls guides, he asked with respect to the Rs100,000. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually it is a grant allocated to them. 

Vote 8-1 Ministry of Youth and Sports (Rs612,000,000) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

Vote 9-1 Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport was called.  

Mr Fowdar: I just wanted to ask the hon. Minister regarding the achievements for 

2015/2016 - removal of asbestos undertaken in 51 sites, does it include Goodlands? 

Mr Bodha: I think, Madam Chairperson, I have a list of the different sites where this 

has been done and I am going to circulate it. I have seen the list in fact. 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, page 181. On the item Minister, can I ask the hon. Minister 
whether  he  can  inform  the  House  about  the  National  Road  Safety  Programme  which  was 
supposed to go to primary and secondary schools? If we could have a list of the primary and 
secondary schools where this National Road Safety Programme has been carried out? 

The Chairperson: No, excuse me, the hon. Member has asked that under the item 

Minister? But, I think he should relate it to one item. 

(Interruptions) 

Minister is only for the Minister’s salary! You can’t ask questions related to a vote item on 
Minister’s salary! Page 182, yes hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On page 182, Madam, I will ask two questions so that the officers can 
give the Minister the information. With regard to item 22120.002, Fees to Chairperson and 
Members  of  Board,  Rs1.3  m.,  can  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  the  list?    As  regards  item 
26313.010, Construction Industry Development Board, can we know why this increase from 
Rs13  m.  to  Rs3.9  m.?    Can  we  have  the  composition  of  the  Board,  the  name  of  the 
Chairperson and his salary? 

Mr  Bodha:  The  increase  is  due  to  the  payment  of  fees  to  the  Chairperson  and 
members of the Building Control Advisory Council and members of the six Sub-Committees 
Advisory Council.  Fees for the Chairman is Rs23,000; members, Rs1,500, and for the Sub-

 

25 

committee, it is Rs1,140. For the Construction Industry Development Board, the Chairperson 
is Mr Gaëtan Siew.   

The  Chairperson:  Can  we  pass  on  to  the  next  question  in  the  meantime?    Hon. 

Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Item 22030.005, Rental of Facilities 

for Events.  Which sort of events does it cover? 

Mr Bodha: The fees is Rs40,000 for the CIDB. With regard to Rental of Facilities for 
Events, in fact, there is a list of facilities that we grant for Maha Shivratree, for Cavadee, for 
Ganesh Chaturthi, Venkateswara, tents, over the year. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On the same item, rental of building, there is an amount of Rs11.4 

m. May we have the details of this figure? 

Mr Bodha:  Rental of building is for Jade House, Epping Investment, Sugar Industry 
Pension Fund, Agricultural and Marketing Board.  This is the list in Moorgate House, where 
the different Departments of my Ministry have been located. 

Mr Uteem: With respect to the Rental of Facilities for Events, the hon. Minister is 
going to circulate the list. But can the hon. Minister also circulate the list of contractors who 
have been awarded the contract for these tentes vertes? 

Mr  Bodha:  In  fact,  you  will  recall,  Madam  Chairperson,  every  year,  there  was  an 
extra expenditure as regards tent - about Rs15 m. What we have done, we have streamlined it.  
We  have  an  in-house  service,  and  it  is  for  the  first  come  first  served.    When  it  comes  to 
events, we have all the list of requirements and then we launch the tenders as per the event, 
just like we are doing now for Ganesh Chaturthi. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Chairperson, under item 21110, we can see that there will be 
recruitment  of  additional  Architects,  Engineers,  Quantity  Surveyors  and  Technical  Design 
Officer for the design and supervision of construction of buildings and related infrastructure.  
May we know from the hon. Minister what are the buildings that they are going to work on 
that warrant this increase in professionals in those fields? 

Mr  Bodha:    I  will  provide  a  list,  but  it  relates  to  new  buildings  and  also  to 

maintenance of a number of buildings which are being in use now by different Ministries.  

26 

 
Mr Mahomed: Mention was made in the Budget for the recruitment of 200 Trainee 
Engineers,  for  them  to  be  registered  eventually  as  professional  Engineers.    May  we  know 
under which vote item this has been catered for, and what is the sum? 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, on recruitment of General Worker, there is in post 
96, and funded for this financial year 189.  But coming to the estimates 2016/2017, there is 
only  an  increase  of  Rs700,000.    So,  I  take  it  this  additional  93  will  not  be  recruited  this 
financial  year,  but  in  the  next  financial  year,  that  is,  2017/2018.  Will  the  hon.  Minister 
confirm that those 93 will be recruited not this year, but the year after, as per estimates that I 
see? 

 Mr Bodha: We in a transition period. The exercise has been carried out by the Public 
Service Commission, and the list is going to be submitted to us.  In fact, it is included in the 
budget of this year, that is, 2015/2016. 

Dr. Sorefan: For 93 General Workers, only Rs700,000 have been … 

Mr Bodha: It is already included for 2015/2016.  It was included, but we did not have 

the possibility to do the recruitment before the end of the financial year. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Chairperson, under item 21111.100, Overtime.  We are being 
asked to vote Rs13.3 m. at a time when we have twice the number of General Workers and 
also a substantial increase in the number of Tradesman to be recruited.  Why is it that we 
recruiting, and at the same time, we are being asked to pay so much overtime? 

Mr Bodha: There is a shortage as regards General Worker.  Overtime is allocated to 
work being done during the weekend, public holidays, because in a certain number of cases 
we have to provide staff during those days. 

Dr. Sorefan: Item 22060, Maintenance. It is actually going up by twice, from Rs8 m. 
to Rs15 m. May we know whether this will be done in-house or by private contractors, and 
which item are we talking for maintenance, please? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson,  maintenance  is  increased  due  mainly  to  new 
contract for servicing central air conditioning system.  It is being done by the Ministry.  In 
fact,  it  relates  to  Emmanuel  Anquetil  Building.    We  have  also  here,  in  the  Government 
House. It relates to maintenance of staircases, lifts, central AC system, and electrical system. 
In fact, it is the maintenance of the two buildings. 

 
Mr Jhuboo: Item 31113.799, concerning the Asbestos Treatment Programme.  Does 

27 

it relate to the Emmanuel Anquetil Building or the ex-CHA or the EDC houses? 

Mr  Bodha:  We  had  a  programme  earlier.  Well,  it  involves  Government  buildings.  
This  budget  is  for  Government  buildings  only.    So,  I  think  it  will  relate  to  Emmanuel 
Anquetil as well. 

Mr  Mahomed:  On  same  page  187,  item  31410.407,  Rehabilitation  works  for 
Landslide Management for which we are being asked to vote Rs57.3 m.  May I ask the hon. 
Minister  whether  this  includes  the  Vallée  Pitot  region  because  many  houses  there  have 
condemned and they are on the verge of collapse? 

Mr Bodha: This relates to rehabilitation works for Landslide Management which we 
are  conducting  together  with  the  Japanese  Technical  Assistance.    It  relates  to  areas  in 
Chitrakoot,  Vallée  Pitot,  La  Butte  and  Macondé,  Kewal  Nagar  and  Camp  Carole  for  an 
estimated cost of the budget that we have here. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  the  same  item,  I  have  not  heard  the  hon.  Minister  mentioning 

Morcellement Hermitage, Coromandel.  Can the hon. Minister inform the House why? 

Mr  Bodha:  Morcellement  Hermitage,  Coromandel,  is  not  there.  Hon.  Quirin  has 
raised this issue before.  In fact, we will see to it that we allocate a budget.  I have said we 
will give it a certificate of urgency. 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Chairperson, I have got two questions.  First, it is again about 
the asbestos.  I understand this is only for Government buildings.  Do we have the treatment 
for  domestic  purposes,  for  example,  at  Cité  St  Claire,  Goodlands?    The  second  question 
relates to item 31410, Rehabilitation works for Landslide Management.  May we know why 
there is such a big difference from Rs1.2 m. to Rs57.3 m.? 

Mr Bodha: I will answer the second question.  The Japan International Corporation 
Agency (JICA) has been working on the design and the tests.  Now, we can proceed to the 
actual works on the terrains. As regard to Hermitage, we have taken a series of actions and 
we are going to see to it that we have a budget allocated for this exercise.  For the domestic 
asbestos programme, I have a list of 46 sites over the whole island and I am going to submit 
it.  For the disposal of the asbestos material, this is done by the Ministry of Environment. 

28 

 
Mr Baloomoody:  Item 31122.811, Acquisition of CCTV.  May we know how many 
cameras have been acquired in the last financial year and why is it that no provision is made 
for the next year? 

Mr Bodha: There is no provision for this year, but the provision is for next year.  It is 
as regards security at the Mechanical Division at Plaine Lauzun. In fact, it is a very specific 
exercise. Cela n’a rien à voir avec les caméras. 

Mr  Uteem:    Upgrading  of  Office  Buildings,  (b)  Construction  of  building  for  QS 
Section, there is Rs52 m. earmarked in the Budget.  May we know from the hon. Minister 
where will that building be located and whether tender procedure has already been launched 
for the construction of that building? 

The  Chairperson:    Can  we  pass  on  to  the  next  question  in  the  meantime?    Hon. 

Osman Mahomed! Page 187! 

Mr  Mahomed:    On  that  same  question  of  rehabilitation  due  to  landslide,  does  the 
sum include intervention in the housing units as well, those which have been condemned and 
are severely affected? 

Mr Bodha: Extension of space for the Quantity Surveying Section, project value is 
Rs53 m.  Well, the present office space by the QS section is an old building.  It is going to be 
situated at Boundary Road in Phoenix. 

On the Land Slide Management, in fact, budget includes the technical works, but also 
we  have  the  relocation  of  a  certain  number  of  households  and  we  also  have  a  problem 
regarding  land.    The  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  has  been  requested  to  propose  sites, 
which they have done.  So, I will include the social package as well. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Item 31112.433 (d) Refurbishment of Electrical Equipment, to the tune 
Rs34 m. May we know from the hon. Minister what electrical equipment are we planning for 
refurbishment and if he can give us a list? 

Mr  Bodha:  From  what  I  see  here,  it  relates  to  the  refurbishment  of  Emmanuel 
Anquetil Building where we are going to have a number of issues such as lifts, fire doors and 
refurbishment of the electrical equipment.  I am going to ask for a detailed list of the works 
which are going to be carried out. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister, are you waiting for your technicians to provide you 

with the information? 

 
Mr Bodha:  Yes. 

29 

The Chairperson: So, we move on to the next page in the meantime! Page 188! 

Mr Uteem:  On page 188, under item of Road Development Authority a sum of Rs146 
m. is budgeted.  May we know from the hon. Minister what happened to the various officers 
who have been suspended in connection with various enquiries?  Have they been dismissed 
or reinstated? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  we  had  first  an  investigative  committee,  and  then  we  had  a 
disciplinary committee.  Afterwards, there is an appea, which is going on actually.  It relates 
to two or three officers.  I don’t have the name of the officers.  Two are suspended officers. 

Mr  Gobin:  On  page  188,  item  31113,  Other  Structures,  (o)  Construction  of  Third 
Land at Grand Bassin.  Since it says ‘Construction of Third Land at Grand Bassin’, may I ask 
the hon. Minister to circulate the tracé from where to where? 

Mr Bodha: In fact it is not at Grand Bassin.  It is at the access of Grand Bassin from 
the South.  Last time, we had parking which was built near Avalon up to Bois Chéri.  The 
third lane from Grand Bassin comes to the parking and we are going to continue the third 
lane up to Bois Chéri. 

Mr Jhuboo: I will take from where hon. Gobin left.  Concerning the construction of 

the A1-A3 Link Road, can we have some indication concerning le tracé, please? 

 
Mr Bodha: I have it, Madam Chairperson.  The A1-A3 comes from Bambous up to 
where Gamma-Civic is and it will connect with the A1-M1 bridge up to Sorèze.  So, part of 
the  traffic  from  the  West  will  go  to  the  region  of  Cassis  or  part  of  it  can  be  channelled 
through the A1-M1 bridge and up to Sorèze and the Ring Road.  The project is part of the 
road  decongestion  programme.    The  start  date  is  supposed  to  be  March  2017  and  the 
completion date is to be March 2018.  The contract has yet to be appointed.  The design is 
almost ready. 

Mr Mahomed:  Item 22130, Studies and Surveys, for we are being asked to vote a 
total of Rs60 m; Rs20m. over the next three years each.  May I know from the hon. Minister 
what  kind  of  studies  is  being  envisaged  here  because  we  all  know  insofar  as  roads  are 
concerned, there has been a lot of studies, so far? 

The Chairperson: Pass on to the next question, hon. Ameer Meea, in the meantime! 

30 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: Page 188, item 31113.003 (d) Design and Construction of grade 
separated junction on M1 at De Caen Street, Port Louis. There is a project value of nearly 
Rs300 m. May we know whether the contract has already been awarded, whether works have 
already started and may we have some details on the project in general? 

Mr Bodha: As regards to this project, Madam Chairperson, the design is ready. We 
are just integrating it with the urban terminal where the bus passenger terminal is going to be 
and the Metro Express is going to be. It is just a question of integrating it and we are going to 
start  the  works.  Luxconsult  has  already  done  the  design  and  we  are  going  to  launch  the 
tender.  Once  we  agree  on  the  urban  terminal  concept  which  will  integrate  the  access,  the 
passenger  terminal  and  the  Metro  Express  terminal.  The  contract  has  been  awarded  to 
Luxconsult and we  expect to start  floating of tender in October, we expect that the works 
could start early 2017 and it will take one and a half years, 18 months. 

(Interruptions) 

No, no! Rs100 m.? 

The Chairperson: Rs300 m. 

Mr Bodha: No. Rs300 m. is the whole project. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  I  just  wanted  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  regarding  resurfacing  of  main 
roads,  is  that  for  the  MPI?  Can  I  ask  when  the  road  from  Candos  to  La  Caverne,  Vacoas 
would be resurfaced? It has been a long time it is in a bad state following works carried out 
by the CWA. 

Mr  Bodha:  We  had  a  working  session  with  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of 
Energy and Public Utilities as regards works which had been carried out by the WMA and 
CWA. First of all, we have the trenching and now we have come to a modus so that we can 
do the resurfacing under the supervision of the RDA because the road has to be reinstated, in 
fact, by either the CWA or the WMA, but we have now a calendar and this is going to be one 
of the priorities. 

The Chairperson: The last question on this page. Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Minister  has  just  mentioned  the  Road  Decongestion 
Programme. I can’t anything in here for the Ring Road. Is that not going to be budgeted for in 
this coming year? 

31 

 
Mr Bodha: As regards the Ring Road, we are repairing the Ring Road Phase I. The 
Capital Budget provides also, as regards to the decongestion programme, we have established 
an order of priority. It is the Jumbo-Phoenix project grade separator first; the A1-M1 Bridge 
second, and the Ring Road Phase II, that is, the tunnel third. 

The Chairperson: Page 189. Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Item  31113.403  –  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation  (a)  Roads  and 
Bridges. May I ask the hon. Minister to circulate the list, especially, for the northern region 
for the rehabilitation and maintenance of roads? 

Mr Bodha: I will do that, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 31113.404  (a) Rehabilitation of Steel Bridges, may  I 
know from the hon. Minister whether we are talking about Le Pont Grande Rivière and where 
the project stands? 

Mr Bodha: As regards Pont Grande Rivière, we are doing a test to see whether the 
base of the bridge is still solid and we will proceed from there. We have asked the consultants 
to do the test as regard the strength of the bridge because we would like to open it on a one-
year basis. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Item 31113.403 – Maintenance and Rehabilitation (c) Road Marking 
and Signage. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has looked into the quality of 
paint  which  has  been  of  a  bad  quality  -  over  the  years,  we  have  been  asking  questions  – 
whether there have been studies and by whom, and whether there is a programme of work for 
the whole island, en termes de délocalisation des responsabilités? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson, 

the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has granted us Rs200 m., in fact, for road signage, road markings, pavements 
and this has to be done in the next months. We have set up a Committee, in fact, to see to it 
that this money is spent and well spent.  

As regards the technology, I totally agree with the hon. Member, a lot of things have 
changed. In fact, we have only one company to do road marking in Mauritius and we should 
be able to have the latest technology and I think that this is a very good question and we will 
see to it that with the Rs200 m., we’ll have the best. 

 
The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

32 

Dr. Sorefan: Under the same item 31113.403 – (b) Footpaths, will the hon. Minister 

give us a list of the footpaths that he is contemplating to be done in this financial year? 

Mr Bodha: We will do that, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ramful! 

Mr  Ramful:  On  the  same  item  –  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation  of  Roads  and 
Bridges,  can  I  have  confirmation  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  that  would  include  the 
Cavendish Bridge which is found at Ville Noire? 

Mr Bodha: You would like to know whether the Cavendish Bridge is being included 

in this list of maintenance. It’s Cavendish Bridge in Mahebourg? 

Mr Ramful: Yes. 

Mr Bodha: I think we did a study. I answered a PQ. I think we are doing some works 

there. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Under item 31113.004 concerning the Construction of St Denis Bridge 
at  Chamarel,  could  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  design  stage  has  been 
completed and whether works will start in 2017? 

Mr Bodha: Construction of St Denis Bridge at Chamarel? 

Mr Jhuboo: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Construction of St. Denis Bridge at Chamarel.  Any other question 

on page 189?  No! 

Mr Bodha: St Denis Bridge, Chamarel. 

The Chairperson: Yes. So, we pass on to page 190 pending the fact that the replies 

are coming. Page 190!  Yes. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  21110.001,  I  find  that  the  posts  of  Senior  Inspector, 
Inspector,  Senior  Procurement  and  Supply  Officer  are  vacant  and  no  provision  has  been 
made.  Can  I  know  what  will  happen  to  these  posts:  Senior,  Inspector,  Inspector,  Senior 
Procurement and Supply Officer? 

 
Mr Bodha: These recruitments will have to be done by the Ministry of Finance and 

33 

Economic Development, by the Central Procurement Office. 

(Interruptions) 

The recruitment of Inspector is being carried at the PSC level. So, we don’t know when this 
exercise is going to be carried out. 

The Chairperson: Any other question on page 190? Page 191! Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Under  item  22060  –  Maintenance,  an  amount  of  Rs4  m.  has  been 

earmarked. I would like to know for which building, for which item it is. 

Mr Bodha: In the meantime, as regards Chamarel, the design is being carried out. For 
maintenance,  on  page  191,  we  have  a  series  of  buildings,  we  have  meetings,  expenses  for 
maintenance of buildings of the different offices of the Electrical Services Division, which is 
not  provided  under  the  Lease  Agreement.  We  have  also  plant  and  equipment;  we  have 
vehicles  and  motorcycles  maintenance,  the  re-roofing  of  Curepipe  road.  These  are  the 
maintenance costs. 

Vote 9-1 Public Infrastructure (Rs2,472,200,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport was called. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  have  two  questions,  Madam.  Under  item  22120.02  -  Fees  to 
Chairperson and Members of Boards and Committees, can the hon. Minister give us some 
details being given the sum and also under item 22120.08 - Fees to Consultants, we are being 
asked to vote Rs15 m. Can we have a breakdown if there are one, two or three consultants 
and how have they been recruited? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson,  it  is  provision  provided  for  payment  of  fees  to 
Chairperson,  Members  of  Boards  and  Committees.  It  is  the  Motor  Vehicle  Arbitration 
Committee  which,  in  fact,  arbitrates  when  you  have  a  constat  à  l’amiable  in  the  case  of 
insurances  when  you  have  accidents.  It  is  the  National  Road  Safety  Council,  the  Road 
Transport Advisory Council, the Traffic Impact Committee, the NTC Appeal Committee, the 
Bid Evaluation Committee and the Departmental Committees. The increase is due to the PRB 
Report 2016, Madam. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Item  22030  –  Rent,  may  we  know  why  there  is  a  doubling  of  the 

amount catered for as compared to last year? 

34 

 
Mr Bodha: It is charges for office space at Air Mauritius Building, 12th floor for the 
Land  Transport  Division;  provision  for  6  reserved  parking  slots  in  Port  Louis;  rental  of 
facilities for events. The additional provision has been made to accommodate the finance, the 
store and the Motor Vehicle Insurance Committee under the same roof at the Air Mauritius 
Building. 

Mr Baloomoody: On the item of fees, the hon. Minister just mentioned a Board, may 

we know who is the Chairman of the Arbitration Board and who are the Members? 

Mr Bodha: Mr Panglose. 

Mr Uteem: On the same items of fees to Chairperson and Members of Boards and 
Committees  and  fees  to  Consultants,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  circulate  the  package 
given to each Board Member and Consultant? 

Mr Bodha: I will certainly do that, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: Yes. Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Under item 22060.003 -  Plant and Equipment (a) Traffic Lights, Rs20 
m. Can the hon. Minister give us a list of the places where the traffic lights will be installed? 
About  the  speed  cameras,  again  can  we  have  a  list  where  these  speed  cameras  will  be 
installed, their date of operation, the suppliers and the operator? 

Mr Bodha: We will certainly do that, Madam Chairperson. The most important thing 
as regards speed cameras is to make an audit of the system as it is now because I don’t think 
that it is… 

(Interruptions) 

No, this is expenditure for the new cameras but, the cameras will not be installed up and until 
we have an audit of the system as it is today. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Coming  back  to  the  same  item,  in  fact,  it  is  with  regard  to 
maintenance, it is not the purchase of new equipment. I will go to the maintenance of speed 
cameras. May we know whether all the speed cameras are operational because we remember, 
at times, there was one which had been cut with a grinder? 

Mr Bodha: Well, all have been reinstated, Madam Chairperson. I have a list where 
new traffic lights will be installed so this is to inform hon. Bhagwan. Of course, junction at 
Mont Roches along Saint Martin Road, it was a request and I think it is a genuine one.  

35 

 
As  regards  the  speed  cameras,  it  is  the  maintenance  for  speed  cameras  and  back 
office, but it also includes the renewal of the software licence and the calibration of each and 
every camera.   

Mr Uteem: Again on the issue of speed cameras, can the hon. Minister tell us which 

company has obtained the award for the maintenance of the speed cameras? 

Mr Bodha: In fact, the whole system has been designed and installed by ProGuard 
Limited for the last three  years. We made a tender to have a maintenance contract and, in 
fact, we ended up again with ProGuard Limited.  

Dr.  Sorefan:  It  was  on  the  same  item  -  speed  cameras,  but  the  hon.  Minister  has 

already given part of the answer. Why did we go again with ProGuard Limited? 

Mr Bodha: I explained it. In fact… 

The Chairperson: The Minister just explained, you should have listened! 

Mr Bodha: We launched an open advertised bidding for the maintenance and there 
was only one bid. That is why I said that we are going to do an audit of the system at present 
and then we will upgrade the system.  

Mr  Mahomed:  While  the  auditing  is  being  done,  are  the  cameras  functioning, 

because we are paying heftily for their maintenance? Are they working now fully? 

Mr Bodha: They are working.  

The Chairperson: Page 196, hon. Bhagwan!  

Mr Bhagwan: I have three questions in one for the Minister, Madam. First, it is under 
item 31113.001 Construction of Traffic Centres (a) Ebène.  It is a long outstanding project 
and  the  land  is  there.  Can  the  Minister  give  us  a  brief  about  the  planning?  Under  item 
31113.311  (f)  Road  Safety  Observatory,  can  we  have  some  details  about  the  expenditure 
which  is  being  earmarked?  Under  item  22900.952  (c)  Education  Program,  can  he  give  us 
some details? 

Mr Bodha: For the road safety I am going to wait for some additional information. 
With regard to Ebène, the traffic centre at Ebène is to cater mostly for bus transport which 
has  been  estimated  at  Rs200  m.  and  the  project  has  already  obtained  the  clearance  of  the 
Project Plans Committee. The project is planned to be completed in two years. It will start 
end 2017.  

36 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Under  the  item  22900.952  –  implementation  of  National  Road  Safety 
Strategy (a) Road Safety Audit & Hazardous Roads, is the amount budgeted to carry out a 
survey and, if it is so, has tender already been launched and has the consultant already been 
recruited? 

Mr Bodha: There was a question as regards to road safety talks. Road safety talks 
were delivered to around 135 primary schools and touching about 12,000 pupils at the III and 
IV  Standards  in  2015.  A  new  programme  is  being  set  up  to  provide  a  continuum  of  road 
safety education throughout the education cycle starting from the pre-primary. In fact, this is 
the contribution of the Ministry of Education to the Road Safety Programme. 

As  regards  the  National  Road  Safety  Strategy,  the  issue  was  about  the  consultancy 
services. It is to set up a road crash investigation and research team to collect vital road crash 
data and to carry out analysis. At least four teams will be constituted for that purpose with 
professionals  from  the  Police  Department,  Forensic  Laboratory,  TMRSU,  RDA  and 
psychologists trained and equipped to study and monitor accident causation particularly what 
we  call  the  care  side  in  the  killed  and  serious  injury  accidents.  So  these  trainings  will  be 
provided by experts from a centre of accident research and road safety. 

The Chairperson: I am just drawing your attention to the fact that I have got a long 
list of those who want to ask questions on page 196, but we have exceeded the time allotted 
by already half an hour.  So, on this page, I will allow four more questions and then we will 
move on to the next page.  According to my list, we have hon. Fowdar, hon. Mahomed, hon. 
Ramful and hon Baloomoody. Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I will come to item 31122 (c) Speed 
Cameras.    I  want  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  we  are  going  to  use  the  same 
model of camera that we are using now or we are going to improve to average speed check, a 
new model? 

Mr Bodha: The present system, Madam Chairperson, started three years back and I 
think  we  have  many  generations  of  speed  cameras  since  then.    What  is  important  is  that 
today, people just slow in front of the camera and they start accelerating just after the stretch 
where we have the camera.  What we are thinking of is to have what we call point to point 
average speed check and this will need an upgrading of the system.  That is why I said we 
will do an audit first. 

37 

 
Mr Mahomed: Under item 26313.990 Expenses i.c.w ex-Mauritius Land Transport 
Authority.    So  if  it  is  ‘ex’  why  are  we  being  asked  to  vote  Rs11  m.  for  this  year?  
Furthermore, the  remit of this department was to spearhead the  Light Rail Transit Project, 
since it is now ‘ex’, which department of the Government is going to spearhead the Metro 
Express Project? 

Mr Bodha: Today, it is being spearheaded by the Prime Minister’s Office.  This was 
said. Once we are going to have the report of the re-assessment by the Singapore Corporation 
Enterprise, then we will have a proper project management unit.  From what I have been told 
is as regard to this Budget, it is an outstanding payment that we still owe for consultancy for 
the SCE. 

Mr  Ramful:  Concerning  Speed  Cameras  -  can  we  have  a  list  of  the  places  where 

those new speed cameras are going to be placed? 

Mr Bodha: We will certainly do that, Madam Chairperson. 

Mr Baloomoody: Madam Chairperson, with regard to the Implementation of National 
Road Safety Strategy, there is one item (e) where we are supposed to vote Rs19 m. for Traffic 
Calming Measures. 

Mr Bodha: These are the speed breakers.  From the past, we have tried a number of 
techniques, we have had the speed breaker; we have the rumbles. So, what is being done, in 
one place in Vacoas, we have something, we have some bricks where you have a thickness … 

(Interruptions) 

No.  And then, you have a level space and then you go down.  The idea is to prevent people 
from speeding in urban areas. 

The Chairperson:  Page 198, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 198, item 22030  Rent. Last year, it was Rs9.4 m. and this 
year it is Rs12 m. And also a second item, if I am allowed, item 22120, Fees, last year it was 
Rs10 m. and this year there has been a substantial increase from Rs10 m. to Rs42 m.  May we 
have details on the breakdown of this figure fees and also in relation to which item these fees 
are being paid for? 

Mr  Bodha:  It  relates  to  the  lease  agreement  between  the  Mauritius  Secondary 
Industries Ltd. and the National Transport Authority.  The agreement has been renewed and 
the  monthly  rent  is  Rs700,000.    The  building  has  been  leased  to  the  National  Transport 

 

38 

Authority since 2000 and the lease agreement was renewed.  The assessment for rent is being 
carried  out  by  the  Valuation  and  Real  Estates  Consultancy  Services  of  the  Valuation 
Department.  So, the payment as at 30 June is Rs9.4 m. 

As  regards  item  22120  fees,  as  from  16  August  2016  with  the  privatisation  of  the 
vehicle examination centre, the National Transport Authority will be using the equipment of 
the operators for the examination of the vehicles pending the new law which will allow the 
private companies to be operating on their own.  Accordingly, the operators will have to be 
compensated  for  the  technical  assistance  and  the  use  of  equipment  during  this  transition 
period of one year. 

Dr. Sorefan: Under item 25, Subsidies – Free Travel Scheme, may we know from the 
hon. Minister whether the same old formula is being used for the last five years because we 
are  being  asked  to  vote  Rs1  billion?    What  actions  had  been  taken  for  those  who  did  not 
accede to our elders, especially the private buses? 

Mr Bodha: As regards the free travel system, we know that there are a number of 
flaws  and  weaknesses  in  the  system  and  we  need  to  re-engineer  it.  So,  in  fact,  we  have  a 
study  which  is  being  carried  out.    The  contract  was  signed  today.    It  is  a  study  by 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers funded by l’Agence Française de Développement au titre de R 15 
million to re-assess the system and to see what would be the best way to spend the free travel 
budget and secondly, to re-structure the NTA and the CNT.  So, we all know that we have a 
number of issues.  We have also the issue about school buses which we increased last year 
because we reduced the number of students travelling per bus.  When we will have the report, 
then we will be able to re-engineer the free travel system because, indeed, it is a huge budget 
and we should see to it that the budget is used properly. 

Mr Baloomoody: Let me come back to the issue of fees again.  The hon. Minister 
replied that it is transitional, only for the next few months.  But provision has been made for 
the next two years, from Rs10 m. to Rs42 m.  

(Interruptions) 

Under item 22120 fees. So, it cannot be only for the transitional period.  Can we have more 
details? 

Mr Bodha: It is fees to Chairman and members of the Board and Committees. It is 
fees  to  Mauritius  Post.  It  is  fees  for  training  and  fees  for  vehicle  examination  during  this 
transition period. 

39 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:    Concerning  Free  Travel  Scheme,  can  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  a 
breakdown of the amount paid to the different bus companies and private operators during the 
past two years and for the year which we are being asked to vote.  Under the sub heading 
.013 Supply of Bus Passes (Free Travel), how many bus passes have been issued for students 
and old-age pensioners? 

 Mr Bodha: As regards the free travel, the monthly payment for the compensation to 
the  bus  companies  is  Rs104  m.;  the  CNT:  Rs27  m.,  private  companies:    Rs31  m  and 
individual buses Rs40 m.  The monthly payment is Rs104 m. and the CNT gets Rs27 m.; 
private companies – Rs31 m.; individual buses - Rs40 m. And we have also the dedicated 
school buses which is Rs1.8 m. For the supply of bus passes; I don’t have the number which 
has been issued.  We know who are the people who are qualified.  They are eligible disabled 
persons, students, the elderly.  So, I will have this information given to you a bit later. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, under the item Free Travel Scheme for Disabled 
Persons. May I know from the hon. Minister what transport schemes are there for disabled 
persons? 

Mr Bodha:  The bus passes are issued only to eligible disabled persons whose details 
are sent to the Road Transport Commissioner by the Ministry of Social Security, National 
Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions.  So,  applications  are  sent  directly  to  the  NTA.    The 
applications  have  to  go  through  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and 
Reform Institutions. I think there are people who are on the Social Register. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  As  per  the  Strategic  Note,  Improved  for  free  transport  service  for 
students  by  increasing  the  number  of  school  buses  by  59,  which  the  hon.  Minister  has 
mentioned that there has been an increase. On one side Government is increasing the buses to 
the students, but on the other side we are still paying the same amount, about Rs1.2 billion to 
private  buses;  how  does  that  tally?  Because  Government  is  helping  to  give  students  free 
travel and at the same time the private buses are being paid. 

The Chairperson:  We have understood your question! 

Mr Bodha:  The study will enable us, Madam Chairperson, to re-engineer completely 
the whole system with the introduction of the MetroExpress because  many of the students 
will be travelling by the MetroExpress and the integration of the MetroExpress with the bus 
network. 

Vote 9-2 Land Transport (Rs2,053,200,000)was, on question put, agreed to. 

 
Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

40 

Scientific Research was called. 

Mr  Mahomed:    We  have  been  asked  to  vote  a  substantive  budget  for  nine-year 
schooling.  It is at page 200, Main Achievements.  It talks about a new curriculum for primary 
education, but nothing is mentioned for a new curriculum for the nine-year schooling project 
for which we know that the curriculum is the heart of the education system. 

The Chairperson:  But this is a policy question!  It is not related to cost, I can’t allow 

it! 

Mr Baloomoody:  Madam Chairperson, on page 203, item 21110.001, Co-ordinator, 
Health and Anti-Drug.  There will be a Co-ordinator for Health and Anti-Drug.  May I know 
whether this person has been recruited and, if so, how does it function because we are going 
to have only one for the whole Ministry? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: So, for the Co-ordinator for Health and Anti-Drug, there 
is no one actually attending this function right now, but two educators will be called upon to 
perform  the  duties  of  Co-ordinator.  They  have  now  returned  to  school.    Following  the 
advertisement  by  the  Public  Service  Commission  to  fill  the  post,  no  candidate  was  found 
suitable. Now, we are planning to review the Scheme of duties so as to be able to fill the post. 

Mr Uteem:  On same page, Counselling Service Manager.  May I know from the hon. 
Minister what function will be performed by this Counselling Service Manager, and whether 
this position has been filled? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The Counselling Service Manager will be responsible to 
administer the counselling service, to plan and coordinate the work of the Senior Educational 
Psychologist, to advise on the formulation of policies and designing of programmes relating 
to    psychological,  pedagogical  practices  and  guidance  of  counselling  services  and  also  to 
work 
in  collaboration  with  other  Ministries,  para-statal  bodies,  Non-Governmental 
Organisations for the conduct of guidance and counselling, sensitisation sessions for pupils, 
teachers and families. 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Chairperson, I don’t see anything about career guidance on the 

Key Actions, can I ask the hon. Minister whether it has been removed from the Ministry? 

41 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The Career Guidance Unit is at the Ministry, but a major 
part of the work is also being done at the level of the HRDC. But we are, in fact, reviewing 
the whole unit after its recent re-introduction at the Ministry of Education. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    On  the  same  page,  what  about  the  Senior  Physical  Education 

Organiser?  Has this post been filled? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The post of Principal Physical Education Organiser, we 
have got one in post. And the Senior Physical Education Organiser’s post is vacant and will 
be filled after the Public Service Commission advertises for the post. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Can I refer the hon. Minister to the last item on page 204, Health 
and Welfare Division. There is a Director for Health and Wellness and an Assistant Director 
for Health and Wellness.  May I know whether these posts have been filled? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  No,  the  posts  have  not  been  filled.  In  fact,  we  have 
advertised the posts, but we could not fill the posts. So, what is being planned to do now is 
that we are planning to advertise the post at the level of the Public Service Commission and 
fill them. In fact, we are trying now to look for a General Practitioner with at least 10 years’ 
of proven experience relevant to the common problems afflicting schoolchildren. 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 205, World Hindi Secretariat. Can the hon. Minister inform 
us about the latest position concerning the building which was supposed to be constructed at 
Phoenix and how the World Hindi Secretariat is run actually? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  In fact, the land has already been invested in the World 
Hindi Secretariat and the funding will be done  by the  Govt of  India. The building will be 
funded  by  the  Government  of  India.  In  fact,  we  have  got  a  collaboration.    The  budgetary 
provisions for the past year was Rs5,129,000, whereas for the coming year, it is a budget of 
Rs14 m. A sum of Rs7 m. will be provided by the Government of Mauritius. 

Mr Mahomed:  Item 22120.008 (a) Study on Green Jobs.  We are asked to vote Rs3 
m.  for  this.  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  in  2013  the  International  Labour  Organisation 
together with the University of Mauritius conducted a green job assessment for Mauritius? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Obviously, Madam Chairperson. The work has not been 
properly done. That is why we have to propose for new studies to be carried out and this will 
be mainly in terms of jobs that would be required in these fields and we are having funds 
from l’Agence Française de Développement for this particular project. 

42 

 
The  objective  of  the  project  is  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  the  demand  and  offer 
regarding green jobs, both in Mauritius and Rodrigues, the needs in terms of adaptation of 
existing training programmes for a better consideration of environmental stakes in the sectors 
where this adaptation is most necessary, so as to allow better integration of green skills in the 
offer of training at the MITD. 

The Chairperson: I remind hon. Members to ask brief questions and hon. Ministers 

to reply briefly.  Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: I am coming back to the World Hindi Secretariat again. Why is there an 

increase of nearly Rs2 m. for the forthcoming year? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  an  increase  of  Rs2  m.  is  because  now  the 
Secretariat is going to be operational. We have already recruited the Secretary General and 
we have also to recruit the Deputy Secretary General. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under item 22120, Fees, .008 (b) National Strategy for Development of 
HR, a sum of Rs7 m. has been voted. Has the consultant been identified, and if yes, who is 
he? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  the  consultant  has  not  been  identified  yet.    He 
will  have  to  come  and  work  on  the  Vision  mission  and  focus  on  the  future  skills, 
methodology and the Action Plan of the HRDC. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  In  relation  to  Studies  and  Surveys,  item  22130  –  Nine  Year 
Continuous Basic Education, we are asked to vote a sum of Rs10 m.   But, as we know, Nine 
Year Schooling is coming into operation next year. So, how come next year, we are going to 
do the studies and surveys? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, for the Nine Year Schooling, a lot of 
work has to be carried out; surveys in terms of requirements, as far as training is concerned. 
All  this  will  have  to  be  carried  out,  and  it  is  being  done.  Presently,  a  large  number  of 
educators are being trained, and such surveys will be required. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 26313.201, Current Grant icw Nine Year Continuous Basic 
Education.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  a  list  of  all the  institutions which  are  going  to 
benefit from this grant and the amount of grant that they will receive? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I’ll circulate the information. 

43 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:  Let  me  come  back  again  to  that  Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic 
Education and link it to the grant that we are going to give to the institution.  On what basis 
are we giving the grant to these institutions when we have not done any survey yet, and now 
we are going to do a survey? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  No,  the  grant  is  not  only  related  to  surveys.  The  grant 
will be with respect to - for example, if I take the MIE - content development, to the training, 
to staffing, to assessment and evaluation.  The same for MES; we will need again training of 
staff, assessment and evaluation.  All this will be required and the fund is for that. 

The Chairperson: Last question on page 205!  

Mr Baloomoody: The Nine Year Schooling will be operational in January, and now 
the hon. Minister is informing us that we have to do teaching of staff, etc. Has this not been 
done yet? May I know whether we have spent any money on this? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: It has already been started and it is an ongoing process. 

Each year, teachers will change. Teachers move on with their students. 

The Chairperson: Page 206. Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Under Item 31112.002, construction of schools and item 311122.999, 
Acquisition of Other Machinery and Equipment, there is a sum of Rs525 m. plus Rs175 m., 
making a total of Rs700 m. The Budget Speech states the Nine Year Schooling will cost Rs2 
billion. Here, we see a figure that is far below. So, can the hon. Minister shed some light on 
this? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Chairperson, the Nine Year Schooling is being 
done in phase. For this Budget year, we have Rs580 m. that has been given. I can circulate 
the  breakup.  We  know  that  there  are  about  Rs20  m.  going  for  the  upgrading  of  primary 
schools; Rs18 m. for curriculum and textbooks, content development; Rs250 m. for digital 
resources;  Rs3  m.  for  continuous  professional  development  of  school  staff;  recruitment  of 
educators,  Rs115  m.;  enhanced  meals  for  ZEP  schools;  giving  up  of  impetus  to  the  SEN 
sector; regional scholarship for Special Education Needs students, TVET reforms, setting up 
of polytechnics. All this will be included. 

Mr Uteem: Page 206, under item 31112.002,  Construction and Extension of Schools, 

is there a list where the new schools will be located? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I’ll circulate same. 

44 

 
Mr Baloomoody: Under Capital Grants, item 26323.071, Pre-Primary Schools - (a) 
Early  Childhood  Care  and  Education  Authority,  the  project  for  is  for  Rs6  m.  and  we  are 
allocating  only  Rs500,000  for  the  coming  year.  May  we  know  how  that  Authority  is 
functioning? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The Authority is for the organisation of the pre-primary 
sector, and the Early Childhood Care and Education Authority takes care of all the primary 
units that we have. 

Mr Baloomoody: The members of that Authority. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  I  will  circulate  the  number  of  staff  involved  in  the 

Authority. 

Mr Mahomed: On that same Authority, Rs500,000 only is being provided for. Is that 

sufficient to cater for the budget of an Authority? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: For the Early Childhood Care Education  Authority, we 
have Rs33 m.  We also have funds going to the public pre-primary schools, and we have the 
private pre-primary schools. So, the amount going to the public pre-primary schools would be 
Rs157 m. and for the private pre-primary, Rs58 m. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  We  are  talking  about  the  budget.  I  don’t  know  where  the  hon. 
Minister gets the sum of Rs157 m. It is not in the budget.  On the public pre-primary schools, 
the project value is Rs34,790,000, and for the coming year we are projecting Rs8 m. So, may 
we know exactly? Can we have a list of the public schools which would benefit from that 
expenditure? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The information will be circulated. 

The Chairperson: Pages 207 and 208! Page 209! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 209, item .005 - Extra Assistance, there has been a huge 
increase from Rs18 m. to Rs26 m. may we have the details of the breakdown of this amount? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  payment  under  extra  assistance  goes  for  supply 

teachers, support teachers, project managers ZEP, cluster coordinators and parent mediator. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  item  22120.007  -  Fees  for  Training.    It  has  come  up  from 

Rs156,000 to Rs3 m. may we know for what purpose? 

45 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Under item Fees for Training, funds will be used for the 
payment  of  fees  to  resource  persons  in  respect  of  the  training  of  Headmasters,  Deputy 
Headmasters,  Mentors,  Assistant  School  Superintendents  and  School  Clerks.  The  training 
courses will aim at improving leadership, managerial and administrative skills. 

Mr  Uteem:  Under  item  22120.025  -  Fees  to  Oriental  Language  Teachers,  there  is 
Rs28 m. earmarked and, at the same time, when  you look at the establishment there is no 
increase in the number  of teachers, senior teachers of Oriental  Language. So, may  I know 
from the hon. Minister how many people benefit from this fee to Oriental language teachers 
and why are they not on the establishment? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: They are not teachers on the establishment for Oriental 
Languages.  These  are  teachers  who  are  operating  in  NGOs  and  sociocultural  set  ups.  We 
have 21,239 pupils for Hindi, 11,498 students for Urdu, 2,421 for Tamil, 1,068 for Telugu, 
412 for Modern Chinese, 967 for Marathi and if I talk now about the teachers, for Hindi you 
have 789, Urdu and Arabic 450, Tamil 108, Telugu 45, Modern Chinese 17, Marathi 40, a 
total of 1,449 teachers. 

Mr  Mahomed:  On  page  209,  item  26210.183  -  Contribution  to  International 
Organisations.    Do  we  not  contribute  to  the  UNESCO  because  UNESCO  has  been 
complaining lately that they have got a lot of financial problems? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  With  regard  to  the  current  grant  to  international 
organisations, we contribute to the Southern and Eastern African Consortium for Monitoring 
Educational Quality and we have contributions made to the CONFEMEN, the UNESCO and 
the ADEA. 

Mr Baloomoody: Item 22900.935 - Summer/Winter School Programme.  Do we still 
have this programme and, if so, can the hon. Minister give a list of primary schools where 
this programme is being run? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I will circulate the list. 

Mr  Quirin:  At  page  209,  under  items  22070  and  22090  -  Cleaning  Services  and 
Security respectively. May we know if the contracts have already been awarded and, if yes, to 
whom? 

46 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The contracts for cleaning services have been awarded to 
Mauriclean  Ltd  and  New  Cleaning  Services.  For  Security,  I  find  that   Defence  Hitech 
Security Services Ltd have got the contract. I will circulate the list of schools involved. 

The Chairperson: Page 210! 

Mr Bhagwan:  At page 219, under item 31122.802 - Acquisition of Equipment for 
Sankoré Project. I have two questions. Can the hon. Minister inform the House how many 
schools are actively engaged in the Sankoré Project and give us some details?  

Under  item  31122.823  -  Acquisition  of  Equipment  for  Early  Digital  Learning 
Programme. May we have some details about the amount which has been earmarked and the 
number of equipment which is supposed to be purchased and which schools will be involved 
in the programme? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  All  schools  are  involved  in  the  Sankoré  Programme.  I 

will circulate information regarding the equipment purchased. 

Mr Fowdar: At page 210, under item 28211.040 Parent Teachers’ Association (PTA) 
(Parent Aided Primary Schools Association.  May we know from the hon. Minister whether 
these grants are meant to cover expenses towards activities organised by the PTA or is it to 
cover expenses of the schools? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the PTA receives money for activities as well as 

for payment in certain cases for staff involved in the cleaning of the premises. 

Mr Bhagwan: Since yesterday we have been asking questions. Madam Chairperson, 
we have been Ministers also.  Every time Ministers say that replies will be circulated.  Can I 
appeal to the Chair, in the past years we have seen that replies are not circulated.  It will be in 
Hansard and we will be following up to see that  these replies be circulated at appropriate 
time. 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Member,  I  take  the  point  which  has  been  raised.  I  would 
request hon. Ministers to give replies as far as possible, but where the reply is very long and 
they think they would take time to give this reply then they can circulate the reply. For lists 
which are requested, they can circulate; but, where facts and arguments are concerned, then 
they will have to give the reply. 

47 

 
Mr Baloomoody: Can I refer the hon. Minister to the grants to the Roman Catholic 
Education Authority? Can we know from the hon. Minister whether the RCEA schools will 
be converted into Academy Colleges when it comes to the Nine-Year Schooling? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Chairperson, this is a question regarding a policy 

of the RCEA. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  If  we  are  giving  grant,  it  is  specific  and  it  is  mentioned  for  the 
Nine-Year  Schooling,  so  may  we  know  whether  they  will  be  part  of  the  Nine-  Year 
Schooling? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Chairperson,  the  Academy  is  part  of  the 

secondary education. When we talk about RCEA, we are talking about Primary sub sector. 

Mr Uteem: I think what my hon. friend is asking is whether they are part of the Nine-

Year Schooling, or not. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Bureau  d’Education  Catholique  has  expressed  its 

wish to join and to be part of the Reform. 

Mr  Uteem:  At  page  210,  under  item  Acquisition  of  Non-Financial  Assets,  there  is 
construction  and  upgrading  of  schools.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  amount 
budgeted  for  the  construction  or  upgrading  of  schools  for  the  integration  of  children  with 
disabilities? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Chairperson,  the  funds  are  not  attributed  thus, 
but obviously, it goes into the whole amount that is required for upgrading of schools. We 
have  not  made  a  special  provision  here,  however,  we  do  have  funds  for  the  setting  up  of 
resource centres for children with special education needs. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Chairperson,  under  item  31122.823  in  relation  to  the 
Acquisition  of  Equipment  for  Early  Digital  Learning  Programme,  the  hon.  Minister  stated 
that  she  would  circulate  the  list  of  equipment.    Can  I  ask  her  all  about  this  Early  Digital 
Learning Programme? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  Madam  Chairperson,  we  are  providing  digital 
tablets to students in grades I and II as from next year. The equipment will include the racks 
for the tablets, the electrical units that have to be set up, the servers, etc. 

48 

 
Mr  Ramano:  Under  item  28212  Transfers  to  Households,  there  has  been  a 
supplementary increase from Rs73 m. to Rs110 m. Can we know from the hon. Minister what 
the difference stands for? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  This  is,  in  fact,  because  of  the  increase  in  the  funds 

available for the School Feeding Programme in the ZEP schools. 

Mr Mahomed: Under the same vote 31122.823 Acquisition of Equipment for Early 
Digital Learning Programme, in the House we heard before that at secondary school level, it 
did not quite work for numerous reasons.  Have we catered for these reasons because we are 
being asked to vote Rs500 m. for this project? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Chairperson,  we  are  using  the  tablets  at  the  level  of  the 
primary school, placing within the tablets all the educational resource materials required so that children 
do not have to carry their heavy bags to school. These will be kept at school and the students will have to 
learn to use the tablet as a tool for their learning. Furthermore, we are coming up with connectivity in 
another  vote  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  for  the 
connectivity at the level of the schools.  

Mr Baloomoody: Coming back to the tablets, we know there was in the past a project 
for the tablets which has been a total failure and a lot of money has been wasted. Have we 
identified a specific supplier who can guarantee not only the supply, but also the servicing of 
these tablets? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: We do agree that the former project was not a very good 
one, but now we are proceeding very cautiously and we will be working together with the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to determine how the supply will be made. 

The Chairperson: Last question! 

Mr Uteem: Is there any amount earmarked in that programme for installation of WIFI 

in the schools for these digital tablets? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: This is not in my vote. This is in the vote of the Ministry 

of Technology, Communication and Innovation. 

Mr Quirin: Under item 31112.402 Upgrading of Schools, can the hon. Minister table 
a list of all the schools which are going to be upgraded and, of course, if they have already 
been identified? 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Yes, Madam Chairperson, I will circulate it. 

49 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  In  relation  to  the  tablets,  that  is,  item  31122.823  Acquisition  of 
Equipment for Early Digital Learning Programme, the hon. Minister stated earlier that there 
was  a  programme.  But  the  programme  that  we  had  earlier  cost,  I  think,  almost  a  billion 
rupees.  What will happen to this project in relation to the new project that is being launched 
now? Will it be scrapped or will it be incorporated in this project? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: This is a policy decision, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 12.56 the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.04 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in Chair.  

The Deputy Speaker: Page 211. Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  In respect of item 21110 - Rectors. There is an increase from 42 to 62 
rectors. So, do I take it that they are going to be 20 more schools or where will the additional 
Rectors house? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: There are a number of acting Rectors who will need to be 

nominated. 

Mr Uteem:  My question is easy. We are increasing the number from 42 to 62. So, do 
we have 62 colleges for these Rectors?  Does it take into consideration new schools that are 
being constructed?   

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  There  are  vacancies.  There  are  about  25  vacancies  and 

we are filling the vacancies. 

Mr Mahomed:  With respect to General Workers, we are passing from 93 to 242.  
May we know when will they be in office because many schools are complaining that there is 
a lack of attendants and General Workers? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  recruitment  is  being  done  and  the  vacancies  are 

being filled.   

Mr  Baloomoody:    Home  Economics  Attendant  -  we  see  no  provision  for  home 

economics attendant.  Are we abolishing this post? 

50 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The new post has been created in PRB report 2016. A 
new  draft  scheme  of  service  has  been  referred  to  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and 
Administrative Reforms for its prescription.  As soon as the scheme of service is prescribed, 
action will be taken for the funding and filling of the appropriate post. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Chairperson, on page 213, item 21110.005 Extra Assistance.  
There is an amount of Rs55 m.  Can the hon. Minister give the details and breakdown and 
also circulate it? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  funds  will  be  used  for  the  enlistment  of  supply 

teachers in State Secondary schools in all subject areas including physical education. 

Mr Mahomed:  Item 21210 - Social Contributions, for which we are being asked to 

vote Rs67.5 m. May I know what is it about, please? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Social  Contributions  are  contributions  to  the 

National Saving Funds in respect to all officers paid under this Sub-Head. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  have  two  questions.  Under  item  27210.013  -  S.C.  and  H.S.C. 
Examination  Fees.    Can  we  have  an  idea  of  the  number  of  beneficiaries  which  are  being 
targeted? I’ll ask another one. Under item 26313.133 - PSSA - Performance Grant to Private 
Secondary Schools, we are being asked to vote    Rs35 m. What is this Performance Grant? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:    For  the  first  one,  we  are  referring  to  all  SC  and  HSC 
students  sitting  for  the  examination  for  the  first  time.  Now,  for  the  Performance  Grant  to 
Private Secondary Schools, there is a component of the Comprehensive Grant Formula which 
is linked to the performance of the schools. So, the performance grant is used for the payment 
to the Private Aided Secondary Schools in line with the new Comprehensive Grant formula. 
It has an element of block and performance grant. The Performance Grant is paid on the basis 
of  achievement  of  performance 
include  among  others:  academic 
performance, participation in sports and extracurricular activities. 

indicators  which 

Mr Baloomoody:  Item 22120 Fees.   It was 589,000. Now, it is Rs2.5 m. May we 

know why there is such a tremendous increase? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The funds will be used to pay resource persons for the 
training  of  rectors,  deputy  rectors,  senior  educators,  school  superintendents,  school  clerks, 
Lab. Attendants and workshop attendants as well as library staff. 

51 

 
Mr  Uteem:    In  relation  to  item  27210.013  Social  Assistance  Benefits  -  S.C.  and 
H.S.C.  Examination  Fees,  the  amount  budgeted  for  next  year  is  the  same  as  for  last  year 
which  is  Rs310  m.  I  thought  that  the  criteria  are  being  revised  so,  why  is  the  amount  the 
same?    

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The criteria are not being revised.  The fund that is made 
available is according to the number of students sitting for exams every year. Now, for people 
going for a re-sit, they are normally paid under another vote at the level of the Ministry of 
Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, not at the level of the Ministry 
of education. 

Mr Baloomoody:  We find that there has been a tremendous increase in rent as well, 

from Rs491,000 to Rs2 m. Item 22030- Rent, on page 213.  

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  For  this  particular  item,  we  are  referring  to  rental  of 
building which turns to around Rs1.5 m. and rental facilities for events in public secondary 
schools  in  terms  of  rental  of  podiums,  salles  vertes,  sound  systems  amounting  to  about 
Rs450,000. 

Mr Mahomed:  There is a list of schools where there will be extensive construction 
and extension.  I believe there will be an extensive construction and extension for a series of 
schools. Is there a project implementation unit or department at the Ministry of Education and 
how many staff does it comprise of. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, we do have a unit and we do have support from 
the  MPI  as  well.  The  construction  work  is  done  normally  through  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure,  but  we  do  have  a  unit  comprised  of  officers  of  my  Ministry  for  the 
supervision. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  214,  in  respect  of  Acquisition  of  Non-Financial  Assets,  item 
31112.402 – Upgrading of Schools (b) R. Seeneevassen SSS, there is Rs44 m. project, but last 
year,  less  than  Rs1  m.  was  spent.  So,  may  I  know  the  reason  for  the  under  spending  and 
whether the contract has been awarded for the extension of the school? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  We  have  for  R.  Seeneevassen  Rs17  m.  made  available 
and it is for the rehabilitation of the veranda, repairs to cracks and concrete, waterproofing 
work, demolition of two classroom blocks comprising canteen, art room, toilets, classrooms 
and construction of two new blocks on ground plus three. 

 
Mr Uteem: Has the contract already been awarded? Because since last year, it was 

52 

supposed to be. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Soil test and investigation are completed. Now, drawings 

are under preparation. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  item  26323.073  Capital  Expenditure  –  Grants,  a  grant  of 
Rs11,750,000 has been earmarked for this year and Rs25,700,000 for next year to the PSSA. 
May we know for what purpose? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  For  the  PSSA,  we  have  rehabilitation  of  the  PSSA 

building, computerisation and hardware projects. 

The Chairperson: Page 216, any questions? Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Item  28211.023  –  Special  Education  Needs  Schools,  Rs90  m.  is 
budgeted. May I know from the hon. Minister which school and Day Care Centres will be 
obtaining the grant-in-aid? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: There are at present 42 NGOs running 54 registered SEN 
schools  which  are  paid  this  grant-in-aid.  The  grant-in-aid  caters  for  salaries  of  managers, 
teachers, assistant teachers, carers and handy workers as well as specialised support services 
such as psychologists, occupational therapists, speech therapists etc. The amount disbursed to 
NGOs is Rs61,263,000. 

The Chairperson: If it’s long, hon. Minister, you may circulate it. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Okay, I will circulate it. The number of NGOs is 42. 

Mr  Mohamed:  On  item  22120,  we  are  being  asked  a  sum  of  Rs200,000  for  Fees, 
when it was Rs46,000 in the previous year. May we know why, although not a big amount, 
such a huge increase, comparatively? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The fees are for the training. We are making provision 

for the training of the Special Education Needs personnel. 

Mr Baloomoody: Item 31122.821 – Acquisition of Braille PC for Visually Impaired 
Children. May we know how many children have benefitted from the provision this year and 
how many are we projecting for next year?  

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, it depends on the number of students that we have 
having these impairments. I’ll give you the number. I have the impression that it is around 54 

 

53 

students this year. 58 braille PCs have been provided for students this  year and the braille 
PCs contained also screen readers and screen magnifier software. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under the same item, may we know through  which institution these 

brail equipment are being distributed. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: To Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund and to Lizie Dan La Main. 

The Chairperson: Next page, 217. Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  On  item  28212.020  –  Student  Scholarship  Schemes  for  Vulnerable 
Households, the Budget is being increased from Rs29 m. to Rs55 m. Are we increasing the 
number of students or the amount of contribution or both? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  object  of  the  scheme  was  to  award  a  fully  funded 
scholarship  of  a  maximum  of  Rs150,000  per  academic  year  covering  tuition  fees, 
examination  fees,  books  and  a  stipend  of  Rs3,000  per  month  for  Mauritian  students  and 
Rs8,000 for Rodriguan students. The amount spent up to June 2016 was Rs7,780,000 for the 
ex-HRKAD Fund and the amount spent for the SRM scholarship is around Rs13 m. So, we 
have  extension  of  the  scholarship  of  the  ex-Human  Resource  Knowledge  and  Arts 
Development  Fund  and  payments  are  still  being  effected.  Scholarship  to  children  from 
vulnerable families, the amount has been increased … 

The Chairperson: Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun, the question was: has there been 

an increase in the number of students? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, we are now providing scholarships for students 

with Special Education Needs as well. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  respect  to  Scholarship  Scheme  to  students  with  disabilities,  may  I 
know from the hon. Minister what is the criteria and whether the Scholarship Scheme refers 
to only tertiary education or other education? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  It  will  be  for  the  tertiary  or  even  for  MITD  and 

polytechnics as well. The criteria has to be worked out. 

Dr. Sorefan: On the same item as my friend, hon. Uteem, how many students are we 

planning to give scholarships? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  For  the  Special  Education  Needs,  we  have  made 

provision for five scholarships. 

54 

 
Mr Baloomoody: On the last item on that page, Capital Expenditure, Grants to the 
Mauritius  Institute  of  Education,  there  is  an  increase  of  Rs7  m.  May  we  know  for  what 
purpose? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  the  light  of  the  Nine-Year  Continuous  Basic 

Education, training of staff, preparation of content material, curriculum development, etc. 

Mr Uteem: Under Item 28211 Transfer to non-profit institution, Rs1 m. is earmarked 

for Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam Foundation. May I know for what purpose? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: This was the Foundation that was put up earlier normally 
to provide support to children who have a need in some forms of loan, etc. but, now with the 
number  of  different  schemes  that  are  available,  very  little  requests  are  made  from  that 
particular fund. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  We  have  under  item  26  –  Grants,  which  is  the  Extra-Budgetary 
Units,  Mauritius  Institution  of  Education,  Rs240,000,000.    There  is  an  increase  of  Rs8  m. 
Then we have the Extra-Budgetary Units in Capital Expenditure Rs17 m. So, may we have 
some details? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Apart from the operational cost, in the case of MIE, we 
are talking about the Capital Budget, we also have the extension of the MIE building and the 
project value is Rs48 m. 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: On 218, the last item 22120 – Fees, last year it was Rs17,000 and 
this year it is Rs6.5 m. May we know the reason for such an increase and also the details of 
this amount? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  amount  refers  to  the  fees  to  Chairperson  and 
Members of Boards and Committees and now it is absorbed under the subhead of vote 101. 
The fees to consultants which support for system wide educational reform and development 
and  regulatory  framework  for  high  education  turns  around  Rs6,000,500  and  the  remaining 
amount, as I mentioned earlier, has been absorbed under the vote subhead 10101. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  At  the  paragraph  Capital  Expenditure  item  26323.077  concerning  the 
construction of a planetarium at Réduit for an amount of Rs153 m. Could the hon. Minister 
shed some light on that provision, please? 

55 

 
Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  We  will  have  to  acquire  exhibits  and  equipment  for  a 
value of about Rs2,800,000. The construction of the planetarium at Réduit for Rs10 m. and 
the total amounting to Rs12.8 m.  

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  219,  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission  (TEC)  Item 
26323.088  recruitment  of  foreign  lecturers.  Can  we  know  how  many  lecturers  we  are 
planning to recruit and whether some have been recruited and also, for Africa scholarships, 
how many scholarships are we planning to give to our African brothers? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: As far as the recruitment of lecturers is concerned, it is 
normally done through the universities at times, as and when required, foreign lecturers are 
made to come and to run courses and this is on an ad-hoc basis, as and when required. The 
target  groups  for  this  service  is  the  UoM,  UTM,  l’Université  des  Mascareignes,  Open 
University, MGI and the Fashion and Design Institute.  

Mr Mahomed: If I heard the hon. Minister correctly for the planetarium we are going 
to purchase about 2 million plus rupees of equipment, is that correct? And then, the building 
project  is  costing  Rs153  m.  so,  can  we  not  use  that  Rs2.7  m.  of  equipment  and  place  it 
somewhere else like, for example, the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre? 

The Chairperson: This is a policy decision. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Planetarium  is  part  of  the  Rajiv  Gandhi  Science 
Centre.  Secondly,  as  far  as  the  building  is  concerned,  it  is  being  funded  by  the  Indian 
Government. 

Dr. Sorefan: Item 26313.088 - Open University of Mauritius, may we know from the 
hon.  Minister  why  the  budget  has  gone  down  by  Rs11  m.?  Is  this  programme  not 
functioning? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Open  University  of  Mauritius  is  a  self-financing 

institution which gets money from its students as course fee as well. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  respect  to  the  grant  to  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission,  we  are 
asked  to  vote  for  an  increased  budget  of  Rs120  m.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 
whether she has carried out any investigation to find out whether any sanction has been taken 
against members of the TEC or are we still voting the budget for the same people who, in the 
past, did not perform? 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Chairperson, in fact, the previous people have left and 

56 

there are new officers who have replaced those who have left. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  In  relation  to  expenses  to  Polytechnics  item  code  22900.963,  it 
seems to be a new item because last year nothing was budgeted, but this year it is Rs25 m. 
and then it went on to Rs35 m. and Rs45 m. for the coming years. May we have some details 
on this figure? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Polytechnics  are  going  to  start  running  next  year  and, 
therefore, the operational costs are included as well. In fact, all three polytechnics will start 
operating: one in Pamplemousses, one in Montagne Blanche, one in Réduit and the financial 
details for the expenditure… 

The Chairperson: Can the hon. Minister circulate it? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I will circulate it. 

Mr Baloomoody: Coming back again to the Open University of Mauritius, for the 

capital expenditure we are allocating Rs5 m. each year, may we know for what purpose? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: For the Open University of Mauritius provision will be 

used for the acquisition of equipment and furniture. 

The Chairperson: Next page 220, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  for  the  Knowledge  Parks  Limited 
there is a loan of Rs72 m. and there is nothing for the coming years, so can I know what was 
that? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  Knowledge  Parks  Co  Ltd  was  meant  for  the 
launching  of  the  building,  the  construction  of  the  three  polytechnics.  Now  that  the 
construction has been completed, we will no longer need the Knowledge Parks of Mauritius. 

Vote  10-1  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research (Rs16,109,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life was called. 

Dr. Joomaye: Page 221 in the main achievements more than Rs8.5 m. attendances 
and  Rs2.1  m.  at  the  primary  healthcare  centres.  Can  we  have  the  breakdown  of  the  cost 
impact on the budget of the 2.1 million attendances at the primary healthcare centres? 

Mr Gayan: I will circulate the details. 

 

57 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Order, please! 

Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t waste time, please! Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes… 

(Interruptions) 

Will the hon. Minister be able to reply? 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Usher, please make sure that they come in a timely fashion we are 

losing time here! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Baloomoody!  Hon. Jhugroo, silence please! Page 224. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: We are still on page 221? 

The Chairperson: Page 221, I am sorry I could not hear! Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: We feared a walk out of the officers, fortunately they are there! 

 (Interruptions) 

Walk in!  

In  the  Strategic  Direction,  it  is  specified  that  there  will  be  promotion  of  Mauritius  as  a 
medical travel destination.  But going through the items, I have not seen any funds allocated 
to that effect. 

The Chairperson: This is a policy question. 

Mr Gayan:  Can the hon. Member repeat his question? 

The Chairperson: Hon. Member, please, we have no time to waste. Speak louder! 

58 

 
Dr. Joomaye: In the Strategic Direction, it is stipulated that there will promotion of 
Mauritius  as  a  Medical  Travel  Destination.    But  I  cannot  see  any  funds  allocated  to  that 
effect. 

Mr Gayan: The private sector, Mr Chairperson, is already doing it.  In fact, the hon. 

Member is aware of the promotion that he is doing for his Hair Clinic! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Under  Main  Achievements,  there  is  New  Operation  Theatre  block, 
including a new Cardiac Surgery Centre at Victoria Hospital operational. If this is so, may 
we  know,  especially  for  the  Cardiac  Surgery  Unit,  how  many  cardiac  surgeons  are  being 
recruited there? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I do not think that there will be need to recruit any more cardiac 

surgeons.  We have a number which is adequate for the needs of Mauritius. 

Mr Mahomed: Strategic Direction - Develop traditional medicine as an alternative 
to allopathic medicine. In the Assembly itself, the Minister said in the past that there was a 
lack  of  resources,  and  yet,  in  this  budget  we  do  not  quite  see  it,  because  in  Plaine  Verte 
Mediclinic, we have been waiting for a unit for more than a year now. The hon. Minister will 
recall. 

Mr Gayan: The idea is to develop traditional medicine, not only Ayurvedic medicine, 
but also Chinese traditional medicine and African traditional medicine.  So, we are working 
on a holistic approach with traditional medicine.  For the Plaine Verte Mediclinic, there will 
be sessional doctors there. 

Dr. Joomaye: Item Total Expenditure – Recurrent.  Regarding the key action at page 
222  for  the  shift  system  implementation,  how  much  increase  of  the  recurrent  expenditure 
would there be due to the implementation of the shift system? 

Mr Gayan: The intention is to recruit about 300 doctors, and to have a shift system 
which is fully operative.  From the workings we have done, it is going to cost about Rs50 m. 
in excess of what we are already paying in terms of overtime. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Regarding  Implementation  of  Continuing  Professional  Development 
(CPD) Programme for Medical Practitioners and Dentists, the target is next door, August of 
this  year.    Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  the  Dental  Council  has  now  advertised  for  the 
CPD? How can this be targeted for this month? 

 
Mr  Gayan:  I  am  afraid  that  the  dentists  are  a  bit  late,  because  we  have  been 

59 

announcing it for a while.   

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Member is a member of the dental professional.  He can take care of that. 

Mr Leopold: On summary of expenditure, I just want to know under which sub-head 
will the treatment, prevention and rehabilitation of substance abusers will fall, and then how 
much money has been earmarked for same. 

Mr Gayan: There will be the items later on.  Can the hon. Member hold his file until 

then? 

Mr  Jhuboo:  On  Recurrent  Expenditure,  item  21110.001,  Director,  Health  Services 
and Director Diabetes and Vascular Services, can we know from the hon. Minister why these 
posts have not yet been filled and no provision made for the coming years? 

Mr Gayan: I need to check this. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister, you can come back later for this answer. 

Mr Gayan: Yes, I will come back. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  While  the  hon.  Minister  is  looking  for  the  answer,  can  he  also 
inform us why for Quality Control Pharmacist/Chemist, no provision has been made for such 
an important post? 

The Chairperson: Perhaps you can circulate both answers. 

Mr Gayan: Yes, I will circulate both. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  225,  there  are  a  number  of  posts  that  have  been  created  for 
former NATReSA. So, may I know from the hon. Minister the number of people who were 
employed at NATReSA and who are now going to be relocated to his Ministry? 

Mr Gayan: Well, they have all been relocated to the Ministry.  They are at the Harm 
Reduction Unit, and others who are Clerical Officers and other grades have been absorbed in 
their relevant grades. 

The Chairperson: Do you have the number, hon. Minister? 

Mr Gayan: They are about 16 in all. 

The Chairperson: Do you have the answers for page 224? 

60 

 
Mr Gayan: I see it is just a blank.  So, even if I circulate, it seems that the posts have 
not been filled. Diabetes and Vascular are being run under the supervision of a Diabetologist 
and fall under the RHD of Dr. Nehru Hospital. I think that is why it has not been filled.  The 
Quality Control … 

The Chairperson: Perhaps you can circulate it hon. Minister! 

Mr Gayan: This one cannot be circulated; it is too dirty to be circulated. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Only  when  the  answer  is  long,  you  circulate.  We  have  to  ask 

supplementary questions.  If everything is circulated, then there is no point for us to be here. 

Mr Gayan: For the Quality Control, this is a post which has been proposed by the 

previous PRB, and then the Ministry decided not to go ahead with it. 

Dr. Joomaye: We can see that under the item Hospital Administrative Cadre, the post 
of  Chief  Hospital  Administrator  was  vacant  and  is  left  vacant.  It  is  not  budgeted  for  the 
coming years.  So, does that mean that we will not have a Chief Hospital Administrator? 

Mr  Gayan: Well, with regard to the post of Chief Hospital Administrator, there is 
none,  but  for  the  Deputy,  the  provision  has  been  made  to  fill  one  vacant  post  and  the 
interview will be carried out by the PSC later this month. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  relation  to  item  22130,  Studies  and  Surveys  (e)  Health  Care  Waste 
Management, there is an amount of Rs4 m. this year and Rs10 m. for the following years.  
May I know from the hon. Minister why are we still carrying out surveys when he, himself, 
stated in the Assembly, following a PQ, that the decision has been taken to have a central 
incineration for all wastes?  So, why are we still doing more surveys? 

Mr Gayan:  The reason is that we have just obtained the land at La Chaumière and it 

 
takes time to process everything.  That is why it is being… 

(Interruptions) 

The land has been acquired.  A survey has been carried out to see if it is appropriate for that 
purpose, and also the consultants.  This is the high technology, so we have to be careful about 
what we do and how we spend the money because you will be asking questions later on as to 
why  we spend that kind of money. 

Mr  Mahomed:  At  page  227,  under  item  22200,  Overseas  Travel  (Treatment  & 
Incoming  Medical  Teams).    The  budget  is  being  increased  from  Rs17  m.  to  Rs37.5 m..  Is 

 

61 

there any particular reason for that? Although it is good!  Are we favouring doctors coming 
over to treat patients rather than sending patients overseas, for example?  

Mr  Gayan:  The  intention  is  to  reduce  as  far  as  possible  the  number  of  patients 
travelling overseas for treatment and to get specialists from overseas to come and treat our 
patients here.  We are still on a transitional phase. So, we have to see how it works out over 
time; but, that is intention. 

Mr Quirin:   On page 227, item 22120 - Fees, can we know to whom the fees are 

payable?  

Mr  Gayan:    The  fees  are  paid  to  consultants,  to  foreign  teams  in  connection  with 
exchangers in the field of Health and Clinical Quality Assurance Framework, but there has 
been no payment for 2015/2016. 

Dr. Joomaye:  At page 227, under item 22130.001 (d) Cost Centre Project, Rs2 m. 

has been voted. Can we have some details about this course and the project? 

Mr Gayan:  The Cost Centre Project was initiated in the five regional hospitals since 
October 2013. 15 officers in the grade of Management Support Officers, Office Management 
Assistants  and  Health  Record  Clerks  posted  at  hospitals  have  been  assigned  the  duties  of 
costing accountants and are paid a monthly allowance of Rs1,500. 

Mr  Ramful:    With  regard  to  Overseas  Travel  (Treatment  &  Incoming  Medical 
Teams), last year we budgeted an amount of Rs17 m. and this year we are being asked to vote 
Rs37  m.  Can  we  have  a  breakdown  of  the  costs  of  the  fees  for  the  Overseas  of  Medical 
Officers and the money that is being earmarked for the treatment of the patients? 

Mr Gayan:  I can circulate the information. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Item 22130, Studies and Surveys.  Last year, we allocated Rs4.2 
m.  to  the  Institute  of  Women’s  Health  and  Rs1.4  m.  to  the  New  Warehouse  at  La  Tour 
Koenig, and no provision is made for the subsequent years.  Are we to understand that the 
studies  have  been  completed,  and  if  so,  may  we  know  what  was  the  specific  topic  of  that 
study? 

Mr Gayan:  With regard to the New Warehouse at La Tour Koenig, no provision has 
been made because the project is in abeyance. We are considering what to do with Sunray 
and the ex-Tobacco Board Building. We are thinking of having something totally new, that is 

 

62 

why there is this provision.  For the Institute of Women’s Health, the contract was awarded in 
August 2013 and the final payment has already been made.  

Dr.  Joomaye:  At  page  228,  under  the  items  28211.065,  Pharmacy  Council  and 
28211.066, Allied Health Professional Council respectively.  I understand, two councils will 
be set up this year and budgeted Rs500,000 each.  Would Rs500,000 be enough to set up a 
Council? 

Mr Gayan:  We have to start somewhere.  I think we consider that to be reasonable. 

Mr Mahomed:  At page 228, under item 31132.401, e-Health.  This appears to be a 
mega project to me.   Rs509,860,000!  We are starting this year with Rs5 m., next year Rs10 
m. and the next year Rs25 m. In my view, it is a very timid start. Is there any reason for that? 

Mr Gayan: In fact, I have explained to the House why we are starting small with the 
e-Health.  We are doing it on a small basis in one of the hospitals and then we are going to 
expand it to all the other hospitals.  The reason is very simple.  We cannot simply import a 
system which operates in one country and impose it here. Some countries have tried it and 
then it was money that was totally gone down the drains. That is why we are starting small 
and  we  hope  to  have  a  home-grown  system  overtime.    We  are  looking  for  a  home-grown 
solution. 

The Chairperson: May I remind hon. Members to keep questions and answers short 

and concise, please! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Capital Expenditure, Acquisition of Non-Financial Assets, Acquisition 
of Vehicles.  We have been asked to vote Rs3 m.. Can the hon. Minister inform the House 
whether provision is being made for the purchase of new ambulances, and if yes, how many; 
whether  there  are  new  types  of  ambulances  other  than  the  existing  ones  which  are  being 
purchased? 

Mr Gayan:  In fact, we are providing for the acquisition of new ambulances. I think 
there are about five. We are going to build up on that. There are also provisions for other 
vehicles to be acquired. 

Mr Quirin:  Atn page 228, item 27210.008 - Assistance to Patients Inoperable in 

Mauritius.  Can we know why the amount budgeted for 2016/17 has been decreased? 

Mr Gayan:  It is because the quality of care in Mauritius has improved. 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Chairperson:  Silence, please! 

63 

Dr. Joomaye: Under the item Recurrent Expenditure, item 21110.001, there will be 
three  new  posts  of  Head  of  Units  for  Medical  Oncology,  Gastro-Enterology,  Neonatology 
that are supposed to be created, but there is no budget allocated. So, will this happen or not? 

Mr Gayan:  We are planning to recruit these persons but there is a scarcity of talent 

in those grades, which is why it is taking some time. 

Mr Uteem:  I want to come back to the e-Health project.  Can I know from the hon. 

Minister whether the contract has already been awarded and to whom? 

 Mr Gayan:  My understanding is that we are working in-house with the Ministry of 

Technology, Communication and Innovation and other bodies.   

Dr.  Sorefan:    An  page  228,  under  item  28211.007  -  Dental  Council  and  item 
28211.014, Medical Council respectively.  These are ongoing project and we financed those 
councils.  There is provision, but why didn’t we pay for the Dental and Medical Councils last 
year?  I don’t see the amount paid to them for the last year. 

Mr Gayan:  I understand that this is only part of the operational expenses of Dental 
Council and a study is now on by our Financial Analyst on the grants being made to all these 
councils.  

Mr  Baloomoody:    May  I  refer  again  to  the  Acquisition  of  Vehicles.    The  hon. 
Minister just answered that we are making provisions to buy several ambulances and only 
Rs3 m. has been earmarked.  I am sure that one ambulance cost much more than Rs3 m. 

Mr  Gayan:    Well,  right  now  we  have  three  types  of  ambulances.    I  am  going  to 

circulate all the information about the ambulances. 

The Chairperson: Next page 229. Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Concerning the Head of Department/Director of Ayurvedic Healthcare 
Services, there is an important contradiction between the policy and the implementation. The 
Minister  himself  stated  that  he  wants  to  develop  traditional  medicine  as  an  alternative  to 
allopathic  medicine,  on  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  no  provision  is  made  for  the 
recruitment of the Health and Department  Director for Ayurvedic Services for 2016, 2017 
and even for 2018. Could the hon. Minister shed some light on that provision? 

 
Mr Gayan:  Well, this is a new post which has been created and this is because we 

64 

want to upgrade the traditional medicine. 

Dr. Sorefan: Item 21 regarding Pre-Registration House Officer. I see there will be… 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, which page you are referring to? 

Dr. Sorefan: At page 229 item Pre-Registration House Officer,  I see that  for this 
year  there  are  375  Pre-Registration  House  Officers  and  I  see  as  allowance  they  will  have 
about Rs90,000. Will the hon. Minister inform us when we are going to recruit those Pre-
Registration House Officers?  

Mr Gayan:  Well, we are hoping to do that by September because I have already in 
intimated to the House, there will be - like it is the case in other countries – an examination 
for  the  pre-registration  and  once  they  pass,  they  will  be  admitted  to  the  pre-registration 
training. 

In September. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: The Director of Emergency Services, I think the provision is made 
for one post. May we know whether this post is filled and what exactly he is supposed to do?  
There is only one Director for Emergency services around the island? 

Mr Gayan:   We hope there won’t be too many emergencies. 

We don’t have any. So, we have one. We’ll start with one. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Next page! Page 230! No question! Next page! Page 231! Hon. 

Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Under 

item  Physiotherapy  Cadre,  we  have  Pool  Attendant 
(Hydrotherapy Unit). May we know in which hospital these two are posted? The one in post, 
where is he posted in Hydrotherapy Unit? 

Mr Gayan: I understand it is at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital. There is a service. 

There is one at Victoria Hospital and one at Dr. A. G.  Jeetoo Hospital. 

(Interruptions) 

 
The Chairperson: Page 232. Any questions? No questions! Page 233! No questions! 

65 

Page 234! Yes, hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Under  item  Biomedical  Engineering  Cadre,  we  have  had  a  lot  of 
questions in this House about equipment that break down very often and entail a lot of high 
cost in repair. Is this Department responsible for looking after the expensive equipment that 
we have in a hospital? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, this is an area where we have a shortage of engineers and we are 
trying to recruit more engineers so that they can look after all the equipment, especially the 
hi-tech equipment which we will be purchasing. 

Dr. Joomaye: On page 234, under item CSSD Cadre, Senior Surgical Technologist, 
there are three in post, that means that all our regional hospitals do not have this post filled in. 
So, where are they posted, those three in post? 

Mr  Gayan:  They should be in the medical services somewhere.  I’ll try  to  get the 

information. 

The Chairperson: Perhaps you can circulate the information if you don’t have it. 

Mr Gayan: I will circulate it. 

The Chairperson: Next page! Page 235! Any questions? No questions! Page 236! No 

questions! Page 237! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Under  item  22140  –  Medical  Supplies,  Drugs  and  Equipment,  there  is 
actually a reduction in the medical drugs and vaccines by Rs80 m. So, may I know from the 
hon. Minister why this reduction? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, what I have here is the provision is to meet the cost of sending 

pharmaceutical products abroad for testing. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Under  item  22140.007  –  Medical  Supplies,  Drugs  and  Equipment  – 
Renal Dialysis - Consumables and Fees, estimates for this year are Rs120 m. and last year it 
was  Rs137  m.    So,  there  is  a  decrease  of  Rs70  m.  May  we  know  why  there  has  been  a 
decrease in the sums allocated for this post? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I understand that the cost of consumables has gone down. 

66 

 
Mr Ameer  Meea:  On page 237, item 22120 –  Fees to Chairman and  Members of 
Boards  and  Committees  Rs9  m.  May  we  know  the  name  of  the  Chairman  and  the  Board 
members as well as their respective fees? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, it’s too long; I’ll circulate it. 

Dr. Sorefan: Regarding the same item Medical Supplies, CT Scan and MRI Fees and 
Materials,  do  I  take  it  that  those  fees  are  for  the  private  sector,  because  I  am  made  to 
understand that the Ministry of Health and Quality of  Life is not resorting to  going to the 
private, they are just doing it in-house. Can I know what these fees are meant for? 

The Chairperson: This is policy, hon. Member. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, when there are breakdowns and there are emergencies, of course, 
there is recourse to the private clinics for CT Scan. These fees are for that purpose. There are 
two things, the number of times they do that. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  the  same  question  of  Medicine,  Drugs  and  Vaccines,  may  I  know 
from the hon. Minister for 2015-2016, the amount of medicines, drugs and vaccines which 
had been disposed of as having passed the expiration date. How much money has been spent? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I can have the information circulated. But what I can inform the 
House  about  is  that  there  was  a  whole  stock  of  expired  drugs  and  within  the  next  three 
months, we will have disposed of them all. 

Mr Mahomed: On the same item, since it is the third time, I am going to go direct to 
the point. Many of my constituents have come to me telling me that the medicines that they 
use  to  get  from  hospitals  are  being  rationed,  so  to  speak  for  all  it  is  worth.  Now,  is  that 
anyhow associated with that reduction in budget, because there is a question of perception, 
would you clarify? 

Mr Gayan: No, there is no shortage with regard to whatever medicine has to be given 

to a patient. There is no problem at all on that. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under the third item Extra Assistance, there has been an increase 
of Rs10 m. to reach the figure of Rs53 m. May we know the reason for such an increase and 
also the details of this figure? 

Mr Gayan: I need assistance for that question. 

The Chairperson: Perhaps you can circulate it if you don’t have it. 

 
Mr Gayan: Unless it is a short one. This is for new recruits. 

67 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Under  item  22120.007,  I  can  see  Fees  for  Training.  May  we  know 
what kind of training is it and who will be trained, and the Budget has been increased from 
Rs2.7 m. to Rs5 m.? 

Mr Gayan: Well, this is for Capacity Building Programme and upgrading of skills. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  respect  to  Extra-Budgetary  Units,  item  26323.095  -  Trust  Fund  for 
Specialised  Medical  Care,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  number  of  cardiac 
surgeons operating at the Medical Centre and the number of people on the waiting list to be 
operated? 

Mr Gayan: There are three cardiac surgeons and there is no waiting list. 

Mr Bhagwan: On the same item, we are being asked to vote more sum than last year. 
Can the hon. Minister justify this increase and also for the new cancer centre, upgrading and 
renovation  of  the  building  where  is  the  building  situated  in  what  is  this  bunker  and 
equipment? Could we have some details about this bunker? 

Mr Gayan: The new cancer unit will be at the former Medpoint clinic. The bunker is 
required  for  the  housing  of  the  radiation  equipment  because  otherwise  the  radioactive 
material can escape so the bunker has to be prepared for that. 

Mr  Fowdar:  With  regard  to  capital  expenditure,  we  were  made  to  understand  that 
there would be the purchase of an incinerator to dispose of outdated medicines but there is no 
provision. 

Mr  Gayan:  No.  The  idea  is  to  have  a  place  where  we  are  going  to  have  a  waste 
disposal for all medical waste and it has to be a new building with new equipment. This is 
what I was answering to earlier on for the terrain at La Chaumière.  

Dr.  Sorefan:  Item  26323.095  -  Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care,  the  hon. 
Minister informed us that there is a cardiac surgeon who is on contract for years and is doing 
additional surgeries.  He is paid and, on top of that, he is taking the waiting list of another 
cardiac centre surgeon who retired… 

The Chairperson: It is a very long question, hon. Dr. Sorefan, come to the point! 

Dr. Sorefan: and he is being paid from this sum. He is getting a lot of money, but is 

not working for the health centre. 

 
Mr Gayan: That is more the ambit of a parliamentary question and not for… 

68 

The Chairperson: Exactly! Next page, 239!  

Mr Mahomed: Item 31112.403 - Upgrading of Hospitals (b) A. G. Jeetoo Hospital 
for which we are voting Rs35 m. Pending the Central Waste Disposal Unit which is being put 
in place, does those Rs35 m. comprise of the high extension of the existing chimney at Jeetoo 
Hospital because there have been many requests in the past. 

Mr Gayan: There is a total rethink about the storage of medication and we are going 

to have a new system because the way it is now is totally archaic and we have to modernise. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under item 31122.811 - Other Machinery and Equipment, Acquisition 
of CCTV cameras in Hospitals, Rs2 m., would these cameras be dedicated to security of staff 
or security of the compounds? 

Mr  Gayan:  Basically,  it  will  be  for  the  security  of  the  staff  and  the  patients  and 

eventually if we need to have it in the compound we will. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  31122.801  -  Acquisition  of  Medical  Equipment  from 

Rs65 m. to Rs250 m. may we have the breakdown? 

Mr Gayan: I can circulate the list. 

Dr. Sorefan: On the same line, Acquisition of Medical Equipment… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Silence, please! 

Dr. Sorefan: Does the provision for Rs250 m. include the CT Scan because there is a 
tender for CT Scan at the SSR Hospital and, if this is so, are we going only for one CT Scan? 

Mr Gayan: I think we are going for two and the 160-slice which is a better version of 

what we have. 

Mr  Uteem:  Again,  on  the  acquisition  of  medical  equipment,  can  the  hon.  Minister 
also circulate a list of contractors, if ever the contract has been awarded, for the procurement 
of those equipment? 

Mr Gayan: It is by the Central Procurement Board, we can always ask the Board to 

circulate the information. It is all by way of tender anyway. 

 
Dr. Joomaye: Under the item Health Surveillance Unit there is only one supervisor 

69 

for rodent control for the entire island. How come there is only one in post for pest control? 

Mr Gayan: We have one supervisor but we have lots of officers doing rodent control 

attendance and he is a good supervisor. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  22130  -  Studies  and  Surveys,  it  was  Rs200,000  and 

now we have come to Rs3 m. May we know the reason of such an increase? 

Mr Gayan: I will circulate it.  

Mr Jhuboo:  Capital Expenditure item 31112.405 - Upgrading of Community Health 
Centres,  there  is  an  amount  of  Rs88  m.  provided.  Can  we  know  if  there  is  an  amount 
provided for the Yves Cantin Community Health Centre in Black River? 

Mr Gayan: Well I will circulate the list of all the Community Health Centres which 

we are upgrading. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under item 31112 - Capital Expenditure, Construction of Area Health 

Centres Rs60 m. project value. Which Area Health Centres will these be? 

Mr Gayan: I will circulate the information. 

Mr Uteem: Could the Minister circulate the list of the Area Health Centres also not 

just the Community Health Centres? 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I go to the Sub-Head 11-104 - Treatment and Prevention of 
HIV and AIDS. We see that there has been provision for one Head AIDS Unit, may we know 
whether that person is in function or we have not recruited yet? 

Mr  Gayan: Here again  there is some thinking being done about having  one single 
body to look after all HIV related issues so there is a merger that will take place. It is being 
restructured. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Under  the  item  National  Aids  Secretariat,  I  can  see  that  the  post  of 
coordinator is vacant and will be left vacant since there is no provision in the Budget for that. 

Mr Gayan: No, I have just mentioned that we are restructuring the whole thing about 

HIV. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22140 - Medical Supplies, Drugs and Equipment, does that 

cover the needle exchange programme? 

 
Mr Gayan: Yes, it does. 

70 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 22900 Other Goods and Services, .925 Rehabilitation 
Programme for Alcoholics and Drug Addicts, it has increased from Rs6 m. to Rs23 m. Does 
that take into account those who are using synthetic drugs? May we know more about that 
Rehabilitation Programme? 

Mr Gayan: Well, with the closing down of NATReSA, this is why the amount has 
increased.  The function of ex-NATReSA will be taken up by an Addictology Unit which we 
are setting up in each of the Regional Hospital.  

Mr Mahomed: Part of the question has already been asked, but since we are there, 
why is prevention not part of that programme? Because I see in other items, the Ministry is 
doing prevention, but in so far as drug is concerned, prevention is not taken on board. 

The Chairperson: This is a policy decision. 

Mr Gayan: Prevention is an ongoing programme of the Harm Reduction Unit.  It is 

already there. 

Dr. Joomaye: Under item 28211 Other Expense, I can see NGO’s for Anti-Smoking 
and Anti-Alcohol Campaign, Rs500,000 has been earmarked. May we know which NGO is 
benefitting from that and is it not an insufficient amount, Rs500,000? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I think the NGO is called Visa. 

Mr  Uteem:  Under  item  22900.903  Awareness  and  Sensitisation  Campaign.  The 
Budget  is  being  more  than  doubled  to  Rs18  m. May  I  know  whether  these  campaigns  are 
carried out by the Ministry or are being sub-contracted to NGOs and other operators? 

Mr Gayan: Well, the National Drugs Observatory has just presented its report and the 
Harm  Reduction  Unit  is  working  together  with  the  Ministry  of  Education,  the  Ministry  of 
Youth and Sports and other stakeholders with a sensitisation campaign around the country. 
But it also applies to tobacco cessation clinics and campaigns on the radio and MBC. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, this is the last question! 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank  you, Mr Chairperson. Under item 22130 Studies and Surveys 

Rs4 m. is allocated.  Can we know studies and surveys about what? 

Mr Gayan: Well, the whole issue of drug abuse. 

 
Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life (Rs10,900,000,000) was, on question 

71 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 12-1 Local Government was called. 

Mr Quirin: On page 247, with regard to the Main Achievements for  FY 2015/2016 
on-line application of Building and Land Use Permits, can we know from the hon. Minister 
the number of online applications submitted to each Local Authority? 

Dr. Husnoo: I will circulate it. 

Mr Quirin: The same item, but this time concerning online payment of fees.  Can the 

hon. Minister circulate the number of online payments? 

Dr. Husnoo: Okay, I will circulate it. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Mr  Chairperson,  item  21210  Social  Contributions,  can  the  hon. 
Minister give us some details about the amount which we are being asked to vote? Can we 
have the list of the social clubs or whatever? 

Dr. Husnoo: This item is meant for contributions to the National Savings Fund for 

employees. 

Mr Gobin: On page 253, Capital Expenditure, under item 26322 (g) Other Capital 
projects  –  Rs120  m,  I  would  just  request  the  hon.  Minister  to  circulate  the  list  of  capital 
projects and their respective sites?   

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, I will circulate it. 

Mr Uteem: Under Capital Expenditure, item 26322 (a) Construction of drains, there 
is an amount of Rs250 m. earmarked.  May I know from the hon. Minister what will be the 
amount allocated for the construction of drains in the region of Port Louis? 

Dr. Husnoo: We have got a long list of the drains.  I can circulate it. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  253,  under  item  26322  (c)  Renovation  of  Port  Louis 
Theatre Phase I, there is a project value of Rs374 m.  Nothing is budgeted for last year and 
for the current year. May we know where matter stand in relation to this project? 

The Chairperson: On page 253, hon. Minister, 26322 (c) Renovation of Port Louis 

Theatre Phase I.   

Dr. Husnoo: Can the hon. Member repeat the question, please? 

 
The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Minister,  the  question  was:  why  has  there  not  been  any 

72 

provision for the years to come, what happened to the project?  Where matter stand? 

Dr. Husnoo: Money has been earmarked in the Budget.  

Mr Uteem: With regard to the renovation of the Theatre of Port Louis, We just want 

to know what stage have we reached?  Have we launched tenders?  Are we doing surveys? 

Dr. Husnoo: Bids document has been sent to CPB for vetting and payment. 

Dr. Sorefan: Regarding Grant to Local Authorities, especially for Municipal Council 
of Vacoas-Phoenix, may we know whether we are still using the old formula as per capita, if 
this is so, the number of residents have increased in Vacoas-Phoenix by quite a lot and we see 
that the grant is more or less the same as last year? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, a different formula is being used by the Ministry of Finance, 
taking different factors into consideration, the works that have to be done and the services 
that have to be provided.  It is a new formula.  It is different from last year actually. I can let 
the hon. Member have more information on that later on. 

Ms  Sewocksingh:  On  page  253,  under  item  26322  Capital  Expenditure,  (e) 
Renovation of the Town Hall of Curepipe, I can see that there is around Rs38 m. which has 
been earmarked.  Can I know from the hon. Minister where matter stand?   

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, for the renovation of the Town Hall of Curepipe, a request for 
proposal  was  launched  for  the  project  by  the  Municipal  Council.    The  contract  has  been 
awarded to Desai & Associates Ltd for an amount of Rs1 m.  It is consultancy fees. So, we 
are working on it. 

Mr Bhagwan: Under the sub heading .999 Global Positioning System for scavenging 
vehicles  of  Local  Authorities,  we  are  being  asked  to  vote  nearly  Rs17  m.  Can  the  hon. 
Minister inform the House whether his Ministry has conducted an assessment and whether all 
these equipment are working in the Local Authorities? Because according to our information 
– it was not you, before - there have been a magouille in that project.  Can the hon. Minister 
conduct  an  inquiry  to  see  how  the  project  was  being  channelled  at  the  Ministry  and  the 
outcome thereof? 

Dr. Husnoo: Well, that is a different question.  That is in the past. We will look into 

it, anyway. 

 
The Chairperson:  The hon. Member can come with a Parliamentary Question. Hon. 

73 

Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Item no. 22120.002, Fees to Chairperson and Members of Boards.  
May  we  know  who  is  the  Chairperson  and  the  members  of  the  board  and  their  respective 
fees? 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No cross talking please! He is asking a question, no cross talking! 

Dr. Husnoo: We will circulate it, Mr Chairperson; the Chairman, the members of the 

Board and the Fees. 

Mr Quirin: Mr Chairperson,, on page 253, it is mentioned that Port Louis Theatre, 
Plaza Theatre  and the Town Hall of Curepipe will be financed under the National  Lottery 
Fund. Can we have some details pertaining to this Fund?  Is it a new one or an existing one 
and what is the amount of money actually in this Fund? 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Actually,  there  are  different  projects  there.  There  is  the  Port  Louis 
Theatre, the Plaza and the Town Hall of Curepipe.  They are at different stages. Money has 
been earmarked.  For example, for Port Louis Theatre, the majority of the money has been 
earmarked already.  Whatever is missing is going to be given from the Lottery Fund.  Same 
goes for Plaza and for the consultancy for Town Hall as well. 

Mr  Armance:    Item  26322.030  (g)  Other  Capital  Projects.    Can  we  have  some 

details or the hon. Minister circulate it? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Yes, it is a long list of projects and we will circulate it. 

(Interruptions) 

Vote 12-1 Local Government (Rs3,816,300,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 12-2 Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service was called. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 21110.001, Fire Fighter, on page 254.  May I know from the hon. 

Minister the number of vacancies currently? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Actually, there is no vacancy.  In fact, last year we recruited about 170 
firefighters.  This year we are going to recruit another 100. So, we are just trying to build up 
the unit. We are trying to have different specialised units.  So, this year we are going to take 
100 more firefighters. 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:    May  we  know  the  number  of  firefighters  who  are  still  on  the 

74 

payroll, but suspended from duty? 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Well,  I  don’t  know  about  this.  I  have  to  check  it  and  circulate 

afterwards. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Item 22060.004, Vehicles and Motorcycles.  Can we know how many 

new fire lorries are being planned to be purchased for the coming year? 

The Chairperson: Do you have the answer hon. Minister? 

Dr. Husnoo: I have to look for it now. 

The Chairperson: Perhaps, you can come back to it later! 

Mr Baloomoody:  On the same page, there is an increase in rent from Rs5.6 m. to 

Rs9.3 m…. 

Dr. Husnoo:  Sorry, may I answer for the last question!  This year we are going to 

buy one water tanker and three double cabs for the transport of the officers. 

Mr Baloomoody: For the rent. Why that increase of Rs3 m.? 

Dr. Husnoo:  You want me to give the breakdown or I circulate it? 

Mr Baloomoody: I just want to know why there is an increase.  Have we acquired 

new buildings, new spaces? I don’t want the breakdown! 

The Chairperson: Perhaps, find out and then come back to it! 

Dr. Husnoo: They are new rates for buildings. That is what I have been told! 

Mr Uteem:  Other Goods and Services, Uniforms.  The amount is being increased 
from  Rs7  m.  to  Rs10  m.  There  are  only  100  additional  firefighters  and    the  uniforms  are 
being increased from Rs7 m. to Rs10 m.  So, may I know why there is this increase? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Last year, I have told you we have 170 new firefighters and this year 

we are going to have 100 new firefighters. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  I  can’t  understand  that  answer  with  regard  to  rent.    The  hon. 
Minister told us: “they are new rates”.  What new rates?  The law allows rent to be increased 
by only 10%. Has that new rate been agreed by the official Valuer of Government. 

75 

 
Dr. Husnoo: Rental of buildings is Rs7 m. here. It includes – Meem building, Head 
Office,  Rs3.39  m.;  Bahemia  Building,  Fire  Safety  Division  –  Rs1.2  m.;  Port  Louis  Fire 
Station- Rs1.1 m.; Quatre Bornes Fire Station – Rs 100,000.  That is what I have got here. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Minister the question is why has the rate gone up by Rs3 m. 

in one year? 

Dr. Husnoo:  I will find it and let you know.  That is all the information I have been 

given here. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Mr  Chairperson,  item  31112.024,  Construction  of  Fire  Station,  (d) 
Relocation of Quatres Bornes Fire Station.  This has been a long overdue project for the last 
15-20 years. I am glad that the Government has earmarked Rs60 m. May we know the site 
and the superficie of the land that has been earmarked? 

Dr. Husnoo: I think it is going to be located at Tulip Avenue; about one acre. 

Mr Ramful:  With regard to the New Rose Belle Fire Station, may I know if the site 

has already been identified, and if so, can we be informed of the whereabouts? 

Dr Husnoo: A plot of land of the acreage of 4,179 m2 has already been invested for 
the project. Presently, bidding documents are being finalised and has been submitted to the 
Procurement Board. Once bidding is ready.... 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister, the question is has a new site been identified and 

the whereabouts! 

Dr. Husnoo:  Yes, it has been identified. 

Mr  Uteem:  Item  31122.803,  Acquisition  of  Fire  Fighting  and  Rescue  Equipment.  
May I know from the hon. Minister whether that includes any firefighting lorry and, as at to 
date, in the existing fleet or what is going to be acquired, how high up  can the firefighter 
ladder goes up to in terms of building, how many storeys? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  I  just  mentioned  earlier,  this  coming  year  there  will  be  one  new  fire 
tender and there are three double cabs as well.  As far as the ladder is concerned, there is one 
which reaches about 30m or so. About 10 storeys high! 

Mr Baloomoody: On the issue of construction of fire stations, the Minister has gone 
on  record  by  saying  that  in  Port  Louis,  the  fire  station  behind  the  Municipality  will  be 

 

76 

transferred and I see no provision in the budget, neither for this year, neither for next year nor 
for the year after.  You have gone on record by saying so. 

Dr. Husnoo:  We will discuss it with the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport when we are going to consider the Immigration Centre Project, but it has not been 
finalised yet. 

Vote 12-2 Fire Services (Rs533,700,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 13-1 Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment was called. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Page  257,  Strategic  Note,  Main  Achievements  -  Marshall  Plan 
against Poverty finalised in collaboration with UNDP. May we know when it was finalised 
and whether the hon. Minister is prepared to lay a copy on the Table of the Assembly? 

Mr Roopun: The final report was given to Government in March this year and it will 

be laid in due course. 

Mr Mahomed: Page 257a, item 21110.001 – Basic Salary.  Provision is being made 
for new cadres: Coordinator, Psychologist, Research Analyst. But no financial provision is 
being made for the next three years. Is there any reason for that? 

Mr Roopun: No. Actually, these cadres will have to be recruited and the scheme of 
service has  yet to be finalised with the Ministry of Civil Service.  We are waiting for the 
clearance, but they are going to be recruited in due course. Provision is made for those cadres 
now. 

Mr Uteem: There are a number of positions which are to be filled by ex-NESC. So, 

may I know how many NESC former staff is being transferred on the Establishment? 

Mr Roopun: There is about five. 

Mr  Jhuboo: Page  257b,  Item  22130  –  Studies  and  Surveys,  a  budget  of  Rs4  m. is 

earmarked.  Can we know for which purpose will these surveys be carried out? 

Mr Roopun: Those surveys for this year were for the Marshall Plan, and for next year 

it is going to be in respect to the new survey for SRM. 

Mr  Uteem:  Item  22130.946,  Expenses  icw  Poverty  Observatory/Monitoring  and 
Evaluation Unit.  May  we have some details about this Unit, how may  staff there are and 
what is its purpose? 

77 

 
Mr Roopun: In fact, this is going to be an observatory, which is going to be set up in 
line with decision taken at the level of SADC and also within the Marshall Plan. Last year, 
we had earmarked a sum of Rs4.8 m., which represented also the salaries for the ex-NESC, 
and this year, it is going to be essentially for the payment of the Chairperson and members 
who will be recruited for the Observatory and also for other expenses such as seminars as 
well as for the International Poverty Day, which is organised in October. 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 22120, Fees, there has been an increase of more than 

100%. May we know why and who are the beneficiaries of the fees? 

Mr Roopun: For last year, it was Rs894,000 and it was for fees of Chairperson and 
members  of  the  Board  Audit  Committee,  training  of  staff,  fees  for  the  consultant  of  the 
UNDP, and this year it is going also to be for consultants of the UNDP essentially, Rs1.7 m., 
in terms of cost sharing for various projects which are going to be implemented during this 
year. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22130, Studies and Surveys.  Answering to a PNQ, the hon. 
Minister stated that we need to have a new survey carried out for the purpose of determining 
families comprising two parents and three children. Is the cost of that survey included under 
the item Studies and Surveys or is there another budget for that? 

Mr Roopun: Yes, it is included for this year. 

Mr Mahomed: Page 257c, under Capital Expenditure, construction of housing units, 
I  see  that  quite  a  substantial  budgetary  provision  has  been  made.  For  those  who  are  non-
landowners,  how  does  it  work?  Where  does  the  land  come  from  and  in  what  way  does  it 
differ from the NHDC? 

Mr  Roopun:  In  fact,  there  is  now  a  new  arrangement  made  with  NHDC,  so  that 
around 10% of all houses, which are going to be constructed, are going to be reserved for 
those under the SRM. 

Mr  Quirin:  Mr  Chairperson,  under  Capital  Expenditure,  Grants,  item  26.323.135, 
National Empowerment Foundation, Social Housing for Vulnerable Groups, construction of 
Fully Concrete Units¸ an amount of Rs85 m. is earmarked for 2016/2017. Can we know from 
the hon. Minister if the sites have already been identified and, if so, the number of units to be 
constructed on each site? 

78 

 
Mr Roopun: In fact, I may refer the hon. Member to page 257, where we under key 
action  for  this  year,  there  is  going  to  be  140  for  those  who  own  land;  these  are  lands 
belonging to the beneficiaries themselves, and also about 125 for non-landowners within the 
NHDC compound. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under the National Empowerment Foundation, there are so many 
ongoing projects like the Welfare and Empowerment Programmes and other projects. Can I 
ask the hon. Minister whether all these projects cover also the inhabitants of Agalega, and if 
he can give any specific example for Agalega? 

Mr  Roopun:  As  regards  Agalega,  I  understand  there  is  no  beneficiary  under  the 
SRM.  I enquired, and it would seem that all of them are employed and they are not within 
the bracket of my mandate as Minister of Social Integration.  But, in due course, I intend to 
visit Agalega to see if there is need for my Ministry to intervene. 

Mr Ramful: For the construction of social housing, I see there is no provision for the 

construction of houses… 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No cross-talking, please! 

Mr Ramful: …made of CIS. Do I take it that now the policy of the Ministry is to stop 

constructing CIS houses? 

Mr  Roopun:  In  fact,  the  policy  of  the  Ministry  is  to  go  straightaway  to  concrete 
houses, because CIS houses were temporary shelters.  But, under the upgrading scheme, we 
do cater in case there is really need for CIS. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  With  regard  to  item  Grants  to  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation, does it include owners of all CHA houses where the slabs are falling? And if 
they want to have a new slab, can they apply under that scheme? 

Mr Roopun: No. 

Mr Baloomoody: There is no provision for these people? 

Mr Roopun: At the level of my Ministry, it is difficult to know whether by the mere 
fact of having a new slab is going to hold, because the building itself is quite of bad quality.  
But  they  can  benefit  from  the  grant  of  slabs,  which  is  under  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and 
Lands. 

79 

 
Mr  Barbier:  With  regard  to  social  housing,  I  would  like  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister  the  conditions  attached,  the  criteria  to  obtain  same,  and  whether  there  is  some 
repayment or loans to be refunded.  If so, may we have all the conditions or if not, we can 
have it later on? 

Mr Roopun:   May I invite the hon. Member to come with a substantive question on 

 
that issue? 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Under the item Social Benefit Empowerment Support Scheme, if the hon. 
 
Minister does not have the information, can he circulate a list of the Empowerment Scheme 
that is going to be proposed for next year. 

Mr Roopun:  This is going to be worked out actually with a Consultant of the UNDP 

 
who is expected to come to Mauritius in September. 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: At page 257, under the last item 28222.017 - New Decent Shelters 
 
Programme (Marshall Plan Against Poverty), where there is a budget of Rs200 m. for the 
next  three  years.    May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  difference  between  the  fully 
concrete units, the CIS units, the CCIS units and now we have a new one, which is ‘New 
Decent Shelters’ Programme? 

Mr Roopun:  In fact, this is a new scheme which has been launched only within this 
 
Budget from funds made available by the Government of India. We are still working with the 
Ministry of Finance to find out ways and means by which we can cater for those who are not 
owners  of  land,  especially  for  those  who  are  the  most  needy  and  do  not  have  sufficient 
means,  in  fact,  to  repay  whatever  we  have  under  the  other  schemes.  This  new  scheme  is 
going to cater for fully concrete houses for the most needy. 

Vote  13-1  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  ( 

 
Rs843,000,000) was on question put and agreed to. 

 

 

Vote 14-1 Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  My question relates to page 261. I don’t know if others have questions 

 
before that page. 

 
The Chairperson:  Is there any question for page 258a? Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

80 

 

Mr  Baloomoody:    One  of  the  main  achievements  is  the  deletion  of  the  986,000 
 
fingerprint data from the Mauritius National Identify Card (MNIC) database.  Can I ask the 
hon. Minister when this was done and the cost thereof? 

Mr Sinatambou: The fingerprint data of all previously enrolled citizens in the MNIC 
 
database was removed from 24 August 2015 to 14 September 2015.  I don’t have the exact 
cost, but I know that it was drawn from unutilised funds relating to the MNIC budget. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  In relation to the job placement of 680 unemployed in ICT/BPO 
 
companies  under  the  ICT  Skills  Development  Programme  (ISDP),  may  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister  how  did  this  Skills  Development  Programme  work  and  what  was  its  duration?  I 
believe that the 680 persons have been employed in sector. But, may we know the number of 
unemployed jobseekers in the ICT/BPO companies who have been employed? 

Mr Sinatambou:  I would suggest that the hon.  Member comes with a substantive 
 
question, but I will try to answer, at least, for one thing.  I understand that almost all those 
who went on placement have been employed.  

 

The Chairperson: Page 259! Page 260! Page 261!  Yes, hon. Uteem ! 

Mr  Uteem:    Under  item  21110.001  –  Legal  Executive  (New  Grade)!    There  is  no 

 
amount being budgeted for the appointment of a Legal Executive.  May we know why? 

(Interruptions) 

 

The Chairperson:  No cross-talking, please!  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Sinatambou:  I understand that no fund is budgeted for this year because we first 
 
need to have the scheme of service to be made and that will take some time, then it will have 
to be circulated and that is going to take more than a year. 

 

The Chairperson:  Page 262! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Under  item  22120.035  –  Fees  of  which  Fees  icw  IT  Security.   
 
Last year, it was Rs40,000 and this year a budget of Rs12 m. is earmarked.  May we know 
whether this is an in-house expense or is it being outsource and to which company name? 

Mr Sinatambou: I understand that the figure is made up as follows.  First of all, a 
 
security audits to the tune of R6.45 m.; tenders have already been made for three out of seven 
audits.  Evaluation has been completed and the contract is waiting to be signed.  For four 

 

81 

others,  the  exercise  is  on..  Then,  there  is  a  sum  of  Rs5.4  m.  for  Information  Security 
Management  Systems,  which  makes  Rs11.85.    The  remaining  Rs600,000  as  fees  to 
Chairperson and Members of Boards and Committees, Departmental Bids Committees, Bid 
Evaluation Committees. 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  In relation to item 26323.054 - National Computer Board, may we know 
 
from  the  hon.  Minister  who  is  presently  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  National 
Computer Board and how much is his salary? 

Mr Sinatambou:  I understand that, at the moment, there is an Ag. Director who is 

 
actually operating there. 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    On  the  same  question,  there  is  a  substantial  increase  in  the  grant 
 
which we are being asked to vote, nearly Rs11 m. for the coming financial year.  Can the hon. 
Minister justify this increase?  And also who is chairing the Board  

Mr Sinatambou:  The grant to the National Computer Board is actually made up as 

 
follows – 

• 
• 
• 

Rs44.4 m. as staff cost; 
Rs15.56 m. as recurrent expenditure, and 
Rs7.05 m. for IT Security, ICT and promotion. 

I do have a list explaining the increase of Rs10.5 m. I will circulate it to the hon. Member.  
The last question was about the Chairperson? 

 

The Chairperson:  Who is the Chairperson of the NCB? 

Mr Sinatambou:  At the moment, the Chairperson who is acting is the Permanent 

 
Secretary of my Ministry. 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ramful! 

Mr  Ramful:  At  page  262,  under  item  22900.092  –  Other  Goods  and  Services  – 
 
Conferences/Seminars/Workshops.  There has been a substantial increase from Rs539,000 to 
Rs6,700,000>  May  we  have  details  about  the  Conferences/Seminars/Workshops  that  the 
Ministry intends to organise? 

82 

 
Mr Sinatambou:  Provision has been made to meet expenses for the organisation of 
 
Conferences/Seminars/Workshops.  One is an ICT Innovation Award which has a provision 
of  Rs1.5  m.;  one  is  an  International  Conference  on  Technology,  Communication  and 
Innovation, which is Rs5 m.  And then, another project for Rs200,000. 

Hon.  Ameer  Meea:    At  page  263,  under  21110.005  –  Extra  Assistance    where  an 

 
amount of Rs2.8 m is earmarked.  May we have the details and breakdown of this figure? 

Mr  Sinatambou:    The  sum  of  Rs2.89  m.  is  for  payment  of  monthly  salaries  and 

 
allowances to an Adviser and to a Public Relations Officer. 

Mr Uteem: I am going to ask the question on the National Computer Board and the 
appointment of the Chief Executive Officer again.  May I know from the hon. Minister for 
how long has this position been vacant and whether there has been appel de candidature to 
fill in these positions? 

Mr Sinatambou: At least, for the five months I have been at the Ministry, I know this 

has been the case.  I will find out for before and let the hon. Member know. 

The Chairperson: Next page 263, any questions?  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Mr  Chairperson,  under  item  26323.054  (c)  Digitally  Empowered 
Development, we are being asked to vote Rs40 m. to increase the number of e-mail accounts 
by 45,000.  So, may I have more details about this project? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  must  say  that  I  was  also  surprised  when  I  was  told  that  it  cost 
Rs40 m. to give 45,000 additional e-mail accounts for Government officers, but I understand 
that this is the cost.  Specifications are ready and tenders should normally be launched by 
mid-September  in  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative 
Reforms. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Mr  Chairperson,  under  item  26323.054  (c)  (ii)  Setting  up  of  200 

additional wifi zones, has these zones been identified and can we be provided with a list? 

The Chairperson: Can the hon. Minister circulate the list of the wifi zones?  

Mr Sinatambou: No, I am not in a position at this stage.  I suppose that if the funding 
is in the budget now, it is afterwards that the survey will be done to locate the 200 additional 
wifi zones. 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Mahomed! 

83 

Mr Mahomed: Mr Chairperson, under item 28215.007 (a) (Innovation Schemes), we 
are being asked to vote Rs125 m. for Innovation Schemes.  May I have more details about 
these Innovation Schemes? 

Mr Sinatambou: Mr Chairperson, a national innovation framework is actually being 
finalised to support joint private sector  and Government innovative projects.  Already  you 
will see in last year’s budget, a figure of about Rs70 m. has been earmarked and 11 projects 
have been approved to the tune of nearly Rs95 m.  So, it is expected that the figure of Rs125 
m. which will go for innovation schemes, there are - if my understanding is correct - 19 such 
innovation schemes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: In relation to setting up of 200 additional wifi zones, this has been 
announced in the budget and even mentioned in the electoral manifesto and the Government 
Programme, but we neither find any figure for this year nor for next year.  It is budgeted for 
the year after, 2017/2018 for Rs40 m.  Why is this so? 

Mr Sinatambou: My understanding is that because it is not going to be paid from 

Government funds; this is being ensured by Mauritius Telecom. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: In relation to the ICT Training Scheme - it is the first item -28212 - last 
year, there was Rs23 m. budgeted and now there is no longer any money budgeted.  Is there 
any  item  anywhere  to  provide  for  the  setting  up  of  the  ICT  academy?  I  cannot  find  it 
anywhere in the budget. 

Mr Sinatambou: I understand from the Budget Speech that this is actually part of a 
budget allocated to the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 
which is for the training for 4,000 individuals of whom 1,000 will be for the ICT sector. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea, last question on this page, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 263, there is a project under item 26323.042 (c) Australia-
Mauritius Wave and Micro Grid Project.  There is an amount of Rs17 m. which is budgeted.  
May we have some details on this project? 

Mr Sinatambou: Could you repeat the question, please? 

84 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: There is a project called Australia-Mauritius Wave and Micro Grid 
Project.    There  is  an  amount  of  Rs17  m.  budgeted.    May  we  have  some  details  on  this 
project? What is all this about? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  In  fact,  this  is  a  project  which  is  joint  Mauritius  Research 
Council/Government of Australia.  It is a joint exercise. The project will lead to the design of 
a prototype with energy device and is being fully funded by the Australian Government.  It is 
expected that it will be finalised at latest by 2017. 

Mr  Mahomed:    On  the  same  item,  26323.042  (d)  Clusters  for  Research  and 
Innovation, we are being embarked on a new project that is going to cost Rs180 m. over the 
next three years, starting with Rs29.5 m.  May I have more details about this project? 

Mr Sinatambou: As the House may be aware, Madam Chairperson, there are actually 
in existence two existing national clusters, one for bio-materials and the second one for bio-
chemistry.  Now, in this particular budget item, three new research and innovation clusters 
will be set up – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Renewable energy; 

Bio-Technology, and 

(iii)  High-Powered Computing. 

The Chairperson: Page 264!  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Under item 22060.005 IT Equipment (a) InfoHighway, an amount of 

Rs46 m. is being budgeted.  Can I know more about this item? 

Mr Sinatambou: What happens here is that we have maintenance and consultancy 
services for the InfoHighway.  We are actually stuck out of the Rs47.020 m. which one will 
find in this budget item.  Rs46.25 m. is for InfoHighway specifically. Now, because we are 
bound by contract for that InfoHighway from the previous Government, we are bound to pay 
an amount of Rs33 m. 

However, we have tried to find consultants to do the same work at a lesser fee.  Now, 
tenders have been launched and a local consultant has been selected at a cost of Rs13.25 m. 
per year as opposed to Rs33 m. When you add those two together – until the local consultant 
can  fully  proceed  without  the  existing  one  –  it  is  Rs33  m.  plus  Rs13.25  m.  which  makes 
Rs46.25 m. 

85 

 
Mr Baloomoody: Can I take the hon. Minister to item 22030.007 Rental of Lines for 
Network System, (b) SchoolNet II where a sum of Rs21 m. is allocated.  May we know more 
about this system? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  The  SchoolNet  II  project  actually  ensures  the  provision  of  high 
speed connectivity  in all the secondary  schools  of this country.  The project is  going to be 
completed  this  year  and  it  is  the  rental  of  telecommunication  lines  which  is  going  to  cost 
Rs21 m. a year. It is for 164 colleges. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On the same item, the hon. Minister stated that this is for colleges. What 
about primary schools, because earlier the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, 
Tertiary Education and Scientific Research said that it is your Ministry who is going to be 
responsible putting wifi in the primary schools? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  this  question.    In  fact,  a  budget  of 
Rs100 m. has been provided, I think, for the next three years of which Rs10 m. is provided 
for  this  year  for  the  provision  of  high  speed  connectivity  in  primary  schools  especially  to 
cater for the grades I and II which are being provided with tablets. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Members we have exceeded already the allocated time for 
this item. I would ask you, please, to be very concise and very short, and I will have to limit 
the questions. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you Mr Chairperson. In relation to the first item 21110.001, 
we see that the posts of Director, CIB; Deputy Director, CIB and Programme Manager, CIB. 
All these posts were not funded in 2016, that is, there was no one in these posts and they have 
been funded in 2017. May we know whether these people have already been recruited and 
also who is heading the CIB Unit actually? 

Mr Sinatambou: The Schemes of Service for the two posts of Director and Deputy 
Director of CIB have recently been prescribed. Action has been initiated to fill the post of 
Deputy  Director.  However,  the  post  of  Director  cannot  be  filled  for  the  time  being  as  the 
Deputy Director should reckon, at least, two years’ service in the grade to be eligible for the 
post. At the moment, it is the two senior most members of the Central Informatics Bureau 
who are actually acting in the position of Director and Deputy Director. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Baloomoody, last question for this page! 

86 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:    Item  22030.007  -  The  Rental  of  Lines  for  Network  System,  (a) 
GINS Rental (SkyGovNet, GFN, GOC Internet). It was Rs76 m. last year, Rs85 m. this year 
and Rs100 m. next year. May we know why these variations? 

Mr Sinatambou: The figure of Rs10.5 m., difference  from Rs76 m. to Rs85 m. is 
justified  by  number  of  additional  projects  of  which  I  will  circulate  the  list  to  the  hon. 
Member. However, one must appreciate that GINS - GOC Internet line rental implies that it 
is  this  particular  institution  which  pays  all  the  telephones  and  Internet  bills  for  the  GINS 
infrastructure for Government and that makes quite a hefty amount of money. 

Mr Uteem:  On page 268, item 22900.099 - Miscellaneous Expenses (Operation and 
Support - Managed Services). There is an amount of Rs60 m. which is 300% increase. May I 
know what does that item relate to? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  This  is  another  of  the  unfortunate  remnants  of  the  previous 
Government.  It is part of the operations and support, and managed services of the national ID 
card.  The  Rs60  m.  actually  encompass  arrears  for  money  which  is  due  for  operations, 
support,  and  managed  services  of  the  ID  card.  And  there  was  a  delay  which  was  due  to 
procurement exercise for contracting out to a local firm in order to reduce the high costs of 
the operation and support of managed services by Singapore Corporation Enterprise (SCE). 
This is what explains the big sum now. 

Mr Baloomoody: Item 22900.099 - Miscellaneous Expenses (Operation and Support 
–Managed  Services).    It  was  Rs19  m.,  now  it  is  Rs60  m.  May  we  know  why  such  an 
increase? 

Mr  Sinatambou:    I  just  explained  that  this  is  one  of  the  unfortunate  remnants  of 
contracts  which  are  binding  on  Government  because  of  the  MNIC  bad  contract.  Now,  the 
Rs60 m. actually concerns Rs33.3 m. which are arrears, which are due for the period April 
2015  to  June  2016,  and  Rs26.7  m.  is  the  amount  which  is  expected  to  be  less  when  we 
contract  out  with  a  local  firm  to  take  over  the  managed  services  of  the  MNIC  card  from 
Singapore Corporation Enterprise. This is what explains this hefty sum. 

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Members  may  I  please  remind  you  again,  especially  the 
Ministers. If it requires a long answer please circulate the answer so that we don’t lose time 
because we have already exceeded the allocated time. Hon. Uteem last question for this page! 

Mr Uteem: Item 22060.005 – Maintenance IT Equipment.  Last year, Rs128 m., this 
year is Rs106 m. In view of what the hon. Minister has said about downsizing the National 

 

87 

Identity Card, do we still need the maintenance contract for that much money, and who has 
been allocated that maintenance contract? 

Mr Sinatambou: In this particular case, these are the maintenance charges payable to 
Singapore Corporation Enterprise for the MNI system. We cannot get out of that contract. I 
can tell you it is much against my will if I say Rs106 m. going to that particular vote item. 

Vote  14-1  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (1,282,000,000) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor-General was called. 

Mr Baloomoody: The Main Achievements for FY 2015/2016 - there is a number of 
litigation cases which have been dealt with including both civil and criminal. May we know 
the number of cases which have been lodged? We know how many have been dealt with, but 
how many cases have been lodged during that period both civil and criminal? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  I  don’t  have  the  information.  I  will  circulate  same  to  the  hon. 

Member. 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 272, item 22120.032 - Fees for Legal Outsourcing, Rs20 m. 
We have seen our local Rs19 m. man. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether Rs20 
m. is for one case? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: No. 

Mr Bhagwan: Would that sum be sufficient to have the services of our local…,then 

we would have reallocation? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: In fact, the amount is Rs26 m.  Which item is it?  Is it item 22120? 
The Legal Outsourcing is fees for the services of Lalive from Switzerland which have been 
retained by Government of Mauritius in the arbitration case of Dawood Rawat and State of 
Mauritius. The fees payable will amount to USD1,545,000 plus expenses.  

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan, listen to the answer! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: It is worthy to note during November 2015 to June 2016, an amount 
of Rs7,430,911 has also been paid Lalive.  Now there is another case as well which is the 
extradition of Mrs Soornack.  The services of Saccucci Fares & Partners of Italy have been 
retained  in  this  case  and  the  fees  payable  will  amount  to  14,250  euros  plus  costs  and 

 

88 

expenses.  It  is  worth  noting  that  during  the  period  April  to  June  2016,  an  amount  of 
Rs639,000 has been paid. 

Mr Ramful: Under item 22100 Publications and Stationery, there is an increase from 

Rs9 m. to Rs21 m. Can we have some details about this? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:    Yes,  the  breakdown  is  as  follows:  the  sum  of  Rs1,250,000  for 
printing  and  stationery,  fax,  photocopiers  and  toners.    Books  and  periodicals  Rs800,000, 
these  would  be  the  general  law  reports  you  have.  And  Rs19.3  m.  payment  to  Blackhall 
publishing Ltd in respect of publication of digitalised and consolidated version of subsidiary 
laws of Mauritius and for payment to Lexis Nexis for access to specialised legal database. 
Now, the increased provision is due to the fact that an amount of Rs10 m. will have to be paid 
to Blackhall publishing Ltd for publication and supply of 450 sets of seven volumes of the 
subsidiary laws of Mauritius. Now, it is worth noting that these sets will be sold at a rate of 
Rs40,000 each. This is subsidiary legislation. 

Mr Ramano: Toujours sous l’item 22120, est-ce que je pourrais savoir de l’honorable 

ministre si cela inclu l’affaire Betamax éventuellement pour les legal fees? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:   L’affaire Betamax est sous le vote de la STC. 

Mr Baloomoody: May I ask the hon. Attorney General with regard to Law Reform 
Commission,  last  year  there  was  a  provision  for  Rs17  m.,  next  year  Rs19  m.  and  then  it 
comes back to Rs18 m.  May we know why this variation? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:      It  is  very  simple.    There  is  next  year  the  organisation  of  the 
Association of Law Reform Agencies for Eastern and Southern Africa ALRAESA and the 
cost of which is Rs1.5 m. This is the difference. 

Mr Uteem: With respect to the publication and stationery, we have just listened to the 
Attorney General, he is telling us that for subsidiary legislation, Blackhall has been awarded 
the contract. May  I know what was the tender procedure followed for the selection of this 
company? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:    This was allocated under the previous Government. I’ll find all the 

information and circulate it to the hon. Member. 

Mr Baloomoody : We are talking about the Office of the Solicitor-General . Under 
item 21110.010 - Service to Mauritius Programme, how does this program fit the Office of 

 

89 

the Solicitor-General? I don’t know why, probably it does not fit because last year there was 
Rs1.5 m. and this year there is only Rs400,000 and no provision is made thereafter. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Yes.  It  is  very  simple.  Regarding  the  Service  To  Mauritius 
Programme,  the  Minister  of  Finance  explained  what  it  is  about  in  the  Budget.  In  all  our 
respective Ministries, there are young graduates who are posted. The reason there is a fall is 
very  simple.  The  Judicial  Legal  Services  Commission  has  proceeded  to  the  recruitment  of 
legal  cadres  and  some  of  them  are  already  being  appointed  at  the  level  of  the  Solicitor-
General’s  Office.  This  is  why  we  don’t  need  so  much  young  graduates  for  STM  and  the 
amount has been reduced. 

Mr Baloomoody: We were told that this programme was more or less to assist young 
graduates,  young  lawyers,  but  why  your  office  is  not  providing  that  service.  Okay,  the 
Ministry has recorded professionals permanently, but at least they should carry on to assist 
the young graduates, young lawyers who come on the market. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:          Those  young  graduates  will  go  back  to  the  pool  of  STM  and 

reallocated to other ministries.  

Vote  15-1:  Office  of  the  Solicitor-General  (Rs204,200,000)was,  on  question  put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 15-2: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions was called. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  274,  there  are  a  number  of  positions:  Chief  Legal  Support 
Officer,  Chief  Legal  Assistant,  Principal  Legal  Support  Officer  etc.  where  no  money  is 
budgeted.  May I know why these are included and if there is any intention of recruiting these 
people? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:     These are recommendations which the DPP had made to the PRB 
and in its report those are new grades. The scheme of service has to be worked out before 
these can be implemented. 

Mr Baloomoody: What about the Law Library Officer? Do we have one in post now? 

There was none, there is provision for one, has he or she been appointed? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:      Not yet appointed, there is one post only. 

Mr  Armance:  Under  item  21110.001  Legal  Research  Officer,  the  amount  jumped 

from Rs17,000 to Rs1 m., is it because of the four new legal research officers ? 

 
Mr Yerrigadoo:    Yes, it is. 

90 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 22120 Fees, there is an increase of nearly 100% from 

Rs3.6 m. to Rs6.1 m. May we know the reason thereof? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:      The  breakdown  is  as  follows:  fees  for  training  Rs900,000; 
consultancy fees Rs600,000; Mr Rosario Domingue is a consultant at the DPP’s office; fees 
in connection with Privy Council cases Rs3 m.; Retainer fees to prosecuting Counsel - these 
are District Court Counsel who are all over the island to give support to prosecutors Rs1.6 m. 

Vote  15-2:  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  (Rs117,700,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 15-3: Office of the Parliamentary Counsel was called. 

Mr  Uteem:  Under  item  21  Compensation  of  Employees,  21110  Legislative  and 

Litigation, there are five new positions. May I know what the litigation is about?  

Mr Yerrigadoo:     This again is the recommendation of the PRB report, the scheme 

of service is being drafted. 

Vote 15-3: Office of the Parliamentary Counsel (Rs19,900,000) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

At 4.21 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  

On resuming at 5.08 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, before we resume with the Committee of Supply, I 
have to inform the House that I have allowed the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and Food 
Security  and  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  to  make  their  statements  out  of  turn.  Hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 
Security! 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

MAURITIUS & RODRIGUES – FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker, thank you first of all to allow me to make the statement out of turn. I am making the 
statement to keep the House informed of developments regarding the evolution of the Foot-
and-Mouth disease in Mauritius and Rodrigues.  

91 

 
With regard to Mauritius, my Ministry is taking all measures to ensure that the Foot-
and-Mouth is contained within the regions of Vallée des Prêtres and Cité La Cure. So far, 156 
infected animals have been culled in these regions. 102 other cases in 16 farms in the same 
localities have been detected and these animals are presently being culled.  

Madam Speaker, some suspected cases have recently been reported at Highlands and 
Notre Dame. After investigation, it has been confirmed that three animals have contracted the 
Foot and Mouth disease. It has accordingly been decided to cull the three animals as well as 
39 other animals which were in contact with them. 

Since the outbreak of the Foot and Mouth Disease, 644 animals have been culled as at 
16 August in Mauritius. With regard to  analysis of specimens of sera and epithelial tissue 
taken  from  sick  animals  in  Mauritius  by  two  reference  laboratories,  namely  the 
Ondersterpoort Veterinary  Institute  of  South  Africa  and  ANSES  laboratory  of  France, 
different results have been obtained regarding the serotype of the virus. 

In  view  of  this  situation,  the  vaccines  initially  imported  from  Botswana  based  on 
results first obtained from South Africa laboratory have been found to be not suitable and the 
vaccination programme scheduled to start on Saturday 13 August has been postponed. 

I had a meeting on Sunday 14 August with the Veterinary staff of my Ministry and the 
FAREI  in  the  presence  of  two  experts,  namely  Dr.  Harena,  Veterinary  Epidemiologist 
attached  to  the  Indian  Ocean  Commission  and  Dr.  Mokganedi,  Epidemiologist  from 
Botswana Vaccine Institute to take stock of the situation.  

At that meeting, it was agreed that the results from the French Laboratory would be 
accepted  subject  to  a  test  from  a  third  party  namely  the  Botswana  Vaccine  Institute  being 
carried out on fresh samples from Rodrigues to reconfirm the results from the laboratory in 
France. 

It was further decided that appropriate vaccines would be imported from Botswana for 
use  in  both  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues.  An  order  of  30,000  doses  of  vaccine  which  is  the 
minimum quantity normally supplied by Botswana Vaccine Institute, will be placed and is 
expected to reach Mauritius during the week-end. 15,000 of the 30,000 doses will be sent to 
Rodrigues. The Botswana Veterinary Institute has, in principle, agreed to take back the first 
consignment of the unutilised vaccines.  

92 

 
My Ministry has already worked out the quantum of compensation payable to local 
importers  and  breeders  of  animals  which  have  been  culled. Arrangements  will  be  made 
shortly for the payment of the compensation. 

 Madam Speaker, I proceeded to Rodrigues on 12 August 2016 to take stock of the 

situation in the island. 

On 13 August 2016, I had a working session with the Crisis Committee set up under 
the  aegis  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly. The  whole  island  of  Rodrigues  has  been 
affected by the FMD and declared as a quarantine zone, except the following regions - 

(i)  

Delo  Vert,  which  constitutes  on  its  own  around  40%  of  the  local  livestock 
population; 

(ii) 

 the Livestock Production Units of St. Gabriel; 

(iii)   Baie Topaze, and 

(iv)   

Ile aux Crabes. 

The following measures have been taken by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

sensitisation on biosecurity measures at farm level through the Veterinary 
Services and extension services via farmers’ meetings, radio and TV 
broadcasts; 
restriction of movement of animals, vehicles and people through road blocks, 
amongst others, and restriction of public gatherings; 
placement of foot dip at the airport and other public areas where there are 
constant movements of people; 
protection of uninfected regions and increased surveillance to protect these 
regions by the Commission for Agriculture, Forestry Department and Police 
Services and the community of breeders themselves among others, and 
placement of protective fencing around the uninfected regions. 

(v) 
At the same meeting, I have proposed to the Crisis Committee that arrangements be 
made  for  Dr.  Mokganedi  to  visit  Rodrigues  to  take  samples  from  infected  animals  for 
analysis at the Botswana Vaccine Institute. 

Dr. Mokganedi proceeded to Rodrigues on Sunday afternoon, and the samples taken 
have been despatched to Botswana on 16 August. The test results are expected by  Friday, 

 

93 

following which, on confirmation of the results obtained from the laboratory in France, the 
batch of 30,000 doses of vaccines will be delivered by this Sunday. 

According to latest information, 1,903 animals have been culled in Rodrigues as at 16 

August. 

Madam Speaker, thank you. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms! 

(5.15 p.m.) 

HERITAGE CITY PROJECT 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain):  Madam Speaker, with regard to the Heritage City Project, I wish to inform 
the House of the procurement of the professional services of STREE, the designated entity of 
a foreign State, as master planner and designer for the Heritage City Project, in accordance 
with Section 3 of the Public Procurement Act; and also the total amount of money which has 
been spent by Heritage City Co. Ltd since its incorporation to date.  

Madam Speaker, on Monday 22 February and Tuesday 23 February 2016, the High 
Powered  Committee  set  up  under  section  3(1C)  of  the  Act,  consisting  of  the  Secretary  to 
Cabinet, the Solicitor General and the Financial Secretary met to consider the procurement of 
professional services of STREE for the Heritage City project.  

The High-Powered Committee stated that - 

(a) 

STREE has unparalleled expertise in creating unique landmark and iconic 
projects;  

(b)  Mauritius stands to benefit from such expertise for (i) the detailed Master Plan 
and Engineering Design and (ii) the Government Offices Schematic Design, of 
the Heritage City Project; 

(c) 

(d) 

the figures and data submitted by STREE are well within the international 
benchmarks for such a project; and 

it was satisfied that the services of STREE represent ‘value for money’ for an 
amount not exceeding USD4.34 million, which is 1.1% of the total project 

 

94 

cost of USD375 million with regard to the two abovementioned components 
of the Heritage City Project. 

The High Powered Committee recommended as per the provisions of Section 3(1B) (b) 
(ii)(A)  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  that  Cabinet  approves  the  procurement  of  the 
professional services of STREE.  

At  a  Special  Cabinet  meeting  held  on  02  March  2016,  Cabinet  considered  the 
recommendations  of  the  High  Powered  Committee,  and  agreed  to  the  procurement  of  the 
professional  services  of  STREE  for  the  detailed  Master  Plan,  Engineering  Design  for 
infrastructure  works,  and  the  Government  Offices  Schematic  Designs  of  the  Heritage  City 
Project on a G to G basis with the Government of Dubai. 

On  08  March  2016,  the  Heritage  City  Co  Ltd  implemented  Government’s  decision  by 
issuing  a  ‘Letter  of  Award’  to  STREE  for  the  2  components  and  on  17  April  2016,  the 
contract  to  procure  services  for  a  total  lump  sum  of  USD4.34  million  for  the  two 
abovementioned components was signed by both designated entities. 

Madam Speaker, since its incorporation to date, Heritage City Company Ltd has been 

allocated an amount of Rs55 m. and has spent the sum of Rs47.1 m., as follows - 

• 

• 

• 

STREE  has  been  paid  USD1.1m.,  i.e.  Rs39.7  m.  and  has  substantially 
completed its services under the first two components; 
Luxconsult  has  been  paid  an  amount  of  Rs3.4  m.  as  part-payment  as 
Consultant  for  the  design  and  construction  supervision  of  offsite  road  and 
infrastructure  works  to  serve  the  Heritage  City  including  preparation  of  the 
Strategic  Environment  Impact  Assessment  report, 
the  Traffic  Impact 
Assessment report and the Urban Transportation and Connectivity proposals 
amongst others; 
Water Research Co. Ltd has been paid Rs2.5 m. for Geo-Technical 
Investigations; 
Land surveying costs of Rs570,000 has been refunded to SLDC; 
Board member's fees of Rs803,250 was paid from January to June 2016; 
Payment to MRA and bank charges amounted to Rs136,505; and 
Payment for Publications of adverts in newspapers amounted to Rs106,421. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
In June 2016, STREE submitted its deliverables for infrastructure detailed design and 
infrastructure engineering design and on Monday 01 August 2016, STREE submitted further 

 

95 

deliverables as regards the draft detailed Master Plan and architectural concept design report 
for Government offices. On the same day, a two-hour presentation was made to Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development. 

On Tuesday 02 August 2016, the Consultants of STREE made their presentation to 
Cabinet  Ministers  at  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  of  their  deliverables  and  the  choice  of 
Parliamentary and Government offices buildings designs was unanimously agreed.   

On Thursday 04 August 2016, the HPC met to consider the proposal of STREE to 
proceed  with  the  last  two  components  of  their  work,  i.e  components  3  and  4  for  the 
Schematic  Design  and  Design  Development  of  the  Parliament  Building;  Prime  Minister’s 
Office and the Detailed Landscape and Streetscape Design.   

The HPC was chaired by the Acting Secretary to Cabinet and Head of Civil Service 
and  consisted  of  the  Financial  Secretary  and  the  Acting  Solicitor  General.  During  its 
deliberations, the HPC was assisted by three experts, namely the Director (Architecture), the 
Director (Civil Engineering) and the Deputy Director (Quantity Surveying) of the Ministry of 
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport.   

The HPC considered that the total cost payable to STREE for all components, i.e. 1, 2, 3 
and 4 would amount to USD9.55 million, which was 2.55% of the total project cost of USD 
375 million. The HPC report also states that the international benchmark for such design is in 
the range of 6% to 8% of the project cost and recommended under Section 3(1B)(b)(ii)(A) of 
the Public Procurement Act for Cabinet to approve the procurement for the final components 
3 and 4. 

Madam Speaker, on Friday 05 August 2016, Cabinet decided to stall the project. All 
outstanding payments to STREE with regard to the contract signed for and other creditors of 
Heritage City Co. Ltd will now be subject to discussions between the relevant parties. 

I thank you for your attention.  

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

Vote 16-1 Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security was called. 

The Chairperson:  Page 281! 

 
Mr  Uteem:  On  page  281,  item  21110.004,  Allowances.  There  is  an  increase  from 

96 

Rs2.6 m. to Rs4.2 m..  Can I know what the increase relates to? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  This  represents  allowances  paid  for  responsibility  allowances, 
cashiers allowances, meal allowances and ad-hoc allowances that are being provided for and 
increased per PRB report. 

Mr Baloomoody:   On page 281, item 21110.010, Service to Mauritius Programme.  
Here again, we find that there was Rs4.4 m.  This year there is only Rs36,000 and then no 
sum  allocated  for  the  subsequent  years.  Is  the  Ministry  doing  away  with  that  Programme, 
which was announced in the Budget Speech as a big programme? 

Mr Seeruttun:  In fact, the Rs36,000 provided for 2016/2017 represents the contract 
of  officers  that  were  employed  for  some  time  and  whose  contracts  of  employment  have 
expired in April 2016. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Are they on that scheme of Service to Mauritius Programme where 
we were supposed to assist young graduates, young recruits?  They are not workers; they are 
not employed.  Because there is no provision for the next budget and the sum has drastically 
been reduced. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  In  fact,  the  Rs36,000  which  is  estimated  for  the  year  2016/2017 
represents the amount for those who were already on that scheme for which their contracts 
have  expired  in  April  2016.  I  have  been  told  that  the  contract  is  for  three  years  and  has 
expired in April 2016.  

With regard to new ones, I don’t think that we have made any provision. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  two  items,  22130.001  -  Studies,  Rs3.5  m.  and  22130.002, 
Surveys,  Rs8  m.  respectively.    Can  we  have  some  details  because  there  is  a  considerable 
increase compared to last year? 

Mr Seeruttun: With regard to studies and surveys, the Rs3.5 m. provision made is, 
firstly, to carry out study for the reopening of the Livestock Feed Factory, given that there 
have been complaints from breeders that there is a need to reopen that factory. So, we have 
provided funds to carry out that study and also we have made provision to carry out study for 
the introduction of endemic birds at Vallée d'Osterlog by the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation. 

Mr Uteem: On page 282, under item 22120 – Fees. There is a substantial increase in 

the fees. It is in respect of what? 

97 

 
Mr Seeruttun: The increase is mainly due for capacity-building for young graduates 
whom we want to get interested in the farming sector. So, we have provided for the capacity-
building of these graduates and also we have provided Rs2 m. for training. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On page 282, under item 311132.401 - e-Government Projects (e-
Agro Industry).  May we know exactly what this is because financially it is progressing very 
little? Is it an urgent project because the total sum is Rs57 m.? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, the total cost of the project is Rs57 m.  And it is a national 
project. And what concerns our Ministry, the amount is provided for the year 2016/2017 is 
Rs5 m. to kick-start the project and then it is going to be on-going until the final completion 
of the project. 

The Chairperson:  Last question on this, hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Again, on the e-Government Project, I 

just want to know when is the project going to be finalised and who is the supplier? 

Mr Seeruttun: I believe the project is being piloted by the Ministry of Technology, 
Communication and Innovation under the responsibility of the Central Informatics Bureau. It 
was decided in December 2015 to go ahead with that Project. It is going to be over a three-
year period. For the year 2016/2017, Rs5 m.; 2017/2018, Rs15 m. and 2018/19, Rs25 m. have 
been  earmarked  for.  The  contract  has  not  yet  been  awarded.  It  is  going  to  be  finalised  in 
December 2016. 

Mr Baloomoody: Coming to that e-Government project, because we have seen that… 

The Chairperson:  We are on page 283 now! 

Mr Baloomoody:  We have not finished on page 282. 

The Chairperson:  No, no! We have to move forward, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:    The  project  is  important  because  we  have  seen  in  many  e-

Government projects… 

The Chairperson:   Hon. Baloomoody, excuse me!  We have got so many pages for 
Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security.  We  have  got  an  allotted  time.    I  can’t  go 
beyond the allotted time each time.  We won’t finish! 

Mr Baloomoody:  Can I have one last question? 

 
The Chairperson:  We will never finish! Page 283!  We will move forward! Yes, 

98 

hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 283, item 28223.001 - Accompanying Measures  for Sugar 
Sector Derocking of Small Sugarcane Planters’ Land (incl. FORIP and Fair Trade projects), 
Rs402  m..    Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  how  many  cooperatives  of  planters, 
individually, are engaged in the Derocking Scheme and for the coming year how many of 
them will benefit from this vote? 

Mr Seeruttun: With regard to the FORIP scheme which also comprises the derocking 

of small planters’ fields, some 12,000 hectares of land were meant to be prepared. 

The Chairperson:  Be brief in you answer, hon. Minister!  The hon. Member has just 

asked for the number of planters who are benefitting. 

Mr Seeruttun: As at to date, 10,253 hectares of lands have been completed under that 
scheme.  We intend for this coming year to carry out another 1,000 hectares of land under 
that scheme. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 28212.034, SIFB: Compensation for Insurance Premium to Small 
Planters.  There is an amount of Rs50 m. earmarked for next year.  May we know what does 
that relate to and why is it a one-off? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  With  regard  to  the  Sugarcane  planters,  the  price  of  sugar  has  gone 
down, as we all know. And to provide financial support to them, we have decided to fund the 
insurance  premium,  that  is,  the  amount  that  they  have  to  pay  to  cover  their  sugarcane 
plantations. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    Item  26323.028,  Irrigation  Authority!    We  have  given  an  extra 
capital grant for a project of Rs125,200,000.  A sum of Rs15 m. is being allocated for this 
year. May we know for what specific project it is? 

Mr Seeruttun: This is with regard to the rehabilitation of the pivot. 

The Chairperson:  Pages 285, 286? Page 287! Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Under  item  22900.099  (ii)  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Programme!  
There is a provision of Rs19 m.  Could the hon. Minister give some details on that provision, 
please? 

99 

 
Mr  Seeruttun:  With  regard  to  this  Climate  Change  Adaption  Programme,  it  is  a 
scheme being funded by the EU whereby funds are transferred to the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic  Development.    But  we  are  those  who  are  implementing  those  projects.  The 
objective of the project is to increase the resilience of vulnerable non-sugar small holders and 
offer key stakeholders to climate change, thus increasing their capacity to develop and sustain 
climate-smart  agriculture  and  there  are  different  schemes  that  are  to  be  funded  out  of  that 
project  with  regard  to  soil  and  water    conservation,  rain  water  harvesting,  innovative 
irrigation  techniques,  develop  sustainable  mixed  farming  practices  for  crop  production  to 
reduce  vulnerability  of  farms,  promote  rain  sheltered  farming  and  disaster  risk  reduction 
measures related to mangroves. 

The Chairperson: I remind hon. Ministers also if their reply is long, they can always 

circulate the reply. Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  page  287,  item  25210.005  –  Freight  Rebate  Scheme,  there  is  a 
provision of Rs25 m. Can the hon. Minister inform us about the different schemes, whether it 
is for fruits or vegetables and how many persons are involved and would be benefitting from 
the scheme? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, it was announced in the Budget Speech that we are increasing 
the percentage of the cost incurred by exporters of different crops and fruits and we have also 
extended those eligible exporters for those who are exporting flowers and other products like 
moringa, colocasia, bittergourd, lady finger and ridge gourd. So, we’ve extended the scheme 
to other exporters so that it would be eligible now to get this kind of subsidy. 

Mr  Fowdar:  Item  25210.007  –  Freight  Rebate  Scheme,  can  we  have  some  more 

details about it. 

The Chairperson: The Minister has just given the details, hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: The same? 

The Chairperson: Just same details. Yes, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody:  On item 25210.009 – Fruit Growers (Litchi, Banana), the sum has 

gone up from Rs8 m. to Rs16 m. May we know why there is such an increase? 

Mr Seeruttun: Well, in fact, as you are probably aware, we were hit by a disease for 
the banana growers, freckle disease and to be able to protect the bananas, we proposed, what 
we call, ‘banana bagging scheme’ to protect the bananas when they are still in the field. So, 

 

100 

we are subsidising 50% of the cost of the purchase of the plastic bags for them to protect their 
bananas. So, that’s one reason why we have seen an increase in the amount being provided 
for.  

With regard to the litchis, we are providing the bird net to protect litchi growers. 

Mr  Uteem:  Item  22130.002  –  Surveys  (incl.  Reimbursable  Technical  Assistance  – 
IFAD).  In  relation  to  surveys,  there  is  an  amount  of  Rs8.5  m.  So,  may  we  know  it  is  in 
relation to what survey? 

Mr Seeruttun: Regarding surveys, we have a contract with the IFAD for service to 

come up with the Seeds Act and regulations.   

As regards the cost for the consultants, we have made provision for Rs8.5 m.   

With regard to the surveys that we are going to carry out, provision of Rs8.5 m. has 

been made for that as well. 

The Chairperson: Page 288! Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: With regard to item 28215.008 -  Accompanying Measures – Non Sugar 
Activities (Bee Keeping), Rs7 m., which is announced in the Budget.  Can we know on what 
criteria this will be disbursed? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Again,  this  is  an  amount  that  has  been  announced  in  the  Budget 
Speech.  The purpose of that is that the bee sector was hit by a disease, Varoa disease, in the 
last two years, and the production went down by 30%. To re-boost that sector, we have made 
provision to assist the beekeepers so that they can improve in their techniques of producing 
honey and also to create new reserves for places where we can have more melliferous plants 
for bees to produce more honey. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  item  28225.006  (a)  Land  preparation  and  Agricultural 
Infrastructure  Development  Projects,  there  is  a  sum  of  Rs18.8  m.  Will  that  project  be 
implemented by the Ministry or grants will be given to the farmers, either for sugar cane or 
for vegetables? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  The  Land  Preparation  and  Agricultural  Infrastructure  Development 
Projects, the sum of Rs7.2 m. was earmarked for the Belle Mare Irrigation Project and Rs10 
m. for the land infrastructure at Plaine Sophie. From what I can see here, this includes the 
construction of wheel tracks at Plaine Sophie and also Glen Park and other regions.  It also 
includes irrigation projects at Rouge Terre, Plaisance and other regions. 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Item  28215.004  –  Food  Crop  Insurance  Scheme.  May  I  know  what  is 

101 

eligibility criteria to benefit from that insurance? 

Mr Seeruttun: This concerns planters, farmers of non-sugar crops and breeding who 
are registered with the Small Farmers Welfare Fund who adhere to that scheme. They have to 
adhere to the scheme to be able to have an insurance cover. What we are doing is we are 
trying to improve that cover so that more and more planters are well covered and in case of 
calamities, they are protected in terms of their losses incurred. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Item 26323.0019 – Food and Agricultural Research and Extension 
Institute.  With  regard  to  the  FAREI,  the  Specialised  Bio-Farm  Unit,  may  we  know  where 
matters stand? 

Mr Seeruttun: Again, as you all know, we are promoting bio-farming in Mauritius 
and we have set up a unit at the level of the FAREI and also at the level of the Ministry to 
coordinate all the activities to get farmers to really be conscious about the advantages of bio-
farming and also to promote this new way of doing agriculture. 

The Chairperson: Page 289! Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Under  item  804  –  Acquisition  of  Laboratory  Equipment,  Rs25  m.,  is 

there any special equipment we are buying? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Again,  we  have  a  Food  Tech  Lab  at  Réduit  and  to  make  it  more 
effective,  we  need  to  have  hi-tech  equipment  to  be  able  to  carry  out  more  analysis  of  our 
crops that we are producing. We all know that we are faced with problems.  At times, we are 
told that we use too much of pesticides.  So, we need to make analysis to make sure that 
farmers don’t abuse of pesticides. So, we are buying those equipment to carry out those tests. 

Mr  Baloomoody:    On  page  289,  item  31112.022  –  Construction  of  a  National 
Wholesale Market. Can we know exactly where this market will be, where matters stand and 
whether the contract has already been allocated? 

Mr Seeruttun: The project had been announced last year. We have already started to 
look  for  consultants  to  assist  in  the  implementation  of  that  project.  We  had  launched  an 
expression of interest in January 2016.  Bids were open in March 2016.  A technical report 
from  Bids  Committee  was  submitted  on  12  of  April  2016.    We  are  still  at  the  stage  of 
selecting the consultants. 

(Interruptions) 

 

It is going to be in Wootun. 

102 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem, last question! 

Mr  Uteem:  Under  item  31112.040  Construction  of  a  Multipurpose  Containment 

Facility (Plant), where will the plant be located? 

Mr Seeruttun:  At Réduit.  

Mr Jhuboo: Capital Expenditure 28225.007 - Capital Transfers (Livestock) (a) Cattle 
Breeders Scheme (Mauritius); (c) Goat Multiplier Farms Scheme; (e) Upgrading of Livestock 
Farm/Poultry Scheme and (f) Reproduction Farm Cattle/Goat…  

Mr Baloomoody: I have questions on page 291 

The Chairperson: I did ask. There was no question.  

(Interruptions) 

No, no, no. I had already asked, there was no question.  

(Interruptions) 

Now  I  went  to  page  292,  I  did  ask.  Hon.  Baloomoody,  you  go  and  see  the  records.  I  had 
asked, there was no question.  I  cannot wait for  you when  you  are concentrating on which 
question to ask. I had asked on each page. I went through each page you can go and verify the 
records if you want. Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Thank you, Madam. In the light of the FMD outbreak in Rodrigues and 
the commitment that Government took towards the Rodriguans and local breeders, will the 
Minister move for additional budgetary provisions in that respect? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Well,  as  we  all  know,  this  outbreak  came  after  the  Budget  was 
presented. We will see how things evolve and we will take the necessary measures to address 
that problem. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Chairperson:  No  cross-talking  please!  You  are  disrupting  the  work.  Hon. 

Rutnah please! Yes, hon. Baloomoody. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, we are on page 292?  

The  Chairperson:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  please  ask  your  question?  No  provocative 

remarks please! Yes.  

103 

 
Mr Baloomoody: There was supposed to be the construction of a model dairy farm at 
Melrose, may we know  where matters stand? This was announced  years  ago.  It is at page 
292. I hope you are still on page 292. 

Mr Seeruttun:  Yes. The model heifer farm is going to be at Melrose. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody, please you cannot be ironical to the Chair. You 

know that.  

Mr Baloomoody: You have asked me which page.  

Mr Seeruttun:  Yes. The model farm has been earmarked to be set up at Melrose. 

Now that funds have been made available, we will start the setting up of that farm.  

Mr  Uteem:  Item  31112.045  Construction  of  New  Slaughter  House,  may  I  know 

where matters stand. 

Mr Seeruttun: Again we have launched expressions of interest to have consultants. 
In the first instance, we did not get the right candidate, we have                  re-launched it and 
we are in the process of selecting the right consultant… 

(Interruptions) 

And it is to be located at Wootun. 

The Chairperson: Page 295. Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Under item 31410.401 Rehabilitation, Upgrading of Nature Reserves 
& Parks, has a survey been carried out? Where exactly are we going to spend this Rs607 m. 
Is there a priority list as far as the parks and reserves are concerned? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Well,  the  parks  identified  are  Powder  Mills,  Mont  Vert,  Plaine 
Sophie, Pointe d’Esny, Ramsar site and other places like Père Nature Reserve, Coastal Native 
Forest, Surinam, Souillac, Coin du Diable, a bit all over the places. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  31111.001  Dwellings  -  construction  of  quarters  and 
barracks, may we know where matters stand. It is a project of Rs11 m. Only Rs2 m. has been 
allocated for this year. Can we know exactly where it will be, where the project stands? 

Mr Seeruttun:  These are for Mont Vert Forest Office, toilets at Forest Side, some 
renovation  works  at  Eau  Bouillie  Forest  Office,  mess  room  etc.  The  project  has  already 
started. 

 
Mr Jhuboo: Under item 22 Goods and Services, 22090 Security, there is a provision 

104 

of Rs4 m. Can the hon. Minister enlighten the House on that provision? 

Mr Seeruttun: The services are contracted with Le Ravin Transport Limited and the 

Director is Mr Aubeeluck from Castel.  

Mr Uteem:  Item 26313.129 Vallée d'Osterlog Endemic Garden Foundation, may  I 

know what this foundation relates to? What is it about? 

Mr Seeruttun: It is an endemic garden that was created some years back and that is 

the cost of running that endemic garden. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  22120  Fees,  last  year  there  was  a  contribution  to 
UNDP for Rs225,000; this year it is Rs2,432; may we know the reason for this substantial 
increase? 

Mr Seeruttun: Fees to consultants under the PAN project which is a protected area 
network  project.  The  provision  will  include  payment  to  EcoAfrica  Environmental 
Consultants and Cread & Co Ltd. They are the ones that are providing the services for this 
project.   

Mr Jhuboo: Concerning Vallée d'Osterlog again, there is a provision of Rs18 m.  as 
capital expenditure and grants. Can the hon. Minister enlighten the House on that additional 
provision of Rs18 m.?  

Mr Seeruttun: For the setting up of a biking trail at Vallée d'Osterlog. 

Mr Bhagwan: I have a few questions. Can the hon. Minister inform the House about 
this Gerard Durrell Wildlife Sanctuary? Where is it situated? We are being asked to vote the 
sum. Secondly, under item 31410.401 (d) Implementation of an islet management plan, who 
has prepared the plan? Can we be given a list of the islets which are to be managed? The 
project of Round Island also, whether work has started and what is the target date?  Under 
item 31410 Saving the Endemic Endangered Reptiles, - I know there are a few here - Rs480 
m. has been earmarked.  Can we have some details?   

Mr Seeruttun: I will circulate the answer. 

Mr Uteem: In relation to item 31410 (g) Saving the Endemic Endangered Reptiles, 
there is no amount budgeted for next year. Is there any reason why? Has all the reptiles been 
preserved now? 

 
The Chairperson: A last question in the meantime! 

105 

Mr Seeruttun: There were some activities carried out in the years 2015/2016.  So, I 
believe that no fund has been allocated for the year 2016/2017, we did make a request for Rs5 
m., but we did not get it, unfortunately. 

The Chairperson:  Last question, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under 

item  31410  Removal  of  Invasive  Alien  Species 

(UNDP/GEF), there has been an increase from Rs4 m. to Rs11 m. May we know why? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  In  fact,  the  increase  represents  work  in  Round  Island,  for  the 
conservation  of  keel-scaled  boa  and  also  for  the  maintenance  and  monitoring  of  seven 
endemic  reptiles  population  on  Islets  including  translocation  on  gunner’s  Quoin,  Ilot 
Marianne, Ilot Gabriel and île au Phare. 

Vote  16-1  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Rs2,611,000,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture was called. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  May  we  know  whether  the  post  of  the  Assistant  Manager  for 

Procurement and Supply has been filled, and if not, why not? 

Mr Baboo: It has not been filled yet. 

 (Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Order, please! 

Mr Baboo: Because we have created a new post to cadre for the increase in workload. 

Mr  Ramano:  Sous  l’item  21111  Other  Staff  Costs,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du 
ministre la liste des advisers attachés au ministre et aussi les différentes rémunérations pour 
ces différents advisers ? 

Mr Baboo: Well, it is too long. I will circulate it. 

Mr Uteem: On page 304, under item 26313.102 Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund, 
may I know from the hon. Minister the composition of the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund 
and in particular whether the representatives of Rabita has been appointed to the Board? 

(Interruptions) 

 

106 

The Chairperson: Hon. Members, on this side of the House, can I ask you to give the 

exercise its seriousness! 

Mr Baboo: Well, regarding, the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund, the Chairperson is 

Prof. Hussein Soobratty and the members, we have Mr Aslam Bagan, Mrs Bilkiss … 

Okay, I will circulate the list. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  My question is whether a representative of Rabita has been appointed to 

the Board as required under the law. 

Mr Baboo: Yes, it has been appointed. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  On  page  304,  under  item  22130  Studies  and  Surveys,  can  we  have 
more details about the two projects (b) ‘Stade Musical’ Project and (c) National Centre for 
Performing Arts Project for which Rs2 m. has been voted? 

Mr Baboo: For the  ‘Stade Musical’ Project, we have  got Rs2 m. in the Budget in 
order to widen the range for the public to attend concert of local and international standards.  
We have not yet finalised the land. 

Mr  Quirin:  Page  304,  under  item  26313.036  Mauritius  Film  Development 
Corporation, an amount of Rs13 m. has been budgeted for 2016/2017.  Can the hon. Minister 
inform us how this amount is going to be spent? 

Mr  Baboo:  To  import  and  export  exhibits,  produce  films,  promote  the  holding  of 
films,  show  festivals  and  to  cater  for  the  cultural  and  linguistic  needs  of  the  people  of 
Mauritius. 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qui  concerne  l’item  22090  Security,  le 
budget passe de R 1,252 million à R 1,900 million. Je peux en connaitre la raison du ministre 
et aussi est-ce que je peux connaitre le nom de la compagnie qui assure la sécurité ? 

Mr Baboo: I do not have it, I will circulate it. 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 22120 Fees, we see that there is an increase of nearly 

of Rs2 m. for fees. May we know for what purpose? 

Mr Baboo: It is fees for the Chairman and members of the Board of Committee such 
as Departmental Bid Committee, Bid Evaluation Committee, Film Classification Board and 
Censor Board. 

107 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  J’ai  deux  questions,  Madame  la  présidente.  For  the  Mauritius  Film 
Development Corporation, we are being asked to vote Rs13 m. Can the Minister inform us 
how much is paid out of the grant to the Chairperson, can we have his name and whether he 
is  on  bail  for  corruption  charges?  On  the  last  line,  Centres  de  Lecture  Publique  et 
d’Animation  Culturelle  (CELPAC),  can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  us  how  many  of  these 
centres are operational and whether in the vote for next  year, there are new centres which 
would be operational? 

Mr Baboo: Well, regarding the MFDC it is Mr Dick Ng Sui Wa. Well, the salary is 

Rs25,800. 

Mr Uteem:  With respect to item 22030, Rent, there is a substantive increase from 

Rs12 m. to Rs16 m.  May we know why there is an increase? 

The Chairperson:  Order, on this side! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baboo:   It is an  additional amount required due to increase in activities of the 

Ministries in terms of organisation of events. Around 200-250 events organised yearly. 

Dr.  Joomaye:    Item  26313.116,  Grants,  Extra  Budgetary  Unit,  Speaking  Unions.  
There is an increase of Rs2.1 m. being voted.  Can we know about this extra budget of Rs2.1 
m.?  Can  we  have  the  breakdown  about  how  this  will  be  distributed  among  the  different 
Speaking Unions? 

The Chairperson:  If your answer is long, then you can circulate it! 

Mr Baboo: Regarding the question of hon. Bhagwan, Centre de lecture, provision is 
made to cater for the purchase of reading materials, administrative costs, general expenses of 
17 CLACs around the island.  Regarding the question of hon. Dr. Joomaye, I will circulate 
the list. 

Mr  Baloomoody: 

Item  26313.044,  Grants,  Extra-Budgetary  Unit,  Rights 
Management Society.  May we know out of the Rs1.8 m., how much is being given to the 
local artists?  When was the last payment effected to the local artists? 

Mr Baboo: It goes according to the distribution of the royalties. 

Mr Bhagwan:  On page 305, the scheme for the concerts, we are being asked to vote 
another  Rs2  m.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  a  list  of  those  concerts  which  the  hon. 

 

108 

Minister has sponsored during this financial year which is ending and what are the criteria for 
the Ministries to sponsor these concerts? 

Mr Baboo:  I will circulate the list. 

Mr  Quirin:    On  page  305,  item  31112.420,  Upgrading  of  Theatres  –  Serge 
Constantin  Theatre,  can  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  some  details  regarding  the  upgrading 
works to be carried out at Serge Constantin Theatre? 

The Chairperson:  Well, we can ask hon. Dr. Joomaye for his next question in the 

meantime! Okay, you have it! 

Mr Baboo: The scope of work is for the replacement of the CIS roof, replacement of 
damaged  timber,  replacement  of  gutters,  restructuring  of  frames  and  replacement  of  false 
ceiling which were damaged in front office and theatre hall including any electrical works, 
painting of front office and repairs of aluminium openings. 

Dr. Joomaye: Page 305 under item Grants, 26323.036, Mauritius Film Development 
Corporation, a one-off budget of Rs10 m. is being voted.  Can we know about the purpose of 
this Rs10 m. for the MFDC? 

Mr Baboo: The sum of Rs10 m. is for the purchase of equipment for the MFDC. 

Mr  Uteem:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  a  list  of  all  socio-cultural  organisations 

which have benefitted or will benefit from the Rs2 m. grant under item 28211? 

Mr Baboo:  I will circulate the list. 

Mr  Ramano:    Item  28212.014  (d)  International  Development  Grant  Scheme  for 
Performing Artists.  Est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre sur quelle base se fait la sélection 
pour les artistes afin qu’ils puissent perform à l’étranger et s’il est d’accord pour soumettre la 
liste? 

Mr Baboo: The provision is made for financial assistance. 

Mr Quirin: Madam Chairperson, item 28212.014 (e) Other support to Artists, Rs3 m. 

is earmarked.  Can we have some details regarding this item? 

Mr Baboo:  Provision is made to assist artists up to a maximum of Rs30,000 for the 

production of CDs formats. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Item  31122.999 Acquisition of Other Machinery and  Equipment.  
We have learnt that there will be equipment for other departments be it the Film Industry and 

 

109 

all the institutions.  Now, it is Rs205,000 and it has gone up to Rs5,150,000. So, may we 
know why there is such a large increase and this equipment will go to which department or 
institution? 

Mr Baboo: Provision is made for the purchase of new materials, instruments such as 
tablas,  harmoniums,  guitars,  violin  and  modern  sound  system  for  dance  classes  for  the 
Centres de formations artistiques to replace old ones. 

Mr Uteem:  On page 306, item 21110, may I know from the hon. Minister why there 

is no amount budgeted for the appointment of a Director? 

Mr Baboo: The Scheme of Service is being finalised. 

Mr  Jhuboo:    Item  22130.001,  Studies  and  preliminary  project  preparation  (a) 
Intercontinental  Slavery  Museum  (b)  Maroonage  Museum.    Can  we  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister whether the consultant has already been appointed, and if yes, can the hon. Minister 
give the name of the consultant? 

Mr Baboo: The consultant has not yet been appointed. 

Dr. Joomaye:  Under same item, do we understand that there would be two museums 

intercontinental slavery and maroonage? 

Mr Baboo:  Yes, there will be two museums.  The slavery museums will be found in 

the compound of Military hospital and the maroonage at Le Morne. 

Mr Ramano: Sous l’item 22090, Security Services, le budget passe de  R377,000 à 

R710,000.  Je peux connaître la raison du ministre.  

Mr  Baboo:  The  increase  is  due  to  additional  provision  made  for  the  disaster 
preparedness plan for the National Archives Department as recommended by the Health and 
Safety Officer and the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Item  22900.099,  Miscellaneous  Expenses  -  Conservation  and 
Preservation  of  Records.  May  we  know  more  about  this  project?  Who  will  handle  that 
project?  Which department? 

Mr Baboo: It’s a new item created for the purchase of equipment and materials to 

preserve and conserve records for special treatment. 

Mr  Ramful:  With  regard  to  item  26323.39  (d),  Peopling  of  Mauritius  Museum  at 

Pointe Canon. We are being asked to vote Rs1.5 m.  Can we know what is this about? 

110 

 
Mr  Baboo:  Provision  is  made  for  the  complete  rehabilitation  of  the  roof  of  the 
Peopling of Mauritius Museum at Pointe Canon. Technical specifications and drawings are 
being worked out. Tender will be launched soon. 

Mr Uteem: Page 308, item 31112.101 – Construction of the National Archives and 
National Library. May I know from the hon. Minister where matters stand with respect to the 
construction of the National Archives? Have we finalised the site? 

Mr Baboo: Well, a provision of Rs105,000,000 is made to kick-start the construction 
of the building, to have the National Archives Department and the National Library at Ebène 
Triangle. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page,  item  311132.401  –  Digitisation  of  Archives.  

May we know again where matters stand, whether there has been any progress? 

Mr Baboo: Provision is made the digitisation of around 1.8 million pages for Phases 
2, 3 and 4 of the project. This is an ongoing project, which has already started since 2009. 
530,000 pages, representing 10% of the collection of the National Archives Department, have 
already been scanned and digitised. 

Mr  Ramano:  Toujours  sous  l’item  31112.101  –  Construction  of  National  Archives 
and  National  Library.  Pour  les  Estimates  2016/17,  2017/18,  les  sommes  qui  sont  prévues 
sont  seulement  pour  le  design  ou  éventuellement  pour  la  construction  et  aussi  pour  la 
gestion ? 

Mr Baboo: For construction. 

Mr Jhuboo: Item 31112 – Upgrading of Cultural Complex/Buildings. Could the hon. 

Minister please circulate the list? 

Mr  Baboo:  Provision  is  made  for  the  restoration  and  conservation  of  the  Trianon 

Indentured Labourers Barracks and the Batterie de l’Harmonie in Black River. 

Vote 17-1 Ministry of Arts and Culture (Rs588,500,000) was, on question put, agreed 

to. 

The Chairperson: Order! 

Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order, hon. Bhagwan! 

111 

(Interruptions) 

Vote 18-1 Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection was called. 

The Chairperson: Page 314! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Page  314,  item  22120,  Fees.  There  is  an  exceptional  item,  Regional 
Interim  Economic  Partnership  Agreement  –  Mauritius  Standards  Bureau.  May  we  know 
from the hon. Minister what this agreement relates to? 

Mr Gungah: It is a programme by the European Union, financed by the European 

Union, and it is for upgrading of the Metrology lab. 

Mr  Uteem:  Item  26313.134,  Enterprise  Mauritius  (c)  Freight  Rebate  Scheme  for 
Africa. The amount is being increased from Rs12 m. to Rs20 m. May I know what products 
qualify for this rebate scheme to Africa? 

Mr Gungah: I can circulate the list.  There are many products that are concerned. 

Mr Baloomoody: Under Capital Expenditure, item 26323.011, Fashion and Design 

Institute. May we know that contribution of Rs4 m. is for what? 

Mr Gungah: It is for the purchase of equipment for the institute. 

Vote 18-1 Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Rs459,200,000) 

was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 19-1 Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare was 

called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! Page 321. 

Mr Baloomoody: No, I am on page 322, item Research Officer. May I know whether 
we have recruited that Research Officer at the Ministry’s level and also whether there is a 
Documentalist? 

Mrs  Perraud:  For  the  post  of  Research  Officer,  provision  is made  for  payment  of 

salaries to Research Officer and for the post of Documentalist, it is a new grade. 

Mr Uteem: What about the Internal Control Officer?  Is that going to be filled this 

year? 

 
Mrs  Perraud:  It  is  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 

112 

Development. 

Mr Bhagwan: Item 22120, Fees. Can we have some details to whom these fees are 
being paid? And also, on page 323, item 22130, Studies and Surveys, can the hon. Minister 
give us a breakdown of these studies and surveys which would be carried out, and in which 
field? 

Mrs  Perraud:  For  Fees,  it’s  provision  for  payment  of  fees  to  members  of  the 
Departmental Bid Committee and training of staff. For item Studies and Surveys, provision is 
made for the development of a comprehensive strategy on street children. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  324,  with  regard  to  Grants  under  items  26313.006 - National 
Women Entrepreneur Council and 26313.067 - National Women Council respectively.  Could 
the hon. Minister circulate the composition of the two councils? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, I will circulate. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  page  324,  under  item  28211.051  -  Transfers  to  Non-Profit 
Institutions  - Women’s Associations.  Can the hon. Minister circulate the list of the Women’s 
Association which are benefiting from that item?  

Also under item 28211.059 - S.O.S Femmes! We see that Rs1 m. has been targeted 
each year and there has been no increase, when we know that they are doing an excellent job 
and they are in financial difficulties. May we know why that sum has remained constant with 
only Rs1 m.? 

Mrs Perraud: Indeed,  we acknowledge the work that S.O.S Femmes is doing. We 
have talked a lot about this subject during the amendments to PDVA and we are helping this 
NGO. 

Mr Uteem: On page 324, under item 31111 - Dwellings, Construction of Integrated 
Services Centre  (Design).  The project cost was  Rs60 m. We see that there is only Rs1 m. 
budgeted. Do I take it that the project has been completed? 

Mrs Perraud: I am informed that the estimated cost of the project is Rs60 m. and a 

sum of Rs1 m. has been earmarked at this stage for the design phase only. 

Mr  Uteem:  Page  325,  under  item  22900  -  Other  Goods  and  Services,  Running 
Expenses of Shelters for Children. Mr Vellien, in his report, was very critical and asked for 

 

113 

an  increase  in  the  number  of  shelters.  So,  is  provision  being  made  in  the  Budget  for 
increasing the number of staff employed in shelters for children? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, it is. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page,  under  the  last  item  26313.053  -  National 
Children’s Council, Support to Child Day Care Centres Scheme.  May we know a bit more 
about that Day Care Centre Scheme, for which we are voting Rs5 m.?  

Mrs Perraud: Provision for one-off grant of Rs200,000 to Child Day Care Centres 
for upgrading to be registered, an amount of Rs464,931 has been disbursed by the National 
Children’s Council to 9 Child Day Care Centres during the last financial year. 

Mr Uteem: Item 22900 - running expenses of Drop-in-Centre, I suppose that is the 
drop-in-centre at GRNW. May I know from the hon. Minister whether this drop-in-centre is 
now operational, how many staff it has and how many children are there? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, it is operational. 

Mr Bhagwan: On page, under item 28211. 004 - Charitable Institutions, where we 
are  being  asked  to  vote  Rs46  m.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  a  list  of  the  charitable 
institutions which would be benefitting from Government’s generosity and the criteria which 
has been set up by the Ministry for such grants? 

Mrs Perraud: I will circulate the paper. 

Mr Baloomoody: Under Capital Expenditure with regard to the construction of the 
Drop-In-Centre in Grande Rivière!  This project has been on for quite a long time and there is 
no  provision  made  for  this  year  and  the  subsequent  years.  Are  we  going  ahead  with  that 
project? 

Mrs Perraud: For the question asked before, there are 27 minors at the Oasis Shelter 

which is already operational. 

Mr Uteem: At page 326, under item 27210.011 - Social Assistance Benefits - Foster 
Care. The budgeted amount is being increased from Rs1.1 to Rs6.2 m. May I know from the 
hon. Minister what is the estimated number of families who are going to benefit from this 
foster care allowance? 

Mrs Perraud: As at date, 57 children have been placed in 48 foster families and from 

March to June 8 placements have been made in 7 foster families. 

114 

 
Mr  Baloomoody:  On  page  327,  under  item  22900.908  –  Women  &  Children’s 
Solidarity  Programme,  (b)  Gender-Based  Violence  Command  Centre  where  Rs5  m.  is 
earmarked. May we know more about this centre? 

Mrs Perraud: Madam Chairperson, the answer is quite long, so I will circulate it. 

Mr Quirin: On page 327, under item 22900.919 - Special Collaborative Programme 
for Support to Families in Distress where an amount of Rs24 m. is earmarked for 2016/2017. 
Can we have some details regarding this item, please? 

Mrs Perraud: I will have to circulate this one also. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22900 - Assistance to Victims of Domestic Violence? As from 
next year, there is an amount of Rs3 m. budgeted. So, may we know from the hon. Minister 
what kind of assistance it will be? Will it be in cash assistance, help to NGOs or what? 

Mrs Perraud: The assistance will be in different forms, so I will circulate the paper. 

Vote  19-1  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 

(Rs451,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  20-1  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms was called. 

Mr Bhagwan: I will take page 328, the Strategic Note - The Mission Statement of the 

Ministry and the Minister, which is – 

 to provide guidance and support for the enforcement of good governance, promote 
financial services and re-engineer public sector bodies to eradicate fraud, corruption, 
malpractices and irregularities in all aspects of public life and restore the national 
values of the country.  

This is the Mission Statement of the hon. Minister.  

On this side of the House, Madam Chairperson, we consider that the hon. Minister has 
failed in his duty and instead he should have resigned after qu’il a été désavoué par le projet 
Heritage City. So, we won’t ask any question to the hon. Minister who should have resigned 
instead. 

(Interruptions) 

Vote  20-1  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms (Rs529,100,000) was agreed to. 

 

115 

Vote 21-1 Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On page 338, I do not know if there is anything before that. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Please! I cannot follow now!  You are making too much noise! 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

Hon. Bhadain, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, can we please continue? No provocative remarks, I say, hon. Bhadain! Right! 
Hon. Bhagwan, please, let us proceed with our work! 

Hon. Rutnah, we did not ask you for your comments, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  338,  item  22900  Other  Goods  and  Services,  the  increased 
amount is Rs5 m.  So, may I know from the hon. Minister what the increased amount relates 
to? 

Mr  Bholah:  This  is  in  regard  to  management  fee  to  DBM,  Rs500,000  for  ex-

Mauritius Business Growth (MBG) loans. 

The Chairperson: Page 339!  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22130 Studies and Surveys, sub-item 22130.002 SME Master 
Plan, an amount of Rs5 m. has been earmarked.  Can I know from the hon. Minister when is 
the SME Master Plan going to be ready? 

Mr Bholah: It is expected to be ready by September next. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under 

item  26313.083  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
Development  Authority  (SMEDA)  (c)  Pre-market  Test  and  Certification  Scheme,  may  we 
know more about the scheme where an amount of Rs5 m. is being allocated? 

 
Mr  Bholah:  This  Rs5  m.  has  been  provided  for  the  refund  to  Small  and  Medium 

116 

Enterprises in respect of cost incurred for certification of products. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  the  same  item  26313.083  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
Development  Authority  (SMEDA)  (b)  Refund  to  SMEs  for  Participation  in  International 
Fairs, may I know from the hon. Minister what is the criteria for refund in those international 
fairs? 

Mr Bholah: First of all, they participate in selected fairs with a view to seeking new 

markets and also to learn about new technologies for their products. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page,  under  Sub-Head  21-103:  Cooperatives 
Development, can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is a Registrar of Cooperative 
Societies now, if not, when are we going to recruit one? 

Mr  Bholah:  Well,  the  vacancy  notice  was  in  the  press  until  recently.    In  fact, 

yesterday was the closing date and we expect the guy to be in very soon. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  Sub-Head  21-103:  Cooperatives  Development,  Madam 
Chairperson, can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has received representations for 
grants for the La Chaumière, St Martin Cooperative Society to alleviate the problems which 
they had raised some time back with the Minister, for additional land also? 

Mr Bholah: Personally, I have not received any representation or request.  The only 
request we had received regarding the exemption from income tax for agricultural products 
and this has been given in this budget. 

The Chairperson: Page 340!  Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  There  are  quite  a  lot  of  vacancies  or  posts  which  have  not  been 
filled: Chief Technical  Officer, Principal Cooperative Auditor, Senior Cooperative  Auditor 
and Cooperative Auditor.  May we know what will happen to these posts and whether they 
have been abolished? 

Mr Bholah: This will be filled in very soon. 

The Chairperson: Page 341!  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under Capital Expenditure 31112.442 Upgrading of Buildings  (NICE), 

may we know where this building is? 

117 

 
Mr Bholah: This building is at Bois Marchand.  In fact, there is a building over there 
and what we are proposing is to refurbish, to modify and to upgrade it which will eventually 
house the National Cooperative College. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  341,  the  last  item  31132.106  Cooperatives  Division  e-
Registration Project (CDeRP), there is a project value of Rs19 m. which seems to be a new 
project.  May we have some details on this item? 

Mr Bholah: In fact, the office of the Registrar will be computerised, so that we may 
go  for  online  applications  for  Cooperative  Societies,  online  registration,  online  payment, 
online submission of financial statements and all that. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 28211 Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions, there are transfers 
to  various  Cooperatives.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  criteria  used  to 
allocate the funds to those Cooperatives? 

Mr Bholah: These are used to pay for the Board members and it has been there for 

years now. 

Vote  21-1  Ministry  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Rs318,300,000)  was, 

on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 22-1 Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions was 

called. 

The Chairperson: Page 345! 

Mr  Uteem:  On  page  345,  there  are  a  number  of  posts  which  are  not  filled  yet: 
Director, Quality and Assurance, Senior, Quality and Assurance, Procurement and no amount 
has been budgeted.  May I know the reason for that? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: If there is no budget, I take it that it will not be filled. 

Mr Uteem: Other Ministers have said, for example, that the post has not been filled 
because  they  did  not  get  applications,  others  have  stated  that  the  criteria  are  still  being 
worked.  So, we want to know why are we having these items and it is not filled. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, the Scheme of Service has not yet been worked out. 

The Chairperson: Pages 346, 347, 348!  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On page 348, item 22900 Other Goods and Services, there is an 

amount of Rs17,600,000 budgeted. May we have the details of this amount? 

 

118 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: It is not for you to reply; you are not the Minister! 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  it  concerns  provisions  made  for  the  payment  of 
uniform  allowance,  accommodation  costs,  passage  costs,  catering  services,  entertainment 
expenses, swimming courses for elderly and disabled persons and lastly services charges. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Under item 22120 Fees.  

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Which page? 

Mr Ramful: Page 348. A sum of Rs75 m. has been earmarked. Can we know what is 

the composition of the Medical Board? 

(Interruptions) 

Under item 22120 Fees, can we know the composition of the Board and can we have details 
of how the fees have been spent? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  The  Medical  Board  is  composed  of  two  generalists. 
Doctor’s fee to attend the Medical Board is Rs1,155  and Rs610 per visit in the event the visit 
is  effected  at  the  patient’s  residence.    We  effected  payment  to  Occupational  Therapist, 
Psychotherapist and nurses too. 

Mr Baloomoody:  May we know whether we have a Social Security Officer now?  It 

is an important post in the Ministry, and if not, why not? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  I presume we have. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  relation  to  item  22120,  Fees  for  Medical  Boards  and  Domiciliary 
Visits, may I know from the hon. Minister the number of doctors who sit on these Boards and 
carry out these domiciliary visits, and the criteria for choosing those doctors? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:    We  have  presently  34  doctors  who  deal  with  the 

domiciliary visits.  They have been appointed on a sessional basis. 

Mr Ramful:  With regard to the item 22030 - Rent, can we know why there has been 

an increase from Rs9 m. to Rs14 m.? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Provisions  made  for  rental  of  buildings;  Social  Security 
Office at Rose Hill; Astor Court Office; local offices including four new offices; an elderly 

 

119 

day care centre at St Pierre; an elderly Day Care centre at Floreal; rental of parking slots; 
rental of vehicles; rental of facilities for events. 

Mr Uteem:  Under item 26313.093 - Training and Employment of Disabled Persons 
Board, previously in a PQ, the hon. Minister said that there was an Officer-in-Charge.  So, 
may I know from the hon. Minister whether now the position of the Manager has been filled? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Not yet.  It will be filled.  As I said in the PNQ and in the 
PQ  addressed  to  me  recently,  we  are  revisiting  the  whole  Training  and  Employment  of 
Disabled Persons Board.  So, we are setting up a new database. We are looking at new skill 
development  programmes,  reconstitution  of  the  Hearing  Committee,  and  the  committee  of 
employees. 

Mr Quirin: Item 28211.004 - Charitable Institutions. Can the hon. Minister table a 

list of these institutions? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Sure, it will be done. 

Mr Quirin:  As well as the amounts donated to each? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, sure. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  On  same  page,  Madam  Chairperson,  item  28212.013  -  Gifts  to 
Centanarians.  Allow  me  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  inviting  us,  Members  of  the 
Opposition, unlike before, for the ceremony. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether 
she  is  contemplating  to  review  the  gifts  being  given  by  the  Ministry  and  the  organisation 
apart from the money? There are other types of gifts which I think our centenarians need. It is 
always du déjà-vu every time: cake, bottles of wine.   

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, it has already been reviewed. The gifts are purchased 

according to the wish and requirements of the centenarians, but within the ceiling. 

Mr Uteem:  Item 27220 - Social Assistance Benefits in Kind,  there is Social Aid and 
then  there  is  Assistance  to  Parents  of  Disabled  Children,  Rs400,000.  May  I  know  what  to 
these benefits in kind relate to? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: The Respite Care Programme meant for children with high 
support  needs  will  be  extended  to  persons  with  disabilities  not  attending  any  Day  Care 
Centres. 

120 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  351,  item  22120.001  –  Fees  for  Medical  Board  and 
Domiciliary Visits, Rs14 m., I would like to ask the hon. Minister on page 348, we also have 
same thing, Fees for Medical Board and Domiciliary Visits, Rs75 m. So, why these two votes 
allocation? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:    This  provision  is  with  regard  to  invalidity  pension  and 

carer’s allowance.  

Mr  Baloomoody: 

the  Sub-Head  22-104:  Reforms  Institutions  and 
Rehabilitation, may we know whether there is a Commissioner of Probation and After Care 
and, if so, when was he recruited? 

  Under 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  We have presently an acting Commissioner. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Are we going to have one full-time Commissioner? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  I hope so. 

Mr  Uteem:    Under  item  22120  -  Fees  to  Mauritius  Post  Ltd,  I  suppose  that  this 

relates to the donation each time a child is born. What are these fees for? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  It concerns provisions made for fees to Mauritius Post Ltd 
for payment of the basic pensions in post offices. Some people do not want to open a bank 
account. So, they still want to cash their pensions from the post offices.  This is the amount 
we pay to post offices. 

Mr Uteem:  On page 353, under item 28211 - Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions, 
28211.049, Probation Home for Girls and 28211.050 Probation Home for Boys, may I know 
from the hon. Minister whether there is any reason why the amount is still the same for each 
of these two? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:    I  presume  there  are  not  too  many  girls  and  boys  at  the 

Probation Home. We have an average of 8 to 9 girls and boys every year. 

Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Rs21,235,000)was called and agreed to. 

Vote  23-1  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 

Outer Islands was called.  

Mr Uteem:  On page 360, item 26323.040, Mauritius Oceanography Institute, there 
of 
a 

Rs194,500,000 

Construction 

for 

the 

project 

amount 

of 

is 

 

121 

Administrative/Research/Laboratory  Complex,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  where 
matters stand; whether the contract has already been awarded; whether the site has already 
been identified?  

Mr Koonjoo: May I know the item number, please! 

Mr Uteem:  Item 26323.040 

Mr Koonjoo:  The project started in October, 2011, construction started in July, 2014 
and  the  project  will  be  completed  in  October,  2015.  The  defects,  liability  period  ending 
October, 2016 and the project value is about Rs172 m. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Under item 26323.070 Outer Islands Development Corporation, 
the grant has gone from Rs8 m. to Rs235 m. for a project of Rs750 m.  May we know the 
status  of  this  project,  whether  contract  has  been  allocated  and  if  it  has  been  allocated,  to 
whom? 

Mr Koonjoo:  This is for the upgrading of the sea and air transportation in Agaléga. 
The project is being followed up by the Indian consultants and we are starting next year after 
the DPR is ready. 

Mr Uteem:  Under the same item, there are two projects, one is the airstrip and the 
other one is the port.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether, at the very least, we have 
finalised the tender documents for the contract or has the contract also not been launched? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Tender documents have not yet been ready.  We are waiting for the 

final DPR to be given to us from the Indian consultants. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  On page 362, item 28213 Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd, an 

amount of Rs75 m. is being budgeted.  May we have details of this? 

Mr  Koonjoo:    The  reply  is  quite  lengthy,  Madam  Chairperson,  I  will  circulate  the 

answer. 

Mr  Uteem:        Under  the  capital  expenditure,  item  31122.999  Acquisition  of  Other 
Machinery  and  Equipment,  there  is  an  amount  of  Rs27  m.  earmarked  for  Ballast  Water 
Management  Project.    Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  this  project  is  about  and 
where it is located? 

122 

 
Mr Koonjoo:  The acquisition of Other Machinery and Equipment, (a) Ballast Water 
Management  Project,  for  the  port  biological  baseline  survey,  awareness  campaign  at 
Rodrigues in connection with the Ballast water project is on.  

Mr Uteem:   On page 363, there are a number of positions which have not been filled 
and some relates to the workshops, may I know from the hon. Minister why these positions 
are not filled yet and will they be filled this year? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Which page, please? 

Mr Uteem:   On page 363, 16 new positions are being created.  My question is will 

all these positions be filled in the coming year?  

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, it will be done. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On page 363, item 31122.999 Acquisition of Other Machinery and 
Equipment, may we know about what machinery and equipment we are talking? Is it for the 
Mauritian Marine Training Academy which does not have any Director? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Other machinery means equipment regarding training and workshops 

practices.  

Vote  23-1  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 

(Rs671,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to.  

Vote 23-2 Fisheries was called. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On page 365, may we know whether the post for the fishing boat 
inspector (Nautical) Technical and Mechanical Officer (New Grade) has been filled and if 
not, why not? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, it will be filled. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Why it has not been filled? 

Mr Koonjoo:  It will be filled, it is not yet filled. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Can we know why it is not yet filled? There is no qualified person 

for that? 

Mr Koonjoo:   After voting the Budget, we will fill the vacancy. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Under item 365004 Allowances, there is an amount of Rs11.5 m. 

May we have details for this amount?   

 
Mr Koonjoo:  These are seagoing allowances, diving allowances to officers carrying 

123 

out underwater exercises. 

The Chairperson: You are not allowed to talk from a sitting position, hon. Ameer 

Meea! 

Mr Koonjoo: And also for ongoing monitoring purpose of ecosystems, surveys for 

casual development and ad hoc underwater surveys.  

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page,  under  item  .005  -  Extra  Assistance,  we  are 

budgeting a sum of Rs1 m. May we know for what purpose? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Chairperson, this is the payment for two contract officers as 

Skipper and Deckhand/Fisherman. 

Mr Baloomoody: Page 366, under item 22120 Fees, there is a tremendous increase in 

fees from Rs613,000 to nearly Rs5.5 m. may we know for what purpose? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  For  Fees  a  sum  of  Rs6.1  m.  was  budgeted  in  2015-2016  for  the 
recruitment  of  consultants  which  has  not  materialised,  unfortunately,  due  to  non-
responsiveness of the bids. It is also for training of aqua culturists, skippers and others. For 
consultation  services  for  crab  culture,  terms  of  reference  have  been  modified  and  it  is 
expected  to  be  launched  very  soon.  It  is  also  for  the  laboratory  test  and,  ultimately,  for 
Mauritius Standard Bureau. 

Mr Ramful: Item 28212.002  Compensation to Net Fishermen, I see that no provision 
has been made for this budgetary year. Do I take it that there will be no compensation for the 
net fishermen? And also, under item 28212.016 Compensation to Heirs of Fishermen, can we 
know how much does one family get in case of accident at sea? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Chairperson, I will circulate the reply. Rs105,000 per family. 

Mr  Uteem:  Item  22900.926  -  Marine  Ranching  Project,  a  sum  of  Rs12,500,000 

earmarked for this year. So, may I know what project is concerned with this Rs12.5 m.? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Chairperson, they are meant for uniforms and Marine Ranching 

Project. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, but this is the question.  

Mr Koonjoo: I will circulate the answer! 

(Interruptions) 

 

I don’t have the figures! 

124 

Mr Ameer Meea: Item 22060 – Maintenance, there has been an increase of almost 
Rs4 m. to reach the sum of Rs9.9 m. may we know the reason for such an increase and also 
the details of this amount? 

 (Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No comments, please! Allow the hon. Minister to find his reply! 

Mr Koonjoo: The budget is for plant and equipment for a gas pool and septic tank, 

the contractor, Mr Seeven … 

(Interruptions) 

I have got so many details, Madam Chairperson, I think I will circulate the answer. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  22130  Studies  and  Surveys,  we  have  moved  from 

Rs60,000 to Rs3.3m. May we know for what purpose? 

Mr Koonjoo: The budget is for training of aqua culturists, skippers and others and the 
surveys  naturally  are  cruise  surveys  for  alternative  mode  of  fishing  on  the  banks.  For 
example, training of 35 bank fishermen and this will be in connection with bank fisheries and 
also for fishing trials. We have got training of 35 bank fishermen. 

Mr Uteem: Page 367, first item 28225 – Transfer to Private Enterprises, Scheme for 
Purchase of Semi-Industrial Fishing Boat, there is an amount of Rs12 m. earmarked for next 
year so, may I know from the hon. Minister what are the eligibility criteria for this scheme for 
purchase of semi-industrial fishing boat? 

Mr Koonjoo: This is for the purchase of canottte for the off lagoon fishing scheme 
and the canotte is financed 50 per cent by the European Union that is about Rs200,000 and 
for the remaining Rs200,000 the fishermen will have to get a loan from the DBM. 

Mr Ramful: Under item 31113.012, Dredging of Boat Passage.  A budget is being 
voted  for  Remy  Ollier,  Le  Morne,  Souillac,  Mare  Chicose  and  Pointe-aux-Sables,  but  the 
budget  has  been  extended  over  a  period  of  three  years.    Will  it  take  three  years  for  the 
dredging work to be completed? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Chairperson, the dredging of boat passage will take place in 

Mahebourg, Remy Ollier, Le Morne, Souillac, Mare Chicose and Pointe-aux-Sables. 

125 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Page  368,  item  21,  Compensation  of  Employees  –  Head,  Competent 
Authority (New Grade), Senior Technical Officer and Technical Officer.  May I know from 
the hon. Minister why these posts are not being filled? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  It  is  to  meet  payment  of  salary  of  12  funded  positions  under  item 

21110.001. 

Mr Uteem: The question was why some of these posts are not being filled. 

Mr Koonjoo: The schemes of duties are being prepared. 

Madam Chairperson: Page 369! 

(Interruptions) 

We have exceeded the time allocation already by 15 minutes.  Page 369! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22120.028, Fees for laboratory Test.  There is an amount of 
Rs6  m.  earmarked  for  next  year.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  who  conducts  the 
laboratory  tests;  whether  it  is  performed  in  Mauritius  or  outside  of  Mauritius,  privately  or 
within his Ministry? 

Mr Koonjoo: The tests are carried out by the competent authority in Mauritius and 

they are sent outside to SGS lab and also in Italy lab for confirmation. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  item  22120.008,  Fees  to  Consultant,  it  goes  from 

Rs159,000 to Rs1 m. May we know who are these consultants and for which projects? 

Mr Koonjoo: This is an expert for drafting of seafood regulations and for elaboration 

of an implementation plan for bio-security. 

Vote 23-2 Fisheries (Rs330,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 24-1 Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms was called. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  page  373,  item  21110.001,  may  we  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister when will the posts of Director (Planning), Assistant Director (Planning), Analyst 
(Management and Human Resources) and Internal Control Officer be filled? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The Ministry is actually working on the provisions that will 
be made for the Scheme of Service.  The posts have to be replaced by the Public Sector Re-
engineering Bureau. 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  On  page  373,  item  21110.005,  Extra  Assistance.  The  cost  has 

126 

almost doubled. May we have the details of this item? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: They are meant for extra assistance. 

Mr Ameer Meea: May we have the details of this amount? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The provisions are made to meet the payment of salaries and 

allowances to advisers employed on contract.  We have actually three advisers. 

Madam Chairperson: You can circulate the list, hon. Minister! 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I will circulate. 

Mr Uteem:  On page 374, Capital Expenditure, item 31132.401, Upgrading of ICT 
Infrastructure (Integrated Human Resource Management Information System).  That was a 
project worth Rs413 m., and for next year, the earmarked amount is Rs70 m.  So, may I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister where  matters  stand  as  far  as  the  implementation  of  this  project  is 
concerned?  Are  they  on  track?  Are  they  delayed?  Where  matters  stand  in  regard  to  the 
implementation of that ICT project? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The provision is to meet the cost of implementation service 
for the HR and payroll modules as well as those for the self-service, learning management 
and performance management modules.  The amount also includes the renewable of technical 
support  service  for  the  five  modules  as  well  as  cost  for  the  maintenance  of  the  HRMIS, 
hardware equipment, training expenses.  The project value is Rs413.5 m., and Rs250.1 m. has 
been spent as at 30.06.2016. 

Mr Uteem: My question was not what this project is about.  My question was about 
the  implementation.    Are  we  on  course  for  implementation  or  are  there  delays  in  the 
implementation phase? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: It is on course. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  I  see  there  is  a  new  item  22900.950,  Improvement  of  Counter 
Services, and there is an amount of Rs4.3 m.  It says ‘improvement of counter services.’  Was 
there a counter services before? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  There  were  a  counter,  but  we  always  have  new  counters.  

This is the policy of the Ministry and all the Ministries to renew them. 

Mr Baloomoody: What is counter services? 

 
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: When you come in an area where you have to meet people.  

127 

This is what we call a counter. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22120 Fees, there is an increase from less than Rs1 m. to Rs8 

m. next year.  So, can we have the details of what those fees relate to? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: There are fees to assessors, and provision is made to meet 
payment to Mauritius Standard Bureau in connection with ISO certification of Ministries and 
Departments.  Five  units  in  different  Ministries  and  Departments  were  ISO  certified  in 
financial year 2015/2016, and ten other projects are ongoing. 

 

The Chairperson:  Hon Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  On page 376, under item 221120 – Fees.  Last year, it was Rs4 
 
m., now it is budgeted Rs20 m.  May we have the details of these fees and if it is a long list, 
the hon. Minister could circulate it? 

 

 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:   In fact, it is a long list. I’ll have it circulated. 

The Chairperson:  Page 376! 

Mr Uteem:  At page 376, item 28213.008 Civil Service College, where an amount of 
 
Rs5 m. is budgeted for next year.  Can we know from the hon. Minister where matters stand?  
Is the College fully operational now? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  The College has been operational since 16 November 2015, 
 
and  there  are  quite  a  few  thousands  of  officers  who  have  already  been  trained.    So,  it  is 
ongoing.  

Mr Baloomoody:  Same item, Civil Service College! May I know how many officers 

 
who, ‘behind the counter’, have followed courses at the Civil Service College? 

 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  Some 2,100 officers, since November. 

Mr Ramful:   At page 377, Capital Expenditure, under item 31122.802 Acquisition of 
 
IT Equipment for Electronic Attendance System.  The project value is Rs25,800,000.  Can we 
know  where  matters  stand  as  regards  this  project?    And  will  it  be  extended  to  other 
Ministries? 

 
it. 

 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: It is quite a long answer.  If you don’t mind, I will circulate 

The Chairperson: Page 378!  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

128 

 
Mr Uteem:  Under item 22900.934 – Enhancement of Work Environment in the Civil 
 
Service.  May I have some details about this enhancement of work environment in the Civil 
Service? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  It is for the enhancement of environment of work.  There 
 
are various projects that are ongoing.  For example, we are doing a response service for the 
Civil Service; there is a gym, and other items also. 

Mr Baloomoody:  We have only one Director in the Health & Safety Unit.  May we 

 
know why the post of Assistant Director for Health & Safety has not been filled? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The post of Director itself is a new post.  There will be an 

 
Assistant who will work with him. 

Vote 24-1 Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms (Rs654,000,000) was, 

 
on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  25-1  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and 

 
Beach Management was called. 

 

The Chairperson:  Page 382! Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Under item 21110.001 – Basic Salary, Minister.  For June 2016, I see 
 
no Minister.  Can the hon. Minister tell us why in the column ‘Funded’ it is blank? Is it that 
there was no Minister? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  You know, I already have a salary for one Ministry.  I don’t 

 
take a second salary. 

 

The Chairperson:  Page 383!  Hon. Ramful! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ramful:    Under  Capital  Expenditure,  item  28222.006  –  Solar  Water  Heater 
 
Scheme.  Can we have a rough idea of how many families have benefitted from that scheme? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The Solar Water Heater Scheme is part of the Government 
 
renewable strategy.  To date, some 70,000 householders have benefitted a grant to purchase a 
solar water heater.  Government will continue to provide a grant to some 7,770 remaining 
households’  applicants  earning  less  than  Rs25,000  and  some  1,500  NHDC  new  houses.  

 

129 

7,770 householders at Rs10,000 each is equivalent to Rs77.7 m.  DBM management fee at 
Rs600 per coupon, which is equivalent to Rs4.7 m. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Minister,  you are  giving  answers to questions which have 

 
not been asked!  The hon. Member wanted to know only the number.  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  On the same item, the Solar Water Heater Scheme, may I know from the 
 
hon. Minister why is it that the sum has been reduced to Rs90 m. and no sum is budgeted 
after 2017? 

 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  I believe the scheme for the beneficiaries is over. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under item 31131.107 – Environment Impact Assessment (EIA), 

 
there is an amount of Rs3 m. budgeted.  May we have some details on this EIA? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  There is a Licensing Project which will take on board the 
 
digitalisation  of  the  EIA  process  in  order  to  expedite  all  the  licensing  system  and  help  to 
curtail delays. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  At  page  383,  under  item  28221.012  -  Rainwater  Harvesting 
 
scheme. There was a sum of R7,819,000 last year and Rs7,200,000 for this year.  So, how 
many people have benefitted from that Scheme? 

 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  I will circulate this answer because it is quite long. 

Mr Bhagwan: Same page 382, under item 28225.011 – Composting Scheme, where 
 
Rs11,328,000 is earmarked.  Can the hon. Minister inform the House how many persons have 
benefitted from this scheme, whether schools also are in the programme and the criteria for 
the allocation for same? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:   It is on the basis of a First come First serve.   There are 

 
2,989 households and 2,513 planters who have benefitted in 2016. 

 

The Chairperson: Page 384?  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Under  item  22120.007  with  respect  to  Fees  (v)Global  Fuel  Economy 
 
Initiative  (Phase  2).    There  is  Rs5  m.  earmarked.    Can  I  know  what  this  Global  Fuel 
Economy Initiative (Phase 2) is about? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Mauritius has secured a grant of USD265,000 from the UN 
Environment Programme and to implement the  Global Fuel Economy  Initiative relating to 
promoting cleaner and more energy efficient vehicles strategy in Mauritius and the Southern 

 

130 

African  region.    The  donor  agencies  are  the  EU  and  Global  Environment  Facility.    The 
project started in April 2015 and will last until June 2017.   

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  22120.007  (b)  (iii)  Climate  Change  Adaptation 
Programme, there is a sum of Rs3.5 m.  May we know where matters stand with regard to 
this programme? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: You want to know how much it is. 

Mr Baloomoody: There is a provision of Rs3.5 m. It is for what purpose, fees paid to 

whom? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: It is quite a large plan.  It is really large.  Before coming I 

looked at that.  I will circulate it. 

The Chairperson: Last question on this, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On the last item, 22900 Other Goods and Services, the amount has 
gone from Rs12 m. to Rs21 m.  May we know the reason of such an increase and also the 
details of this increase? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  This  is  provision to  meet  the  cost  of  uniforms  for  Office 
Care  Attendants,  Office  Auxiliaries,  Drivers,  Store  Attendants,  Procurement  and  Supplies 
cadre and other protective clothing and equipment.   

Provision  for  catering  for  events  and  miscellaneous  expenses  for  the  proper 

implementation of projects funded by grants received from international organisations.   

Provision  is  also  included  for  funding  for  the  Awareness  Campaign,  World 

Environment Day and other events. 

The Chairperson: Page 385!  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  item  31410.402  (a)  Rehabilitation  of  Beaches,  can  the  hon. 

Minister give us a list of the beaches which have to be rehabilitated? 

(Interruptions) 

Under items 31410.402 (b) Coastal Rehabilitation – Climate Change Adaptation Programme 
and (c) Beach Reprofiling Programme, there is a long list.  Can the Minister circulate all the 

 

131 

lists? I would like to know whether he has identified the priorities for the beach reprofiling 
and the rehabilitation of other beaches.  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  Thank you.  I will circulate, as you mentioned. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under item 31122.999 Acquisition of Other Machinery and Equipment, 
(a)  equipment i.c.w. Contingency Plan and Disaster Preparedness in case of Oil Spill, the 
amount budgeted is only Rs1 m.  Like it just happened to MV Benita - can I know what will 
this Rs1 m. be used for? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: These are for the procurement of bombs.  And also we have 

grants from other countries which help us to provide for these equipment. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Under item 31410.402 Improvement/Upgrading/Rehabilitation of 
Beaches,  there  is  a  sub-item  (b)  Coastal  Rehabilitation  –  Climate  Change  Adaptation 
Programme.  It is a project value of Rs239 m. with an estimate of next year’s budget, Rs90 
m.  Can we have some details of this project? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I will circulate the information for the whole item. 

The Chairperson: Page 386!  Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  item  22060.010    Maintenance  of  grounds,  there  is  a 
provision of Rs8 m. and rivers and canals Rs2 m. Will the hon. Minister circulate the list of 
the grounds and canals which have been maintained? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you for allowing me to circulate it. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful:  May I know from the Minister whether priority would be given to the 

flood-prone areas and rivers?   

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Yes, I’ll do.   

The Chairperson: Page 387!   Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Under item 314190.402 Improvement/Upgrading/Rehabilitation of rivers 
and mountains, can I know from the hon. Minister whether any amount out of the Rs13.2 m. 
has been earmarked to rehabilitate Signal Mountain? 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

132 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: There is a long list.  For Signal Mountain, I can’t say.   

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  last  item  on  capital  expenditure  31410.403  Improvement, 
Upgrading/Rehabilitation of Public and Other Sites, there is a sum of Rs20 m. Last year, it 
was Rs12 m. Will the hon. Minister circulate a list of the public and other sites?  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Circulate it! 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you very much. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Under  item  31113.425  Embellishment  of  Infrastructural  Works, 
there  is  an  amount  of  Rs15  m.  already  expensed  and  Rs18  m.  budgeted.    May  we  know 
whether this amount is expensed in-house or is it being outsourced?  Can we have a list of 
where those works have been done? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Provisions  for  upgrading  embellishment  of  infrastructural 
works and landscaping works for socio-cultural organisations throughout the island.  Most of 
them are done in-house and there are some which are done on contracts.  They are both. 

The Chairperson: Page 389!  390!  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Under item 22070 Cleaning Services, there is a huge budget of Rs521 
m.    Can  the  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  all  the  procedures  will  be  followed 
concerning  the  allocation  of  contract  because  we  have  been  reading  in  the  press  so  many 
cases going to Court and challenge? So, can the Minister inform the House whether when his 
officers would be preparing the documents, there won’t be cases ending in Court and to the 
ICAC?  Can the Minister give us a list of the beaches? 

I will take another item 22070.003 Operation of Landfill Sites.  Can we know which 

are the landfill sites?   

Under item 22070 Operation of Transfer Stations, there is a sum of Rs210 m.  Can we 

know what is the lifespan remaining for the Mare Chicose Landfill? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I’ll make sure that all procedures are being followed.  The 

lifespan is two years. 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

133 

Mr Uteem: Under item 22130 Studies and Surveys, may I know whether the contract 

for the studies has already been awarded and, if so, to whom? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Provisions  are  made  for  the  conduct  of  studies  and 
preliminary  projects.    The  preparations  are  as  follows  –  waste  recycling  and  resources  for 
various  strategies.  The  Ministry  is  in  the  process  of  implementing,  the  contract  is  not  yet 
awarded. 

Mr Ramful: The last item at page 389 Capital Expenditure - 28222.021Compensation 
for the Relocation of Inhabitants of Mare Chicose, may I know where matters stand.  Have all 
the inhabitants been relocated or not? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: There is still one person who is still claiming and the rest 

has already been relocated. 

The Chairperson: Page 390. Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: At page 390, I am a bit worried. Under item 31113.009 (b) Hazardous 
Waste Storage Facility at La Chaumiere, La Chaumiere is in two Constituencies - 19 and 20, 
a  bit  in  14.  It  is  becoming  the  dirty  area  of  Mauritius.  It  has  been  recommended  by 
consultants  I  know,  but  can  the  Minister  inform  the  House,  with  regard  to  the  hazardous 
waste facility, we will be having another health storage facility. Can the Minister inform the 
House  whether  there  is  now  an  assessment  being  done  through  the  Budget  to  review  the 
whole area of La Chaumiere which is a dirty area defined by Government. Even we, when we 
were in Government, identified the site. Can, at least, a reassessment be done with regard to 
the safety of the health of the population surrounding the site? 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan, you know fully well that this is a policy matter.  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: We are doing the most of it. 

Mr Baloomoody: At page 391, under item 31132.105 Multi-Hazard Early Warning, 
Emergency Alert and Advisories System, Rs15 m. Can the hon. Minister enlighten us on this? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  The  Multi-Hazard  Early  Warning,  Emergency  Alert  and 
Advisories System is a reliable high performance system towards the necessary infrastructure 
to disseminate warnings and alerts to a maximum number of people and stakeholders in the 
Republic of Mauritius within an acceptable timeframe. 

134 

 
Mr Uteem: Under item 22030 Rent, as from next year, there would be an amount of 
Rs5 m. budgeted whereas last year it was zero. May I know which premises are being rented 
for Rs5 m.? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Provision  required  for  renting  of  office  space  at  the 

NDRRMC and renting is at a negotiation stage. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I wanted to make a point. Since this morning we have been listening, 
rightly perhaps, to Ministers who will be circulating the information. We are reaching the last 
Ministry. Can I appeal to you that it will be on record that the Ministers responsible will take 
the appropriate time to circulate, at least, all they promised to circulate. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Member, I can give you the guarantee that this is on record 

and since it is on record, it will have to be circulated. Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Under item 22900 - Other Goods and Services, from Rs883,000 to 
Rs4.8 m., can the hon. Minister circulate a list of the other goods and services? Can he tell us 
who are the beneficiaries and the contractors who are providing the service? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The provision is made to meet payments of the following 

items: the uniforms Rs200,000; catering Rs175,000; hospitality and ceremonies Rs30,000. 

The Chairperson: Who are the contractors? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I am waiting for the answer. I will circulate the answer as 

  
soon as I get it. Thank you. 

Vote  25-1  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and 

Beach Management (Rs1,536,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  was 

 
called 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Under  Main  Achievements  for  FY  2015/16,  there  were  1,432 
inspections carried out by labour Inspectorate; may we know how many contraventions there 
have been following these inspections? 

Mr  Callichurn:  I  don’t  have  the  figure  with  me  right  now  but  I  can  circulate  it 

ultimately. 

135 

 
Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Minister, when he will circulate the document? 
Can he also circulate the number of cases lodged at the Industrial Court and how many have 
been dealt with within that year? 

The Chairperson: If you have got the information you can circulate it. 

Mr Callichurn: The paper is with me. I will have it circulated. 

Mr Baloomoody: At page 396, can I ask the hon. Minister whether we have now a 
Deputy Director with regard to labour and industrial relations, and, if not, why not? Is there a 
Deputy Director, Occupational Safety & Health? These are two important posts. No provision 
has been made for these two posts. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Well,  they  are  new  grade  posts  created  by  PRB.  The  scheme  of 

service is under preparation. 

Mr Uteem: Under item 31132.401 Computerisation of Registry of Associations - may 
I know from the hon. Minister where matters stand with regard to the computerisation of the 
registry of associations?  

Mr Callichurn: Well, the system is ready to go live; however, there is an issue with 
the Orico licence. The Orico standard Edition I licence initially proposed by the supplier is no 
longer orderable and same has been replaced by Orico standard Edition II which is threefold 
more expensive. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Under item 31132 Modernisation of work permit system, may we 

 
know where matters stand? 

Mr Callichurn:  A project  is being implemented by the Government in line with the 
 
e-Government  strategy,  an  electronic  platform  for  which  companies,  employers  and  other 
stakeholders can conduct transactions electronically to reduce time taken in processing the 
delivery of permits and licences.  Well, tenders were launched in March, 2013 and awarded 
to Trutech Stormedge Co. Ltd in September, 2013.  It is a contract of Rs14.5 m.  Maintenance 
agreement  will  be  signed  for  the  period  of  March  2017  to  February  2018  with  the  local 
representatives of Trutech Stormedge Co. Ltd after the warranty period.  

Mr Uteem:  Under item 22900.003 – Passage Costs (Repatriation of  Expatriates), 
 
last year there was Rs76,000 and this year, Rs1 m. is being budgeted.  May I know from the 
hon. Minister the reason for this increase and isn’t it still a condition of work permit that they 
have to deposit the price of the return ticket, so why are we budgeting this amount? 

136 

 
Mr  Callichurn:    Previously,  there  was  a  policy  that  the  employees  should  keep  a 
bank guarantee, but there was a change in policy and they are no longer required to give this 
bank  guarantee.  However,  this  is  a  problem  because  the  repatriation  cost  is  borne  by  the 
Government and we will have to find ways how to curtail this situation.  My Ministry is in 
the process of reviewing the policy and what I will be proposing is that companies henceforth 
buy open return tickets.  So, the problem will be a thing of the past.  

Vote  26-1  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  (Rs 

613,000,000) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government was called. 

Mr Jugnauth:  May I, Madam Chairperson, move for amendments to the Vote 28-1 - 
Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government under item 32155058 “Heritage City Co Ltd.”  

“Under column 2016/17 Estimates, 

 

 

 

To delete “1,500,000” 

And 

To insert “0” 

Under column 2017/18 planned, 

 

 

 

To delete “700,000” 

And 

To insert “0” 

Under column 2018/19 planned, 

 

 

 

To delete “500,000” 

And 

To insert “0”” 

And under item 32155061 “Special Purpose Vehicle icw Metro Express - 

To delete “800,000” 

“Under column 2016/17 Estimates, 
 
  And 
 
Under column 2017/18 Planned, 

To insert “2,300,000” 

 

137 

To delete “800,000” 

To insert “1,500,000” 

 
  And 
 
Under column 2018/19 Planned, 
 
  And 
 

To insert “1,700,000”” 

To delete “1,200,000” 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  A very important item, Madam Chairperson, at page 402, item 22180 
Mission Expenses (Ministers, Delegates and Officials), there is a decrease from Rs191,788 to 
Rs150,000 and the hon. Minister should be commended for that. He heard la voix du peuple 
and we know all these pigeons voyageurs. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether a 
definite criteria will be set up for all those concerned with regard to all the items concerning 
missions and per diem and whether he has issued directives already to Ministries?  

Mr  Jugnauth:    Madam  Chairperson,  with  a  view  to  making  judicious  use  of  the 

funds allocated for missions abroad, the following actions have been taken -   

1.  Per  diem  payable  to  officials,  including  Ministers  and  Members  of  Parliament 
proceeding on missions abroad has been reviewed and rationalised and for certain 
categories, the rates of per diem have been revised downward. 

2.  The  rates  of  entertainment  allowance  payable  have  also  been  reduced  by  some 

20%, and 

3.  Supervising officers have been requested to prepare an annual mission plan, keep 
the number of delegates to strict minimum, have recourse to our representatives in 
overseas Embassies and High Commissions who are attending those international 
events, conferences and meetings where possible and also make maximum use of 
teleconferencing and other modern telecommunication facilities. 

Now,  there  is  also  a  table  which  has  been  drawn  with  regard  to  per  diem  and 
entertainment  allowance  for  mission  overseas  as  from  01  July,  2016  and  this  has  been 
circulated to all Ministries. 

Mr Uteem:  Under item 28217 Compensation arising out of Government Liability, 
may I know from the hon. Minister of Finance what contingent liabilities are being envisaged 
here? 

 
Mr  Jugnauth:  Compensation  arising  out  of  Government  liability.      These  are 

138 

provisions that are required for payment of compensation to third parties in respect of - 

1.  Court cases 

2.  Accidents involving Government vehicles 

3.  Injury on duty and medical negligence.  

The actual expenditure for 2015/2016 is as follows –  

Court cases  

 

 

 

 

Accidents involving Government vehicles 

(there are 29 cases) 

 

 

 

Injury on duty and medical negligence  

 

 

 

 

Rs10.2 m. 

Rs1.8 m. 

Rs2.2 m. 

There is a list of all the cases which I can circulate. 

Vote  27-1  Centrally  Managed  Expenses  of  Government  (Rs1,643,000,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to.  

 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government was called. 

Mr  Uteem:    With  respect  to  the  last  item  on  page  403,  Air  Mauritius  Ltd  - 
Contributions  icw  Africa/Asia  Air  Corridor  Project,  an  amount  of  Rs100  m.  is  budgeted.  
This subsidy relates to what purpose? Is it subsidy on tickets or on promotion? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I have to find it. But I know it is a subsidy which is given to Air 

Mauritius with regard to the newly operated flights to Dar es Salaam and Maputo.  

Mr Baloomoody:  Under item 21120.001 – Medical Insurance Scheme, provision is 

made for Rs10 m. Can I ask the hon. Minister where matters stand? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Provision is being made for the implementation of the Government 
Medical Insurance Scheme for public officers. I understand that a committee will be set up 
comprising of different stakeholders to work out the details and the guidelines of the scheme.  
This scheme is expected to be operational in 2017.  That is why there has been no provision 
for the last year and Rs10 m. for the coming year.  

Mr Uteem:  Under item 25120 – Financial Public Corporations, Interest Subsidy on 
Loans  to  Development  Bank  and  SME  Development  Bank,  do  I  take  it  that  this  amount 

 

139 

represents the difference between the market rate and the preferential rate of interest that is 
going to be offered on loans to SMEs? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Exactly. 

Vote 28-1 Centrally  Managed Initiatives of Government  (Rs4,386,100,000) was, on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 29-1 Contingencies and Reserves (Rs600,000,000) was called and agreed to. 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016  

       (NO. XVII of 2016) 

The Schedule was agreed to. 

Clauses 1 and 2 were called and agreed to.  

The title and the enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House to 

ADJOURNMENT 

Friday 19 August 2016 at 3.00 p.m. 

 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

MATTER RAISED 

(8.05 p.m.) 

ROSE-HILL - ROBBERY CASES 

Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière):  If you bear 
with  me,  I  have  an  urgent  matter  for  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  concerning  the  Police.  
These days in Rose-Hill, especially in the centre of Rose Hill, since two or three weeks, there 
have been lot of robberies par des personnes portant des cagoules.  I  can state within the 
compound where I stay, there is a big compound at Clos Verger area where there are more 

 

140 

than hundred families.  I have contacted the Police myself and we have started a sort of own 
surveillance since yesterday.   

Can I appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to direct the Commissioner of Police, at 
least, to talk to his officers of the Western Division, the CID Section of Rose Hill, to look 
actively  into  this  situation  because  it  is  causing  a  problem  for  the  security  and  people  are 
really worried about that. 

The Prime Minister:  I will mention it to the Commissioner of Police and I am sure 

he will take the right steps. 

They are not taking.  Unfortunately, I can’t direct! 

(Interruptions) 

At 8.06 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 19 August 2016 at 

3.00 p.m. 

