No. 08 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 24 MAY 2016 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MOTION 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 

THE CABINET 

 
     (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Attorney General 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

 

Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 08 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 24 May 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

7 

 

PAPERS LAID 

 The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

A.    Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development, 

Ministry for Rodrigues and National Development Unit ‒ 
(a)   Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Supplementary  Appropriation 

(2015-2016) Bill (No. VII of 2016). (In Original) 

(b)   The Estimates of Supplementary Expenditure (2015 - 2016) of 2016.  
(c)   The Annual Report 2014 of the Employees Welfare Fund. 

(d)   The  Loan  Agreement  (First  Regional  Development  Policy  Loan  for  the 
Accelerated  Program  for  Economic  Integration)  between  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
dated 18 May 2016.   

B.    Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport ‒ 

The Road Traffic (Crop Season) Regulations 2016 (Government Notice No. 114 
of 2016).                

C.    Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research ‒ 

The Education (Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 112 of 
2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

D.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The  Report  and  Accounts  of  the  Mauritius  Cane  Industry  Authority  for  period  
19 March 2012 to 31 December 2013. 

 

E.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  Non-
Taxable Goods) (Amendment No.16) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 
113 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT PROJECT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Light  Rail 
Transit Project, he will state -  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the amount of money spent in relation thereto as at to date;  

if  a  new  feasibility  study  will  be  carried  out  therefor,  indicating  the 
involvement  of  the  Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise  in  relation  thereto,  if 
any;  

how  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  will  be  amended  to  accommodate 
same  taking  into  consideration  the  involvement  of  the  Republic  of  South 
Korea  therein,  if  any,  following  the  recent  signature  of  the  Framework 
Cooperation Agreement therewith, and  

(d) 

if a new Road Decongestion/Light Rail Transit Master Plan will be proposed. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
to  ask  this  question  as  it  relates  to  two  of  the  most  ambitious  projects  ever  designed  in 
Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  country  is  faced  with  major  transport 
network  difficulties  which  cause  acute  traffic  congestion  problems  especially  during  peak 
hours at the entrance and exit of Port Louis.  The Road Decongestion Programme is one of 
the most important road infrastructure projects ever embarked by any Government.  It will 
lay  the  foundation  of  a  modern  Mauritius  and  it  will  help  to  alleviate  the  road  traffic 
congestion problem, which is being aggravated with the increasing number of vehicles.   

It will enhance mobility and fluidity especially among the main conurbations along 

Curepipe – Port Louis corridor.  This is as regards infrastructure and mobility.  

As regard to Mass Transport System, the  LRT  has been one of the most ambitious 
projects for the transportation of passengers from the Upper Plaine Wilhems to Port Louis 
and it has been around here since 1989. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the Mauritius Light Rail 
Transit System Project was initiated under a Government to Government Agreement between 

 

10 

the Government of Mauritius and the Government of Singapore represented by the Singapore 
Cooperation Enterprise (SCE). 

A feasibility study was undertaken by the SCE in October 2013, prior to the Project.  

The estimated capital cost of the Project is Rs24.8 billion in 2013. 

I am informed that Rs539,226,992 have been spent as at date on the LRT Project as 

follows - 

SN 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

 

Singapore Cooperation Enterprise (Consultancy 
Services) 

KDA Geo Systems Co Ltd for land survey and 
data processing services 

 

 Rs411,692,528 

 

Rs25,462,250 

Water Research Co Ltd for geotechnical survey 

Rs5,842,657 

P & P Link for Communication port folio 

Rs8,096,230 

MRA (Tax Deduction at Sources TDS) & Value 
Added Tax 

Rs86,941,387 

Grant Thornton for Household & Traffic Surveys 

Rs1,150,000 

Legal Fees 

Rs41,940 

Total 

Rs539, 226,992 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House 
that  the  Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise  team  was  engaged  in  2012  to  undertake  the 
Feasibility Study and Project Implementation Planning for the Mauritius Light Rapid Transit 
system. Following the successful completion of that stage, the SCE team was assigned the 
duty  to  undertake  the  role  of  Transaction  Management  and  Transaction  Advisor  for  the 
project’s procurement. 

11 

 
Today,  in  view  of  the  significant  work  already  done  and  the  sum  paid  to  SCE,  no 
feasibility study is envisaged. Discussions are currently being held with SCE with the view to 
engage them to produce an update of the studies already completed.   

In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  a  delegation  of  SCE  has  arrived  yesterday  to  start 

preliminary discussions on the matter. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Road 

Decongestion Programme will involve the following components - 

(i) 

(ii) 

A1-M1 Link Road and Bridge over GRNW linking Coromandel to Motorway 
M1 at Soreze; 

Ring Road Phases 2 & 3 (including 2 Tunnels); Signal Mountain and Colline 
Monneron; 

(iii)  Quay D/Freeport Roundabout, and 

(iv) 

Jumbo/Phoenix/Dowlut  Roundabout  linking  it  to  the  Terre  Rouge/Verdun 
Road. 

As announced in the last year’s Budget, my Ministry had initiated necessary steps for 

the implementation of the Programme as from this year.   

I wish, however, to inform the House that the Road Decongestion Programme on its 
own would not have solved the problem of traffic congestion.  This is the reason why since 
the  start  we  knew  that  we  have  to  come  ultimately  with  an  alternative  mode  of  transport 
which would be complementary to the Road Decongestion Programme and that is the key 
word. 

While the Road Decongestion Programme will ease fluidity of movement of vehicles, 

the LRT will ensure mobility of people and facilitate the access to jobs and other activities. 

Madam Speaker, the Road Decongestion Programme is therefore complementary to 
the possibility of having an LRT.  It is visioned to have a road transport system with a three 
tier structure. It is like ground plus two. What exists actually will form the base, that is, the 
first level.  The Road Decongestion Programme will be the second level and the LRT will 
represent  the  third  level.    All  the  levels  will  be  integrated  to  provide  greater  mobility  and 
fluidity in the transport system for the next 30 years. 

 

12 

Madam Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the Ministry had already initiated procedures 

for the implementation of the Road Decongestion Programme as from this year as follows - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Ring Roads Phases 2 and 3; 
Quay D/Freeport Roundabout; 
A1 –M1 Link Road, and 
Phoenix/Jumbo Roundabout. 

Bids have already been invited for consultancy in respect of the following projects in 

September 2015 - 

(i) 

(ii) 

The grade separated junction at Phoenix, and 

A1 – M1 Link Road. 

However, following my visit in November last to South Korea, I was very impressed 
by the Korean state-of-the-art technology and knowhow in the fields of roads, bridges and 
tunnels construction, I invited them to make a technical and financial audit of our RDP.  In 
fact, a Korean team of consulting and engineering firms visited Mauritius in November 2015 
and  made  an  initial  assessment.    They  came  on  a  second  visit  in  March  2016  to  make  a 
complete  technical  and  financial  assessment  of  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  which 
had started with Rs34 billion, but which had been reduced to Rs15 billion. 

They  submitted  their  final  report  in  April  2016  and  necessary  procedures  were 
initiated  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act  to  consider  the 
possibility  of  an  implementation  of  the  RDP  under  the  G  to  G  agreement.    In  fact,  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  was  signed  between  the  RDA  and  the  Korea  Expressway 
Corporation on 05 April 2016. 

A  due  diligence  exercise  was  carried  out  on  the  proposal  of  the  Korean  Team  to 
ensure that Government is obtaining value for money.  The due diligence exercise has been 
completed and submitted to the High-Powered Committee set up under the chairmanship of 
the  Secretary  to  Cabinet  and  Head  of  the  Civil  Service.    The  report  of  the  High-Powered 
Committee will be submitted shortly to Government for consideration and a decision. 

Madam Speaker, it is not proposed to amend the Road Decongestion Programme to 
accommodate the LRT.  However, in view of the different alignments of the LRT and the 
RDP, it is proposed to study how best we could integrate the transport system along the two 
alignments.  

 

13 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (d) of the question, there exist a Master Plan for the 
RDP and a Master Plan for the LRT.  It is, therefore, not proposed to carry out a separate 
Master  Plan.    It  is  more  appropriate  to  see  how  to  integrate  the  two  from  the  Town  and 
Country Planning perspective to see to it that the project can be implemented efficiently and 
that they are financially viable if Government decides to go on the LRT Project. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to add that at all times the RDP has taken into account the 
alignment  of  the  LRT.    As  I  mentioned  in  the  House  last  week,  all  the  92  plots  of  land 
acquired for that purpose have been maintained. 

Mr Bérenger: There is a last part. 

Mr Bodha: Yes, I answered part (d). 

Madam Speaker: It has been answered. 

Mr Bodha: There exist a Master Plan for the RDP and a Master Plan for the LRT.  It 
is, therefore, not proposed to carry out a separate Master Plan.  It is more appropriate to see 
how to integrate the two from the Town and Country Planning exercise to see to it that the 
project be implemented efficiently and that they are financially viable if Government goes 
with the LRT system. 

Mr Bérenger: Does this figure of the funds already spent on the LRT project include 

land acquisition and, if not, do we have the figure for land acquisition so far? 

Mr Bodha: No. It does not include the acquisition of land. In fact, this is being done 
at the level of the Ministry of Housing and Lands. From what I have heard, it is around Rs2 
billion. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move to the second part, that is, the LRT itself, we have been 
told  that  there  will  not  be  a  new  feasibility  study  carried  out,  but  an  update  of  the  2013 
feasibility study. Do we have, at this stage, the latest estimate of what the LRT project will 
now cost? It was estimated at Rs24.8 billion in 2013. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, this is going to be the starting point. In fact, we have not 

started discussions at all so far. 

Mr Bérenger: We were told last week that there had been a meeting held under the 
chairmanship of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  Anything new!  Can I ask whether there has 
been development since then and whether Minutes of that meeting are available? 

 

14 

Mr Bodha: It was a meeting, in fact, to address the issue of the roadmap if we were to 

consider the LRT as a feasible option. 

Mr Bérenger: At this stage, do we know whether, if we go ahead with the LRT, it 
will  be  a  PPP  project  and  how  it  would  be  financed,  and  can  we  know  the  financial 
involvement of India eventually therein? 

Mr Bodha: No. We are not yet there, Madam Speaker.  

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  I  wonder  whether  we  will  ever  get  there.  Did  I  hear  the  hon. 
Minister say that the tracé itself will be re-examined, will be updated or re-examined by the 
same Singapore people? 

Mr  Bodha:  What  I  said  is  that  we  have  an  alignment  which  has  been  there.  This 
alignment has at all times been taken into consideration when we designed the RDP; all the 
plots which have been acquired along the alignment have been preserved. So, the alignment 
is there. It is intact. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether, at this stage, the Government has taken a decision 
whether  it  is  going  to  proceed  the  way  that  the  previous  Government  did?     According  to 
expert  advice  that  I  have  received  from  the  African  Development  Bank  and  other 
development institutions, it was very dangerous the decision that was taken, that is, to allot 
one tender, one contract, to one firm or group of firms to design and construct the LRT, and 
then later on choose another firm to operate.  The expert advice I got, this is the last thing to 
do because if the operator has not been involved in the first two parts thereof, it is going to 
raise all sorts of objections.  There are going to be extra costs, amendments and so on.  So, 
has a decision been taken at this stage now that we are envisaging to get going with the LRT 
again, to have the three stages, that is, design, construction and operation allotted to the same 
consortium or group of companies? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, in fact, we are just starting again.  What we are going to 
do is, we have all the studies which have been carried out by the Singapore team.  It is going 
to be actualised and then we will sit down and see what are the implications as regard to the 
roadmap.  That was, in fact, the purpose of the meeting with the Prime Minister; it is to see 
what is the roadmap as regard to the technical, later the financial.  First of all, we have to see 
the project from the reassessment and the re-evaluation as at 2016.  

Mr Bérenger:  Yes, but I am sure that the hon. Minister will agree with me that this is 
what  took  place  before.  The  Singaporeans  did  the  feasibility  study.    They  took  charge  of 

 

15 

everything and yet, according to me, the wrong decision was taken to proceed in two stages: 
design and construction, and then later to get somebody else to operate. My question is: have 
we decided not to follow that very dangerous route anew? 

Mr Bodha:  There is, in fact, no decision which has been taken, but I agree with the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition on one matter.  The most important thing in whatever we do in 
infrastructure or major project is the technology. You should do it in such a manner that you 
have the best technology at the best price. So, we are going to reassess what has been done by 
the Singapore team and see what is the best way forward. The hon. Leader of the Opposition 
mentioned the three stages. We will see whether from what has been already done, how to 
move in such a manner that it is in the best interest of the country and it is in the best interest 
of the country to be able to provide this project to the nation. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Last  week,  only  a  week  ago,  I  move  on  to  the  Road  Decongestion 
Programme,  the  hon.  Minister  said  that  he  had  absolutely  no  problem.  He  said  he  has 
absolutely no problem: “Of course, we can table the Memorandum of Understanding.”  Can I 
know why it has not been… 

Mr Bodha:  I am sorry about that, Madam Speaker. We can table it.  We will table it as 

soon as we can today. 

Mr Bérenger:  And what about the report! He told us also last week that the report 
from the Korean firm had already been received some time back and it was being examined. 
Will it be made public? 

Mr Bodha:  First of all, Madam Speaker, it is a 300-page report.  Second, there has 
been a due diligence report which has been worked upon it. Thirdly, there has been a High-
Powered Committee which met and discussed the due diligence report. The whole document 
is going now to Cabinet. Once Cabinet decides one way or the other, all the documents will 
be  laid  on  the  Table  of  the  National  Assembly.  I  said  that  we  are  going  to  do  this  in  all 
transparency.  It  has  to  be  done  in  the  best  interest  of  Mauritius.  And  I  said  that  all  the 
problems we have had in the past like financial overruns, delay, quality of project, delivery 
will have to be taken care of. Nous n’avons pas droit à l’erreur. Nous n’avons pas droit aux 
erreurs que nous avons commises dans le passé, Madame la présidente.   

Mr Bérenger:  I am glad to hear that.  Can I have a point of clarification?  Because I 
have  listened  to  the  hon.  Minister  carefully  last  week  and  I  read  the  verbatim  and  at  one 
point, at page 62 of the verbatim, this is what the hon. Minister said –  

 
“From what I understand (…) 

16 

I know that the hon. Minister understands many things.  

(…) KEC, that is the Korean Company, is the regulator, the builder.” 

Can I have a point clarification whether they are regulator, a builder or both and anything 
else? 

Mr Bodha: The Korea Expressway Corporation, in fact, is the regulator and the builder 
and  the  manager  of  about  8,000  kms  of  motorway  in  South  Korea.    They  also  do  the 
procurement, the engineering  and they manage the tunnels.   In fact, there are two things  I 
have said, may I say three things, Madam Speaker? Firstly, Korean technology has built the 
highest building in the world today, 126 towers, the Burj Al Khalifa in Dubai.  They have 
built a motorway of 34 kms four-ways on the sea in Korea and they have built, now, a tunnel 
of  12  kms  in  the  mountains,  four  lanes  which  I  have  been  able  to  visit.    So,  the  Korea 
Expressway Corporation, in fact, is the regulator and also the manager of the main projects in 
Korea. 

Mr Bérenger:  But not the builder!  If I heard the hon. Minister correctly, he said on 
several occasions:  “They have also built this, built that”. I take it that they plan things; they 
regulate, but are not builders.  I take it they tender out the works for the building of those 
projects. 

Mr  Bodha:  What  KEC  does,  in  fact,  is  the  engineering,  the  procurement  and  the 
construction  in  relation  to  the  main  contractors  in  South  Korea.    The  main  contractors  in 
South Korea, we have:  Daewoo Engineering, Samsung Engineering which has, in fact, built 
the building of the Burj Al Khalifa.  Let me now just give an idea.  They built the Barakah 
Nuclear Power Station in Abu Dhabi; 387 kms motorway in Algeria.  They are building the 
tunnels… 

(Interruptions) 

They do the EPC, that is, the Engineering Procurement and the Construction is done by the 
other main contractors which are also Government companies. 

Mr Bérenger:  That is what I wanted to hear that they are not builders. They tender out 
the works contrary to what the hon. Minister said last week.  So, did I hear correctly that, as 
far as the Road Decongestion Programme is concerned, at this stage, none of its components 
have been left out including, I take it, for example, the tunnel coming into Port Louis? 

 

17 

Mr Bodha:  The RDP is going to be implemeneted as it is with all the components. On 
the  contratry,  in  fact,  the  former  proposition,  which  was  by  Maynard  which  was,  in  fact, 
designed by the former Government, proposed a 1.2 km tunnel  under the Signal Mountain 
which would be a two-lane tunnel.  What the Koreans have proposed is a four-lane tunnel 
below the Signal Mountain and we would have co-exited around Dauguet. We thought about 
a viaduct along the Mountagne Coupée near the Champ de Mars.  What the Koreans have 
proposed, in fact, is to dig a tunnel under Colline Monneron so that this will then go beyond 
Cité Martial to link up with the great seperator coming from the North. 

Mr Bérenger:  On the last part of my question, maybe the hon. Minister didn’t get the 
point which I was making.  The hon. Minister has informed us that there was a Master Plan 
for the LRT by whatever name called.  There is a Master Plan for the Road Decongestion 
Programme, again by whatever name called, and they are going to be merged in one way or 
the other.  My question is: don’t we need a Road Master Plan for the whole of the island?  
Because what has been going on at the same time, before we were going for LRT, then we 
went  for  decongestion  and  in  the  meantime,  fiscal  policy  is  encouraged,  purchase  of  cars, 
leasing and so on.  Bus companies have been encouraged to borrow billions.  So, there is no 
overall Master Plan  for  road traffic in Mauritius. My  question is: is that not required now 
before we embark again on the LRT project to have une vue d’ensemble, a Master Plan for 
road traffic planning and development in Mauritius? 

Mr Bodha: That’s a good idea, but we would like to mention to the hon. Leader of 
the  Opposition  that  this  is  the  programme  of  the  Labour  Party  and  the  MMM  about  road 
infrastructure. It was exactly what we are doing now. To come back to the … 

Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruption, please!  No interruption! 

Mr Bodha: But, as regard the major alignments, I have them here, Madam Speaker. 
In  fact,  there  are  two  connecting  points.    One  is  Phoenix  where  we  have  the  three 
roundabouts and the great separator and the last one is at the terminal in Port Louis. So, we 
have the two alignments here. And then, what I said is that the alignment as regards the LRT 
has  never  been  tampered  with.  It  has  always  remained  there.  The  land  which  has  been 
acquired has always remained there. Again, it is a decision of Government. If Government 

 

18 

decides to go ahead with both projects, both projects can be done. I also said that I totally 
agree  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  We  will  go  to  Cabinet,  most  probably  this 
week, and all that we are going to do with South Korea will be made public once Government 
has taken a decision. I can say that it is the best solution we can have. The Koreans have also 
proposed in their package – because it goes beyond the building of the roads or the bridges or 
the tunnels - that they will work on a road Master Plan as well within the package that we are 
going to sign with them, again if Government decides to do so. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  My  question  pertains  to  the  LRT.  Would  the  hon.  Minister  kindly 
confirm to the House whether during the days of the previous Government, the way leading 
to the LRT Project, there was a High-Powered Committee comprising of the then Secretary to 
Cabinet  and  Head  of  Civil  Service,  the  Solicitor-General,  Supervising  Officer  of  the  MPI, 
CEO of the then MLTA and, most importantly, a Probity Officer who is a senior member of 
the Judiciary and that this Committee has verified all the transactions and have found out that 
everything  was  in  order  and  for  the  MLRT  Project  to  be  implemented  as  a  priority 
concurrently and not as a second storey or third storey of the building; he just gave analogy 
that he is proceeding with? 

Mr Bodha: Whether there was a High-Powered Committee which stated that it was 

the best project, I think this is yet to be proven. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  due  diligence  on  the  Korean 
Company, the Korea Expressway Corporation. Will the hon. Minister confirm to this House 
whether this company is not a private company - he seems to give us the impression that it is 
a Government entity, but according to my information, it is a private company – and whether 
this due diligence was done by RDA with the help of the Chairperson, Mr Wong So, who, I 
understand, has a relationship with the Koreans? 

Mr Bodha: I would like to say this loud and clear to the nation, as my friend, hon. 
Bhagwan, usually says. The poor daughter-in-law of Mr Wong So has a snack in Grand’Baie. 
What can this have with a project of this magnitude, Madam Speaker! And, I said once this 
has gone to Cabinet and Cabinet has approved this, all the documents, the Mission Report, 
the due diligence exercise and the High-Powered Committee Report will be laid on the Table 
of the National Assembly. 

19 

 
Mr Rutnah: In relation to the breakdown of the figures that the hon. Minister was 
giving earlier on, the hon. Minister quoted legal fees. Can he enlighten this House who were 
appointed as legal advisers in relation to this project, how much fees have been paid so far 
and  when  were  those  legal  advisers  appointed?  If  the  hon.  Minister  does  not  have  the 
information now, perhaps it can be tabled later. 

Mr Bodha: No, I don’t have the answer, but I think I can provide it later. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!  

(Interruptions) 

No cross-talking, please! 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has said on many  occasions, if ever Government 
goes  ahead  with  the  LRT  Project.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  local 
authorities are in the picture because, in the past, local authorities were not in the picture and 
within the tracé, there are places where market has to be removed or other utilities? So, can 
the hon. Minister inform the House whether in the costing of the whole project, funds will be 
given to local authorities from the start to the end so that, at the same time, provisions can be 
made to move utilities such as markets and other items? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I have been made to understand that this LRT file was a 

top secret file in the Prime Minister’s Office and all the RDA… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes. The RDA people never knew about the alignment. Everything was done at the level of 
the Prime Minister’s Office. That’s why when hon. Mahomed said… 

 (Interruptions) 

…said that there was a High-Powered Committee which analysed, I said this has yet to be 
proven. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I think it is very important. Everybody …. 

(Interruptions) 

 

20 

…all  the  stakeholders  -  because  this  is  going  to  be  a  major  project  -  again  I  say  if 
Government comes with a decision to go about it, all the stakeholders have to be taken on 
board because this will change the face of Mauritius totally. As regards the funding, I think 
we will have to consider that matter as well. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just mentioned the opacity in the past 
and we are talking about a huge project. So, may I get the assurance from the hon. Minister 
that in respect of all tender documents and all agreements that are going to be signed, whether 
with the designers, the contractors and the operators, there would be no confidentiality clause 
so that in this House we will be able to ask questions and get answers? 

Mr Bodha: I do not want to be called by any names, Madam Speaker. This is a very 
important project. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said that all the projects that we do should 
be done in transparency, no cost overrun, no delay and there should be quality. I can give the 
assurance to the House and I said if Government tomorrow decides on the G to G with South 
Korea,  the  Mission  Report,  the  Due  Diligence  Report  and  the  High-Powered  Committee 
Report will be laid on the Table of the National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  think  I  heard  that  as  far  as  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  is 
concerned, when the report of the Koreans will have been examined and so on, it will go to 
Cabinet next week, from what I heard. Can we have an indication of a time frame, by what 
time  the  updating  of  the  feasibility  study  for  the  LRT  should  be  ready  and  when  can  we 
expect, therefore, that to be before Cabinet? 

Mr Bodha: In fact, as regards the RDP, it is going to Cabinet this week if the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister, of course, agrees to it. 

As regards the LRT, we are having the first discussions today and tomorrow. And, we 
know the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, if decisions have to be taken, they would be taken as fast 
as we can. 

As  regards  the  RDP,  Rs2.5  billion  have  already  been  earmarked  for  this  year  and 

works are supposed to start in December. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

 

21 

BANK OF MAURITIUS – ASSET MANAGEMENT COMPANY – SETTING UP 

(No. B/449) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the possibility of setting up an Asset Management Company (AMC), he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the  names  of  the  members  of  the  Working  Group  set  up  to  examine  same, 
indicating the respective expertise thereof; 

the proposed financial structure of the AMC; 

the  expected  time  frame  within  which  legislation  will  be  introduced  for  the 
implementation of the AMC, and 

(d) 

if the AMC will be a subsidiary of the Bank of Mauritius. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, on 08 January 2016, the Bank of Mauritius 
issued  for  public  consultation  a  document  on  the  ‘Setting  up  of  an  Asset  Management 
Company in Mauritius’. This Consultation Document was duly published on the website of 
the Bank of Mauritius on the same day and is available for consultation by members of the 
public. 

With respect to part (a) of the question, the names of the members of the Working 

Group as well as their respective expertise are as follows – 

(i) 

Mr  Deenesh  Ghurburrun,  Chairman  of  the  Working  Group.    He  was 
previously, Assistant Director-Supervision at the Bank of Mauritius and he is a 
Chartered Accountant, reckoning 31 years of service at the Bank; 

(ii)  Mr Clarel Benoit, Barrister-at-Law, Legal Adviser of the Bank of Mauritius, 

with 30 years of practice as Barrister; 

(iii)  Mr Gunness Ramdewar, Senior Attorney, Attorney of the Bank of Mauritius, 

with 50 years of practice as Attorney-at-Law;   

(iv)  Mr  Mario  Hennequin,  Banking  and  Finance  Consultant,  with  30  years  of 

practice in the banking industry;  

(v)  Mr Pravind Samboo, Head of Risk Control Unit, Corporate Credit at Barclays 

Bank Mauritius Limited, with 38 years of practice in the banking industry; 

22 

 
(vi)  Mr  Mardayah  Kona  Yerukunondu,  Assistant  Secretary-Legal  Services 
Division,  Barrister-at-Law,  reckoning  37  years  of  service  at  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, and 

(vii)  Mrs Rajshri Jutton-Gopy, Chief-Legal Services Division, Attorney, reckoning 

19 years of service at the Bank of Mauritius.  

Regarding part (b) of the question, the Working Group has proposed that the stated 
capital of the AMC be  Rs1 billion, and the initial amount paid as capital be Rs500 m., 60 
percent of which will be held by the Bank of Mauritius and the remainder by  commercial 
banks and other institutions. 

Concerning  part  (c)  of  the  question,  it  is  expected  that  the  draft  legislation  will  be 

ready by the end of this year. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, the proposal of the Working Group for Bank 

of Mauritius to hold 60 percent of the shares of the company is under consideration.   

Dr.  Sorefan:  Will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  what  was  the 
outcome  of  the  visit  of  the  Second  Deputy  Governor,  Mr  Punchoo,  who  was  not  in  the 
Working Group, who went to Ireland with a team - today I read that on the Public Notice 
from the Bank of Mauritius - and he was not in the capacity of Working Group… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

Dr. Sorefan: Yes, I started that. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House 
what was the outcome of the visit of the Second Deputy Governor, Mr Punchoo, who was not 
in the Working Group, went to Ireland with a team of the Central Bank for the setting up of 
the  AMC  mentioned  in  the  Public  Notice  of  today  in  which  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  is 
blowing his own trumpet and, at the same time, trying to discredit his previous colleague? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware whether he went with a team and what 
has been the outcome. I am given to understand that he is in charge of banking supervision. 
He  also  supervises  the  setting  up  of  AMC  and  works  of  the  Working  Group.  He  is  a 
supervisor. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan, I will draw your attention to the fact that 
your questions should not be long and, second, that you should not express any opinion in 
your question. 

23 

 
Dr. Sorefan: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House regarding the case of 
Mr Mario Hennequin who is 70 years old being recruited as a consultant by the Governor of 
the Central Bank, he is a retired officer from Barclays and he is enjoying a consultancy by the 
Governor of the Central Bank and Mr Mario Hennequin is the brother-in-law of the Chief 
Resource  Officer?  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  said  this  same  Chief  Resource  Officer  is 
having an enquiry by the ICAC. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  he  has  been  chosen  because  of  his  experience  in  the 
banking sector. He is a professional and has the expertise required. I would like to point out 
whether in this country people who are related to people in Government have no right to live! 
If  they  deserve  something,  they  should  not  get  it!  Well,  this  was  the  philosophy  of  the 
previous Government, not ours! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just mentioned 
that in addition to the Bank of Mauritius there will be other shareholders of the AMC, other 
institutions. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether, at this stage, he has a list 
of institutions which have given their consent to become shareholders of that company? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will see to that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful, last question! 

Mr Ramful: Since the idea of coming up with this Asset Management Company is to 
do away with the Sale by Levy system that we have, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give us 
an  idea  about  the  amount  of  non-performing  loan  that  we  have  currently  in  the  banking 
system? 

The Prime Minister: I need a specific question of that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Last question on this, Madam. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, I said! 

SEYCHELLES - STATE BANK OF MAURITIUS - DIRECTORS 

(No. B/450) Dr. R.  Sorefan  (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix)  asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

 

24 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the directors employed at the State Bank of Mauritius Branch in the Seychelles, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to if it 
had received a request from the Central Bank of the Seychelles for a due diligence exercise to 
be carried prior to the appointment thereof and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that SBM Bank 
(Seychelles)  Ltd  is  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  SBM  Holdings  Ltd  through  SBM  Bank 
Holdings Ltd. 

Following an application made by SBM Bank (Seychelles) Ltd for a banking licence 
in the Seychelles, the Central Bank of that country wrote to the Bank of Mauritius in January 
2016.   

The  request  for  information  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles  was  part  of  its  due 

diligence process with a view to conducting an overall assessment of the application. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Bank of Mauritius responded to the Central 
Bank  of  Seychelles  in  accordance  with  the  established  practices  between  regulators.  
Exchange of information on a regulator-to-regulator basis is strictly confidential and is made 
on the basis of trust.  Accordingly, the Bank of Mauritius has advised that no information can 
be disclosed to any other party, in accordance with section 26 of the Bank of Mauritius Act. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  May  we  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  Dr. 
J. Khadaroo,  who  is  a  Director  of  SBM,  is  also  a  Director  at  the  Seychelles  branch  and 
whether  there  is  a  conflict  of  interest  for  supplying  IT  applications  to  SBM  (Mauritius) 
without tender and enjoying a royalty fee of Rs80,000 per month? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if he is enjoying Rs80,000, I hope he deserves it. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

MAURITIUS REVENUE AUTHORITY - MR K. R. - VAT REGISTRATION 

(No. B/451) Dr. R.  Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

 

25 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to Mr K. R., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Revenue 
Authority, information as to the amount of Value Added Tax that he owes thereto, indicating 
the steps that have been taken for the recovery thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  Mr  K.  R.  was  under  a 

contract of services and therefore was not liable to be registered for VAT purposes. 

Dr. Sorefan: As per my information, a contract for service requires payment of VAT. 
Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House whether, as an independent, non-executive 
Director and having a contract as a Service Consultant, he should not pay VAT to the MRA? 

The Prime Minister: A contract of service, I have been told, is similar to a contract 
of employment, where the person derives income, bonus, sick and casual leave, medical and 
insurance cover, and other benefits. The income benefits are subject to income tax. A contract 
for service is similar to consultancy services, that is, a self-employed person doing business 
on his own account. The PAYE is subject to VAT. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  As  per  my  information,  a  service  contract  is  consultancy.  They  are 

trying to get away with this. This man has enjoyed Rs33 m. ... 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  each  and  every  time,  I  ask  you  to  put  your 

question. Don’t provide information! The object of a question is to get information. 

Dr. Sorefan: Well, a service contract is consultancy, and it goes without saying that 
he should pay VAT.  I will ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to look into it that this man comes 
to Mauritius and pays the VAT because he is bound to do it, as he is a consultant.  The ex-
Chairman of the Bank is just evading to pay VAT and he left the country. 

The Prime Minister: The hon. Member is on the wrong track. 

MINISTERS - CODE OF CONDUCT – ELABORATION 

(No.  B/452)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Ministerial Code, he will state if consideration will be given for the 
advisability of a review thereof to include an obligation on the Members of Government not 
to use offshore tax arrangements for the sake of transparency and good governance. 

26 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  stated  in  my  reply  to  Parliamentary 
Question No. B/99 of 05 April 2016, in line with our commitment to reinforce our overall 
governance framework, Government is envisaging the elaboration of a Code of Conduct for 
Ministers. 

The  issue  raised  by  the  hon.  Member  as  to  whether  the  Code  should  include  an 
 
obligation  on  Members  of  Government  not  to  use  offshore  tax  arrangements  will  be 
considered in that same context. 

Mr  Fowdar:  Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  Ministers  are  not  allowed  to  be 
 
Directors  and  shareholders.    But  are  they  also  not  allowed  to  be  beneficiary  owners  in 
offshore sector? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if the law allows it, then I see no problem. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Madam  Speaker,  holding  an  offshore  account  does  not  make  you  a 
criminal as long as you comply with the tax requirements of your country. Does not the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister think that it is the declaration of assets law that should be amended? Any 
MP should, at least, indicate whether he holds directly or indirectly a bank account, onshore 
or offshore. 

The Prime Minister: Well, the Labour Party was in Government for so many years.  
Why  didn’t  they  think  it  fit  to  amend  that  law?    Madam  Speaker,  use  of  offshore  tax 
arrangements  by  Members  of  Government  to  the  extent  that  our  offshore  centres  already 
comply  with  international  norms  and  standards,  including  standards  on  transparency  and 
exchange  of  information  as  well  as  international  standards  against  money  laundering  and 
combating the financing of terrorism, it may not be necessary to impose any prohibition on 
the use. The more so that we have recently reinforced our legal arsenal in the fight against 
illicit  enrichment  through  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity  Reporting  Act.  Moreover, 
financial institutions are already required to maintain appropriate risk management systems in 
relation to politically exposed persons. Nevertheless, the proposals of the hon. Member may 
be considered in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Order, order please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Ganoo! 

27 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  see  to  it  that  when  the 
Ministerial Code is drafted and prepared, this Code makes it an obligation to anybody who 
becomes  an  MP  or  a  Minister  to  declare  whether  he  has  been  granted  the  nationality  or 
citizenship of another foreign country, that is, in case he has a double nationality, he should 
declare it also? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comment, please! 

(Interruptions) 

No comment, please! 

The Prime Minister: I have been given to understand, Madam Speaker, that the Draft 
Public Service Bill incorporating a Code of Conduct for Members regarding Public Officers 
and  Advisers  is  currently  being  prepared  by  the  Attorney  General’s  Office.    It  should  be 
pointed  out  that  it  is  up  to  a  Minister  to  scrupulously  avoid  any  danger  of  an  actual  or 
apparent conflict of interest between his ministerial position and his private financial interest. 
In  order  to  avoid  such  a  danger,  the  Minister  should  normally  be  guided  by  the  general 
principle that he should  either dispose of any financial interest  giving  rise to the actual or 
apparent conflict... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: ...or take... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! You are disrupting the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

The Prime Minister: ... or take alternative steps to prevent it. However, procedures in 
relation  to  Ministers,  private  interests  should  not  be  such  that  they  exhibit  the  holding  of 
ministerial office by individuals with wide experience whether from industry, the professions 
or some other walks of life. The framework should only ensure that systematic steps are taken 
to avoid the danger of an actual or perceived conflict of interest. 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, I just want to confirm from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

if investment in a foreign bank by Ministers is considered as a business. 

 
The Prime Minister: Well, we should consult the State Law Office for that. 

28 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

MBC – ENGLISH FOOTBALL PREMIER LEAGUE – LIVE BROADCAST 

(No. B/453) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  
whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

the present financial situation thereof - 

(i) 

(ii) 

giving details of the income thereof and;  

indicating the amount owed thereto and the measures taken, if any, for 
the recovery thereof, and  

(b)  

if  negotiations  will  be  held  with  the  Digital  Satellite  Television  for  the 
broadcast  of  the  matches  of  the  forthcoming  Barclays  Champion  League 
Football. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I am 
informed  by  the  Officer-in-Charge  of  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  that,  for  the 
period  01  January  2016  to  20 May  2016,  the  income  received  by  the  MBC  amounts  to 
Rs296 m.,  derived  mainly  from  the  collection  of  television  license  fees  and  payment  of 
advertising charges.  The actual expenditure as at 20 May 2016 is Rs244 m. 

Concerning part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that, as at 20 May 2016, a total 
amount of Rs62 m. is owed by the Corporation representing arrears in respect of advertising 
charges and late payment of domestic and non-domestic television licence fees. I am further 
informed that the following measures are being implemented to recover the amount due - 

• 

• 

• 

legal action has been initiated against debtors; 

payment facilities in instalments are being provided to some debtors, and 

an in-house monitoring unit has been set up for the timely collection of all 
dues through close monitoring and follow-up. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Officer-in-
Charge that negotiations for the broadcast of the matches of the forthcoming English Football 

 

29 

Premier  League  will  soon  be  initiated  with  the  authorised  licencee  for  free-to-air  live 
broadcast. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Due to the fact that MBC is overstaffed - in a reply to my previous PQ - 
will  the  hon.  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  asking  the  new  management  or  the  actual 
management to undertake the appropriate reforms? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am surprised. I understand that MBC is understaffed; 
now I am being told that it is overstaffed. Well, if it is so, we will pass on the information so 
that the situation be remedied. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  which  institution 
performs the audit exercises of the MBC and whether previous audit reports had revealed any 
weaknesses and made appropriate recommendations? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will need a specific question for that. I don’t have that 

information at hand. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  MBC  is  sending 
threatening letters to households to pay their redevance immediately or else action will be 
taken for just Rs150 not paid? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if they have been asked to do so amicably and there had 
been no response, I don’t see anything wrong in what the hon. Member is suggesting is taking 
place. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated that the MBC is understaffed, 
at least, can he state when a new Chairperson and a new independent Director-General will 
be appointed? 

The Prime Minister: The needful is being done, very soon. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

 

30 

LOVEBRIDGE PROJECT - OPERATIONAL 

(No.  B/454)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Lovebridge Project being implemented under the 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  he  will  state  the  amount  of  money  invested  therein  by 
Government  and  by  the  private  sector  respectively,  as  at  to  date,  indicating  the  amount  of 
money disbursed therefrom during the present financial year, giving details as to the projects 
implemented thereunder. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  context  of  the  National  Parrainage 
Programme,  an  amount  of  Rs100  m.  has  been  earmarked  as  one-off  grant  to  support  the 
Lovebridge  ‘parrainage’  project,  out  of  the  amount  of  Rs126  m.  of  unspent  CSR  money 
collected  from  the  private  sector  by  the  MRA  during  the  year  2015.  The  amount  was 
disbursed on 26 January 2016. 

I am informed that the private sector, whose contribution is expected to be above that 
of Government, has so far mainly contributed in kind, in terms of office premises and staff, 
equivalent to some Rs2 m.  However, the Lovebridge Project is yet to be fully operational.  I 
am also informed that as per its project plan, the private sector will be contributing towards 
the  implementation  of  the  programmes  relating  to  education,  housing,  health  and  food 
requirements of the poor and needy. 

I am further informed that Lovebridge Ltd has so far recruited some 25 technical staff 
that are currently being trained to coordinate support programmes to the poor households. 46 
families  (220  persons)  are  already  benefitting  from  Lovebridge  Ltd  and  the  number  of 
beneficiaries will increase to 2,500 by December 2017.  

 Lovebridge Ltd will be submitting bi-annual progress reports and its audited annual 

report from which more details will be available on its activities and programmes. 

Madam Speaker, I have given strict instructions to review and strengthen the existing 
monitoring and evaluation mechanism of the use and the outcomes of the funds allocated for 
the Lovebridge Project. 

 Furthermore, in the context of the next Budget, the CSR framework will be reviewed 

in line with the implementation of the Marshall Plan against Poverty. 

 

31 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, it is really shocking the figures that we just heard, 
that only Rs2 m. has been contributed by the private sector and that in kind - not in cash, but 
in kind.  A lot of emphasis was made by the previous Finance Minister… 

Madam Speaker: Your question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: …on this issue during the last Budget but, in my question, I asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  details  of  the  amount  that  has  been  spent  by  Lovebridge  in 
relation to CSR, but we did not get an answer. 

The Prime Minister: Well, I think I mentioned. What I have here is that an amount 
of  Rs100  m.  has  been  earmarked  as  one-off  grant  to  support  the  Lovebridge  ‘parrainage’ 
project, out of the amount of Rs126 m. of unspent CSR money collected from the private 
sector by the MRA during the year 2015.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, it 
is stated in the question the money disbursed therefrom, the Lovebridge Company, that has 
been disbursed in relation to CSR; it is not the money that has been contributed. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  what  are  the  expenses  incurred,  I  have  no  details  over 

here. We will try to get the information and table it. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he has the figures, but, 
first, the Rs100 m. was generously allotted by the former Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development to go into that company. Rs100 m. of public money! We have been told that it 
has been earmarked.  Can we know the reason why not a cent, not a rupee of that Rs100 m. 
has gone to Lovebridge Company Ltd. to date? What is the reason? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: I understand a total of Rs3 m. has been disbursed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Yes, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Could the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister consider tabling not only where this money is going to, to which organisations, if 
there are any, because my information is that the organisations that are supposed to benefit 
from this whole  Lovebridge Project are not found within certain  geographical areas of the 
country, and there is an abuse and discrimination with regard to those who benefit from that 

 

32 

project?  So,  that  is  why  my  humble  request  is  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  tables  a 
complete detailed list of those organisations, with their addresses, which are benefiting from 
this Lovebridge Project. 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we will try to ask them to furnish the information and 

then table it. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in the last Budget the previous Finance Minister 
stated that this is a new approach for empowering vulnerable families, and in a PQ by myself 
last year, he stated, I quote - 

“In the Budget there are 38 companies, now we have 110 companies”. 

And he also stated - 

“This  is  why  I  am  very  excited  to  see  this  reaction  from  the  private  sector  to  the 
request of Government”.  

Now, we have seen that this excitement had led to only Rs2 m. of contribution and that in 
kind.  So, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether it would not be proper to return to the 
previous system whereby  2% of the company’s book profit was being treated as CSR and 
thus,  this  was  taken  to  fight  poverty  for  vulnerable  families,  and  also  whether  guidelines 
should be re-instated? 

The Prime Minister: Well, it seems to me it has not been that pleasant.  So, we will 

have to look into that. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over! Questions addressed to Ministers!  Hon. Rughoobur! 

NINE-YEAR BASIC SCHOOLING PROGRAMME - PRE-PRIMARY EDUCATION 

(No. B/464) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Nine Year Basic Schooling Programme, she will state if 
adequate measures have been taken for the integration of children aged between 3 and 5 years 
therein. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  reform  agenda  of  my  Ministry  is  a 
systemic one that, in fact, covers the entire spectrum ranging from the pre-primary, primary, 
secondary, TVET sectors as well as the tertiary sector.  

 

33 

The  Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic  Education  Reform  is  just  one  component  of  my 
Ministry’s  overall  reform  agenda  for  education  and  training  sector.  It  provides  for  a  new 
education structure which covers the primary and lower secondary education subsectors, that 
is, Grades 1 to 9.  

However,  the  educational  reform  does  cover  the  pre-primary  sector  as  well,  as  my 
Ministry  is  strongly  convinced  of  the  pivotal  role  played  by  this  sector  in  building  the 
foundation upon which future learning ultimately depends. The pre-primary education, thus, 
becomes the most essential educational starting point. 

Madam Speaker, this is why my Ministry is currently engaged in bringing in a number 
of measures in the pre-primary sector with a view to rendering it more conducive to teaching 
and learning process. 

In this regard a number of initiatives are currently being taken and these are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii) 

the  review  of  the  National  Curriculum  Framework  for  pre-primary  which 
provides  guidelines,  learning  outcomes  and  indicators  for  the  teaching  and 
learning process in this sector with a view to aligning it with a new curriculum 
developed in the context of the NYCBE Reform; 

the  development  of  the  Early  Childhood  Special  Needs  Framework  for  the 
pre-primary sector; 

the  professionalisation  of  the  sector  through  capacity  building  and  training, 
including  training  of  teachers  working  with  children  with  special  education 
needs; 

setting  up  quality  assurance  mechanisms  by  providing  training  to  the 
Supervisory Cadre; 

development  of  new  norms  and  standards  entailing  a  review  of  the  current 
Early Childhood Care and Education Regulation in order to ensure qualitative 
improvement for the sector; 

construction  and  opening  of  new  pre-primary  units  to  promote  equity  and 
access, and 

the improvement of learning environment in both public and private preschool 
institutions. 

 

34 

Madam Speaker, I wish to further inform the House that in order to ensure a smooth 
transition and integration of the pre-primary schools’ children to the primary sector, a number 
of measures have been taken to determine the readiness of these pupils. One of them consists 
of  the  administration  of the  Developmental  Learner  Profile.  The  DLP  is  a  tool  which  will 
allow the teacher to follow and the child along set targets. 

Another new initiative in the Early Childhood Education Sector is the adoption of new 
approaches to pedagogy. The Early Childhood Care and Education Authority has embarked 
on  a  Preschool  Curriculum  Enrichment  Programme  in  Science  and  ICT.  Some  700  pre-
primary teachers have been trained in the use of ICT.  The Digital Awakening Project has 
been implemented on a pilot basis. A teacher’s manual on the Early Years ICT Integration 
Programme has also been developed. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  major  transformations  in  the  pre-primary  sector  and  with  our 
willingness  to  share  our  good  practices  and  model,  Mauritius  has  been  requested  by  the 
Association  for  the  Development  of  Education  in  Africa  to  host  the  Inter-country  Quality 
Note Early Childhood Development which is a mechanism for peer learning among African 
countries, the main objective of which is to serve as a forum for advocacy and monitoring 
early childhood development, as a priority in national development agendas. We are in the 
process of finalising an ICQNECD Strategic Plan 2016-2018. 

Madam  Speaker,  all  these  innovative  measures  for  the  pre-primary  sector  bear 
testimony  of  the  special  attention  my  Ministry  is  giving  to  this  sector  with  a  view  of 
equipping  each  child  with  knowledge,  foundation  of  skills  and  attitude  that  will  guarantee 
success to all their future learning. The more so these accompanying measures will definitely 
ensure the full integration of children aged 3 to 5 into the next phase of basic education in the 
context of the Nine Years of Continuous Basic Education Reforms.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:    I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  her  reply.    One  of  the  sustainable 

development goals for education approved by the United Nations is, and I quote –  

“By  2030,  ensure  that  all  girls  and  boys  have  access  to  quality  early  childhood 
development,  care  and  pre-primary  education  so  that  they  are  ready  for  primary 
education.” 

May I ask the hon. Minister - I know that there has been a list of measures that have 
been  taken  by  her  Ministry  -  at  the  level  of  intersectoral  collaboration,  in  terms  of  NPF, 

 

35 

Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare,  Ombudsperson  for 
Children, have there been any measures taken to ensure that the children are prepared to go 
for this transition? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  already  working  in  close 
collaboration with the Ministry for Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare 
and the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions to ensure that 
all children in Mauritius get access to quality education. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have visited the website of the Ministry 
and I have found a French version brochure on Nine Year Basic Schooling and a PowerPoint 
presentation  of  20  pages.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  there  is  a  full 
strategy document, an Action Plan whereby things are clearly defined in terms of time frame, 
costing because it is going to cost big time?  Is there such a document? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  already  passed  the  final 
document through Cabinet.  I have sent the document for peer reviewing at the World Bank.  
We  have  already  received  the  response  from  them.    They  found  the  document  extremely 
interesting and they are even thinking of using it as a model for the region.  So, in fact, the 
document is ready.  We are finalising it.  The figures will be in there as far as the planning for 
the next few years are concerned.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I understand that the Early Childhood 
Care and Education Authority has the responsibility to monitor the management of all this. 
May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  enlighten  the  House  as  to  the  adequacy  of  resources  to 
supervise not only the access, but the quality of education in those pre-primary units? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam Speaker, I have just mentioned to the House that 
we are improving on quality.  We are, in fact, ensuring that there is a proper quality assurance 
done and we are training supervisors for that particular purpose. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon! 

Mrs  Selvon:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Could  the  hon.  Minister  tell  the  House 

what are the adequate measures being taken for the special needs children? 

 

36 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:    Madam  Speaker,  I  would  request  the  hon.  Member  to 
come  with  a  substantive  question,  but  I  will  still  say  that  in  my  answer  that  I  have  just 
mentioned we are taking on board special training for teachers who will be responsible for 
the training of students with special needs and this is already incorporated in the project. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

NPF/NSF INVESTMENT COMMITTEE - COMPOSITION 

(No. B/465) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions  whether, 
in  regard  to  the  National  Pension  Fund,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) 

composition of the Managing Committee thereof; 

(b) 

total  amount  of  fixed  deposits  thereof,  indicating  the  names  of  the  banking 
institutions wherein the funds have been deposited, indicating the amount thereof 
in each case, and  

(c) 

amount of funds invested in immovable properties, giving the list thereof. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, there is no Managing Committee for the 
National Pensions Fund. I take it that the hon. Member is referring to the National Pensions 
Fund/National  Savings  Fund  Investment  Committee,  known  as  NPF/NSF  Investment 
Committee  set  up  under  section  38  (2)  and  (3)  of  the  National  Pensions  Act  1976.    The 
National Pensions Fund and National Savings Fund Investment Committee which is currently 
chaired  by  the  Financial  Secretary,  has  a  tripartite  composition.    I  have  arranged  for  a 
document  to  be  laid  in  the  Library  of  the  National  Assembly  giving  out  the  present 
composition of the Committee. 

Madam Speaker, the NPF and NSF Investment Committee has been set up with the 
purpose of determining how to invest the surplus funds of the National Pensions Fund and 
National Savings Fund. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I have to inform that to date the National Pensions 
Fund holds fixed deposit accounts in different banks in rupees, US dollars, Australian dollars 
and GB pound sterling. I have again arranged for the breakdown of the fixed deposits to be 
laid in the Library of the National Assembly. 

37 

 
As for part (c) of the question, I am informed that a total amount of Rs1,368,300,000 
has been invested in immoveable properties. This investment comprises the purchase of two 
multi-storeyed buildings in Ebene, namely Altima Building for a sum of Rs380 m. and Ebene 
Heights for a sum of  Rs443.4 m. The remaining amount of Rs544.9 m. has been spent for the 
construction  of  12  buildings,  one  housing  the  headquarters  of  the  Ministry  and  of  the 
National Pensions Fund in Port Louis and the others housing regional social security offices. 
A list giving out the relevant details has been laid in the Library of the National Assembly. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, may  I know from the hon. Minister  if there has 
been a Consulting Adviser that has just been appointed to advise the Investment Committee 
and the name of that company? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: The NPF/NSF Investment Committee acts independently, 

but we do have an Investment Adviser and he is consulted with regard to investment made. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  if  the 
consulting  adviser  of  the  NPF  is  a  subsidiary  of  the  State  Investment  Corporation?  May  I 
have the answer? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t think so. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has told us that the National Pensions Fund does not 

have a Managing Committee. It has a Board? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  we  know  whether  the  Board  is  up  to  date?  Can  we  have  the 

membership of the Board? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Yes.  The  Chairperson  of  the  NPF/NSF  Investment 
Committee  is  the  Financial  Secretary,  Mr  Manraj.  We  have  three  representatives  of  the 
Government and then we have employer representatives and employee representatives. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Secondly,  the  National  Pensions  Fund  has  its  actuaries  and  those 
actuaries have to review and produce their actuarial review at regular intervals as provided in 
the law. Can I know whether we are abiding by the law and when the next actuarial report is 
expected out? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  yes,  we  are  abiding  by  the  law.  There  is  a  report 

which will be out in three months by Deloitte Company. 

38 

 
Mr  Mahomed:  I  do  reckon  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  stated  she  is  tabling  some 
documents and we are talking about investing public money. If there is a figure to be put on 
the performance of that portfolio, can the hon. Minister provide to the House an indication 
about the performance of our investment over 2015? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well, the  Committee is  presumed  to  satisfy  itself  on  the 
soundness and legality of the proposed investment. I do understand that there is an amount of 
Rs101 billion in the said account. 

Mr  Uteem:  In  a  press  communiqué  in  2013,  the  NPF/NFS  Investment  Committee 
stated that it is guided by three basic principles when making an investment, namely: return, 
security and liquidity. So, may I know from the hon. Minister whether investments are still 
guided  by  these  core  principles  and,  therefore,  will  the  hon.  Minister  agree  with  me  that 
Pension Fund should not be used to buy shares in national insurance company? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, as I said earlier, the Committee is here to look into 
the soundness of the investment and I do hope that they are doing their work properly - look 
into the investment and act independently. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister gave us the composition of the Board earlier on, but 
I did not hear her give us the names of the trade union representatives on the Board of the 
National Pensions Fund. Can we have that? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  I  have  given  the  composition  of  the  NPF/NSF 
Investment Committee and not the Board. We have employee and employer representatives 
in the NPF/NSF Investment Committee. 

(Interruptions) 

Employer  representatives  are  Mr  Chasteigner  Du  Mée,  Mr  Bussawah,  Mr  Appavoo. 
Employee representatives are Mr Oodit, Lecturer, University of Technology, Mauritius; Mr 
Naugloo, Finance Officer, Department Archive and Mr Vythilingum, Finance Officer. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, last question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether the NPF has been invited to 
invest in the National Insurance Company and, if so, what has been the decision of the Board, 
whether to invest or not in the NIC? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Unfortunately, I am not aware of this. 

 

39 

PLAISANCE-GRAND’BAIE & TERRE ROUGE-VERDUN TRUNK ROADS – 

LIGHTING & MAINTENANCE 

(No. B/466) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the trunk 
roads from Plaisance to Grand Bay and from Terre Rouge to Verdun respectively, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road Development Authority, information as to if – 

(a) 

(b) 

regular cleaning and maintenance thereof are being carried out, and 

measures  are  being  taken  to  repair  the  defective  lighting  system  thereof  in 
collaboration with the local authorities 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  problems  raised  by  the  hon. 

Member. 

I  am  informed  by  the  RDA  that  the  trunk  roads  from  Plaisance  to  Grand’Baie  and 
from Terre Rouge to Verdun concern motorways M1, M2 and M3 over some 82 kilometres.  

The RDA carries out regular cleaning and maintenance works, including resurfacing, 
grass  trimming,  pruning  of  ornamental  plants,  lopping  of  branches,  cleaning  of  drains  and 
repair or replacement of damaged guardrails along those roads throughout the year, in line 
with its mandate. 

I am further informed that the motorways have been maintained and up to April/May 
2015, an amount of Rs9,058,290 had been disbursed for milling and resurfacing works along 
motorway M1 from Wooton to Ebene northbound and southbound. 

Moreover, the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and 
Beach Management has, from 18 April to 17 May this year, carried out trimming and carting 
away of branches on both sides of the motorway from the roundabout at Beau Plan to the 
roundabout at Terre Rouge. Mowing of grasses on both sides and along the central verge of 
the  motorway  of  M2  from  the  roundabout  at  Beau  Plan  up  to  Calebasses  has  also  been 
concurrently undertaken. 

Additionally, the Ministry of Tourism and External Communications and the Tourism 
Authority  have  been  involved  in  the  cleaning  and  maintenance  of  the  motorway  from  the 
airport roundabout to Mahebourg in the context of the ‘Greening Mauritius’ Campaign. Trees 
are being planted and maintained along the stretch of the motorway, as and when required. 

40 

 
Madam Speaker, in spite of the efforts made by all the various bodies, we are aware 
of  problems  on  certain  segments  due  to  lack  of  resources,  including  manpower.  As  a 
sustainable measure, Government is envisaging to review the structure for the cleaning of the 
motorway as follows – 

a) 

b) 

c) 

the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management will be entrusted with the responsibility of planting and lopping 
of existing trees, trimming of plants and general embellishment along all the 
motorways; 

the Road Development Authority will be called upon to look after the cleaning 
of the other classified roads, and 

the Local Authorities will be responsible for the other roads within their local 
boundaries. 

The Road Development Authority would, however, continue to be responsible for the road 
furniture, the maintenance of roads and for the drains.   

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I have to inform the House that, 
in  fact,  the  Street  Lighting  System  concerns  several  public  bodies,  namely  the  Road 
Development Authority, the Local Authorities and the Central Electricity Board. 

The RDA has the responsibility to install the street lighting on all major roads within 
the  road  construction  period.  Maintenance  of  the  network  is  catered  for  under  these 
construction  contracts  for  the  first  year  only.  After  the  construction  of  the  road,  the  RDA 
hands  over  the  street  lightings  to  the  Local  Authority  concerned  which  then  has  the 
responsibility  for  its  maintenance.    The  involvement  of  the  CEB  is  mainly  to  provide 
electricity for the street lightings. 

However, on 07 April 2016, Government has decided that the responsibility for the 
lighting  of  all  motorways  be  entrusted  to  the  CEB  while  Local  Authorities  would  be 
responsible for the lighting of other classified and non-classified roads. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed by the Local Authorities that street lightings 
are defective along many segments of the motorways. The matter is being studied at the level 
of the Central Electricity Board. A survey has been made and in this context a meeting will 
be chaired by the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities.  

41 

 
With regard to the Terre Rouge-Verdun Link Road, my Ministry is looking into the 
possibility of extending the opening of the road till 9 o’clock at night in light of the various 
representations  of  the  public.  Therefore,  I  have  already  requested  the  CEB  to  carry  out  a 
survey of the street lighting system thereat and to remedy any segment where the system is 
faulty. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  think  this  issue  of  the  motorway 
being  in  a  deplorable  state  these  few  months  has  been  raised  on  several  occasions.  May  I 
know from the hon. Minister, in terms of cleaning - it has not been that clear in his reply - 
who is to be accountable for the maintenance of the motorway? I am not speaking about the 
trees on both sides, but the maintenance because this is impacting negatively on the image of 
the country. 

Mr Bodha: The maintenance of the motorway itself will be under the responsibility 

of the Road Development Authority. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you.  My  question  relates  to  the  defective  street  lighting 
system. Would the hon. Minister be able to tell the House whether it is being envisaged - 
since we are paying one of the highest tariffs for street lighting which is Rs7.82 per Kw/hour, 
tariff 510 and the more so street lighting has a heavy bearing on the peak electricity demand 
at night time - to go for more economical and ecological solutions like Solar PV lighting and 
LED lighting? 

Mr Bodha: This is being studied by the CEB and the meeting with the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities will, in fact, consider the situation as 
it is now and whether we can use other alternative modes. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is looking into the possibility 
of  revamping  this  project,  of  asking  the  private  sector  to  look  after  the  maintenance  and 
upkeep of the roundabouts in terms of the CSR? That was an initiative taken which has given 
good results and was abandoned afterwards. Can he inform the House whether he intends to 
ask  the  RDA  or  initiate  actions  himself  with  the  private  sector  which  falls  within  the 
Plaisance to Grand Bay motorway in terms of embellishment, upkeep and maintenance? 

42 

 
Mr Bodha: This is a very good idea. In fact, in the past, most of the roundabouts were 
under the responsibility of private companies. L’AHRIM has offered, in fact, to consider this 
possibility for the embellishment and the landscaping of the roundabouts and my colleague, 
the Minister of Environment, now will coordinate with them to see to it that this can be done 
as well. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I ask the hon. Minister whether 
he thinks that it is a wise decision to entrust to the Central Electricity Board the maintenance 
of street lighting? As it is, they don’t have enough time to cope with the present situation, that 
is, looking after the consumers of the Central Electricity Board and now, with the additional 
workload they have to maintain the street lighting on our roads? 

Mr Bodha: Well, we have… 

(Interruptions) 

We have made a request to the CEB and the CEB is considering the request. Today what is 
happening is that the local authorities don’t have the resources, don’t have the manpower to 
see to it that the street lighting in all the segments of the motorway is carried out in the best 
manner. So, in fact, it seems that the CEB has the manpower and the installation throughout 
the  island  because  they  are  servicing  I  don’t  know  how  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
households. So, if there is any problem to remedy any situation they are the authorities which 
can deliver because today as it is, it is not working. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister look into the dual 
carriageway  coming  from  Mapou  towards  Calebasses,  there  is  in  the  middle  of  the  dual 
carriageway a very large hole in which a motor vehicle actually plunged into and the driver 
died?  Can the hon. Minister look into that hole and try to… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, when I said ;look into the hole’, I did not mean literally but metaphorically - 
to look into it so that it is covered in such a way that other accidents do not take place? 

Mr Bodha: I will certainly do that, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

43 

 
Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  Parliamentary 
Questions have been withdrawn: P.Q. Nos. B/470, B/497, B/498 and B/499.  I suspend the 
sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.02 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

VILLE NOIRE, CAVENDISH BRIDGE – LIGHTING & REPAIRS 

(No. B/467) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Cavendish Bridge of Ville Noire, along the Plaine Magnien Road (A12), he will state if he 
has been informed of the bad state thereof and, if so, will he, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Road Development Authority, information as to if consideration will be given 
for a survey to be carried out thereat with a view to – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

assessing the life span thereof; 

replacing the wooden planks thereat, and  

reviewing the street lighting system thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why 
not. 

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir,  I would like to refer the hon. Member to the 
reply made by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question No. B/710 at the sitting 
of the 20 October 2015 in relation to the Cavendish Bridge which is situated along the Plaine 
Magnien/Mahebourg Road (A12). 

In fact, all bridges/culverts along classified roads including the Cavendish Bridge are 
maintained by the Road Development Authority. The Cavendish Bridge links la Ville Noire 
Village  to  Mahebourg.  The  Bridge  was  constructed  in  the  year  1853  by  Governor  James 
Higginson  and  rebuilt  in  stone  and  concrete  by  Paul  Le  Juge de  Segrais  in  1908.  It  was 
inaugurated in 1911 and is today considered as a potential heritage site. 

In year 2000, the RDA constructed footpaths in a metal structure with wooden planks 
on both sides of the bridge, to allow safe movement of pedestrians from one side to the other. 
In July 2011, the bridge was repainted by the RDA in the context of its centenary celebration.  

44 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the 
RDA that the highway authority carries out regular inspections of bridges under its purview, 
as part of its Bridge Maintenance Programme. The Cavendish Bridge was inspected by the 
RDA on 14 April 2016, that is this year, and it was found to be structurally sound in terms of 
the  bridge  deck,  arch  ribs,  bridge  abutments,  wing  walls,  bridge  approach,  footways  and 
gullies.  The  need  to  commission  a  study  to  assess  the  lifespan  of  the  bridge  does  not, 
therefore, arise at this stage.  

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am given to understand that the wooden planks 
are subject to theft, to decay, to wear and tear and thus require regular maintenance by the 
RDA.  

However, with a view to enhancing safety of pedestrians and minimising maintenance 
interventions,  the  RDA  is  envisaging  the  replacement  of  the  wooden  planks  by  treated 
wooden planks fixed on galvanised mild steel plates.  

The  RDA  is  currently  holding  consultations  with  the  National  Heritage  Fund 
regarding this project and is expecting to launch the Request for Quotations by the end of 
June 2016. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the 
District Council of Grand Port is responsible for the street lighting system along the bridge. I 
am further informed that seven decorative lamps along that bridge are not functional due to 
recurrent acts of vandalism. In fact, the local authority has replaced and repaired these lamps 
on several occasions. As a sustainable remedial measure, the District Council of Grand Port is 
working in collaboration with the Energy Services Division of my Ministry for the redesign 
of the street lighting network. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister consider tabling the survey reports carried out, 
with dates and whether he has got any pictures with regard to the deterioration of the said 
bridge? With your permission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if I may table some pictures taken by 
me on the site and a copy can be given to the hon. Minister to see the state of the said bridge.  
Being given that Cavendish Bridge of Ville Noire - as just mentioned by the hon. Minister - 
forms part of the history of Mauritius and as the present state represents a security hazard for 
users, will the hon. Minister give due consideration to restore same at the earliest possible? 

Mr Bodha: I will do so certainly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I am going to table a copy 

of the report which was made in April 2016.  

 
CEB - GAS TURBINE PROJECT - MOTT MAC DONALD REPORT  

45 

(No.  B/468)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Mott Mac Donald Report on the geotechnical studies in respect of the implementation of 
the Gas Turbine Project on the Grande Saline site, he will –  

(a) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Electricity  Board, 
information as to when it was commissioned, indicating the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

date on which same was handed over thereto and; 

cost of the geotechnical studies, and  

(b) 

state if he will table copy thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I shall reply to this question 
together with P.Q. No. B/500, more especially as we are unlikely to reach P.Q. No. B/500 
today. 

I shall start by referring to part (b) of PQ No.  B/468 and, in that connection,  I am 
tabling  a  copy  of  the  Mott  MacDonald  Report  entitled  Hydrogeological  &  Ecological 
Assessment and dated March 2016. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the project for the construction of a tank farm to store Heavy 
Fuel Oil dates back to 2011 when the Ministry of Housing and Lands agreed to reserve State 
Land found at Les Grandes Salines for the erection of a heavy fuel oil tank farm. According 
to  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  this  was  necessary  in  order  to  cope  with  the  increase  in 
consumption of electricity in Mauritius. The lease for a portion of 62,785 square metres was 
finalised on 20 March 2015. 

In the meantime, CEB obtained an EIA licence on 20 September 2013. 

On  30  October  2015,  the  Ramsar  Committee  approved  the  grant  of  the  Ramsar 
Certificate for the project subject to a number of conditions, including a condition that the 
hydrogeology characteristics of the site needed to be confirmed by an expert in the relevant 
field. It was also specified that the necessary geotechnical investigations should be carried out 
on  the  site  and  construction  of  all  infrastructure  works  will  need  to  be  supervised  by  an 
experienced consultancy firm. 

 
I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that its appointed Mott Mac Donald on 

46 

28 November 2015 to carry out the required exercise.  

In March 2016, Mott Mac Donald submitted its recommendations which were sent to 

the Ramsar Committee.  The cost of the study was 25,758 Pounds sterling.  

I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  that  there  is  no  project  for  the 
implementation  of  gas  turbine  project  at  Les  Grandes  Salines.  The  project  is  only  for  the 
construction of a tank farm.  

In  answer  to  part  (b)  of  P.Q.  No.  B/500,  I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  five 
consultation  meetings  were  held  in  the  context  of  the  EIA  study  conducted  between  31 
October 2012 and 31 January 2013. The EIA report which was submitted to the Ministry of 
Environment  contains  information  on  the  outcome  of  the  consultation  meetings.    For  the 
moment, only land levelling and felling of trees are being carried out. 

Mr Bérenger: Since the hon. Minister has said that the new tank farm project is going 
ahead  and  that  an  EIA  certificate  has  been  obtained  from  CEBB,  an  EIA  certificate  was 
obtained on the conditions that the tank farms be situated as far away from the residential 
quarters at the other end? Is there any change there and, if there is any change, has a new EIA 
certificate been obtained? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. It dates to 06 January 2016, the Ministry of Environment 
approved the relocation of the HFO tank farm. Well, let me use the exact words “CEB was 
informed that the proposed relocation of the HFO tank farm is recommended subject to the 
following conditions. All conditions attached to the Ramsar clearance shall be scrupulously 
observed. The proponent shall submit a copy of its contingency plan to the Mauritius Port 
Authority.  Mitigation  measures  shall  be  implemented.  Measures  against  fire  hazard,  a 
boundary wall of adequate height as well as a buffer of trees shall be provided to shield the 
premises of CEB from the residential area to minimise noise disturbance and other nuisances. 
Only emergency access should be allowed along the seven boundaries. All other conditions 
of the EIA license bearing references dated 30 September 2013 remain in force except for 
condition of the 17 which is waived. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I try to get it clear. Am I right in saying – I am asking that indeed 
the CEB requested that the tank farms be re-sited and they have obtained the Environment 
Committees’ green light, that is the tank farm will be not at the one end of the site furthest 

 

47 

away from the houses and so on and is now – whether this is so, has been brought close to the 
houses? 

Mr Collendavelloo: From the letter of 06 January 2016, which I may table in order 
that there is no ambiguity in my answer, it does appear that CEB made that request for the 
relocation of HFO tank farm.  I can equally table it, so that you have all the information. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister himself, in a reply - I think a PNQ or 
PQ - confirmed that the site was inappropriate for the installation of a combined-cycle power 
station, as he has just stated. Could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister evaluate, give the country 
some light to the financial and technical prejudice which the CEB would have incurred had 
the  issue  not  been  raised  here  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  following  the 
controversial letter sent by the General Manager of CEB on 08 October 2015? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That encourages me to delve into a debate of opinion.  I would 

rather have a substantive question on this, so that I can answer. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is the distance from 

the place where these tanks will be stored and the next habitation? 

Mr Collendavelloo: More than 60 metres. 

Mr  Mahomed:  To  me,  the  construction  of  tank  farms  on  this  marshy  plot  of  land 
raises two issues.  The first one is safety because we are talking about highly flammable gas, 
and also the cost of construction because the land is as it is. Does the report stipulate whether 
it is safe to construct there, and what kind of cost is the CEB going to incur in constructing 
there? Is it normal cost, high cost, very high cost? 

Mr Collendavelloo: On safety, the hon. Member will note all the mitigation measures 
which  are  recommended  by  Mott  MacDonald.    Of  course,  safety  must  be  the  prime 
consideration.  Secondly, with regard to the cost, I don’t have the cost in mind. If the hon. 
Member asks a question, I will come with detailed answer, but I know it was as a result of a 
tender exercise that this was finally agreed. 

Mr Bérenger: The CEB makes a mess of a lot of things, and they granted the tender 
for building of the plant before they had obtained the green light and so on. Then, they had to 
pay damages to the contractor. Now that the tanks have been moved, can I know - if the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  has  the  information  -  whether  there  are  additional  damages  that  have 
been paid or are going to be paid to the contractor? 

 

Mr Collendavelloo: I shall enquire. 

48 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether all permits have 

been obtained prior to the start of the work at that site, especially for… 

Mr Collendavelloo: The works have not started. 

Mr Baloomoody: No. Clearing of site has started. Clearing of that site has started. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, cleaning of site has started. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, can I know whether all the permits have been obtained from the 

appropriate authorities? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Please, come with a question based on this, and I will answer. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, last supplementary! 

Mr Bhagwan: When we go back to the project itself  - it is clear, because this has 
been discussed in the National Assembly through PQs and PNQs - would not the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister agree that, had it not been for some whistle-blowers, genuine Mauritians, the 
country would have lost millions of rupees due to the mistakes and mismanagement at the 
level of the Central Electricity Board? 

Mr Collendavelloo: It is a question of opinion, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

BATS - CULLING 

(No.  B/469)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  bats,  he  will 
state - 

(a) 

the number thereof culled since October 2015 to date, indicating the -  

(i) 

(ii) 

regions where the culling exercises have been carried out;  

culling method resorted to, and  

(iii) 

amount of munitions used;  

(b) 

(c) 

if any report has been prepared on the impact thereof on fruits production, and  

if  any  consultation  is  ongoing  with  the  relevant  local  and  international 
organisations concerned therewith. 

49 

 
Mr  Seeruttun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  bat  species  which  exists  in  Mauritius, 
namely the Pteropus niger species, is a protected species and lives exclusively on fruits.  This 
species  is  endemic  to  Mauritius  and  was  in  the  early  1970s  classified  as  “critically 
endangered”.    However,  the  population  has  increased  considerably  over  the  years  and, 
according to the last survey carried out in November 2013, it was estimated at around 90,000. 
The  bat  population  has  been  causing  significant  damages  to  fruit  plantations,  especially 
during the fruiting season in November/December. 

Last  year,  my  Ministry  received  numerous  complaints  from  growers  regarding  the 
damages  caused  by  fruit  bats  in  both  commercial  orchards  and  in  backyards,  affecting 
principally  mango  and  litchi  productions.  According  to  some  reports,  even  bananas  have 
started to be eaten by bats. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  one  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Ministry  to  control 
damages caused to fruits by bats was the introduction of a bird net scheme, which subsidises 
the cost of net at the rate of 75%.  However, despite this measure, the damages caused by bats 
have continued to increase.  In 2014, the damages caused to litchi production increased to 
50% as compared to 22% in 2010. 

In view of the representations made by fruit growers last year and the risks of losses 
in fruit production, which could have affected both the local and export markets, my Ministry 
decided to carry out a controlled culling of bats during the last fruiting season. Consultations 
were held with all stakeholders and the collaboration of the Police authorities was sought for 
the culling exercise, and the culling operation was carried out during the period 06 November 
to 04 December 2015. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I have been advised as 

follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  number  of  bats  culled  during  the  operation,  as  per  the  report  of  the 
Commissioner of Police, was 30,938; 

the  culling  of  bats  was  carried  out  in  various  regions  throughout  the  island 
where bats exist, and these regions are mainly forest areas on both State and 
private  lands.  The  island  was  split  into  four  regions:  the  northern,  southern, 
western and central eastern regions, and the culling exercise was carried out 
on different sites in those regions, and 

 
(iii) 

50 

the  Special  Mobile  Force  resorted  to  culling  by  shooting  with  rifles  of  0.22 
calibre, and 26,225 cartridges bore 12 mm were used. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regard part (b) of the question, an assessment carried out 
by  the  Food  and  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Institute  (FAREI)  indicated  that  an 
average of 10% decrease in fruit loss has been recorded across the island. 

Regarding part (c) of the question, all stakeholders were consulted prior to the culling 
exercise, and subsequently the National Parks and Conservation Service of my Ministry has 
started, in collaboration with the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation, a survey of the roosting sites 
of bats for an eventual island wide survey of the bats population. 

I also had the opportunity to meet Mr Luther Bois Anukur, Regional Director of the 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), in March this year, and a number 
of priority areas were discussed, including the IUCN support to the development of a national 
strategy  to  address  the  bat/human  conflict  and  to  the  ecological  restoration  of  degraded 
habitats. 

The IUCN has delegated a bat specialist, namely Dr. (Mrs) Tammy Mildenstein, who 
is a member of the IUCN Species Survival Commission Bat Specialist Group and a specialist 
in flying fox monitoring techniques, to assist the NPCS in the bat survey.  Dr. Mildenstein 
was  in  Mauritius  from  18  to  23  May  2016,  and  I  met  her  yesterday  itself  to  discuss  her 
preliminary  findings.  She  has,  in  fact,  congratulated  Mauritius  for  our  sustainable 
management of our bat population and the efforts made by the Government to manage the 
loss  of  fruit  production  through  the  subsidy  scheme.  She  acknowledged  also  that  the  bat 
population  in  Mauritius  is  quite  high  as  compared  to  other  small  islands  which  are  facing 
similar bat/human conflict problems.  She will submit her report and the Ministry will decide 
on the way forward for the bat survey and the necessary measures to be taken going forward. 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  a  Contracting  Party  to  the  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity, it is our duty and obligation to preserve our endemic species and I can assure the 
House that all efforts will be made by my Ministry to continue to protect and manage the bat 
species population and ensure its survival. 

Mr Bérenger:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can I know -  since we have ratified the given 
Convention  and  the  hon.  Minister  himself  has  reminded  us  that  bats  are  our  model,  is  a 
protected species - before culling took place, do we have under the Convention, and did we 
obtain the green light for culling of so many bats and so on?  

 

51 

Mr Seeruttun:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know that this problem has been with 
us for some time now and we know the trouble faced by  all the fruit  growers.  When  we 
decided  to  go  ahead  with  this  programme  of  culling  the  bat  population,  we  did  inform  all 
those contracting parties with whom we have signed some obligations.  Obviously, their role 
is  to  protect  and  to  ensure  that  all  endangered  species  are  well  protected,  but  we  did  also 
inform them that from our survey that we carried out, the bat population has gone to such a 
level that today it has become nearly a pest.  So, we need to control it, but our aim was not to 
go and put in danger the whole population.  We did also inform them that we are going to do 
it within a given period of time and we are going to go to a level of 20% of the population 
that we had identified at this very moment. 

Mr Bérenger:  My question is:  “we did also inform them of this (…)”, ‘them’ being 
whom?  Is there an institution, an organisation which under the Convention we have to report 
to, get the green light of? 

Mr Seeruttun:  We informed the International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN) to whom we are contracting party and also the local representative here which is the 
Mauritius Wildlife Foundation. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  The hon. Minister has informed us that 30,000 bats have been culled.  
Can he inform the House that in the process of the culling with the Special Mobile Force, 
how these bats which were hit were disposed of?  Just shooting and leave them there?  Was 
there any protocol how to dispose of these bats? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Seeruttun:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  we  undertook  that  exercise,  we 
mobilised a number of personnel from my Ministry, especially the personnel of the National 
Parks  and  Conservation  Service  to  assist  the  SMF.    All  the  bats  that  were  culled  were 
collected and then incinerated at the level of my Ministry. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  The argument of the Wildlife is that 
the culling period  coincides with the lactating and calving period of the bats.  So, can we 
know from the hon. Minister whether he will postpone the culling or move it forward and he 
will take on-board the issues of the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation? 

 

52 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we haven’t decided yet whether we are going 
to  conduct  the  same  exercise  this  year.    As  at  to  date,  we  are  proposing  to  carry  out  the 
survey, to do a count and then look at the outcome of that survey and then decide what to do.  
So far, we haven’t yet decided whether we are going to carry out the same exercise that we 
did last year. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed, last supplementary! 

Mr  Mahomed:    The  hon.  Minister  has  made  mention  of  complaints  received  from 
mango,  litchi  and  banana  planters,  but  another  problem  that  bats  cause  is  havoc  on  our 
electricity distribution network.  Has the Ministry obtained any formal complaint or request 
from the Central Electricity Board with regard to that problem? 

Mr Serruttun:  No, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, next question, please! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    One  last  question,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  on  this  very  important 

issue! I have only asked one supplementary.   

The Deputy Speaker:  One last question! 

Mr Bhagwan:  We are five months from the fruits’ season like mangoes, litchis. From 
past experience, what does the hon. Minister intend to do to reassure the fruit growers six 
months before December? Especially, we have the issue of nets.  There is a real problem.  We 
all know there is a problem of distribution, purchase and installation.  So, what does the hon. 
Minister has to say to the fruit growers as we are at six months of the season of litchis and 
mangoes especially as they have lost a lot of money? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the net scheme is still on.  In the next Budget 
we  are  going  to  provide  fund  for  that  scheme.    So,  we  are  going  to  go  ahead  with  the 
distribution of nets to those who are willing to buy them at the subsidised price. We have also 
embarked  in  a  programme  to  plant  fruit  trees  in  the  bats’  habitats  so  that  instead  of  them 
moving  away  from  their  habitats  to  come  and  look  for  food  in  residential  areas.  We  have 
already  embarked  into  that  programme.  We  are  also  encouraging  fruit  growers,  instead  of 
planting fruits that would grow tall, to go for dwarf varieties.  That would be an easier way to 
protect the plants.   

(Interruptions) 

 

53 

It is a real problem, like I said.  It has been there for a long time. It is only now that we are 
taking the problem with both hands. We have, at least, to tackle it the way it has to.  We have 
tried last year with the culling exercise.  Hopefully, we will see some positive results this year 
and we will continue to monitor it so that, in the future, we can do away with the problem of 
bats destroying our fruits production. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, next question! 

HOSPITALS & CARDIAC CENTRE - CARDIAC SURGEONS 

 (No.  B/470)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Cardiac Centre of 
Pamplemousses and the public hospitals, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

(i) 

(ii) 

(c) 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  number  of  Cardiac  Physicians  with  qualifications  and  expertise  in 
Paediatric Cardiac Intervention currently employed thereat;  

if the name of one Mr R. M. was removed from the list of patients awaiting 
angioplasty in April 2016 and, if so, indicate - 

the reasons therefor, and  

who took the said decision, and  

the  number  of  foreign  cardiac  surgeons  employed  on  contract  thereat, 
indicating in each case the – 

terms and conditions of employment thereof, and 

number of open cardiac interventions that they have carried out. 

(Withdrawn) 

STRAY DOGS  

(No.  B/471)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the stray dogs, 
he will – 

(a) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Society  for  Animal 
Welfare  (MSAW),  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  control 
thereof, and  

 
(b) 

54 

state  if  his  Ministry  is  in  presence  of  representations  with  regard  to  the 
proliferation thereof and, if so, indicate the actions taken in relation thereto, if 
any. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  that  the  dog  population  in 
Mauritius is around 300,000, out of which at least 80,000 are considered to be strays, that is, 
without an owner or a defined abode.  

The  Mauritius  Society  for  Animal  Welfare,  the  MSAW,  which  has  replaced  the 
Mauritius  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals  (MSPCA)  since  2013,  is 
responsible for the control of stray dogs and operates in strict compliance with the provisions 
of the Animal Welfare Act 2013 and the rules set out by the World Organisation for Animal 
Health. 

The main measure adopted over the years for the control of stray dogs was to catch and 
euthanise them. Stray dogs are sources of serious problems in the society and the MSAW is 
constantly  pressurized  from  different  quarters,  namely  hotels,  schools,  hospitals,  market 
places, District Councils and Municipalities, etc. to catch stray dogs. However, there has also 
been growing pressure from NGOs for the MSAW not to resort to the ‘Catch and Euthanise’ 
method. MSAW was thus in a disarray and had to restrict its activities.  

As from last year, MSAW has adopted a three-pronged approach to control stray dogs 

in Mauritius, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Mass Sterilisation of dogs; 

Catching and euthanasia of stray dogs in accordance with the Animal Welfare 
Act 2013, and 

(iii)  Registration  of  dogs  and  sensitisation  of  owners  on  ‘Responsible  Pet 

Ownership’. 

The mass sterilisation campaign, in fact, started in September 2015 and the public was 
invited to call with their dogs at the different veterinary clinics for the sterilization of their 
pets.  Accordingly, sterilisation campaigns were conducted in several regions, namely, Union 
Park,  Abercombie,  Calodyne,  Beau  Bassin,  Rose  Hill,  Camp  Levieux,  Bambous,  Flacq, 
Rivière du Rempart and Pamplemousses amongst others, and only yesterday the Municipal 
Council of Vacoas has also started a campaign. I am informed that some 2,065 dogs have 

 

55 

been sterilised as at to date. However, this figure is on the low side as the target is to sterilise 
at least 15% of the dog population. 

With regard to the ‘Catch and Euthanise’ method, some 2,258 dogs have been caught 
since January 2016 to date and 2,023 have been euthanised. It is proposed to accelerate this 
campaign and the targets are the public beaches, hotels, schools and hospitals. It is relevant to 
mention  that  the  MSAW  has  recruited  additional  staff  and  purchased  new  equipment  to 
render the dog catching activity more effective. 

In addition, sensitisation campaigns on ‘Responsible Pet Ownership’ will continue to 
be  held  in  primary  schools,  community  centres,  Citizens  Advice  Bureaux  and  other  social 
groups.    The  MSAW  has  recently  set  up  a  Communication  Unit  and  recruited  a  new 
Communication  Officer  to  give  a  boost  to  its  communication,  sensitisation  and  education 
campaigns through distribution of pamphlets, weekly talks on the radio to sensitise members 
of the public. Emphasis will also be laid on increased use of the social media to communicate 
with the public. The Quiz, Essay and Debates competitions on the theme of Stray Dogs and 
the Welfare of Animals in general which used to be organised by the MSAW in the past will 
be revived to promote responsible pet ownership. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (b) of the question, my Ministry and the 
MSAW normally receive complaints from the public and different institutions regarding the 
presence of stray dogs. These complaints are being attended to by the MSAW, on a priority 
basis, given its limited resources. It is also worth mentioning that the staff of MSAW operates 
in very difficult conditions and are at times demotivated as they are often harassed and even 
attacked by members of the public in the course of their duty. 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  hon.  Minister  gave  very  approximate  figures  for  the  dog 
population in general and for the stray dog population. Very approximate! I am sure he will 
agree with me that  what we want to know is: is the situation improving over the last five 
years? Are we progressing or is it going from bad to worse? 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I did mention the figure of 80,000 of stray 
dogs,  but  then,  again,  among  the  dogs  that  we  call  ‘stray  dogs’,  some  of  them  are  owned 
dogs, but they are left in the open, especially at night and some of them are ‘stray dogs’ are 
not owned. According to the figures obtained from the MSAW, about 80% of those 80,000 
that are supposed to be stray dogs are really strays. So, these are the figures that I have got, 
and like I said, we have embarked in a campaign to sterilise dogs in Mauritius. We are also 

 

56 

pushing  forward  to  control  those  strays  and  I  am  sure  we  will  get  the  results  in  the  near 
future. We have had to also train the personnel. You would agree with me that the MSPCA, 
ever  since  it  was  created,  and  up  to  now,  has  not  been  really  upgraded  in  terms  of 
infrastructure, in terms of training of personnel and all these have been taken care of now to 
address these problems. 

Mr Bérenger: Another statement! My question is: are we progressing? If we look at 
the situation  year after  year, my question was simple: are we progressing or  are  we  going 
backwards? 

Mr Seeruttun: Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it looks like we are going on the right 
direction to control the dog population. I have not got the figures to give whether the number 
that we used to have five years back has gone down or not, but what I can say is that we are 
faced with the problem now and we are doing our best in terms of addressing the problem. 

Mr Bérenger: In the same line, the number of dogs killed - stray dogs, I mean, which 
are caught and disposed of – how has that progressed? Do we have figures over the last five 
years; is that moving, in what direction? Is the hon. Minister aware that in the recent past, 
those animals were killed in the most unacceptable conditions? Has that changed, has that 
been modernised or are they still being butchered? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  again,  I  have  just  mentioned  that  we  are 
providing training to the personnel of the MSAW so that everything that is being done now, 
are being done in a very humane way so that there is no more ‘butchering of dogs’. So, all 
necessary measures are being taken to ensure that a humane approach is adopted. 

(Interruptions) 

No more butchering is being done now. Again, it is a problem that we have to face with and 
we are doing our level best to make sure that we reduce that problem of stray dogs. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, the question was: do you have the figures of the 

number of dogs captured? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  I  have  just  mentioned  that  since  January  to  date  we  have  captured 
some 2,258 dogs. But, again, if you ask me the number for the last five years, I have not got 
the  figures  with  me  at  the  moment,  but  I  can  look  for  it  and  table  it  on  the  Table  of  the 
National Assembly. 

57 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  stated  that  he  has  given  more  funds  to  the 
Mauritius  Society  for  Animal  Welfare.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  us  how  many  of  the 
vehicles are actually operational at the level of the Mauritius Society for Animal Welfare for 
this job? 

Mr Seeruttun: Unfortunately, I have not got the number of vehicles available at the 
MSAW,  but  I  know  that  they  are  planning  to  buy  one  and  they  have  also  been  offered  a 
vehicle from the Airport of Mauritius Ltd and they are in the process, therefore, of increasing 
their vehicle fleet. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed, last supplementary! 

Mr  Mahomed:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  about  15%  being  the  target  of 
sterilisation.  That  is  a  very  low  figure  if  I  go  by  the  latest  report  of  the  Humane  Society 
International which recommends that we go for a target of 65% to 70% of sterilisation rate if 
we  want  to  reduce  productive  capacity  below  replacement  level  and  ensure  population 
reduction over time. 

Mr Seeruttun: Well, I said 15% annually.  This is our annual target. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question! 

ECONOMIC & TRADE ADVISORS - POSTING 

(No. B/472) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Regional Integration whether, 
in regard to the Economic and Trade Advisors in  post since July 2005 to December 2014, he 
will give a list thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

posting thereof; 

duties and responsibilities thereof, and 

breakdown  of  salaries,  foreign  service  allowances  and/or  other  allowances 
drawn and fringe benefits to which they were entitled. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the information requested by the 

hon. Member is being tabled. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether a special friend of the former 
Prime Minister, Mr Laurent Obadia, who was involved in the transaction for the purchase of 

 

58 

airbuses by the former Government, is among the list of Trade Advisers posted in Paris and 
can we know what are the financial implications for the term he has been in office? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mr  Laurent  Obadia  worked  from  01  March  2006  to  15 

January 2015. His duties were – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

to  maintain  a  reliable  network  of  contacts  with  the  French  Economic  and 
Commercial Operators; 

to report activities on policies; 

to direct investment to Mauritius; 

to provide assistance and information to investors, and 

any other duties as assigned by the Head of mission. 

The  total  salary  he  received  for  that  period  was  Rs8,775,347.08  and  the  entertainment 
allowance he received for that same period was Rs18,011,468.58 and then he received finally 
a special gratuity of Rs1,194,000. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister state how come a Trade Advisor posted in Paris 
be co-opted on the Board meetings of Air Mauritius Ltd. in the past although he was not an 
official member of the Board? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  if  the  hon.  Member  said  it,  it  must  be  true.  I  don’t 

have the information with me. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether he is aware that Mr 

Laurent Obadia was involved in the Dufry/Frydu transaction? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  if  the  hon.  Member  has  the  information  it  must  be 

right because I don’t have this information with me. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister state whether any Economic and Trade Advisors 
have  been  nominated  since  December  2014  and,  if  so,  can  we  know  the  names,  countries 
where these persons have been posted and the terms and conditions of their employment? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: 2014, well, no one has been recruited since. There has been 

no recruitment. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Okay. Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

59 

AGALEGA ISLAND – JETTY & AIRSTRIP  

(No. B/473) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the Agalega Island, he will state – 

(a)  

if  any  port  development  project  is  being  envisaged  to  prevent  the  risks 
associated with the disembarkation of goods and of passengers thereat, and  

(b)   where matters stand as to the implementation of the Airstrip Project thereat. 

Mr Koonjoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regards part (a) of the question, I wish to 
inform the House that a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Government 
of Mauritius and the Government of India, by virtue of which the Government of India would 
assist the Government of Mauritius through a financial grant of USD 18 million to, inter alia, 
undertake the construction of a new jetty for berthing of ships to ensure safe embarkation and 
disembarkation of goods and passengers. Development of port is not envisaged at this stage. 

As regards the Airstrip Project, the status is as follows –  

(i) 

(ii) 

in January 2016, the Government of India has deputed a team of three experts 
to be part of the Implementation Agency as per the MoU; 
the team visited Agalega Island soon after they arrived and, in the light of 
consultations with various stakeholders, has advised that the investigations be 
carried out and a detailed project report be prepared.  

The  draft  terms  of  reference  have  already  been  prepared.  The  procedure  for  the 
appointment of a consultant is under way and is due to start in the coming weeks. The project 
is expected to be completed by December 2018.  

My  Ministry,  in  collaboration  with  the  Outer  Islands  Development  Corporation 
(OIDC),  is  closely  monitoring  each  phase  to  ensure  timely  and  successful  project 
implementation. This project will drastically change the socioeconomic landscape of Agalega 
island,  enhancing  connectivity  between  mainland  Mauritius  and  Agalega  and  thus  offering 
new opportunities for a better quality of life to the inhabitants of the island. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  am  sure  the  Minister  is  aware  that,  for  more  than  10  years,  the 
Government of India has stood ready to help us. For more than 10 years we know that this 

 

60 

airstrip cannot be used normally, only in emergencies. At least, we are being told that it is 
expected that works will finish in December 2018, but can’t things be activated? 

Mr Koonjoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know that and I am sure that the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition knows better than anybody  else that things are not easy there in 
Agalega. First of all, we don’t have the construction material in Mauritius, we have to take 
them there. All these things we have taken into consideration and we are doing our best. It is 
almost one year that we are in power and… 

Okay! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Let the hon. Minister answer! 

Mr Koonjoo: 15 months, is the hon. Member happy? 

(Interruptions) 

We are doing our utmost best, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and be assured that this Government 
will not leave any stone unturned to fulfil our mission. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Are  you  aware  hon.  Minister  that  between  year  2000  and  2005  and 
precisely  before  year  2003  there  had  been  two  consultancies  done  with  regard  to  port 
development  and  airstrip  of  Agalega  and,  as  just  mentioned,  there  will  be  no  port 
development?  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  got  a  time  frame  with 
regard to the jetty project? When this will start because the condition of disembarkation is 
very dangerous for those people going to Agalega? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  The  jetty  project  is  together  with  the  airstrip  project.  So,  we  are 
working on both of them and, as I told the House, it will take by the end of 2018 to complete 
both projects, but, side by side, we are doing other jobs also. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: This project had been announced in the last Budget and an amount 
of more than Rs300 m. had been budgeted. Now we just heard from the hon. Minister that a 
MoU has been signed with the Government of India for 18 million USD. Can I ask the hon. 
Minister does this USD18 million include the jetty and the airstrip or is it only for the jetty, 

 

61 

and also now we just heard that the project will be terminated by end of 2018, that is, in two 
and a half years and the hon. Minister said that things are difficult there but, at least, tenders 
should be launched so that things are activated quickly. 

The Deputy Speaker: Don’t state your opinion! 

Mr Koonjoo: It is good for the information of the House that I give the following 
information. I said that we are monitoring the project. There is a Joint Project Management 
Commission  with  India  and  Mauritius  together.  This  Commission  is  being  monitored  by 
myself  and  there  is  another  Implementation  Agency  which  is  a  Committee  chaired  by  the 
Permanent  Secretary  of  my  Ministry.  We  are  following  everything  to  make  things  happen 
quickly but, my good friend will understand that, at times, we have got problem of the rough 
seas and he should know that, at times, when our ship goes there it has to wait for weeks or 
days before embarking  and disembarking cargo. This is one thing. We are doing our best. 
Alright! I must recall the hon. Member that the grant that India has given is meant for the 
jetty as well as for the airstrip.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  hon.  Minister  keeps  on 
telling us, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, about the bad weather there, about the rough seas, about 
the difficulty in accessing the island. That is the whole point. That is the whole point of the 
need for the construction of the jetty and the airport. Since he has stated that there is a Joint 
Working  Committee,  that  he  is  monitoring  all  of  this,  could  he,  therefore,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, tell us, if many consultant has been appointed, has the design been approved, 
and if so, by whom and when is the work about to start? Simple question: when will it start? 

Mr Koonjoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I said we are following all procedures. We are 
waiting for the DPR report to be out and for the information of the House, we are waiting for 
one consultant to come and help the three members already in Mauritius. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, a last supplementary! 

Mr Jhugroo: With the upgrading of the jetty, will the hon. Minister confirm whether 
there  has  been  any  provision  made  with  regard  to  disembarkation  of  goods  in  containers 
there? 

62 

 
Mr Koonjoo: I just said that at times it is difficult to embark and disembark cargo. 
Unfortunately, at times we have to wait and I am sure the hon. Member knows that because 
he has been in Agalega, he has been Manager there, he should know the problem in Agalega. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, you have already answered this in the previous 

supplementary questions. I think you have made your point.  

Hon. Fowdar! 

(Interruptions) 

CAREER GUIDANCE SERVICE & HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 

COUNCIL 

(No.  B/474)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the students, she will state if career guidance is being provided 
thereto by her Ministry, indicating if a service has been set up therefor and, if so, indicate the 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

role played by the Human Resource Development Council thereat, if any, and  

if the said service will fully apprise the students of the secondary and tertiary 
levels  of  future  jobs  prospects  and  guide  them  in  their  choice  of  fields  of 
studies. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish, at the outset, to inform 
the  House  that  the  portfolio  of  Career  Guidance  Service,  whose  mission  is  to  provide 
guidance and counselling to students and the public at large, has just been transferred back to 
my Ministry on 16 May 2016. I must, however, highlight that the Career Guidance Service 
also fell under the purview of my Ministry earlier, that is, from 1993 till 22 June 2015, date 
on  which  it  was  shifted  to  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 
Training for a period of nearly one year.  

Now that the portfolio of Career Guidance Service is again with my Ministry, a new 
orientation  is  being  defined.  The  Career  Guidance  Service  will  be  restructured  in  order  to 
provide  students’  continuous  support  and  advice  with  regard  not  only  to  their  choice  of 
subjects  at  school  level  but  also,  most  importantly,  to  their  future  career  and  personal 
development. 

63 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the 
House  that  the  Human  Resource  Development  Council  has  been  asked  to  conduct  skill 
studies in 10 different sectors of the economy in line with the Government Vision 2030. The 
Council will have to provide useful information on skill requirements which will be widely 
disseminated  by  the  Career  Guidance  Services  to  education  and  training  providers  and  to 
secondary and tertiary education students. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to highlight that the HRDC has launched the Career 
Development Stairway website for the ICT/BPO sector and this provides information on job 
profiles and career progression potentials for students at schools, universities, jobseekers as 
well as employers. The HRDC will also be called upon to support the Career Cube Project 
and work in collaboration with my Ministry and the Career Guidance Service with a view to 
triggering  the  thinking  process  of  students  about  career  management  by  exposing  them  to 
career  talks  and  themes  such  as  managing  careers,  developing  employability  skills, 
interviewing skills, etc. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  further 
inform the House that the Career Guidance Service will be delivering talks on the choice of 
subjects to students of Form III, Form V and Upper VI in order to empower them to make 
timely and informed choices regarding further studies, training for lifelong employability and 
also personal fulfilment.  

With  a  view  to  keeping  abreast  with  the  latest  developments  in  the  educational 
landscape  locally  and  internationally,  career  and  educational  fairs  will  be  organised  for 
students  to  have  the  opportunity  to  gather  information  related  to  postsecondary  studies  as 
well  as  vocational  and  technical  studies.  Information  on  employment  opportunities  and 
sectors that will be recruiting will be made available to them. 

The Career Guidance Service will work in partnership with the HRDC to create the 
skills interface platforms between the universities and industry in order to gauge the skills 
gap and enhance employability. This will help students in their choice of the field of study 
and career. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar: Thank  you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I do understand that  the subject 
matter Career Guidance has just been transferred to the Ministry of Education. It should have 
been with the Ministry  of Education right at the beginning.  In the meantime, can the hon. 

 

64 

Minister - in view of the present labour mismatch - consider whether she would advise the 
tertiary level to review the curriculum so that the new curriculum meets the demand in the 
labour market in the future? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Tertiary  Education 
Commission  also  produces  a  list  of  Indicative  Priority  Fields  of  Study  that,  as  its  name 
suggests,  provides  a  list  of  areas  of  focus  for  undergraduate  and  postgraduate  education. 
However, at the University of Mauritius, we also have a committee which has been set up 
where consultations are held with the industry and the private sector in the designing of the 
curriculum and courses. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  May  we  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister how many staff there are in this Career Guidance Department at her Ministry and 
how regularly do they carry out these school courses? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Career Guidance Services at 
the Ministry is manned by seven employees. However, we need to review it. I have just said, 
we are restructuring the Unit so as to make it more adequate for the provision of the service. 
As  far  as  the  education  fairs  talks  are  concerned,  obviously,  we  are  preparing  to  have  it 
regularly at schools. We also often send our officers to the different schools on request.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  One  of  the  main  criticisms  of  the  Auditors  in  the  Performance 

Audit Report of 2015, they said – 

“The problem is of employment and employability of jobseekers (...) and there is an 
absence of a holistic approach”.  

We have so many institutions, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Employment, the 
ITC  and  the  Human  Resources  Development  Council  and  all  these  are  working 
independently. I have just heard the hon. Minister mentioned several institutions as well. So, 
is  Government  prepared  to  have  a  holistic  approach  as  there  is  only  one  Unit  which  can 
advise, especially youngsters who want to go for further studies to get information? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  my  answer  I  have  just 
mentioned that there is a collaboration that has been established between my Ministry, the 

 

65 

HRDC and the institutions providing training so that, in a consulted manner, we may decide 
on the way forward. 

The  Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: The Career Development Stairway which provides online information 
on job opportunities etc, I believe is restricted to the ICT/BPO sector only. Now, does the 
hon. Minister propose to extend it to other sectors? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Certainly,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  We  have  just 
mentioned that the HRDC has come up with a career step up and this will be applied to other 
sectors as well. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Fowdar, a last supplementary! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  she  is 
disadvising  those  who  are  going  to  study  for  medicine  these  days  because  we  have  got  a 
surplus of doctors actually on the market? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are not doing that. In fact, 

we are just ensuring that the quality of education dispensed is raised. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Fowdar, next question! 

NATIONAL ICT/BPO CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK 

(No.  B/475)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Business Process Outsourcing Sector, he will state if his Ministry has carried out a training 
need  analysis  in  relation  thereto  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  his  Ministry  will  organise  and  fund 
these training programmes with a view to boost up the sector. 

Mr Sinatambou: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with a view to boosting up the ICT/BPO 
sector, my Ministry held a number of consultations with different stakeholders as far back as 
during the month of April and May 2015 to identify the competencies and skills required for 
the  sector.  I  am  informed  that  dedicated  meetings  were  held  with  employers,  Industry 
Associations, the National Computer Board, the University of Mauritius and the University of 
Technology Mauritius.  

As an outcome of these consultations, my Ministry has come up with a draft National 
ICT/BPO  Capacity  Building  Framework  document  which  provides  a  roadmap  for  moving 

 

66 

towards  the  second  wave  of  technology,  communication  and  innovation  development  by 
2020.  

 

The broad goals and objectives of the framework document are  - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to address the mismatch between supply and demand of qualified manpower 
for the ICT, call centre and BPO sector;  
to increase the employability of jobseekers and supply the ICT/BPO industry 
with a pool of qualified manpower, and  
to create the required Human Resource Talent pool to sustain the second wave 
of ICT development.  

As  part  of  the  process  involved  in  the  elaboration  of  this  draft  National  Capacity 
Building Framework document, a survey on training needs was carried out during the month 
of October 2015 among 200 ICT/BPO companies employing at least 10 employees. A second 
survey on training needs was carried out during the month of March 2016 among another 100 
ICT/BPO  companies.  The  findings  of  both  surveys  will  be  used  in  finalising  the  draft 
National Capacity Building Framework document and eventually to mount relevant training 
programmes  in  the  required  fields  with  a  view  to  producing  a  significant  pool  of  talented 
manpower and addressing the issue of skills mismatch.  

As  regards  the  question  whether  my  Ministry  will  organise  and  fund  the  training 
programmes, this is going to be a joint exercise between the public and private sectors with 
part funding from both sides. 

Mr  Fowdar:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  have  been 
consultations between the private sector and the public sector to see when and how they can 
fund these training programmes? 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes.  In fact, there is already in existence an endeavour which is 
called the ICT Skills Development Programme which is funded jointly by the public and the 
private  sector.  So,  consultations  had  already  happened  before  this  current  exercise  and 
funding is already done  currently for existing training, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on a joint 
basis.  This  time,  with  the  new  capacity  building  framework,  the  same  type  of  approach  is 
being recommended, but we first want to finalise the draft capacity building framework. 

Mr  Fowdar:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  when  was  the  last  training  needs 

analysis carried out for the ICT sector? 

 

67 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, to that question, the last one would be the one which has been 
carried out here because, as I said, there have been two surveys, two training needs surveys 
whereby, in October 2015, 200  ICT/BPO companies were  actually surveyed as part of the 
training needs analysis. A second survey was carried out, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in March 
2016,  this  time  among  an  additional  100  ICT/BPO  companies.  Maybe,  I  should  say  that 
things  are  delaying  a  little  bit  because  the  response  has  not  been  up  to  the  standard  we 
expected. From the 200 companies which were surveyed in October 2015, we got only 22 
companies which responded and from the additional 100 companies which were surveyed in 
March 2016, only 33 have responded. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In the Budget it was announced that 
the Reduit Campus would be used to offer courses in ICT and other ICT related fields and 
before that we were told that we are going to have an ICT Academy, and from the answer of 
the  hon.  Minister  I  don’t  hear  anything  about  these  projects.  So,  are  these  projects  still 
ongoing? Are we still going to have an ICT Academy and the campus at Reduit to provide 
training to ICT related fields? 

Mr Sinatambou:  For the campus at Reduit, I am not the substantive Minister, but I 
can answer for the ICT Academy where we are opting much more for a professional type of 
education. For example, we have received the approval of Cabinet to have an MOU signed 
with  the  IBM  Middle  East  and  Africa  University  which  is  about  bringing  technology 
knowledge to students. We have an agreement, in principle, with Oracle to provide, again, 
professional technical training. So, the  ICT Academy will be much more oriented towards 
technical  hard-core  professional  expertise,  but  for  the  Reduit  site,  I  believe  a  substantive 
question, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, should be put to the substantive Minister. 

Mr  Fowdar:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  besides  the 

training, does he envisage to help the BPO sector by organising a roadshow for them? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I certainly would like to do that. However, we need to have a 
more  systematic  and  holistic  approach.  Yes,  the  Ministry  is  very  much  inclined  to  help  in 
doing that. However, it has to be done in conjunction with the Board of Investment and with 
all those organisations which are part and parcel of the system. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Fowdar! 

 

 

68 

SME - DBM & BPML BUILDINGS - VACANT SPACE 

(No. B/476) Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) asked 
the Minister of Business, Enterprise  and Cooperatives whether, in regard to the Small and 
Medium Enterprise projects, he will state if his Ministry will put at the disposal of potential 
investors the former DBM building and other vacant Government buildings. 

Mr Bholah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish, in the first instance, to inform the hon. 
Member that the decision to put any vacant DBM or Government building at the disposal of 
potential investors does not rest with my Ministry.  

However, I am informed that a Committee, which has been set up at the Ministry of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  which  comprises  of  representatives  from  DBM, 
BPML,  SLDC,  SMEDA  and  my  Ministry,  is  considering  the  option  of  making  available 
suitable  vacant  space  in  the  DBM  and  BPML  buildings  to  the  small  and  medium 
entrepreneurs.  

DBM and BPML have been requested to identify the vacant space available in their 
respective industrial buildings and the extent that could be converted into SME units for use 
by the small and medium entrepreneurs, and also to indicate whether the identified vacant 
space would require any structural modifications or renovation works, and the costs thereof.  

Once those information are available, the Committee will consider whether it would 

be cost-effective to use the identified vacant space. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister 

whether this information is being passed on to potential SME investors? 

Mr Bholah: No. We will wait for the final report to be available so that exact and 

accurate information be given to the SMEs. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I understand we are not talking about SMEDA 
moving  there,  we  are  talking  about  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  moving  to  the  vacant 
space. So, may I know from the hon. Minister what will be the criteria used to allocate these 
spaces to the SME and what would be the rental which is going to be charged to these SMEs? 

Mr Bholah: Well, as I said, neither my Ministry nor SMEDA owns any building. It 

will be up to the owners of the building, either BPML or DBM, to fix the rental. 

 

69 

Mr  Barbier:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  do  not  know  whether  the  hon.  Minister  is 
aware of the DBM buildings which are in the industrial zone.  Actually there is a lot of space 
which is free but, unfortunately, the price is up to market value. Will the hon. Minister see to 
it that these buildings be put at the disposal of small enterprises at a reasonable rate so that 
they can take the opportunity of using these buildings? 

Mr Bholah: Yes, the hon. Minister is right. According to information provided to me, 

there exists at this moment… 

Hon. Member, I am sorry! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please continue! 

Mr Bholah: The hon. Member is right. Presently, there exists some 200,000 ft.² of 
vacant space only at DBM, but structural modifications need to be brought around and once 
these are completed then, obviously, DBM will ask for SMEs, for small businesses, to come 
in and to occupy this space. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Fowdar, last supplementary! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether, 
when allocating these buildings to the new entrepreneurs, he will consider giving them some 
sort of rent-free for certain years, and also tax-free in their business venture for some time? 

Mr  Bholah:  Well,  we  will  give  all  sorts  of  incentives,  but  I  can’t,  at  this  moment, 
promise whatever incentives we can give to them.  But I can say that, regarding the three sites 
that we have, the SME Parks that we have, for the first three years of occupation, the Ministry 
of Finance and Economic Development provides a rebate to the extent of 50% on the rent. 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH & SPORTS – COACHES – EMPLOYMENT 

(No. B/477) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Coaches/Adviser Coaches employed 
by  his  Ministry,  he  will  state  if  there  have  been  changes  in  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
employment thereof and, if so, indicate the reasons therefor. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  the 
Coaches are employed on the permanent and pensionable establishment of my Ministry, and 

 

70 

the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  employment  are  as  per  the  recommendations  of  the  Pay 
Research Bureau. 

As regards Adviser/Coaches, I would like to refer the hon. Member to the reply I made 
to PQ B/762 at our sitting of 03 November 2015, wherein I informed, among others, that the 
services of all Adviser/Coaches have been retained on a month-to-month basis.  In fact, when 
I assumed Office as Minister, the contract of three Adviser/Coaches had already expired since 
August 2014, 18 October 2014 and 08 November 2014, and their services were retained on a 
month-to-month  basis.    As  regards  to  the  remaining  15  Adviser/Coaches  whose  contracts 
expired on 31 December 2014, the same principle was applied as the three Adviser/Coaches 
before. 

On  the  basis  of  performance  reports  submitted  by  their  respective  immediate 
supervisors, the contract of employment of 12 of them has been renewed for a further period 
of one year. 

Insofar  as  the  alignment  of  their  salaries  in  the  wake  of  the  PRB  Report  2016  is 
concerned,  the  matter  has  already  been  taken  up  with  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and 
Administrative Reforms and a reply is being awaited. 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, le ministre vient de nous dire qu’il y a un certain nombre 
de  Coaches  et  d’Adviser/Coaches  dont  les  contrats  ont  été  renouvelés  sur  une  base  d’une 
année. Peut-on savoir du ministre à partir de quelle date ces contrats ont été renouvelés, s’il 
vous plaît ? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  As from 01 January 2016. 

Mr Quirin: En ce qui concerne les autres, peut-on savoir combien de temps cela va 

prendre pour qu’ils puissent bénéficier d’un même type de contrat ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, there are only three remaining, and the process is under 

way for their contracts to be renewed as well. 

SPORTS COMPETITIONS – GOVT. OWNED INFRASTRUCTURES - FEE 

(No. B/478) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the competitions organised by sports 
federations in the premises of Government owned infrastructures, he will, for the benefit of 
the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council,  information  as  to  the  conditions, 
including the financial implications, if any, imposed by the Council therefor. 

 

71 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Sports 
Council that National Sports Federations are required to pay a fee whenever they organise 
competitions in the premises of Government-owned infrastructures.  The fees applicable have 
been calculated just to cover the expenses to be incurred for payment of overtime to handy 
workers and also to meet cost of utilities. 

A  higher  rate  is  applicable  during  weekends  and  public  holidays  and  also  where 

lighting facilities are provided. 

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, I am tabling a paper giving details of rates applicable for the 
different  categories  of  infrastructures  as  well  as  those  applicable  during  weekdays  and 
weekends together with the standard conditions for renting of the infrastructures. 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, peut-on savoir de l’honorable ministre à partir de quelle 
date  cette  nouvelle  politique  de  faire  payer  les  fédérations  pour  l’utilisation  des 
infrastructures a été appliquée, s’il vous plaît? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I am informed that it has been like that for some time. Actually, for 
training purposes, the infrastructures are made available free of charge.  However, in case of 
training conducted after 18 00 hours and during weekends, a nominal fee is charged to meet  
the cost of overtime and utilities. 

As  far  as  students  are  concerned,  training  is  free  of  charge.    However,  educational 
institutions have to pay an appropriate fee.  But I don’t have the exact date from when it was 
applicable. I can look into it and table it in the Assembly. 

Mr  Quirin:  M.  le  président,  bon  nombre  de  fédérations  éprouvent  déjà  de  grosses 
difficultés  à  faire  fonctionner  leurs  fédérations,  et  cette  fois-ci  on  leur  demande  de  venir 
payer des sommes  énormes. J’ai, en ma possession, copie d’un courrier électronique de la 
fédération de badminton, où, pour l’utilisation du gymnase de badminton pour une semaine 
on  leur  réclame  à  peu  près  R  40,500  -  en  gros.  C’est  énorme !  Les  fédérations  éprouvent 
d’énormes  difficultés.  Quand  elles  sollicitent  le  ministère,  le  ministère  n’a  pas  de  budget. 
Déjà,  pour  organiser  leurs  compétitions,  cela  leur  coûtent  énormément.  Est-ce  que 
l’honorable ministre ne considère pas qu’il faut revoir cette décision ?  Je ne comprends pas 
cette nouvelle politique. C’est pour cela que j’ai demandé  à l’honorable ministre la date  à 
laquelle cette nouvelle politique a été appliquée. Est-ce que c’est récent ? Est-ce que c’est la 
politique du gouvernement ‘Lepep’ de faire payer les fédérations ? 

 

72 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we are the one giving money to the federations. I think it 

is in our policy to assist them. 

(Interruptions) 

It is the Mauritius Sports Council, which is a parastatal body.  Actually, pour améliorer les 
structures, pour pouvoir vraiment maintenir les structures, we need a minimum amount of 
money, especially to pay the handy workers overtime and also to pay for electricity.  I think 
this is the minimum cost being charged by the Mauritius Sports Council, so that they can still 
run the gymnasium.  I prefer to have the gymnasium opened rather to have it closed. 

Mr Ameer Meea: In his reply, the hon. Minister stated that for students, the facilities 
are free, but for educational institutions, they have to pay a fee.  Doesn’t the hon. Minister 
think that this does not make sense at all? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, I said that this is a minimum fee, and this fee is charged 
by the federations.  The federations are the ones who are charging because they are the ones 
who are keeping the stadium.  So, they need a minimum fee to pay their workers.  It is a very 
small amount. 

The Deputy Speaker:  One last question, hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  M.  le  président,  peut-on  savoir  quelle  est  la  somme  qui  a  été  récoltée 
depuis  que  le  Mauritius  Sports  Council  applique  cette  nouvelle  formule  de  faire  payer  les 
fédérations  ?  L’honorable  ministre  n’est  pas  au  courant  de  la  date.  Mais  est-ce  qu’il  a  les 
chiffres par rapport à la somme, à ce jour, récoltée par le MSC? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Unfortunately, I don’t have this figure with me.  I will have to ask 

the Council. 

ST. FRANÇOIS XAVIER STADIUM – LIGHTING & BLEACHERS  

(No. B/479) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the St. François 
Xavier Stadium, he will state if consideration will be given for the covering of the bleachers 
and for the provision of lighting thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  the  hon.  Member  is  aware,  major 
upgrading works have been carried out at St François Xavier Stadium during the first phase 
of a project “Extension of St. François Xavier Stadium”, undertaken in the years 2010-2013.  

 

73 

I understand that there was a second phase of the project wherein provision would have been 
made to cover the bleachers and also to provide lighting facilities thereat. 

The  Ministry  has  not  yet  embarked  on  the  second  phase  of  the  project  due  to 

budgetary constraints. 

Following  the  decision  to  entrust  the  organisation  of  the  10th  Edition  of  the  Indian 
Ocean Islands Games 2019 to Mauritius, my Ministry will have to undertake major upgrading 
and  uplifting  works  at  its  various  sports  infrastructures  which  may  be  retained  as  sites  for 
competition  or  for  training  purposes.    The  upgrading  works  will  be  carried  out  during  the 
period 2016-2019.  Funds to meet the cost to be incurred will have to be provided over four 
financial years, starting 2016-2017. 

In this context, St François Xavier Stadium will be one of the sites where upgrading 
works will have to be carried out, and these works will include the covering of the bleachers 
and provision of lighting amongst others. 

Once the approval in principle of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
is obtained regarding allocation of funds, the detailed scope of works and the calendar for the 
works to be undertaken would be worked out.  At this stage, I cannot indicate as to when the 
works would be undertaken. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  At  the  St.  François  Xavier  Stadium,  there  is  no  need  for  any 
upgrading  of  any  infrastructures  because  the  infrastructures  there  are  very  good.    There  is 
only need for lighting and to cover the bleachers, because the local inhabitants can’t make use 
to the maximum of the stadium as when the sun sets, they can’t use the stadium. They only 
use it for one and half or two hours per day.  So, can the hon. Minister treat this as urgent, so 
that this can be done quickly? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, with regard to the St. François Xavier Stadium, this is 
one of the projects that we wanted to put the bleachers because it attracts lots of spectators. 
But, unfortunately, when we decided to go onto that project, we found out that the synthetic 
turf - because this football ground is a synthetic one - needs to be replaced. So, it’s better than 
we do the synthetic turf first - actually we do the whole project together, the covering and the 
synthetic turf as well. So, it will be a major project because we will have the Indian Ocean 
Island Games there. 

 

 

74 

UNEMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/480)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the  Minister of  Labour,  Industrial Relations, Employment  and Training 
whether, in regard to the unemployed, he will state the present number thereof, indicating the 
– 

number thereof found in the age group of 16 to 28 years, and 
actions being taken to address the present unemployment issue. 

(a) 
(b) 
Mr Callichurn: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Employment Division of my Ministry is 

mandated to register and place job seekers in gainful employment. 

As at 31 March 2016, the total number of registered unemployed job seekers across 
all age groups stood at 24,576 comprising of 7,815 males and 16,761 females. The number of 
registered unemployed job seekers thereof aged between 16 to 28 stood at 14,060 comprising 
of 5,437 males and 8,623 females. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  list  is  quite  long.  So,  I  am  tabling  the 

information sought. 

Mr Mohamed: At some stage, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has been 
quoted widely as contesting the figures of unemployment rate delivered or the methodology 
proposed and practised by the Statistics Office of Mauritius. Could he inform the House what 
does he intend to do in order to correct any such anomalies that he has detected? Because this 
does remind me of a very, very long time back, when the hon. Vice-Prime Minister Soodhun 
was  also  Minister  of  Labour,  he  had  spoken  the  same  language  of  not  being  happy,  and 
saying that the Central Statistics Office were delivering figures that were not correct and that 
there were less unemployed. So, what does the hon. Minister intend to do in order to correct 
this problem, which he has found? 

Mr Callichurn: Let me explain first. The difference in figures produced by Statistics 
Mauritius and the Employment Service can be explained by the fact that Statistics Mauritius 
works on a sample size of about 5% of household in Mauritius and then extrapolates on the 
proportion of unemployed thereafter. Conversely, the Employment Service Register which is 
in  my  Ministry  registers  individual  job  seekers  as  opposed  to  sampling  the  population  job 
seekers. So, it is more reliable. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  have  got  two  more  questions;  this  is  one  of  them,  with  your 
permission, Sir! Is the hon. Minister aware that the ILO and sometime in 2014, had asked an 

 

75 

expert called Mr Kofi Agosu who is an LMIS Specialist from the ILO Office in Pretoria, to 
carry  out  un  état  des  lieux,  precisely  of  the  methodology  that  was  used  by  the  Central 
Statistics Office or the Statistics Mauritius Office, for collecting of data in order to come up 
to a figure of employment and had detected as far back as 2014, that there were some lacuna 
in the methods of the Statistics Office of Mauritius. Is the hon. Minister aware that there is 
such a report? And, if not, I will gladly share that with them. 

Mr  Callichurn:  I  am  not  aware  of  such  a  report.  I  will  be  very  glad  if  the  hon. 

Member could share the information with me. Thank you. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has the figures for the percentage 

of the unemployed youths who have studied up to tertiary level? 

Mr Callichurn: No, unfortunately, I don’t have the information. The hon. Member 

can come with a substantive question, I will be glad to answer. 

Mr Uteem: At the level of the Ministry, has any survey been carried out to ascertain 
the time which a person spends on the list from the date he is registered with the Ministry and 
the date that he gets an employment? On average how long does it take for him to get an 
employment, once he has registered with the Ministry? 

Mr Callichurn: Actually, the officers of my Ministry are working on a system so that 

we can capture those figures. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, last supplementary! 

Mr Mohamed: En passant, the report which I am giving to my good friend, the hon. 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training is there. What the hon. 
Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  is  saying  is  that, 
according to him, the figures provided by Statistics Mauritius are not in any way closer to the 
reality. Therefore, in his view, if he is saying that the exact number of unemployed should be 
lower than what Statistics Mauritius says, would he, therefore, not agree on the same basis 
that the level of unemployment of 7.8 % at the time when the previous Government was in 
power, must have been lower? 

Mr Callichurn: Without any doubt, it must have been. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, next question! 

 

 

76 

SAUDI ARABIA – DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS 

(No.  B/481)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Non  Aligned  Movement,  he  will  state  the  impact  of  our 
membership  thereto,  if  any,  following  the  development  of  our  diplomatic  and  bilateral 
relationship with Saudi Arabia. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Mauritius  joined  the  Non-Aligned 
Movement  (NAM)  in  1973  and  highly  values  its  Membership  with  the  Organisation. 
Moreover,  it  may  be  recalled  that  NAM  has  repeatedly  and  forcefully  reaffirmed  our 
sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia. 

The kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned 

Movement and it enjoys close and privileged ties with many NAM countries. 

I wish to emphasise that the development of our diplomatic and bilateral relationship 
with Saudi Arabia will not impact and have any adverse bearing, in any way whatsoever on 
our  membership  to  the  NAM  and  to  any  other  Regional/  International  Organisations.  The 
consolidation of our relations with Saudi Arabia, as with our other sovereign nations, is an 
important  component  of  our  economic  diplomacy  and  can  only  enhance  intra-NAM 
cooperation. 

I also wish to put on record that since 2015, this Government has spared no efforts to 
further boost our bilateral relations with Saudi Arabia through the opening of the Mauritius 
Embassy in Riyadh and a Consulate General in Jeddah.  

In  that  regard,  on  28  April  2016,  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  Saudi  Arabia 
informed my Ministry that the Registration Certificate, a perquisite for the recognition and 
opening of the Embassy of Mauritius has been issued. 

Mr Bérenger: Being given that we are talking about the Non-Aligned Movement and 
Iran, I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that Iran is the outgoing Chairperson of the Non-
Aligned  Movement.  They  were  supposed  to  hand  over  to  the  next  Chair  -  already  quite  a 
while back. The next Chair is Venezuela which is in the situation that they are in. Therefore, 
can  I  know  whether  his  Ministry  can  inform  the  population  what  next?  The  Summit  was 
supposed to be held in Venezuela a few years back. What is going to happen now? What is 
being prepared? 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, at the next meeting in Venezuela the new Board will 

77 

be elected, including the new Chairman. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  I  was  trying  to  get  out  is,  whilst 
congratulating the excellent measures, I hope it does come to reality of going ahead with any 
development with regard to Saudi Arabia and whilst agreeing that it is of utmost importance, 
what has his Ministry done or at least himself, through any Members of Government, in order 
to  reassure  the  membership  of  the  Non-Aligned  Movement,  including  Iran,  that  whatever 
statements – I did not mean that badly – but the actual Vice-Prime Minister stated about the 
position of Saudi Arabia as opposed to Iran, widely reported on the internet whereby siding 
with the Saudi Arabia as opposed to Iran and getting into this diplomacy harmlessly?  What 
has the Ministry or himself done in order to reassure the Non-Aligned Movement that in no 
way should it be interpreted as us being on the wrong side of history? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I don’t know how we could be on the wrong side of 
history if our relations with Iran also are as good. In fact, Iran was the Chairman of the Non-
Aligned Movement in 2002 as far as I remember.  

A  substantial  question  came  out  once  those  two  countries  broke  relations,  whether 
Hajj Muslims could go from Iran to Saudi Arabia for the next Hajj coming and I need to tell 
you  that  some  good  news  are  coming  that  Iran  has  accepted  the  conditions  put  by  Saudi 
Arabia for Hajj from Iran to go to Saudi Arabia for the next Hajj. 

The Deputy Speaker: A last supplementary! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you. What I would like to be more precise, maybe if I am more 
precise then the hon. Minister would be able to give me a precise answer. The actual Vice-
Prime Minister has made it very  clear that he sides with the tough stance of Saudi Arabia 
against Iran and approves the tough position of Saudi Arabia against Iran. How, therefore, 
does  he,  at  the  Head  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
reconcile that position with our excellent relationship with Iran?  That is the point I am trying 
to make. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I grasp the point, but, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, I am 

not aware of what the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands said. 

(Interruptions) 

78 

 
The Deputy Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. 
B/492 has been withdrawn! Time is over! Hon. Lesjongard, there are still two minutes if you 
can have a… 

Mr Lesjongard: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thought time was over. PQ No. B/482! 

LAND RESEARCH AND MEDIATION UNIT – ALLEGED LAND DISPOSSESSION 

(No.  B/482)    Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the families who have been allegedly dispossessed of their land by the 
sugar barons, he will – 

(a) 

(b) 

state if he will now table the list of the names of the 42 families concerned 
therewith, and  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Land  Research  and  Mediation 
Unit,  information  as  to  if  the  42  families  concerned  therewith  have  been 
officially convened to appear before the said Unit and, if so, indicate where 
matters stand. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Next time! 

(Interruptions) 

We’ll try again next time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. We’ll try again next time! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please let us not waste time! There is one minute left! 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir… 

I was… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Thank you for giving me the chance to hold the fort.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to part (a) of the question, the list of the 42 cases of 
alleged dispossession of land has been laid in the Library of the National Assembly on 28 
March 2016.  

 
I would also like, at the outset, to clarify that out of the 42 cases, only 5 of them relate 

79 

to sugar estates.  

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Head of the Land Research 
and Mediation Unit that all 42 families have been contacted. In certain cases, the Unit has 
held several meetings with claimants on the technical and legal aspects of the claims and has 
advised on the way forward. 

So far, the progress on these 42 cases is as follows –  

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

in 31 cases, the claimants have now been advised to contact a legal adviser in 
order to seek redress in Court; 
in 6 cases, the matters are pending before the Supreme Court; 
2 cases are in the process of being lodged before the Supreme Court by the 
claimants; 
in 1 case the dispute has been settled between the parties,  
1 complainant has lost his case in Court, and 
1 case has been referred to the Ministry of Housing and Lands regarding the 
illegal prescription of State land. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to inform the House that this whole exercise is 
proving to be a tedious task, the more so, as the Unit is also attending to some 300 other cases 
mentioned in the Truth and Justice Commission Report.  

Moreover,  the  State  Law  Office  has  pointed  out  that,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned, 
upon perusing the report submitted by the former Land Research and Mediation Commission, 
they have not encountered cases that could be the object of criminal prosecutions. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Government, through the Land Research and Mediation 
Unit,  has  left  no  stone  unturned  to  help  those  who  have  been  dispossessed  from  their 
properties to have the necessary advice and assistance in their quest to retrieve their land.  

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The Deputy Prime Minister in 
a reply in November 2015 - I have a copy of the reply - he stated that he is tabling the list of 
the 42 families. Now, we understand that five months later, that is, on 29 March that the list 
was tabled. Is he aware that those families have been roaming about in the various Ministries 
to know whether their names are on that list and it was only in the month of March although 
that, in the same reply he stated that: ‘we are moving very fast in order to give satisfaction to 
those families,’ and it is only five months later that that list was tabled? 

 
The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  think  the  hon.  Member 

80 

should make… 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Member should make a difference between a list that is being tabled that he asked 
for, that was tabled in March, although the question is today. The list was tabled in March 
and  that  is  what  he  asked  for  and  the  efforts  which  I  will,  in  fact,  recognise  of  our  Land 
Mediation Committee to find a solution to these 42 cases. 

They have been contacted. They have not waited for these people to take cognizance 
of the list that has been tabled here in the House. These people have been contacted directly 
by Mr Mandaree who is in charge of the Committee. So, they have not waited for this here. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Mr Deputy Prime Minister, in a reply to this House, you stated in 
November: ‘I am tabling a list indicating the names of the families concerned.’ Five months 
later, you have tabled the list. Now, you are stating that Mr Mandaree has contacted those 
families.  Only  five  families  have  been  contacted  informally,  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister, 
until today. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Well, there is no need to get excited. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lesjongard: I have to get excited. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Well, if you want… 

I am not fooling… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

The Deputy Prime Minister: ... any family… 

(Interruptions) 

 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, let the hon. Deputy Prime Minister answer! 

81 

The Deputy Prime Minister: …nor am I fooling you.  

And you are not fooling me either… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Let the hon. Deputy Prime Minister answer! 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Believe me, you are not fooling me either! I know very 

well what you are up to. 

Now, I don’t want to get into a fight with you. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Deputy Prime Minister… 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Now, my information… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, I have allowed time to run out 
and it is actually four minutes past the time allocated. So, either the hon. Member let the hon. 
Deputy Prime Minister reply to his question or we stop now! 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Member  is  misleading 
this House in trying to pretend to be in the Opposition! I know very well what this Member is 
being up to and I can say it in this House without misleading the House, but I will abstain 
from that. Now… 

... what I am going to tell you now… 

I know very well what you are… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Do you want me to tell you? Just challenge me and I will tell you! Just challenge me and I 
will tell you what you are doing! So,… 

 

82 

(Interruptions) 

…Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there has been some delay, I agree and I apologise, in laying the 
information on the Table of the House. The Government is paying about Rs300,000 a month 
for this Committee to work. We have done what we have done. I cannot go and do the work 
myself. We have taken people who are supposed to be doing the work. Now, the Member is 
coming up and telling me that the information that has been provided to me is not accurate. I 
have  noted  his  statement  and  I  will  go  back  to  challenge  the  information  that  has  been 
provided to me. But the information that has been provided to me, I am giving it to you in 
good faith and please don’t challenge that! I am giving you the information in good faith in 
that  there  are  42  cases,  31  cases  of  these,  not  five,  have  been  advised  to  contact  a  legal 
adviser to take the case to Court because we only take it so far. Six cases are in Court. Two 
other cases are in the process of being lodged. One case has been settled. One complainant 
has lost his case. These are all facts that I am providing! And 1 case has been referred to the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands. This is the information that I have given to the House. 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Right!  Time  is  over!  Madam  Speaker  will  now  resume  the 

Chair. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair.  

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  have  to  inform  you  that  the  statement  of  hon. 
Minister Bhadain is unusually lengthy in view of the importance of the subject matter. I have 
used my discretion to allow the said statement to be made. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MAURITUS & INDIA - DOUBLE TAXATION AVOIDANCE CONVENTION 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  make  a  statement  on  the  amendment  of  the 

 

83 

Double Taxation Avoidance Convention (‘the DTAC’) between the Government of Mauritius 
and the Government of the Republic of India for the avoidance of double taxation and the 
prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and capital gains and on other 
economic discussions held with India. The Mauritius-India Treaty has been in existence for 
the past 32 years. Amendments to the Treaty have been the subject of discussions between 
the two Governments for the last 10 years. The Joint Working Group (JWG) on the DTAC 
between India and Mauritius had met on ten occasions to address issues relating to the misuse 
and abuse of the DTAC, without any positive outcome. 

Madam Speaker, the factual chronology of events with regard to discussions on the 
DTAC and on other economic issues since this Government took office are as follows: on 04 
June  2015,  a  Ministerial  delegation  led  by  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  held  discussions  in  India  and  a  draft  Protocol  prepared  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  was  submitted  to  the  Indian  authorities.  On  29 June 
2015, the Joint Working Group (JWG), led by the Financial Secretary, held its 11th and last 
meeting in New Delhi, and a ‘revised’ draft protocol was initialled by the Financial Secretary 
and the Secretary of the Ministry of External Affairs of India. 

On  03  July  2015,  Cabinet  agreed  to  the  signing  of  the  Protocol,  but  operators  in 
Mauritius expressed their concerns with regard to Article 11 on ‘Interest’ and Article 13 on 
‘Capital Gains’ and submitted that the revised Protocol would not safeguard their interests.  

On  06  July  2015,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  sent  a 
letter to the Indian authorities requesting for confirmation that the provisions contained in the 
Protocol regarding Capital Gains shall apply only to new investments made on or after 01 
April 2017. Four days later, on 10 July 2015, a second letter was sent for the date of entry 
into force of the Protocol to be set either as 01 April 2017, or the date of entry of GAAR 
(General  Anti  Avoidance  Rules),  whichever  is  the  later;  and  also  for  the  ‘grandfathering 
provision’ to apply. Further four days later, on 14 July 2015, a third request letter was sent by 
the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development, which in addition to the requests 
made,  also  asked  that  Capital  Gains  should  not  be  charged  in  India,  where  conditions  of 
Limitation of Benefits (LOB) are met; and asking for exemptions for banks not to pay tax on 
interest to be reintroduced and for the Protocol to be amended again.  

On 31 August 2015, the Indian authorities rejected these requests which they termed 
as, and  I quote, ‘unacceptable’, except for the ‘grandfathering provision’, which remained, 

 

84 

and  I  quote,  ‘under  consideration’.  In  October  2015,  during  the  state  visit  of  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister to India, the issue of the DTAC was taken up with the hon. Prime Minister of 
India. It was confirmed that the interests of Mauritius will not be harmed and we were invited 
to conclude on the amendments to the DTAC in view of the introduction of GAAR on 01 
April 2017 and India’s decision to implement ‘Source Base Taxation’. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  28  February  2016,  an  Indian  delegation  led  by  Mrs  Renu  Pall 
(Joint  Secretary)  visited  Mauritius  and  held  discussions  with  the  Financial  Secretary,  the 
Secretary for Foreign Affairs and myself. The next day the Indian Minister of Finance, hon. 
Arun  Jaitley,  in  his  Union  Budget  Speech  2016/2017,  confirmed  India’s  commitment  to 
implement GAAR as from 01 April 2017. On the same day, the then Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  of  Mauritius  publicly  expressed  his  refusal  to  sign  the  revised 
Protocol. On 02 March 2016, the Indian delegation confirmed that India was revising its Tax 
Treaties and would no longer entertain Double Non-Taxation. They explained that Mauritius 
had  only  two  options:  either  to  negotiate  a  grandfathering  clause  of  Article  13  to  protect 
existing  investments;  or to  continue  with the  current  Treaty  until  the  coming  into  force  of 
GAAR on 01 April 2017, following which, in the absence of a clear arrangement, that is, the 
signed Protocol revising the DTAC, a ‘Notice of Termination of Treaty’ would be issued. We 
were also informed that Cyprus had been declared a ‘Notified Jurisdictional Area’, under S 
94A(1)  of  the  Indian  Income  Tax  Act  since  November  2013  and  the  benefits  under  the 
Cyprus-India Treaty had been suspended. 

On 12 April 2016, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development sent a delegation led by myself, comprising of the hon. Attorney General and 
other officials to India to continue discussions with the Indian authorities. After a full day of 
negotiation with the Indian delegation, led by Dr. Hasmukh Adhia, the Revenue Secretary of 
India, they were agreeable to the ‘grandfathering provisions’ on Article 13 only and also a 
phasing-out period of 2 years. They further clarified in no uncertain terms that, if the Treaty 
was not revised prior to the deadline of 01 April 2017, a ‘Notice of Termination of Treaty’ 
would be issued, which  both countries should avoid. Accordingly,  I informed the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  and  obtained  his  instructions  prior  to  meeting  with  the  Indian  Minister  of 
Finance.  After the meeting with hon. Arun Jaitley, it was agreed that - 

(i) 

with regard to ‘Article 13’, all investments made through Mauritius before 01 
April 2017, will NOT be subject to Capital Gains Tax in India; 

 
(ii) 

85 

a phasing-out period will be granted to Mauritius from 01 April 2017 to 31 
March 2019, whereby only 50% of Capital Gains made through Mauritius will 
be  taxed  in  India  and  the  remaining  50%  will  be  taxed  in  Mauritius  at  0%, 
subject to investments being substance based, that is,  LOB compliant; and the 
LOB threshold be revised to provide that a company shall be deemed to be a 
shell/conduit  company  if  its  revised  expenditure  on  operations  is  less  than 
Rs1.5 m. in the immediately preceding period of 12 months from the date the 
gains arise. Comparatively, the threshold for Singapore, is 3.5 times more, as a 
company  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  shell/conduit  company  if  its  total  annual 
expenditure is less than SGD 200,000 (Rs5.2 m.); 

(iii) 

as  regards  ‘Article  11’  on  interest,  all  debt-claims  made  through  Mauritian 
banks  prior  to  01  April  2017,  will  NOT  be  subject  to  withholding  tax  on 
interest in India; and all debt structures made by banks and other institutions 
thereafter, through Mauritius shall be taxed at a rate not exceeding 7.5% of the 
gross  amount  of  the  interest  as  compared  to,  for  example,  10%-15%  in 
Singapore, and 

 (iv) 

linkages  to  be  established  between  the  GIFT  (Gujarat  International  Finance 
Tec-City) and the MIFC (Mauritius International Financial Centre). 

These  were  the  discussions  held  with  regard  to  the  protocol  amending  the  DTAC, 

Madam Speaker.  

The next day, on 13 April 2016 meetings and discussions were held with the Foreign 
Secretary and the Principal Secretary at the Prime Minister’s Office in India, which focused 
on other financial and economic matters, relating to the line of credit of USD500 m. which 
was provided by H.E. Shri Narendra Modi during his visit to Mauritius, but which could not 
be  utilised  without  increasing  our  national  debt.  We  requested  for  financial  assistance  in 
terms of grants and equity participation, for the setting up of a new “Financial Services City”, 
that is, the new Mauritius International Financial Centre (MIFC); the Heritage City project; a 
new  International  Exhibition  and  Convention  Centre,  and  another  capital  project  to  be 
announced in the Budget 2016/2017. The relevant debt figures, financials and project files, 
were provided to the Indian authorities for due consideration. 

On 29 April 2016, Cabinet approved the signature of the revised protocol to amend 
the  DTAC.  On  05  May  2016,  the  Special  Envoy  of  the  Prime  Minister  of  India  led  a 

 

86 

delegation  to  Mauritius  to  finalise  discussions  with  my  Ministry  on  the  financial  grant 
assistance  sought  by  Mauritius.  The  next  day,  a  meeting  was  held  at  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office  where  the  Indian  delegation  confirmed  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  the 
Government  of  India  would  provide  a  total  amount  of  Rs12.7  billion  (USD353  m.)  in  the 
form of financial grants for four specific projects. The only condition attached is that these 
projects should be awarded to Indian companies by the Government of Mauritius using our 
own  tendering  process.  Accordingly,  written  confirmation  was  sent  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister of Mauritius. 

On  10  May  2016,  the  revised  protocol  amending  the  DTAC  was  signed  by  the 
Financial  Secretary,  representing  the  Government  of  Mauritius  and  the  Indian  High 
Commissioner to Mauritius, representing the Government of the Republic of India.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of the House on the following -  

(i) 

(ii) 

Certainty,  clarity  and  predictability  has  been  restored  for  investors  in  our 
jurisdiction with the re-negotiated protocol amending the bilateral treaty; 

All  investments  made  through  Mauritius  prior  to  01  April  2017  would  not 
attract any payment of Capital Gains Tax, whenever the shares are sold. As a 
result  of  the  ‘grandfathering  provisions’:  (i)  there  will  not  be  any  abrupt 
exodus of existing investments from Mauritius, and (ii) between now and 31 
March  2017,  there  may  well  be  an  increased  flow  of  investments  and 
structures into Mauritius; 

(iii)  The phasing out period until 31 March 2019, brings certainty to international 
investors about LOB substance requirements in Mauritius and also that 50% 
of  their  capital  gains  are  taxable  in  Mauritius  at  zero  percent  whilst  the 
remaining  50%  will  be  taxed  in  India,  whilst  the  Singapore-India  treaty 
provision on capital gains exemption will terminate after 31 March 2017. Our 
revised treaty ensures that capital gains on sale of shares will only be taxed at 
half the rate i.e. between 5% and 7.5%; 

 (iv)  The  removal  of  capital  gains  tax  exemption  to  a  Mauritius  resident  for 
investments made after 01 April 2019, will curb tax evasion and misuse of 
treaties. It is in line with the requirements of BEPS, Base Erosion and Profit 
Shifting,  and  the  G-20;  it  will  eliminate  Double  Non-Taxation  and  the 
negative  reputational  risk  faced  by  Mauritius  with  regard  to  the  European 

 

87 

Union,  the  European  Investment  Bank,  the  OECD  and  also  NGOs  across 
Europe and Africa; 

(v)  With  regard  to  debt  structuring,  the  new  arrangement  with  respect  to  the 
renegotiated reduced withholding tax rate of 7.5% on interest, compared to 
Singapore (10%-15%); Cyprus (10%) and the  Netherlands (10%-15%) will 
make Mauritius a preferred jurisdiction for investors inasmuch as India has a 
growing  debt  market  compared  to  equity  and  is  relaxing  its  exchange 
controls to facilitate debt from overseas, this will usher India-Mauritius tax 
relationship  into  a  new  era.  The  protocol  has  made  Mauritius  even  more 
competitive  than  Singapore,  Cyprus,  and  the  Netherlands.  Moreover,  other 
forms  of  securities  such  as  Compulsorily  Convertible  Debentures  (CCDs), 
Optionally  Convertible  Debentures  (OCDs),  and  some  derivatives  are  not 
affected.  

(vi) 

The revised protocol also mitigates the risk of abuse of our jurisdiction as a 
money  laundering  platform,  as  there  is  now  enhanced  transparency  for 
genuine investors, and  

(vii)  Positive  changes  in  our  tax  treaties  are  now  being  implemented  in  our 
financial  services  sector  in  line  with  international  best  practices  of  good 
governance, with companies operating activities of substance and providing a 
full  chain  of  value-added  services  in  Mauritius.  The  new  vision  of 
Government for the new MIFC will be announced in the coming days. 

Madam Speaker, on other economic issues discussed as I stated earlier, India has been 
attentive to our needs regarding our inherited debt predicament and has agreed to provide us 
with grants assistance amounting to Rs12.7 billion for four main projects, which includes a 
grant of Rs3.6 billion to enhance the offerings of our financial services sector and assist our 
sustainable  development  and  progress  into  a  ‘Non-Tax  Treaty  Centric’  jurisdiction  of 
international repute and substance. 

I remain, Madam Speaker, thankful to all those who have contributed to the fruitful 

conclusion of negotiations and to the Government of the Republic of India. 

Thank you. 

 

 

 (4.31 p.m.) 

88 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

“WEEKLY” MAGAZINE - EDITORIAL ENTITLED “CATCH ME IF YOU CAN” 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, my attention has been drawn to the “Editorial” of 
the weekly magazine, the “Weekly” issue No. 193 for the week 28 April to 04 May entitled 
“Catch me if you can”. 

For record purposes, I have deemed it fit to reproduce certain extracts of the article, I 

quote - 

 “With the scant respect for the normal parliamentary practices being displayed week 
in  and  week  out  in  our  national  assembly,  I  suggest  we  close  it  and  allow  the 
honourable members to do what they do best; travel a bit more at our expense and 
carry on with any deals they wish to engage in no questions asked. 

Our national assembly has become grotesque in its intolerance of accountability on 
almost all issues. And the Speaker seems to be unwittingly helping in the muzzling of 
MPs every time ministers find themselves in a tight spot over key issues. 

On  Tuesday,  our  Speaker,  shrieking  at  the  top  of  her  voice,  was  quick  at  stopping 
opposition  members  from  asking  supplementary  questions  about  the  National 
Insurance Company…” 

The article further continues, I quote - 

“Before the opposition had the opportunity to challenge that, the Speaker decided it 
was  time  to  move  to  the  next  question!  After  barely  two  supplementary  questions 
instead of four! And when the Speaker decides, you obey.” 

I  am  furthermore,  laying  a  copy  of  the  article  on  the  Table  of  the  Assembly.  Hon. 
Members,  in  my  view,  it  is  clear  that  the  article  constitutes  a  deliberately  tendentious  and 
motivated attack on the National Assembly, the highest institution of the Republic. 

I must say that being personally targeted by these disparaging remarks places me in a 

delicate situation. 

Besides  being  perverted  and  grossly  misrepresentative  of  the  Proceedings  of  the 
House, the article, in its reference to the Chair, also displays ignorance of certain basic rules 

 

89 

governing parliamentary practice and procedure. In so doing the author does not only thrust 
indignities on the House but also categorically accuses the Chair of partiality. 

Hon.  Members,  as  guardian  of  the  Standing  Orders  and  Rules  of  the  National 
Assembly,  I  have  no  alternative  than  to  submit  myself  to  the  provisions  of  the  Standing 
Orders governing breaches of privilege. 

Hon. Members, according to Erskine May, I quote - 

“reflections  on  the  character  of  the  Speaker  and  accusations  of  partiality  in  the 
discharge of his duties may be held to constitute breaches of privilege or contempt.  … 
The Speaker’s actions cannot be criticised incidentally in debate or upon any form of 
proceeding, except a substantive motion”  

In  an impugned article,  of a similar nature in  India, in 2005, a journalist made allegations 
against the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, to the effect that he, I quote – 

“is partisan, has no sense of prestige, is high-handed in his behaviour and has no sense 
of fair play”. 

The then Speaker Somnath Chatterjee, concluded, I quote –  

“according  to  me,  the  position  in  law  is  beyond  any  doubt  and  to  anyone  concerned 
with the parliamentary system, it is clear that the impugned article not only reeks of 
malice, but is highly contumacious in its conception and in its contents as it deliberately 
accuses the Speaker of partiality and reflects on his character and actions as Speaker 
which amounts to gross breach of privilege of the Speaker and also of the House.” 

Similarly,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  impugned  Editorial  is  tantamount  to  a  breach  of 

privilege of the House. 

Hon. Members, such unwarranted criticism coming from no one less than the Editor-in-

Chief herself, should, in my opinion, be viewed with the greatest concern. 

I would like to stress that I am unequivocally attached to the liberty of the press. The 
role of the media to air, report and publish the workings, including debates, questions and 
other proceedings of the House is essential in a modern democracy and its right to comment 
and to fair, albeit fierce, criticism cannot and should not be negated. 

Moreover, the importance of a good working relationship between Parliament and the 
media cannot be underscored.  I believe that a good working relationship between the media 

 

90 

and the legislature should be based on mutual respect and the recognition of our respective 
role. 

The  press  is  rightly  described  as  the  fourth  pillar  of  our  democracy  and  has  been 
referred  to,  as  a  common  man’s  last  hope.  Without  a  free  press,  democracy  would  be  in 
danger.  However,  this  freedom  should  not  be  taken  as  a  license  to  make  gratuitous  and 
motivated attacks on great institutions of the Republic. 

Having said so, I would like to reiterate my commitment to continue fostering the good 
professional  relationships  which  have  always  existed  between  our  two  institutions  and  to 
even further strengthen them. To that effect, my office does not hesitate to provide updated 
facilities to the press to help them discharge their obligations in the best possible manner. We 
are also in the process of adopting new technologies which will further enable journalists to 
capture parliamentary information in real time. 

Hon. Members, as Speaker, I am duty-bound to protect the privileges of the House and 

at the same time to see to it that our noble institution is not denigrated. 

Keeping  in  mind  the  long-standing  professional  relationships  between  the  media  and 
the  National  Assembly  and  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  both  are  essential  actors  in  a 
working democracy, I am inviting the Editor-in-Chief to tender her unreserved apologies to 
the Chair and to the House. 

In case no apologies are received within a week, I shall come back to the House to have 

the matter dealt with as appropriate. Thank you. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  (2015-2016)  Bill 

(No. VII of 2016) be read a first time. 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL WAGE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL BILL 

(No. VI of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  National 

Wage Consultative Council Bill (No. VI of 2016). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

 

 

(4.39 p.m.) 

91 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre D’or): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker.    Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  say  a  few 
words  on  this  Bill.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  and  his  team  for  the 
preparation of this important Bill and, at the same time, I would also like to thank all the hon. 
Members who have intervened before me and I thank them for their valuable contribution. 

Madam Speaker, let’s start on a positive note. I think there is unanimity in the House 
in  the  setting  up  of  this  Wage  Council,  but  there  are  reservations,  there  are  concerns 
expressed  especially  from  hon.  Members  on  the  other  side  of  the  House  on  certain  issues 
relating to the independence of the Council, on the issue of quorum and a few other issues.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  should,  first  of  all,  probably  refer  to  an  interesting  event  in  the 
early 80s when Lady Thatcher was appointed Prime Minister.  Everybody is aware that when 
she was appointed Prime Minister, she came up with drastic reforms of the economy. She 
wanted to bring drastic reforms. She wanted to privatise. She was in favour of an open market 
economy and, at that time, Madam Speaker, more than hundred top economists in the UK 
expressed  their  concerns,  protested  against  the  reforms  being  brought  and  we  know 
afterwards what happened. The reforms were successful, but that was not the point I wanted 
to make. The important point that I wanted to make, Madam Speaker, is the reply that at that 
time Lady Thatcher sent to those hundred top economists stating to them, “I had to disregard 
your complaints. I had to disregard whatever protests you had simply because there was not a 
single proposal in the document you sent to me.” 

Madam Speaker, there are two issues that I wanted to address, today, in my speech on 
this Bill. The first issue I wanted to address is the issue of competitiveness of our nation. The 
second  issue,  of  course,  is  my  personal  disappointment  on  an  amendment  which  is  being 
brought at the request of the unions. 

Madam Speaker, on the competitiveness of the nation, of the country, we are talking 
of legitimate rights. In the Wage Council, we have stakeholders, the employers, the unions, 
we have representatives of the Government having the legitimate rights. It is based on these 
rights  that  the  unions  have  suggested,  have  proposed  a  series  of  reforms  of  which  part  of 
them  have  been  taken  on  board  by  the  Government.  But,  Madam  Speaker,  we  cannot 
dissociate legitimate rights from responsibilities. The understanding of the responsibility of 

 

92 

one  and  all  will  enable  us  to  understand  that  the  competitiveness  of  our  country  is  too 
important, Madam Speaker and this is what Singapore understood long ago. Singapore set up 
the Wage Council in as far back as 1942. Madam Speaker, as far back as 1942, almost 44 
years back and when we look at the Wage Council of Singapore, even if it is not similar to 
what  is  being  proposed,  even  if  there  we  are  not  talking  about  minimum  wage,  Madam 
Speaker.  I have been looking at the latest report of that Wage Council. They have exactly 
done what we should be doing with this Wage Council, Madam Speaker.  

Let  me  quote  two  recommendations  of  the  latest  report  of  the  Wage  Council  of 
Singapore, Madam Speaker, just to give  you an idea of the type of Wage Council that we 
require for a country, that I hope would be the case in the years to come and I quote – 

“1. 

2. 

The  Government  endorses  the  NWC’s  focus  on  skills  to  ignite  productivity 
growth and sustain wage increases. The labour market is expected to remain 
tight  in  2015  and  this  will  place  some  upward  pressure  on  wages.  Raising 
productivity  is  essential  for  wage  growth  to  be  sustainable  and  to  enhance 
Singapore’s economic competitiveness.  

As such, the Government supports the NWC's recommendation that real wage 
increases should be in line with productivity growth over the long term, and 
that  employers  should  share  productivity  gains  fairly  with  workers  and  in  a 
sustainable manner. The Government urges employers, unions and workers to 
work together towards this goal.” 

Madam Speaker, this is the type of Wage Council, this is the type of recommendation 
that we expect; a structure that we are about to put in place, to come in the months, in the 
years to come. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  what  Singapore  did  long,  long  ago,  and  we  want  the 
stakeholders,  especially  the  unions,  the  Government,  the  employers  to  understand  that, 
without the competitiveness of the nation, it would be impossible to promote the interest of 
any stakeholder, be it the Government, be it the unions or the employers. 

The  other  issue  that  I  wanted  to  raise  in  my  brief  speech,  Madam  Speaker,  is  the 
amendment  that  we  are  bringing  to  this  Bill,  relating  to  the  payment  of  additional 
remuneration.  Madam  Speaker,  everybody  is  aware  about  the  total  mess  we  end  up  with 
whenever there is tripartite negotiation. Year after year, it is the same story, Madam Speaker. 

 

93 

You get to sit in a Tripartite Committee at the end of the financial year, you get discussions 
on the rate of compensation, and it ends on a total mess. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  I  look  at  what  has  been  withdrawn  -  the  additional 
remuneration part -, the amendment made, for me, let’s put it this way, it is very unfortunate.  
It’s very unfortunate because, Madam Speaker, the unions, unfortunately, do not understand 
where their interest lies, because this would have, at least, given them the opportunity for a 
year to discuss on ways and means to come with proposals on the type of compensation that 
they want for their workers. It is not only a question of wage, Madam Speaker; increasing 
wages. You have got other forms of compensation that could have been discussed with the 
Government. You have got one year to discuss, and at the end of the year, you come with a 
full package. If they have a proposal for a Tripartite Committee at the end of the year under 
the chairmanship of the Prime Minister or the Deputy Prime Minister, it could be put in place 
to  discuss  and  ratify  that  package.  But  it  is  very  unfortunate  that  we’ve  missed  such  an 
opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, to conclude, as I said, personally I have reservations on this, because 
excluding  this  additional  remuneration  defeats  the  very  purpose  of  this  Bill.  The  only 
proposal  I  would  be  having  is  that,  once  this  Bill  is  voted,  over  the  coming  months  the 
stakeholders sit together and try to see if this second part relating to additional remuneration 
may  be  reintroduced.  I  believe  this  would  be  in  the  interest  of  all  the  parties  and  in  the 
interest of the nation as well. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(4.48 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 

Speaker, I think that this Bill raises three fundamental questions. 

The first question is: Should we have a national minimum wage? 

Second question: How should that national minimum wage be fixed? 

And the third question: Who should fix the national minimum wage? 

On the necessity to have a national minimum wage, there is consensus in this House, 
and may I say outside of this House also, that the time has come for Mauritius to adopt a 
national  minimum  wage,  and  that  would  be,  Madam  Speaker,  only  reflective  of  Mauritius 
complying  with  its  longstanding  international  obligations.  For  example,  Mauritius  has 

 

94 

obligations  under  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  that  was  proclaimed  by  the 
United Nations General Assembly in Paris on 10 December 1948. According to paragraph 3 
of Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights – 

“Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for 
himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if 
necessary, by other means of social protection.” 

Unfortunately, this provision of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not enshrined 
in our Constitution. But, today, with this Bill, we are getting closer to our commitment to this 
particular Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 

In 1973, Mauritius also ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 

Cultural Rights. Article 7 of that Convention provides, and I quote – 

“The  States  Parties  to  the  present  Covenant  recognise  the  right  of  everyone  to  the 
enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work which ensure, in particular: 

(a) 

Remuneration which provides all workers, as a minimum, with: 

(i) 

Fair  wages  and  equal  remuneration  for  work  of  equal  value  without 
distinction  of  any  kind,  in  particular  women  being  guaranteed 
conditions  of  work  not  inferior  to  those  enjoyed  by  men,  with  equal 
pay for equal work; 

(ii) 

A decent living for themselves and their families in accordance  with 
the provisions of the present Covenant;” 

Again,  introducing  this  national  minimum  wage  would  enable  Mauritius  to  comply 

with Article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 

Mauritius is also a member of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) which was 
created in 1919, as part of the Treaty of Versailles that ended the First World War. The aim 
of the ILO is to promote rights at work, encourage decent employment opportunities, enhance 
social protection, and strengthen dialogue on work-related issues. 

On 02 December 1969, Mauritius ratified Convention 26 of the ILO, which concerns 
the creation of Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery. That Convention entered into force as far 
back as 1930. 

95 

 
Under  Article  1  of  the  Convention,  Mauritius  undertook  to  create  the  machinery 
whereby minimum rates of wages can be fixed for workers employed in certain trades – in 
particular  in  home  working  trades  –  in  which  no  arrangement  exists  for  the  effective 
regulation of wages by collective agreement or otherwise and where wages are exceptionally 
low. 

In fact, applying this provision of Convention 26 of ILO, the Government in 1974 set 
up the National Remuneration Board under the then Industrial Relations Act, which has now 
been repealed and replaced by the Employment Relations Act 2008. 

Upon  the  recommendations  of  the  National  Remuneration  Board,  30  Remuneration 
Orders have been passed by the Ministry, covering various sectors of the economy. Those 
Remuneration Orders provide for a minimum wage for people employed in certain sectors 
covered by the Remuneration Orders as well as conditions of work. 

However,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Remuneration  Order  is  of  limited  effectiveness 
because the National Remuneration Board only works when matters are referred to it by the 
Minister,  and  the  Minister,  under  the  law,  will  only  refer  matters  to  the  NRB  where  he  is 
satisfied  that  no  arrangement  exists  in  an  industry  for  effective  regulation  of  wages  and 
conditions of employment or where a request has been made by a negotiating body consisting 
of a substantial number of workers in an industry not covered by collective agreement. 

Madam  Speaker,  workers  in  sectors  that  are  not  properly  syndicated,  that  are  not 
 
grouped together very often end up falling outside the Remuneration Orders and if they are 
outside the Remuneration Orders it means that they don’t have a guaranteed minimum wage 
and, therefore, can be exploited by employers. 

Mauritius,  Madam  Speaker,  unfortunately,  is  not  among  the  52  countries  which 
ratified  Convention  131  of  the  ILO  concerning  Minimum  Wage  Fixing,  with  Special 
Reference to Developing Countries which entered into force on 29 April 1972. 

According to Article 1 of the Convention 131 – 

“Each  Member  of  the  International  Labour  Organisation  which  ratifies  this 
Convention  undertakes  to  establish  a  system  of  minimum  wages  which  covers  all 
groups of wage earners whose terms of employment are such that coverage would be 
appropriate.” 

96 

 
Madam Speaker, it is most unfortunate that the Bill today before this House does not 
reflect all the provisions of the ILO Convention No. 131 and I will come back to this later 
when I deal with the minimum wage fixing machinery. 

Madam Speaker, the primary objective of the minimum wage is to protect the income 

of the lowest paid workers in order to guarantee them a decent standard of living. 

During a debate on the first draft proposal for basic minimum wage in 1909, Winston 

Churchill is reported to have said, and I quote –  

“It is a serious national evil that any class of His Majesty’s subjects should receive 
less than a living wage (…) the good employer is undercut by the bad, and the bad 
employer by the worst.” 

So, Madam Speaker, having a minimum national wage serves two main purposes; on 
the one hand, it enables the lowest paid workers to receive wages which allow them to have a 
decent living but, on the other hand, and equally important, it protects the most vulnerable 
workers from being exploited by unscrupulous employers. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill talks about minimum wage. But, unfortunately, there is no 
definition of what is included or excluded in this definition of wage. There is no definition of 
wage.  Does  it  mean  basic  wage?    Does  it  include  bonuses,  gratuities  and  allowances  for 
shifts? Does it include tips? Does it include benefit in kind? Is it the same as remuneration as 
defined under the Employment Rights Act? I hope during the summing-up the hon. Minister 
can give more clarity as to what consist of the minimum wage so as to avoid any dispute in 
the  future,  and  especially  to  prevent  unscrupulous  employers  from  exploiting  workers  by 
adding bonuses to wages. 

The next issue, Madam Speaker, is: do we need only one minimum wage or several 
minimum  wages?  I  am  glad  to  see  that  there  will  be  no  distinction  between  the  minimum 
wage for  women and that for men. Equal pay, equal work. And,  I hope  the Remuneration 
Orders will also, in due course, be amended to remove this distinction between women and 
men  when  it  comes  to  wages.  Indeed,  as  many  hon.  Members  of  this  House  may  know, 
Remuneration  Orders  for  the  tea  industry,  the  salt  industry  and  the  sugar  industry  provide 
different  minimum  wages  for  men  and  women;  women  being  paid  roughly  20%  less  than 
men for the same type of work. 

So,  if  we  agree  with  this  principle  of  equal  pay  for  equal  work,  then  I  don’t 
understand why in the Bill the hon. Minister is proposing that we have a different minimum 

 

97 

wage  –  a  lower  minimum  wage  -  for  young  persons  aged  between  16  and  18.  Maybe  the 
argument is to encourage people to employ more young people. But I don’t think that this 
argument holds, Madam Speaker, because like any adult young persons also have needs and 
they also have wants. Many of the young persons become workers because they are forced to 
do  so,  because  they  need  to  provide  for  their  families.  They  need  to  earn  a  living.  And  it 
would  be  very  unfortunate  if  the  difference  in  wage  gives  an  opportunity  to  employers  to 
exploit young persons. So, I would urge the hon. Minister to reconsider this section 5 (b)(iii) 
which  provides  for  lower  rate  of  national  minimum  wage  for  young  persons,  a  measure 
which, according to me, is both discriminatory and unjust and also which may result in the 
exploitation of young persons. 

Madam Speaker, turning to what I consider to be the second fundamental issue posed 
by this Bill which is how is this minimum wage calculated.  Now that we have agreed that we 
need to have a national minimum wage, how do we calculate that national minimum wage? 
What method and what elements do we take into consideration?  

In a report prepared by the ILO in September 2014 entitled “Minimum Wage Fixing 
Challenge in Mauritius” by  a team led by  François Eyraud, the report considers two main 
methods of fixing minimum wage. One is income based. One is based on cost of living and 
aims to determine the rate that will cover the basic needs of the workers. The second method 
is to take wages statistics into consideration and fix the minimum wage as a percentage of the 
median wage. This is very important, Madam Speaker, to note that ILO does not recommend 
one method or the other. It does not favour one method over the other. In fact, what ILO says 
time and time again, repeatedly, in that report is that we need a system which would be the 
result, and I quote –  

“(…) of a large debate and social dialogue.” 

So,  ILO  encourages  social  dialogue  so  as  to  come  up  with  a  method  of  calculating  the 
minimum wage which would be acceptable, which would be tailor-made to Mauritius.  

So, if we consider in a little bit more details, what are these two methods that have 
been dealt with by the ILO.  The first method is based on household income. The CPI basket 
is used to determine the minimum income which a household needs to live above poverty line 
and  that  income  is  then  divided  by  the  number  of  wage  earners  in  this  household.  For 
example,  if  we  take  Statistics  Mauritius,  the  last  Household  Budget  Survey  carried  out  in 
2012 and reported in April 2013 we find that the average monthly household consumption 

 

98 

expenditure for 2012 was Rs23,940. So, if we apply inflation for the past three years we get 
to a figure of roughly Rs25,000 to Rs26,000 as being the minimum household expenditure. 
Then we take this Rs26,000 and we divide by the number of wage earners. If we decide that 
there are two wage earners we get Rs13,000. If we decide that there are three wage earners 
we get Rs8,700. 

Of  course,  this  figure  is  adjusted  to  take  into  consideration  that  a  number  of 
households also get pensions and other benefits. But, this method, Madam Speaker, has the 
merit of getting to a wage which is close to the cost of living, the actual amount of money 
which employees need to obtain to earn a decent living. And, it is with no surprise that trade 
unionists  favour  this  method  of  calculating  minimum  wage  because  that  would  result,  in 
theory at least, to a higher minimum wage than under the second method. And it also ensures 
that  the  minimum  wage  would  be  equivalent  to  the  living  wage  or  what  the  French  call 
minimum vital. 

The second method, Madam Speaker, on the other hand, takes into consideration the 
actual  wages  that  are  being  paid  to  workers.  Statistics  Mauritius  comes  up  with  annual 
statistics based on surveys and determines what are the wages that are being paid to workers 
in this country. Then, they take the median wage.  What is the median wage? The median 
wage  is  the  middle  wage  which  means  that  50%  of  workers  earn  higher  than  that  median 
wage  and  50%  of  workers  earn  less  than  that  median  wage  and  this  is  different  from  the 
average wage. Average wage being the total wage earned by all employees divided by the 
total number of employees. An average wage is usually higher than median wage. So, once 
you have decided what the median wage is, which is set by the Statistics Mauritius Office, we 
apply  a  percentage.  The  minimum  wage  would  be  50%  or  60%  or  any  percentage  of  that 
median wage. 

Now, to give a concrete example, if we take the figures used by the ILO in its report 
in 2014, the average wage was Rs20,993 but the median wage was only Rs11,625. So, if we 
take this median wage, we apply the compensation that we have received in 2013, 2014 and 
2015, we will get roughly a median wage today of around Rs13,000. So, then the minimum 
wage, if we apply 50%, would be 50% of Rs13,000, which means Rs6,500 or if we apply 
60%, it will become Rs7,800.  

So, clearly, Madam Speaker, applying the second method, usually results in a lower 
minimum wage than applying the first method although the care may be taken to ensure that 

 

99 

this minimum wage calculated under the second method will ensure a decent living, it cannot 
be guaranteed because it is not based on the income needs of the worker, it is based on the 
actual  wages  that  they  are  receiving.  Therefore,  if  we  use  the  second  method,  we  cannot 
really talk about minimum vital because it is not minimum vital, it is based on the wages that 
are being paid. 

So, my question, Madam Speaker, is: why already tie the hands of the National Wage 
Consultative  Council?  Why  don’t  we  give  them  the  liberty  to  come  up  with  their  own 
formula  which  can  be  a  combination  of  both  methods?  They  can  base  themselves  on  the 
basket, what is the cost of living and then they look also at what is the existing wage which 
workers are earning and come with a formula à la mauricienne which is what ILO, in fact, 
recommended after consultation, come up with your own formula. It is very unfortunate that 
already  we are binding  ourselves and even though the hon. Minister is  moving for certain 
amendments at Committee Stage, the main provision remains the same, which is section 5 (b) 
(ii) of the Bill which provides, and I read – 

“The Council shall – 

(b) be responsible for making recommendations to the Minister – 

(i)  subject  to  subparagraphs  (ii)  and  (iii),  for  the  introduction  of  a  national 
minimum wage calculated on an hourly rate equivalent to a proportion of the 
domestic median wage of the preceding year for the lowest paid workers;” 

So, this Council, their hands are already linked, they have to come up with a proportion of 
the  median  wage.  Now,  in  determining  this  proportion,  they  can  take  many  factors  into 
consideration: the cost of living, the economic situation, but they still are bound to follow 
the  median  wage  and  come  up  with  a  proportion  and  it  is  in  this  respect,  I  think  it  is 
unfortunate that we are tying the hands of the Council like this.   

Madam Speaker, moving to the third and final  part of my intervention, that deals 
with who should fix the minimum wage and I dare say, Madam Speaker, this is the most 
controversial  aspect  of  this  Bill,  the  composition  of  this  Minimum  Wage  Consultative 
Council and, in particular, the perceived mainmise which the Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations,  Employment  and  Training  will  have  on  this  Minimum  Wage  Consultative 
Council.   

Earlier in my intervention, Madam Speaker, I referred to ILO Convention No. 131, 

concerning Minimum Wage Fixing, with special reference to developed countries.  

 
Paragraph 3 of Article 4 of the Convention provides that – 

100 

“Wherever  it  is  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the  minimum  wage  fixing 
machinery, provisions shall also be made for the direct participation in its operation of 
– 

(a)  representatives  of  organisations  of  employers  and  workers  concerned  or, 

(...) on a basis of equality.” 

So, ILO, Article 4, Paragraph 3, of Convention No. 131 very much emphasises the 
tripartite nature of this Wage Fixing Mechanism and requires that workers, representatives of 
organisations of workers be there on the basis of equality.  

But if we turn to what is being proposed to the Bill, Madam Speaker, is very different. 
Section 10 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a board. The Council will be administered 
and managed by a Board; the Board will consist of 29 members, 7 members will not have 
voting  rights.  Out  of  the  29  members,  19  members  would  be  appointed  by  the  Minister, 
including  the  Chairperson.  7  of  the  remaining  10  persons  are  representatives  of  various 
Ministries. Section 11 (3) provides that the quorum for a meeting is 12 members, excluding 
the members who do not vote. So, 12 members who do not vote effectively means that if the 
Government representatives are there, if the representatives of the employer  are there,  you 
don’t need the representative of the worker to be there to have a quorum. I think this is very 
wrong because this goes against the recommendation of ILO, of Convention No. 131 which 
requires  the  direct  participation  of  representatives  of  the  worker  when  fixing  the  National 
Minimum Wage.  

So,  I would urge the hon. Minister to consider at Committee Stage to move for an 
amendment to provide that, at least, the presence of one representative of the workers should 
be present for this Council to be present because it will serve no purpose if the Board were to 
take a decision in the absence and behind the back of the representatives of the workers. 

But amending the quorum, Madam Speaker, will not be sufficient. If the Board is to 
function properly, then, the workers should be allowed to choose their own representatives to 
the Board. Why should it be the Minister who appoints the representatives of the workers? 
Why shouldn’t the workers themselves be allowed to represent themselves? To be allowed to 
choose  one  of  them  to  sit  on  that  Board.  Why  politicise  the  whole  process?  Surely,  there 
would be a temptation for the Minister to appoint representatives who  are perceived to be 
close to him, which will defeat the whole purpose of this Board. What will happen, Madam 

 

101 

Speaker,  if  all  major  trade  unions  and  confederations  of  workers  decided  not  to  sit  on  the 
Board?  

Only a few days ago, Madam Speaker, in an article which appeared in “Le Mauricien” 
of 19 May 2016, last week, Mr Ashock Subron, one of the main trade unionists in Mauritius, 
representative of General Workers Federation is reported to have said the following, and I 
quote – 

« Je  ne  siègerai  jamais  sur  un  tel  conseil.  Pour  moi,  ce  sont  les  travailleurs  qui 
doivent  nommer  leurs  représentants  et  non  pas  le  ministre.  C’est  une  question  de 
principe ».  

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the position of Mr Subron is shared by all the trade 
unionists which I have had the opportunity of speaking to since this Bill has been circulated. 
No one wants to be tagged as being a Minister’s appointee, as being a ‘zom minis’. It is the 
workers who will have to choose their representatives and not the Minister.  

Madam Speaker, we are all in favour of a national minimum wage. I know that the 
hon. Minister has made several concessions to the trade unionists on issues such as hourly 
rate, confidentiality and annual wage compensation although I see that hon. Rughoobur is not 
agreeable to the removal of this section which was unanimously asked for by trade unionists. 
I  am  sure  that,  like  me,  the  hon.  Minister  would  have  preferred  that  there  is  unanimity  in 
support  of  this  Bill  in  this  House  and  outside  this  House,  especially  among  the  workers 
because this Bill is meant precisely to protect the workers. So, I would make an appeal to the 
hon. Minister to, at least, consider on this issue of the representatives of workers sitting on 
the Board if an additional concession can be made so that the workers themselves be allowed 
to  choose  their  representatives,  and,  if  this  being  the  case,  then  the  Wage  Consultative 
Council  can  start  work  as  soon  as  possible  and  minimum  wage  would  be  a  reality  in 
Mauritius. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 5.17 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.53 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Please, be seated. Hon. Roopun! 

 
The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 

102 

Roopun): Madam Speaker, I rise up to support and applaud the presentation of this Bill. 

The  setting  up  of  a  minimum  wage  for  all  workers  of  this  country  irrespective  of 
gender, along with the Marshall Plan against poverty, are landmark measures ever taken by 
any Government to effectively combat poverty and reduce inequality. 

In fact, a Government headed by Sir Anerood Jugnauth is once again creating history 

and it gives me pride to be associated with such an event today. 

I  am  particularly  glad  that  there  is  general  consensus  in  this  House  about  the 

philosophy of this Bill.  

And I must commend the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training for incorporating various suggestions coming from the Unions and thus eliminating 
contentious issues. 

It is not a surprise that the Opposition came with some criticisms, mainly about the 
mechanism  put  into  place  as  any  system  is  bound  to  have  its  strength  and  weakness;  it  is 
indeed not easy and practically impossible to satisfy everybody. 

But what is most important is that we are keeping our promises and we have taken a 
daring  decision,  despite  the  worldwide  gloomy  conditions,  and  this  Bill  will  forever 
transform the social landscape of this country.  

I  must  reiterate  that  this  Government  fully  endorse  the  Sustainable  Development 
Goals adopted in September last at the UN and that we are more than ever determined, to 
achieve  Goals  1  and  8  which  provide  for  the  elimination  of  poverty  in  all  its  forms 
everywhere and also for the provision of decent work for all. 

The previous Government had promised to democratise the economy,  yet we know 
how a few cronies close to power misappropriated, not to say expropriated, everything they 
could lay their hands on.  I need not give examples, but will just refer to the recent report of 
the  World  Bank  which  shows  that  between  2007  and  2012,  some  18,500  additional 
Mauritians became relatively poorer. 

On assuming office, Madam Speaker, this Government reacted promptly by providing a 
substantial increase of 30% to beneficiaries of various social allocations and since, the latter 
are receiving some Rs80 m. every month. And I have all reasons to believe that the number 
of persons presently in relative poverty must have decreased significantly. 

 

103 

Madam Speaker, one of our main objectives is to eliminate extreme poverty by the end 
of this mandate. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has more than once reiterated that commitment. 
The strategy to do so is being finalised through the Marshall Plan. But for the purpose of this 
present debate today, I shall not dwell further on this issue.  

Madam  Speaker,  through  this  Bill  our  aim  is  to  combat  poverty  from  another 
perspective.  When we talk about poverty we would refer generally either to the extreme poor 
or those who are in relative poverty, but there is also a segment which we very often failed to 
capture and about which we hear very little.  They are the moderate poor who, despite being 
in employment, remain impoverished and have very little chance of effectively moving out of 
the vicious circle of poverty. It is this category of workers, Madam Speaker, that we have 
first and foremost the intention to help through this Bill. 

These workers who are usually active in the informal sector, executing a host of low-
skilled and casual jobs such as labourers working in small vegetable plantations, lorry helpers 
engaged in employment with private owners, handy workers who are hired on a daily basis 
for different types of manual jobs.  

Such workers, however willing they are to work hard, are unable to sell their labour for 
an  income  sufficient  to  maintain  a  decent  standard  of  living.  After  feeding  their  family, 
paying  for  rent,  utilities  and  other  running  expenses,  they  barely  have  anything  left.  They 
have no union to defend their cause. They have unpredictable schedules, work for long hours 
and are on holidays hardly a few days a  year. These low-paid workers are in a precarious 
situation,  barely  surviving  and  any  unfortunate  or  unexpected  events  such  as  illness  or 
accident can be devastating and put them on dole. 

This  category  of  workers,  Madam  Speaker,  deserves  our  respect  and  admiration 
because  they  never  give  up.    They  toil  hard  to  provide  for  their  loved  ones  and  all  of  us 
should  be  forever  grateful  to  them  for  the  significant  contribution  they  made  and  are  still 
making to the economy. 

For  those  workers  who  have  no  PRB,  no  Remuneration  Order,  we  wish  to  create  a 
benchmark  below  which  their  salary  cannot  go.  By  setting  up  a  minimum  wage,  we  are 
narrowing the income gap and indirectly ensuring a transfer from the wealthier to the poorer 
and thus promoting the development of an egalitarian society. We are also enhancing their 
bargaining power while providing a shield against exploitation. 

 

104 

Setting up a minimum wage policy will not only  contribute in lifting workers out of 
poverty, but will also protect women’s incomes and close the gender gap since women are 
disproportionately represented at the bottom of the occupational hierarchy and thus remain at 
the bottom of the income distribution.  

We trust that the minimum wage will contribute in achieving Goal 5 of the SDGs which 

is: achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. 

In  short,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  shall  contribute  in  giving  due  recognition  to  the 
thousands  of  workers  who  have  in  one  way  or  another  contributed  to  the  socio-economic 
development  of  our  country.  However,  while  proceeding  on  this  route,  we  should  thread 
cautiously. Despite the good intention of the Government, we should ensure that in trying to 
help the low wage earners we do not end up doing a disservice to them. 

We should be alive to possible unintended consequences such as loss of employment, 
increases  in  cost  of  production  which  make  us  less  competitive  or  which  are  ultimately 
shifted to the consumer, thus making goods inaccessible to the very poor we intend to help. 

It is a very delicate balancing exercise to ensure on one side that the minimum wage is 
high enough to secure a socially accepted standard of living while ensuring that it is not too 
high in order not to cause unemployment. I, here also, wish to join in with the hon. Minister 
to appeal to the employers not to resort to downsizing and laying off of workers, but rather to 
assure their social responsibility. 

The  hon.  Minister  has  given  us  examples  of  various  countries  where  this  policy  has 
been successfully implemented and I am confident that here also we will be able to achieve 
the proper equilibrium. 

Madam Speaker, this is a tall order, but we have the political will and shall leave no 
stone unturned to realise this objective whose overriding goal is to improve the quality of life 
of the working class of this country while ensuring equity, equality and social justice for all. 

I,  therefore,  end  up,  Madam  Speaker,  by  wishing  the  National  Wage  Consultative 

Council well in this endeavour and I thank all hon. Members for their attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon! 

(6.01 p.m.) 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madame  la 
présidente,  ma  première  remarque  est  qu’il  est  de  notre  devoir  de  créer  le  salaire  minimal 

 

105 

pour tous les citoyens de ce pays sans discrimination aucune. Je suis, donc, pour le principe 
du  salaire  minimal  et  je  voterai  pour  le  projet  de  loi.  Mais,  je  ne  vais  pas,  pour  autant, 
renoncer à mon devoir de dire des vérités qui s’imposent. 

Un salaire minimal est tout à fait possible car nous sommes un pays où les ressources 
pour cela existent en dépit de ses difficultés économiques.  Les riches continuent d’accumuler 
des  fabuleuses  richesses  comme  leur  semblable  à  travers  le  monde  avec  ou  sans  crise 
économique  ou  financière.  Donc,  si  le  salaire  minimal  soulage  quelque  peu  la  misère  qui, 
selon la banque mondiale et Statistics Mauritius, s’accroit à Maurice, il ne faut pas se limiter 
à l’égard des salaires seulement pour connaître l’ampleur de l’inégalité  car il faut mesurer 
aussi  l’inégalité  dans  la  distribution  des  richesses.  Revenus  et  richesses  sont  en  effet  deux 
notions  différentes.  Dans  ce  contexte  d’ailleurs,  je  pense  que  Maurice  a  besoin  d’une 
nouvelle  génération  de  penseurs  économiques  et  politiques  pour  ne  pas  rester  figé  dans  la 
première moitié du XXe siècle comme c’est le cas en ce moment, en plein XXIe siècle où 
nous sommes, nous nous accrochons à des notions d’avant le déluge. 

Madame la présidente, pour la première fois dans l’histoire du monde, on a eu une base 
de données phénoménale avec des chiffres sur deux siècles d’accumulation des richesses et 
des écarts de revenus pays par pays compilés par l’économiste français, Thomas Piketty, dans 
un ouvrage volumineux d’environ 700 pages. Qui dit revenu dit salaires et salariés! Sur la 
base  de  cette  étude,  il  est  clair  que  salaire  minimal  ou  pas,  la  pauvreté  continuera  de 
s’aggraver, les salaires ne pouvant pas suivre la courbe ascendante vertigineuse des richesses 
de la classe qui contrôle l’économie. 

Piketty,  comme  d’autres,  parmi 

les  nouvelles  générations  de  politiciens, 
d’économistes  et  de  penseurs  politiques,  de  gauche,  à  travers  le  monde,  propose  un  impôt 
gradué  et  juste  pour  la  richesse,  pour  un  début  de  solution  aux  inégalités,  comme  je  l’ai 
suggéré récemment, dans une interpellation parlementaire. Ce qui veut dire que les salariés 
sont toujours les perdants et les grands patrons, toujours les gagnants, car ils continueront à 
accumuler les richesses, salaire minimal ou pas. Pour le salaire minimal, le débat n’est plus 
sur son principe, car il est proposé à cette Chambre par l’honorable ministre du Travail, mais 
le  problème  qui  se  pose  pour  la  classe  ouvrière,  c’est  que  le  patronat,  qui  depuis 
l’indépendance, est choyé par tous les gouvernements pour son rôle, certes positif, dans le 
développement  économique, n’en a pas moins été ouvertement hostile au cas où le salaire 
minimal est voté par cette Chambre aux autres avantages obtenus de haute lutte par la classe 
ouvrière. Ainsi, je ne comprends pas pourquoi le patronat, depuis que le salaire minimal a été 

 

106 

promis  par  l’Alliance  Lepep,  tente  par  tous  les  moyens  d’abolir  plusieurs  gains  des 
travailleurs obtenus en plusieurs décennies de lutte héroïque. 

J’ai reçu dans ce contexte une lettre des dirigeants de la General Workers Federation 
et  du  Joint  Negotiating  Panel  de  l’industrie  sucrière,  signée  par  Messieurs  Ashok  Subron, 
Serge Jauffret et Devanand Ramjuttun. C’est bon si vous avez tous reçu la lettre. C’est très 
bien! Ils s’opposent, avec raison, à ce qu’ils considèrent une influence néfaste des patrons sur 
le projet de salaire minimal de l’actuel gouvernement. Cette lettre rappelle aussi la lutte des 
esclaves et des travailleurs engagés et de leurs descendants qu’ont de multiples agissements 
du  patronat  et  ces  trois  syndicalistes  considèrent  que  peu  de  choses  ont  changé  et  je  les 
comprends parfaitement, étant née, moi-même, dans un camp sucrier, lieu d’une misère, que 
beaucoup dans cette Chambre trouveront difficile à comprendre. 

La lettre  cite des déclarations des patrons dans  la presse demandant  en  échange du 
salaire  minimal  l’abolition  de  tous  les  Remuneration  Orders  de  la  compensation  salariale 
annuelle  et  de  la  négociation  collective.  Il  y  a  clairement  des  tentatives  du  patronat 
s’exprimant sur le salaire minimal d’amener le gouvernement à réduire la portée du même 
salaire minimal et casser les reins au mouvement syndical. Ce sont là  des accusations très 
graves. 

Madame la présidente, je propose, en conséquence, au  gouvernement de tenir compte 
de  ces  critiques,  faisant  état  d’une  mesure,  à  première  vue,  progressiste  et  de  se  rendre 
compte que les critiques syndicales sont fondées, en fait, sur une réelle réduction des droits 
des  travailleurs  mauriciens  depuis  plus  d’une  dizaine  d’années,  notamment,  sous  l’ancien 
gouvernement. 

Nous avons été élus sur une plateforme qui promettait, je cite – 

« 12  mesures  gouvernementales  prioritaires  dont  celle-ci:  introduire  un  salaire 
minimum pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle. » 

La réplique des employeurs a été très brutale dans leur déclaration largement rapportée dans 
la  presse. Les  syndicats  pensent  qu’il  y  a  aussi  des  mesures  qui  semblent  incluses  sous  la 
pression  des  employeurs  pour  limiter  carrément  l’effet  bénéfique  de  la  loi  proposée  sur  la 
classe ouvrière. 

Madame la présidente, il est à noter que ce projet de loi est proposé dans une grande 
cacophonie concernant l’économie nationale. Il aurait dû s’accompagner d’une réduction du 
chômage par une création substantielle d’emplois. Pour moindre création massive d’emplois 

 

107 

comme promis et espérés, c’est cela un miracle économique ! Nous avons promis en 2014 à 
la  fois  une  réduction  du  chômage  et  la  création  massive  d’emplois  grâce  à  un  miracle 
économique. Pour l’instant, force est de constater que les choses se passent autrement et cela 
va pousser vers la baisse le montant final de l’éventuel salaire minimal. 

Madame la présidente, je me prononce pour le projet de loi qui est devant nous, tout 
en invitant le gouvernement à revoir de fond en comble, son attitude envers tous les secteurs 
de l’économie formelle et aussi informelle, surtout que celle-ci est totalement négligée. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bholah! 

(6.10 p.m.) 

The Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives (Mr S. Bholah): Madam 
Speaker, I wish to commend the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment 
and Training for bringing this important piece of legislation in this House. 

This  Bill  flows  from  the  vision  of  this  Government  to  adopt  the  philosophy  of 

développement à visage humain et chances égales pour tous in all its endeavours. 

Through the proposal to introduce a national minimum wage, we are indeed tackling 
an  issue  which  concerns  many  Mauritian  homes,  that  is,  that  of  alleviation  of  poverty  by 
increasing the standard of living of those at the low wage bracket. 

In fact, it is interesting to note that the first national minimum wage law was passed in 
New  Zealand  as  far  back  as  1894  and,  today,  we  are  in  2016.  So,  Madam  Speaker,  as  a 
responsible and humane Government, we are taking a step forward to change the lives of the 
most vulnerable workers of our society. The minimum wage has always been a hot-button 
issue for Members of the political community and for economists, as well. 

However, it is a fact that some 190 countries in the world, across all continents, have 
successfully adopted a national minimum wage. It is a common fallacy, Madam Speaker, that 
a country’s good economic performance guarantees a trickle-down effect on citizens who are 
at  the  bottom  of  the  earning  scale.  This,  unfortunately,  is  the  principle  failure  of  most 
economic models prevailing in today’s world and there are numerous examples that we can 
cite: 

• 

China, in spite of its successive economic booms, still has human rights and 
environmental problems that have a direct bearing on its population. 

 

• 

• 

108 

India,  on  the  strength  of  its  good  economic  performance,  has  space 
programmes and yet millions of families in India don’t even have a toilet. 
Russia  has  enormous  amount  of  minerals,  resources,  but  it  has  acute  social 
problems that it is unable to address at this moment. 

As  policy-makers,  we  nevertheless  have  the  golden  opportunity  to  go  beyond  this 
systemic failure by introducing adequate legislation, notably like the national minimum wage 
so that those at the bottom of the ladder may also reap the benefits of a country’s economic 
prosperity. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  introduction  of  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill 
which caters for the introduction of a national  minimum wage is  a shield that will protect 
workers  at  the  lowest  rung  of  the  socio-economic  ladder.  These  workers,  many  of  whom 
represent  marginalised  groups,  simply  don’t  have  the  bargaining  power  to  fight  for  a 
minimum living wage without Government’s intervention. 

We are all conscious of the fact that there are too many people who are exploited by 
what we call ‘labour market monopsonist’ and who are being paid unfairly low wages which 
are often too low to support themselves or their families. It is our duty and responsibility to 
ensure that our fellow countrymen have enough to live on. 

The  introduction  of  this  new  legal  framework  is  a  clear  indication  that  this 
Government is keeping its finger on the pulse of the world agenda as a question of irradiation 
of poverty and ensuring prosperity for all or among the top goals of the 2030 Agenda for the 
Sustainable Development of the United Nations. We have catered for our elderly citizens by 
increasing their pension in December 2014 and now, through the introduction of the national 
minimum wage, we are showing our will to bring justice to the less fortunate of our society. I 
am  convinced,  Madam  Speaker,  that  every  modern  society  stands  the  greatest  chance  of 
survival in face of stubborn odds when no one is left behind. 

Meaningful  change  starts  with  a  strong  focus  on  our  vulnerable  citizens.  A  key 
consideration of this Government during its mandate is to reduce the gap between the rich 
and  the  poor,  promote  social  justice  as  well  as  economic  empowerment.  The  proposed 
national wage will act as an increased incentive for the unemployed to join the labour market 
as  opposed  to  other  methods  of  transferring  income  to  the  poor  that  are  not  tied  to 
employment such as food subsidies for the poor or welfare payments for the unemployed. 

109 

 
All the highlighted benefits will have the positive boule de neige effect on the vitality 
of our economy, as it will stimulate consumption by putting more money in the hands of low-
income people who usually spend their entire pay cheques. 

However,  Madam  Speaker,  being  Minister  responsible  for  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises,  I  have  been  solicited  by  numerous  entrepreneurs  who  have  expressed  their 
apprehension  with  regard  to  the  introduction  of  a  national  minimum  wage.    I  must  say, 
Madam Speaker, that I fully understand their concerns, which are indeed legitimate. 

It is obvious that if larger enterprises have the capacity of accommodating an imposed 
minimum  wage,  smaller  businesses  like  restaurants,  pharmacies,  hardware  stores,  mini 
supermarkets, etc., operate in a more precarious economic context. As an example, let us take 
the case of low-cost supermarkets around the island. It is a fact, Madam Speaker, that they 
are extremely popular among consumers due to their prix imbattables, a configuration solely 
enabled by the fact that the owners of those supermarkets consent to a low market. 

Furthermore, a minimum wage will affect the profit margin of pharmacies too, given 
the  fact  that  they  are  subjected  to  an  imposed  mark-up  rate  under  the  Maximum  Mark-up 
Regulations  made  under  the  Consumer  Protection  (Price  and  Supplies)  Control  Act. 
Entrepreneurs I have met, argue that, with a minimum wage for workers, they will then be the 
only persons bearing the financial burden for fighting poverty. When we walk in the shoes of 
entrepreneurs, we realise that it is of utmost importance that we attend to the conundrum that 
they will face with the possible knock-on effects. 

Madam Speaker, any major reform proposed has its pros and cons. I have paid due 
attention  to  the  potential  drawbacks  of  a  national  minimum  wage  as  expressed  by  our 
entrepreneurs. For such businesses, a national minimum wage can be equivalent to a marginal 
cost that would have a negative impact on profit. How do they usually absorb those marginal 
costs? Madam Speaker, to do so, they go to the extent of decreasing allowances and fringe 
benefits that are payable to employees; others might lay off workers or cut down on training 
or overtime costs. I am of the opinion that, as a responsible Government, we should be alert 
when it comes to such potential consequences. 

Indeed,  while  Government  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  low  wageworkers  are 
adequately  paid  by  the  introduction  of  this  policy,  it  will  also  have  to  ensure  that  the 
minimum wage does not have an adverse effect on the profitability margin of small firms. 

110 

 
There is a need, Madam Speaker, to find a middle ground and to reach a consensus. It 
is important that we learn from countries like New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdom, 
China,  Indonesia  and  Thailand  to  see  how  they  have  managed  the  transition  to  the 
introduction of a minimum wage and how they are addressing the adverse effects of such a 
policy on small enterprises especially. 

However,  I  wish  to  reassure  the  House  as  well  as  our  entrepreneurs  about  the 
consultative spirit in which the National Wage Council will operate. It is also clear that the 
proposed  Council,  whose  functions  are  clearly  outlined  and  which  makes  provision  for 
several  cases  and  situations,  advocates  adaptability  and  dynamism  with  a  review  of  the 
national  minimum  wage  every  five  years  and  the  formulation  of  recommendations  for 
transitional  arrangements  for  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  wage  for  specific  sectors  of 
employment. 

Madam Speaker, I am among those who are deeply disturbed by the cruel realisation 
that some hardworking families still have very little and struggle to make ends meet. That is 
why I believe that the introduction of the national minimum wage is due, and I am confident 
that the mechanism that will be endowed with this responsibility will have the capacity to 
come up with efficient mitigating measures in case of need. 

I hereby urge all parties to go beyond the traditional for and against arguments and 
adopt a realistic point of view. A national minimum wage  will stimulate consumption and 
thus put more money into the economy by allowing low-paid workers to spend more. 

Madam Speaker, I hereby wish to express my pride for being part of a Government 
that is not only coming up today with a morale boosting measure, but that also walks the talk 
when it comes to the introduction of innovative and pioneering measures for the benefit of 
the  Mauritian  society  at  large.  I  strongly  believe  that  the  discussion  of  both  sides  of  the 
minimum wage argument is productive as long as we are able to cooperate and work together 
for the overall aim underlying the introduction of a minimum wage, that is, to reduce poverty, 
increase standard of living and lessen inequality in our country. 

I thank you for your attention. 

(6.20 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam Speaker, I must say that when I received this piece of legislation and when I came to 
this Assembly for this debate, initially I was trying to address my mind to what exactly was 

 

111 

being  proposed  by  the  hon.  Minister,  what  was  being  proposed  by  Government.  I  was 
wondering whether it was in line with our policy; the policies and the vision of the Labour 
Party, and whether it was something that went totally against what we had worked for, what 
we had prepared, and what we had tried to introduce when we were in Government. 

At the outset, let me thank the hon. Minister for his kind words. I mean, it is quite 
embarrassing, I must admit.  It is nice of him, but it is embarrassing at the same time because 
in some way it forces me into a situation where I have to concede that he is being nice and to 
start my intervention by saying that he is being nice.  Can you imagine what type of feat I 
would have to accomplish by trying to be nasty to him! That would not sound good. So, let 
me basically say that  I thank him for his kind  words, and for those who don’t understand 
what I am trying to get at, they just have to listen very carefully or maybe they would not 
understand still, but it is not their fault. They just can’t. 

Let  me  just  share  with  the  august  Assembly  what  we  did  when  we  were  in 
Government - the Mauritius Labour Party -, and it is necessary to address the truths. Having a 
piece  of  legislation  on  national  minimum  wage  is  not  simply  a  point  in  time  today,  this 
Tuesday, that we are debating this. It would be very economical and very wrong on our part 
if we were to limit this whole debate to what is going on today. What people have to realise 
and what people have to look into is what is the history behind this movement that started as 
far back as the beginning of the 1900s or even before. But, as far as I recall, as far as I have 
read, as far as the 1937 events, the beginning of changes in the labour movement - those are 
very important landmarks that have to be recorded, that have to be mentioned because it is 
not simply that I, as Minister of Labour between 2010 and 2014, decided, ‘well, we are going 
to come up with minimum wage. Let us just call on Guy Ryder.’ 

(Interruptions)  

Yes, it is. Let us just call Guy Ryder who was the Director General of the ILO and let us send 
some  experts  to  Mauritius  because  we  need  to  have  a  document  and  a  research,  and  a 
working document to set up a minimum wage in Mauritius. This is just part of the equation, 
but not the whole story. The fact that the hon. Minister has brought it today is another part, an 
important part of the equation, but not the whole story and it is important for us to go back in 
history to look at all the landmarks.  

 
If  I  am to go back to 1934, the Minimum Wage Ordinance of  1934 found a lot of 
objections to its implementation. It is not as it was never implemented in 1934, but it was 

 

112 

only in 1940 that we saw its implementation. That was referred to by the hon. Minister of 
Labour in his address when he explained that this only fixed minimum wages for agricultural 
labourers in Moka District only, and when we go all along from 1941 the Minimum Wage 
Ordinance  that  fixed  a  minimum  rate  of  wages  for  all  agricultural  labourers  and  not  those 
only in Moka only and we end up all through the 40s and the 50s, where the 1950’s saw the 
establishment  of  Minimum  Wages  Advisory  Boards  and  Commission  to  constitute  wages 
board to advise on wages. So, this issue has always been a live issue. What today symbolises 
is, in fact, the struggle of workers’ representatives, the struggle of individuals that have to be 
remembered  and  have  to  be  given  a  position  of  importance  in  our  history,  in  our  country. 
People  who  have  struggled  for  the  rights  and  benefit  of  workers,  wages,  conditions  of 
employment, it all started a long time ago. 

And we are only but just one of the speck of sand in this whole global picture. Then 
we are – and I am very happy and proud that I have managed to contribute somehow to this 
whole equation. But in the big picture we are just a speck of sand and nothing else because 
when  we  are  to  look  into  what  those  people  in  history  have  achieved,  it  is  amazing.  It  is 
amazing to read about the 1937, 27 June meeting held by the Labour Party at Camp Rabaud, 
Rivière du Poste where the following decisions were taken in 1937.  

 
One, the working  class  of Camp Rabaud, Rivière du Poste assembled at the public 
meeting. It was the demand that the enforcement of the ordinance on minimum wages and 
fixation of salaries at  a  minimum of Rs3 in those days.  It is important  for us to put aside 
political differences because this is an issue of national importance. That is why I right away 
started out by congratulating the hon. Minister, thanking him for his kind words because he 
has risen above the political issues and the political arena, and the everyday differences that 
really do not really help us at every moment. 

There was also another issue which was raised at the 1937 meeting, which was to ask 
Government to order an enquiry to be held on the dealings of the middlemen who purchased 
the  canes  and  the  hope  that  Government  will  take  all  the  necessary  measures  for  their 
protection.  

Thirdly, revision of the Constitution giving the right to vote. Things started to move, 
the ground started to shake and, in those days, we go with the strike of 1937.  The struggle in 
those  days  of  the  strikes  of  1937,  when  workers  were  claiming  their  rights  to  redress 
grievances, to get that the simple issue like their working conditions would get better, and it 

 

113 

was the first time in those days that Government found a necessity to create a well-structured 
dispute resolution system and a commission of enquiry was appointed in 1937.  And when we 
go on, we see that so many things changed along the years, starting with the struggle, starting  
with  the  creation  of  the  Labour  Party  itself  that  started  in  the  Labour  Movement,  the 
movement  for  the  struggle  of  workers  where  we  started  as  a  Party.  These  things  must  be 
remembered. It is all good and well to say that it is an important day today, but it is important 
also not only an important day for what we are doing today, but to pay homage to the fact that 
most if not almost all institutions created for the protection of workers in Mauritius bear the 
stamp and the seal of the Mauritius Labour Party. This is a historical fact.  You look at the 
National Remuneration Board, this bears itself the seal of the Mauritius Labour Party. Look 
at each  and every institution that has been created ever since 1938 with the leaders of the 
Labour Party. Curé, Anquetil, all those people, the creation of the Labour Department back in 
1938, the establishment in 1943 of the Labour Advisory Board! 1944, 1949! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I have the impression that historical truths hurt certain sensibilities. 
Let me go on! I am not concerned about the end.  If I may be allowed to, at least, address this 
august Assembly... 

Madam Speaker:  But nobody is interrupting you. You have well started. 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam.  I bow. 

(Interruptions) 

 It is clear that some people will try to bow to the historical truths because what is a nation if 
it  does  not  know  its  past.  I  am  not  talking  about  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  who  knows 
history.  Unfortunately,  not  everything  stops  at  the  footstep  or  at  the  door  of  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister, otherwise I would not make that comment. This is not what I am saying. But 
some others whom historical facts hurt because they do not find themselves in that history, 
because they have not marked history and if they continue on the trend of wanting to make 
politics out of everything, they will not mark history. So, I come back to my good friend the 
hon. Minister of Labour, he has marked history, take that point. When hon. Gayan came up 
and said also with kind words addressed that to me, I was taken aback. I was saying, with 
hon. Gayan sending kind words to me there must be a hidden agenda. 

(Interruptions) 

 

114 

 But then again, since I found the Rt. hon. Prime Minister acknowledged that it had to be said, 
then  I  said  to  myself  if  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  saying  so,  hon.  Gayan  therefore 
obviously is trying to follow suit. Let us not make a procés d’intention of what he was doing, 
but  what  I  am  trying  to  get  at  here  today  is  history  is  important.    If  one  goes  to  all  the 
institutions that were created, the Labour institutions in 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977 and the 80s 
and how we ended up with the new Employment Legislation, the amendments of 2013, the 
amendments of 2015 with the new Government, changes in work conditions, but then, again, 
it  would  be  unfair  for  me  not  to  recognise  as  well  how  much  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, as he was a young man then, had not contributed also to this Labour Movement. 

It is necessary at some stage in one’s life to recognise the importance of history and, 

in that history it also consists of the movement in the 1970s. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, certain people; I myself at some point in time may have said that the strikes in those 
days  did  a  lot  of  harm  to  the  country,  but  when  you  put  that  aside,  and  when  I  had  the 
opportunity and the honour of being Minister of Labour and I looked at what were the results 
that came about, there were good, concrete and positive results somehow. Not everything can 
be rosy in life, but one has to try to put aside the wrong and look at the positive. So, yes, the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition has marked history, and his Party and the members of his Party 
in those days have marked history. Yes! 

As far as the signals and the hand signals that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and the 
eyes that he is twinkling in my direction wishing that I also say that he has contributed to 
history. Let me say he has also contributed to history! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: He has also been Minister of Labour! 

Mr Mohamed: It is not every day - as he, himself, puts it in his own particular style - 
that we see someone who has been in the workers movement, suffer at the hands of a regime 
and turned to this regime and worked for that regime. Now, this is someone who has marked 
history. 

(Interruptions) 

And how he likes reminding us, in the struggle for the workers of this country he has 
seen  the  light,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  he  also  talked  about  the  flees,  he  talked  about  the 

 

115 

helicopters, he talked about his lawyer, hon. Baloomoody who is here, who helped get him 
out, and I am wondering whether I should blame hon. Baloomoody for getting him freed. 

History would have been different.  

(Interruptions) 

So, let us get back to the history that we are concerned with. When I met with Mr 
François Eyraud, it is necessary that I pay homage to him as well because he is someone who 
has got no interest of his own to protect. He is a professional. He has got no axe to grind, he 
has not got political points to score, he is there to give an objective opinion, and when I look 
at the CV of Mr François Eyraud who was delegated by the Director-General of ILO as a 
consultant to work on this particular report, it is necessary for me to remind the House that he 
had worked as a Researcher and a Professor at the University of Aix-en Provence as a Labour 
Economist for 15 years. It is necessary for me to also talk about the various ouvrages that he 
has authored, one of them being the Fundamentals of Minimum Wage Fixing ILO 2005, le 
salaire minimum, une perspective internationale, une encyclopédie des ressources humaines 
édition Vuibert 2012, pour une politique salariale équitable dans l’administration publique 
du Burundi, novembre 2012, Globalisation, Flexibilisation and Working Conditions in Asia 
and the Pacific, Chandos Publishing, Oxford 2008. So, this is indeed a gentleman who is very 
well informed about the issues surrounding minimum wage. And when he sent me his report 
on 11 September 2014 through the ILO Office in Madagascar, he said something important, 
but  before  I  get  to  that, I  think  that  since  I  paid  homage  to  him,  I  would  like  to take  this 
opportunity,  Madam  Speaker,  to  thank  every  single  officer,  Senior  Inspector,  every  single 
Head  Director,  Assistant  Director,  the  Permanent  Secretaries  and  the  actual  Permanent 
Secretary of the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training for their 
work and their contribution in this Report, because without them this Report would not have 
been  here  and  without  their  work,  their  contribution  and  the  then  now  still  Adviser,  Dev 
Luchmun, he was also the Adviser of the Ministry, where we recognise quality and we do not 
make political issues out of quality and this, I thank the hon. Minister for. I would like to pay 
homage to this team and all those who have retired in the meantime, because through them 
they have come up with an excellent Report that Mr François Eyraud has produced. And also, 
it is necessary that I pay homage also to Mr Dan Cunniah of the ILO - not Callikan - because 
I remember how this Mauritian national, who has retired now from the ILO, has been very 
helpful to our delegation each time we went over to Geneva to meet with the ILO and he also 
has been instrumental in us getting the experts for this Report.  

 

116 

But it is important to read the first page of the Report, because I heard hon. Roopun 
talk about poverty and it is unfortunate that, in my humble view, and I hope he does not take 
any wrong in my observations; he has tried to politicise this whole debate. But then, again, I 
mean  that  is  his  choice  and  he  stands  or  falls  by  that,  but  when  he  says  that  poverty  in 
Mauritius has increased and he bases himself on a Report of the World Bank to say so, maybe 
he should say that the Report that is being referred to is, in fact, the World Bank Report of 
2015  and  that  Report  that  he  refers  to  is  called  ‘Mauritius  -  Inclusiveness  of  growth  and 
shared  prosperity’.  That  is  the  Report  that  he  refers  to  and  that  Report  clearly  says  that 
absolute poverty declined in Mauritius from 8.5% in 2007 to 6.9% in 2012 and he talks about 
the inequality issue and that is why he chose to only refer to the paragraph that says - relative 
poverty has increased by .02, of 6 points. So, the complete picture is important because we 
cannot simply choose to refer to relative poverty because it suits the Government of the day 
but we forget at the same time when we quote a document we refer to which document it is, 
we  refer  to  which  year  it  is  and  what  is  the  title  of  that  document  and  we  also  refer  to  a 
complete quote by referring to the other aspect which is ‘absolute poverty has declined’. So, 
if  you  want  to  politicise  this  whole  debate  it  does  not  take  us  anywhere,  but  what  is 
important, as I said, Mr François Eyraud in the first page of his Report says - 

“Today, less than 1% of the population is classified as poor.” 

And here, he is referring to Mauritius.  

“Mauritius is now positioning itself for another important transition.”  

Now, those are his words and those are not  words that were pronounced sometime 
after the election. It was his analysis as from 2013, gave a Report dated September 2014 and 
he says, and he congratulates Mauritius in the process that - 

“Today, less than 1% of the population is classified as poor.” 

That is an expert, whom I have said and I repeat, had no axe to grind, had no political 

marks scoring to make, he simply was an independent expert and he goes on to say - 

“The  Mauritian  economy  has  shown  sound  growth  over  the  last  decade  (with  the 
exception of the year 2005).”  

And then, he goes on to talk about the global crisis and the effects that it has had and 

how we had managed to stabilise growth around 3% to 4%.  

“However – he says - it remains at a reasonable level by international standards.” 

 

117 

Now, those are important remarks that one cannot simply ignore because it would not 
be  intellectually  honest  to  ignore  such  things.  But  I  read  the  Report  at  page  29,  second 
paragraph and I quote, he says - 

“However, before fixing a minimum wage, Mauritius has another issue to address: the 
type of minimum wage machinery to be implemented. For the time being, we have 
seen  that  there  are  two  parallel  mechanisms  which  support  low  wage  workers:  the 
compensation system and the Remuneration order system.  International  experiences 
show  that  simpler  mechanisms  are  more  easily  understood  and  consequently  more 
effectively enforced.” 

And he goes on to advise Government - 

“Therefore it is strongly advised not to add a new system to the ones which already 
exist, (…)”. 

This  is,  very  rarely  does  he  advise;  he  makes  suggestions,  he  makes  proposals,  he 

gives options to Government but in this, he says - 

“(…) it is strongly advised not to add a new system to the ones which already exist, 
but rather (…)”, he goes on, 

“(…) to reform the machinery as a whole and elaborate a single coherent and efficient 
system.” 

Is this what the hon. Minister is proposing? His intentions are noble, his intentions I 
should congratulate him for, but, unfortunately, I believe that slightly more work can still be 
brought to this piece of legislation, if it is not now maybe along the way, that we have to 
concentrate  on  the  possibility  of  not  adding,  as  he  says,  a  new  system  to  the  ones  which 
already  exist  but  rather  to  reform  the  machinery  as  a  whole,  a  single  coherent,  efficient 
system.  

This  is  what  he  proposes,  but,  Madam  Speaker,  I  was  lucky  enough  to  receive  a 
covering note and that covering note was from the Director of the ILO Office in Madagascar 
dated 11 September 2014. In that covering note when he sent me the report as  I was then 
Minister, he said to me: “we would like to point out that the next step is to hold a tripartite 
meeting  to  discuss  the  findings”.  This  is  precisely  what  we  did  because  we  believe  in 
tripartism.  He  said:  “to  have  a  view  of  the  tripartite  constituents  on  the  document”. 
Workshops  were  organised  and  the  experts  came  to  Mauritius  where  we  made  the  report 

 

118 

public. It was posted on the website. We received comments in those days from the tripartite 
constituents as to what they believe this whole  report was about and their views. But it is 
most  important  also  for  me  to  remind  the  House  here  that  I  was  lucky  because  I  had  the 
chance of meeting with Mr Eyraud and I had the chance of discussing with him and I had the 
chance of coming to the self-conclusion that we shared as to how this minimum wage should 
be implemented and allow me here, on another part of my intervention, now to say what I 
believe should be done. 

Firstly,  I  believe  that  there  should  be  two  Committees.  The  Committee  that  is  being 
created by virtue of this legislation is only one Council, but I am of the view that there should 
have  been  two.  Not  that  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  has  the  right  to  create  a 
technical  committee,  but  I  believe  that  no  committee  should  be  subservient  to  a  main 
committee.  I  believe  that  there  should  be  two  committees;  one  would  be  an  executive 
committee and one would be a technical committee.  

Secondly, the Executive Committee, in my  humble view,  could be organised in four 
groups; three independent members chosen among civil society. It should be mentioned in the 
piece of legislation, ‘civil society’ and that includes academics. It should not be left to the 
discretion and the choice any members of the executive because world trend has shown that 
the right of Ministers to decide on certain issues is being gradually eroded away and we are 
doing anyway with it. It has shown that. So, here, we should talk about academics recognised 
in the country and accepted by all parties; at least, four trade union representatives or if you 
want to accommodate everyone, all the central syndical, they could be present. I mean the 
confederations, the representatives of employees, but two representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training,  and  two  representatives  of  the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to be present on the Executive Committee.  
And  the  Chair  of  that  Executive  Committee  should  be  chosen  among  the  independent 
members.   

Now, what about the technical committee which should also be created by legislation 
independently of the Executive Committee because they have two different tasks and the role 
of the technical committee is of utmost importance and they cannot be under the orders or the 
directives of any other person or any other committee. It has its own right to be there and it is 
an important role. 

 

119 

Therefore, that Committee should be constituted, Madam Speaker, of experts to provide 
the Executive Committee with relevant data  and it should be staffed with people from the 
National Remuneration Board.  It should be staffed by people from the Statistics Mauritius, 
from the PRB, Economists, Statisticians, Sociologists and now the experts to be recruited as 
Consultants depending on the needs of the Executive Committee. And what should have been 
the mandate over and above what I see here?  It should be set up for a period of one year and 
not  more.  This  Committee,  the  Council  should be  set  up  for  a  period  of  one  year  and  not 
more. At the end of the period this Council should be able to recommend to Government the 
establishment  of  a  national  minimum  wage  level  together  with  a  mechanism  of  periodical 
adjustments.  

So, the whole point of the work of Mr Eyraud is precisely this: to create the council, 
have an Executive Committee and at the same time have also a technical committee work for 
one year, get all the experts on-board and ensure that he can now advise Government on the 
establishment  of  this  national  minimum  wage  level  and  what  mechanism  is  to  be  chosen.  
Because Mr Eyraud has references to possibilities; how do you calculate it; what would be 
good  to  Mauritius.    He  did  say  in  his  report  that  it  should  be  left  to  the  members  of  the 
Council  to  decide  what  would  be  the  best  option  going  forward;  what  would  be  in  the 
national interest. Unfortunately, this choice is not being left to the constituents. As part of its 
mandate,  it  would  not  be  sound  policy  to  just  add  a  minimum  wage  fixing  system  to  the 
existing system and this is basically what has to be looked into. 

Now, I am of the view that, as I said - I would not because I have said  it does not in 
any way mean that we should not encourage the hon. Minister for the good work he has done 
- it is still time and I also believe that a certain stage we should look at other countries. For 
example, when we are considering to establish a minimum wage in Mauritius, look at other 
countries!  The process of establishing minimum wage in the UK is well documented and I 
humbly advise, suggest and propose that this council should invite, at beginning of its work, 
one  or  several  members  of  the  UK  Commission,  the  Low  Pay  Commission  to  expose  the 
details to the Executive Committee of that Council, to explain the UK experience.  And one 
should look into the possibility of ensuring that we do not end up with a situation where we 
have  a  National  Remuneration  Board,  where  we  have  the  salary  compensation,  where  we 
have the PRB, where we have now the National Minimum Wage. This, for me, is something 
which  I  believe  should  be  looked  into  and  we  should  have  a  simpler  system  easier  for 
everyone to understand and to foresee. 

 

120 

A last issue as a recommendation which I would like to make is, for the revision of the 
Remuneration  Order  and  Compensation  Systems.    It  is  important  for  us  to  review  the 
mandate of the Remuneration Order Board. The new role should be modified and it should be 
focused.  Maybe what we could do is give a role to the NRB which is then to organise, on a 
periodic basis, a collective bargaining process by sector to review the wage rates and other 
working  conditions  in  each  sector  because  very  often  we  don’t  have  those  collective-
bargaining  in  various  sectors,  and  then  it  could,  therefore,  be  a  reviewed  method  of  work 
under the National Remuneration  Board where the Remuneration Order  Board would then 
become  a  facilitator  for  sectorial  bipartite  discussions  by  organising  them  and  providing 
technical  support.  The  name  of  the  Remuneration  Board  could  then  be  changed  into  the 
Sectorial Bargaining Committee and the National Remuneration Board into the Collective-
Bargaining board. We have to review, but we cannot keep a status quo on the system. 

So, having said that, I would like to, once again, say that the Labour Party has, each and 
every moment in history, each decade, whenever there have been changes brought to labour 
legislations, whenever there have been institutions created for labour, for workers… 

 (Interruptions) 

the Labour Party has been present. The fact is… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order please! 

Mr Mohamed:  It’s a truth!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr  Mohamed:  And, therefore, since it is the  truth that is why  I understand why it 
hurts!    But  what  is  most  important  again  is,  we  have  managed,  in  spite  of  certain  people 
trying  to  disrupt  what  we  are  trying  to  do,  which  is  being  above  party  politics,  on  a  very 
national  issue.  Certain  people  will  always  have  to  add  their  voices  to  create  disruption 
because  without  disruption  they  themselves  do  not  exist.  Without  disrpution  they  have  no 
role. So, that is why… 

(Inerruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, come back to the Bill! 

121 

 
Mr Mohamed: I am coming to the Bill, but I am being disturbed.  What I am trying 
to get at here is that we have to be above party politics and this is precisely what we have 
tried to do. 

I have made those suggestions in the name of the Mauritius Labour Pary. I have made 
this  necessity  reference  to  history  because  somewhere,  some  place,  certain  people  want  to 
change history by obliterating truths.  That is something we should all avoid for the future of 
this  country,    when  our  children  turn  back  and  see  what  has  happened,  how  the  struggle 
started  from  the  moment  of  the  abolition  of  slavery  to  today,  but  there  has  to  be  une 
reconnaissance that not only has one party contributed - the Labour Party in almost all of it, 
the oldest party - but all parties somehow, some place, have contributed to the advancement 
of the cause of workers.  

Today is the day of the  hon. Minister of  Labour,  Industrial Relations, Employment 

and Training and I give it to him. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(6.56 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart): Madam Speaker, 
this cannot be today a greater day than ever existed in the struggle that workers have led in 
this country since time immemorial. 

I heard very intently everything said by hon. Mohamed and I assure him that I will not 
add speck of salt to solve the equation, but I will solve the equation with a drop of honey so 
that it be sweet. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, to set the scene right, we have heard a lot about history during his 
discourse. But, let me remind everybody in this House that history did not start insofar as 
Labour struggle is concerned from 1936 onwards, but it started when the vessel called ‘Atlas’ 
bordered the shore of Mauritius in 1834 with 36 indentured labourers who were then called 
‘Coolies’.  They used to be called ‘Hill Coolies’.  Why ‘Hill Coolies’? Because they came 
from India, from that part of Bihar where there were hills. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt, please! 

 

Don’t interrupt! 

122 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: It’s Okay! My grandma used to say: “Kutta bhonké hazaar, hathi chalé 

bazaar.” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  I  was  talking  about  those  Hill  Coolies  who  arrived  on  board  of 
‘Atlas’ from the hilly region of India. Since 1834, the struggle really started and we should 
never forget those who colonised our country and enslaved our people. Those struggles as 
well  we  should  never  forget.  But,  unfortunately,  when  the  colonisers  enslaved  our  people, 
they were not paid, they were beaten and there were no remunerations. 

In 1834, a coolie was earning Rs5 a month if he is male and a female was earning Rs4 
a  month.  The  coolies  had  to  work  from  6  o’clock  in  the  morning  to  6  o’clock  at  night, 
Monday to Saturday and on Sundays, they had to do extra work and the struggle started there. 
Then, they signed a document in Calcutta, under the order of a stipendiary Magistrate called 
Mr  MacFarlane  in  the  District  Court  of  Calcutta  that  they  would  be  paid  Rs5  and  Rs4 
respectively. 

When they came to Mauritius, it was hard, they were struggling and then, until 1860, 
one eminent person, whom we always forget in the House when we talk about history, is Mr 
Adolphe de Plevitz. He was the spokesperson of all those who were struggling, all those who 
were looking for a better life and a better wage. Adolphe de Plevitz wrote himself the petition 
called  ‘The  Adolphe  Petition’  to  the  Government  of  England  and  asked  that  matters  be 
remedied in Mauritius. He was also a sugar planter from Nouvelle Découverte, but he was a 
French  man.  Thanks  to  his  intervention,  there  was  a  Royal  Commission  set  up  and  the 
workers, the coolies started to get some degree of dignity in their fight and struggle against 
oppression.  

Madam Speaker, then, after a long time, in 1936, the Labour Party came. And I agree 
with what my very able friend, hon. Mohamed, said about the Labour Party of 1936, 1937 
and  onwards.  The  leadership  of  Maurice  Curé,  together  with  others  like  Jean  Prosper, 
Assenjee, Jeetoo, Samuel Barbe, Emmanuel Anquetil, Moutia and Pandit Sahadeo. That was 
the Labour Party. Thereafter, the Labour Party of Rozemont, three leaders at the time started 
by Curé, then Anquetil, then Rozemont. That was the Labour Party that was fighting for the 
people of this country. 

123 

 
Tactically,  you  may  have  heard  hon.  Mohamed  never  mentioned  Sir  Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam and Navinchandra Ramgoolam. Tactically! Because he knows what happened in 
1973  when  the  Labour  Party  brought  the  Industrial  Relations  Act  in  this  House  and  what 
happened to the rights of many workers. That’s why, tactically, no mention was made of the 
Labour  Party  of  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  struggle  of 
workers, those who have been involved in those struggles, will ever forget the enactment of 
the Industrial Relations Act and the Public Order Act. Never! 

Then,  we  also  had  the  glorious  days  in  1969  when  from  the  Mouvement  Etudiants 
Mauricien took birth the Mouvement Militant Mauricien. Again, we should never forget the 
struggle that the  Leader of the Opposition then  brought  for the betterment of the  workers, 
introduction of the cost of living allowance, etc. These are history. We cannot erase history 
because we are not born with erasers. But, at the same time, we should never forget those 
words when the women went on strike ki la police ek Riot Unit pas marche avec biberon. We 
should never forget this, as well, in history. 

So, Madam Speaker, it is a struggle of the people of Mauritius that started a while 
back  and  we  have  talked  a  lot  about  the  Ordinance  of  1934.  Let  me  tell  you  how  this 
Ordinance of 1934 came about.  It came about following the first struggle that Adolphe de 
Plevitz started and thereafter it continued until such time that the then rulers were forced to 
consider  and  to  enact  and  to  come  with  the  Ordinance  in  1934  to  introduce  the  minimum 
wage and that was called the Minimum Wage Ordinance. 

In 1939, introduction of the minimum wage only for agricultural workers and later - 
why 1939? Why from 1934 then came 1939? Because that is the reality that the Labour Party 
of M. Curé, … 

(Interruptions) 

Anquetil  and  others  were  putting  pressure  that  there  should  be  law  in  order  to  set  up  the 
legislative framework to respect people’s right to a decent pay. Then came 1941 when the 
situation was a bit harmonised. All the workers in this country were entitled to a decent pay. 
The 1934 Ordinance eventually was replaced by Regulation of Workers Ordinance of Wages 
and Conditions of Employment in 1961. 

Madam Speaker, we have come a long way. The Minister who has presented this Bill 
was a good friend of mine at the Bar. He was then at the Bar fighting for the rights of workers 
at Industrial Court. Then he became a Magistrate, a man of justice. And the day when he said 

 

124 

he was going to be a candidate for the general elections, I called him. I said: “What are you 
doing? Why did you resign?” He said: “My country needs me and I need to do justice for my 
country  and  I  can’t  sit  down  in  the  District  Court  to  do  justice.”  And,  today,  he  is  doing 
justice to the workers of this country by bringing this legislation! 

Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

My friend hon. Mohamed is not here because he has an important call to take… 

(Interruptions) 

But, let me deal with a few things more that he said. Because he said all the Members of this 
august Assembly have been doing politics and I am not doing politics.  

(Interruptions) 

And, I am not going to do politics and I am also not going to do sound bite politics like he 
did. Because when we do politics we have to be honest to ourselves and not try to erase the 
real fact of history. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I reminded Members last time that there should be 

no phone in this august Assembly! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  what  hon.  Mohamed  said  at  the  very  start  he 
rhetorically asked these questions: first, what exactly is being proposed by the Minister and 
the Government? Secondly, whether this legislation is in line with the Labour Party policy? 
And  then  he  said  what  Labour  did  when  they  were  in  Government.  Then  he  started  with 
history. But, let me tell everybody something hon. Mohamed did not deal with the questions 
that he asked! And, let me tell you what he did when he was Minister of Labour. 

Earlier on he tried to solve the puzzle for us, so to say. He tried to solve the puzzle 
and he said that we are part of the equation early. That is why I said I am going to solve this 
equation. 

(Interruptions) 

 

125 

He really gave the impression that there should be two committees! 

(Interruptions) 

… one Executive Committee and one Technical Committee. That is what he said! He made it 
sound so simple that those who have not followed debates in the past would think that hon. 
Mohamed is really a genius who has been able to solve the puzzle that this Government is not 
able to solve and the hon. Minister is in a conundrum. But, look at what he said… 

(Interruptions) 

This was the question by hon. Ms S. Anquetil. I think she is related to Emmanuel Anquetil, if 
I am not mistaken. She asked a very nice question about minimum wage and I will not read 
everything, I will read only the operative part of it. And this is the reply… 

It is quite long. She asked – 

(Interruptions) 

“(…) the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations and Employment whether he will 
state if consideration will be given for the introduction of an across-the-board national 
minimum wage and, if so, give details thereof and, if not, why not.” 

Addressed to hon. Shakeel Mohamed.  Now, part of the answer was –  

(Interruptions) 

“For instance, there are some documents and experts that say that a national minimum 
wage is good because it sorts out and brings a solution to poverty alleviation.  There 
are certain other experts that say that a national minimum wage would be very bad 
since it really destroys job creation.”   

 (Interruptions) 

“So, it is a complex issue (…).” 

So, when he is Minister of Labour this was a complex issue. When he sits on the other side; 
“there should be two committees, one Executive and the other one Technical.” So easy!  

But,  Madam  Speaker,  the  reality  is,  like  I  said  earlier  on,  we,  especially  I  am  not 

going to engage myself into sound bite politics. Let us look further… 

(Interruptions) 

 

126 

To another supplementary question: ‘whether it would be good for job creation, must it live 
side by side with the National Remuneration Board or must we do away with the National 
Remuneration  Board?  Is  it  good  for  the  country?  Then,  furthermore  about  the  National 
Remuneration Board and this time a question – I see hon. Ganoo smiling and he knows what 
I am coming with. 

Hon. Ganoo.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t engage in conversation with the orator, please! Let him talk! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: I think the hon. Member is enjoying the show! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, but he should not disrupt you! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  question  from  hon.  Ganoo.  Following  a 
question from my very good friend, hon. Steven Obeegadoo, who earlier on asked a question, 
thereafter it was hon. Ganoo asking – 

“Did I understand the hon. Minister to be saying that the introduction of the National 
Minimum  Wage  tantamounts  to  the  doing  away  of  the  National  Remuneration 
Board?” 

And, part of the answer was – 

“(…) if we do come ahead, if we are advised to do it, what form will it take?  We 
want to listen from the experts as to whether it can live or stand side by side with the 
National  Remuneration  Board,  or  maybe  we  have  to  do  away  with  it  and  come  up 
with a new system altogether in the interest of the country and the workers.”  

Yes, he was dithering about it when he was in Government; he was dithering! He was not 
saying then, ‘look, if the national minimum wage will come, either it will be a boy or a girl, 
either we do away with the NRB or it will have to run side by side.’ Questions after questions 
put  to  him,  answers  after  answers,  he  was  simply  dithering.    But  now  that  he  is  in  the 
Opposition, he cannot expect us, within 16 months of Government, to come and clean all the 
mess that has been left since ages in this country. 

127 

 
When  we  campaigned  during  the  2014  election,  what  did  we  campaign  for?  We 
campaigned for alleviation of poverty amongst others, and how to do it is to bring what we 
use to call and what the Prime Minister used to call la paix sociale and l’harmonie sociale in 
the country. Once we achieve la paix sociale and l’harmonie sociale, then we can have peace 
in  the  country  and  we  can  then  progress  as  a  nation,  socially  and  economically.  Without 
stability, we cannot do that, and that is why one of the themes of our campaign was to bring a 
national minimum wage. We have been criticised by hon. Baloomoody, for example, that this 
was in our manifesto and that we were going to accomplish it in the first three months of 
Government. But, yes, it takes time!  We have to live in the real world! 

The Minister concerned already set up, just after election, a study.  He started to look 
into matters.  It took time because there was the report of Mr François Eyraud and then he 
had to carry out his own research, he had to engage the officers who are involved with him at 
the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training.  Then, after having 
carefully studied all the aspects and the economic impact of the national minimum wage, now 
he has come, quite rightly - quite rightly - with this law, with this Bill called the National 
Wage Consultative Council. 

Now, it is not the function of this Council to say what will be the national minimum 
wage just by simply dreaming one day and coming up with something. No, it is not like that. 
What this Bill is doing is simply creating a council and the council is going to have its own 
framework,  where  workers’  representatives  will  be  involved,  employers  will  be  involved, 
there will be representatives of the NRB and the PRB, there will also be other professionals, 
representatives  of  various  departments  who  will  be  there  to  make  a  reasoned  decision  to 
recommend. They are not going to decide; they are going to recommend what would be the 
acceptable quantum of the minimum wage, and it is then onward that decision will be taken 
as to the quantum. 

The hon. Minister has also been criticised that he did not hold sufficient consultations. 
Although  hon.  Baloomoody  made  certain  criticisms  about  consultations,  that  trade  unions’ 
representatives  were  not  contacted,  no  consultations  were  held  with  them,  when  my  very 
good friend, hon. Ramful, was on his feet, he conceded that the hon. Minister did, in fact, 
consulted the trade unions and, across the board, the trade unions have in principle agreed 
with  the  present  Bill  as  it  is,  subject  to  the  amendments  that  have  been  proposed  by  the 
Minister on the other day, namely clause 5, clause 10 and clause 18. 

 

128 

(Interruptions) 

Now  that  I  have  been  interrupted,  let  me  say  one  more  thing  about  what  he  said  about 
remuneration.  This  is  about  the  struggle  that  bus  workers  were  into,  and  this  is  in  August 
2014 s’il vous plaît! Lexpress.mu - a nice picture of Mr Ashock Subron and Reaz Chuttoo, 
Madam Speaker.  And the dispute was partly about what?  

« (...)  le  gouvernement  ne  promulgue  pas  la  nouvelle  grille  salariale  du National 
Remuneration Board (NRB).” 

« Ce dernier a, entre autres, recommandé une hausse salariale variant entre 7 % et 
34 %, selon les différentes catégories d’emploi. » 

And look at this ! - 

« Le  ministre  Shakeel  Mohamed  a  soutenu,  dans  un  premier  temps,  que  les 
compagnies  d’autobus  seront  incapables  d’en  absorber  le  coût  estimé  à  R  440 
millions pour l’ensemble de l’industrie. » 

He was technically the porte-parole de l’industrie du bus. 

« Il  a,  cependant,  changé  son  fusil  d’épaule  en  affirmant  qu’il  serait  illégal 
d’accorder  une  nouvelle  augmentation aux  employés  de  ce  secteur.  Ce  qui  a 
contribué à attiser la colère des travailleurs. » 

« Les contraintes légales auxquelles fait référence Shakeel Mohamed ne sont que de 
faux  prétextes  pour  ne  pas  donner  aux  travailleurs  leur  dû.  La  vérité est  que  le 
ministre est en train d’utiliser son pouvoir discrétionnaire en faveur du patronat. » 

This is not from me. 

Madam Speaker, I see notes are coming to me, but before I end, let me say this.  This 
Government, with the current leadership - some people criticise that there is no leadership in 
Government as if when they were in Government, they were big leaders! 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  part-time  Prime  Minister!    And  thanks  to  the  prime  ministership  of  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth today, we are in this House, through the Minister of Labour, making history. Why 
making  history?  Because  we  are  technically  endorsing  what  has  been  said  in  the  United 
Nations Declaration of Human Rights, in particular at Articles 23 and 25.  For the sake of 
completeness, I propose to read what is said in Articles 23 and 25. 

 
Article 23 – 

129 

“Everyone  has  the  right  to  work,  to  just  condition  of  work,  to  protect  against 
unemployment, to sufficient pay to ensure a dignified existence for oneself and one’s 
family.” 

Article 25 – 

“Everyone has the right to a decent standard of living, adequate for health and well-
being,  including  enough  food,  clothing,  housing,  medical  care  and  necessary  social 
services.” 

Madam Speaker, I am sure, by the end of our mandate, this Government will be able 
to  drive  this  country  to  be  fully  compliant  with  these  two  Articles  of  the  United  Nations 
Declaration of Human Rights, and on this note, I thank everybody. 

(7.24 p.m) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): Madam Speaker, on this high note, I have to say that I am very honoured to be able 
to intervene, to add my voice to this really important and very marking piece of legislation. 

 
The Government of Mauritius is now positioning itself for a very important transition. 
It has embarked upon a challenge, that is, to bring a second economic miracle to the country 
and this will be done through transforming Mauritius into a high-income country by 2030.  

Now, this Government in order to achieve what has come up with the National Wage 
Consultative Council Bill, as it is styled with all the amendments that have been proposed, 
and circulated, all that have been heard through in this House, and I have to say from the last 
Sitting to today, appear to be a distortion of what the reality is and what this Bill represents. 
The Government brings a piece of legislation, a Bill to this House with the intent to change 
the life and better the life of our Mauritian workers, to put into reality an electoral promise, 
and what we hear in this House is that we are too late, it is not good enough. But never what 
is done by any Government will be perfect. There is no such thing as perfection. We strive to 
bring  change  and  through  this  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Government,  the  hon.  Minister, 
whom I highly commend for coming up with this piece of legislation at this point in time, I 
really  feel  that  this  is  the  meaningful  change  that  this  Government  is  talking  about.  
Everybody is talking about we are too late with it, the environment is not right, the economic 

 

130 

situation  is  not  right,  yet  in  the  teeth  of  all  that,  hon.  Minister  Callichurn  comes  with  this 
piece of law talking to all the representatives of the syndicates.  

I salute the hon. Minister and I think it is highly commendable of him to come up with 
such a piece of legislation. Indeed, he has the mettle of someone to turn away from practice, 
to turn away from his profession to come and save the workers of this country and we should 
indeed encourage such endeavours. We should say thank you for putting into legislation form 
what our Government has talked about in the course of our electoral campaign and putting it 
into life.  

What we also have heard is that this Bill has been really criticised in that the Minister 
has retained a lot of power and trying to control the Council through the Board members. But 
that,  I  believe,  has  been  said  without  actually  taking  into  account  the  amendment  that  has 
been  circulated,  Clause  10  (4)  of  the  Bill,  which  says  that  the  Chairperson  shall  not  be 
actively  engaged  in  politics.  So,  it  is  very  much  clearly  stipulated  in  the  Bill  and  it  is  the 
Minister who is responsible - I shall talk about consultation if I have the time later on - that is, 
the Minister who responds to such consultation, who comes up with such amendments. The 
point which I wanted to make is that the hon. Minister has been criticised for trying to retain 
powers and that he will have leverage over the Council, but we forget to read Clause 17 (1) in 
its context, that is - 

“The Minister may give such written directions of a general character to the Council, 
not inconsistent with this Act, (…).” 

 So, in no way, is the hon. Minister retaining any kind of leverage, any kind of power 
that this House fears as has been done in the past. This is not a hire and fire Government. 
This is a Government pour le peuple, this is a Government for people who are working hard 
out there and are awaiting for meaningful change to happen, for the wages to be looked at and 
coming up with changes in just like that with minimum wages is not in consonance with the 
ILO Report that has been cited so much in this House.  I have been so surprised when I heard 
different hon. Members on the other side of the House citing this ILO Report of Mr François 
Eyraud. What is said in the Report and what has been cited a lot is, yes, indeed, we need to 
come up with a system, but what we forget is that what has not been cited in this House is 
what is said in that Report, that  - 

 

131 

 “The aim of this technical report is to assess its efficiency both in term of supporting 
low wage earners and governance. Alternative minimum wage fixing systems will be 
then presented.” 

It never talks about setting out the minimum wage; it talks about the system, and it is said that 
- 

“This report does not aim to recommend the implementation of a newly ready-made 
minimum  wage  fixing  system,  but  at  providing  the  stakeholders  with  the  relevant 
information helping them to figure out the changes they think should be made to the 
current systems. There is no ideal minimum wage system.” 

And I repeat, it is said clearly in bold that - 

“There  is  no  ideal  minimum  wage  system.  The  best  system  is  the  one  elaborated 
through social dialogue leading to a compromise.” 

This is what it is all about and this is what the National Consultative Council Bill is all 
about. It is about dialogue, and we see through the various amendments that have come to the 
Bill, it is all about talking to different parties, the spirit of what ILO recommends, tripartite. 

The House has heard about the two systems, that is, the annual salary compensation 
system and the remuneration order system. This has been lengthily addressed and embroiled 
upon in this House, so I will not go into this, but what I will say, and what the Report says 
about those two systems is that the mechanism which tends to focus mostly on low earners is 
that it looks at increasing the higher rate  for low wage earners and lower for higher wage 
earners. In fact, the other system, that is, the remuneration order system tends to actually go 
and look at only 50% of workers. That is, it tends to be partial in its approach. This is why 
this Government and the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 
has come up with this Bill which sort of fills in the gap. It sort of comes and adds to what it is 
all  about,  we  have  the  remuneration  order  system  through  the  NRB,  then  we  have  the 
tripartite which is already there and it furthermore anchored into sub clause 10,  that is, when 
it talks about the Board and it gives the chance, and this again, has been highly criticised; but 
when we look at clause 10,  we have a representative of the PMO, a representative of the 
Ministry, representatives for all the relevant sectors, business, agriculture, industry, tourism 
and,  most  importantly,  we  have  a  representative  from  the  NRB,  that  is,  the  Remuneration 
Analyst, the Director of the PRB,  a representative of Statistics Mauritius, seven members of 
the organisations of employers together with four members of workers organisation and this 

 

132 

has  been  again  brought  by  amendment  after  extensive  consultation.  In  the  conclusive 
paragraph of the ILO Report, which again is, comme on dit, le favori of this House, on the 
other side, citing it, it says - 

“To be sustainable, such a system should be the result of a large debate and social 
dialogue.” 

This is what has been going on since the First Reading of the Bill. 

There has been dialogue, there has been exchange, there has been consultation, but I 
 
also read, Madam Speaker, when I look at, I had to go and Google what ‘consultation’ means, 
because when I listened to the other side of the House, ‘consultation’ means: I am telling to 
do this and you must do this. This is not what ‘consultation’ means. ‘Consultation’ means a 
dialogue,  a  discussion,  a  discourse,  a  debate,  a  negotiation,  deliberation.  It  does  not  mean 
what  is  being  thrust  upon  this  House,  that  is,  what  we  say  is  what  you  should  put  in  the 
legislation. In its concluding paragraph, this Report says–  

“All these facts and data should be used to start an examination of the best options to 
reform the current system of minimum wage fixing (…).” 

Of course, the Council will be making recommendations for a national minimum wage, 
both in the private and public sector together with payment of additional remuneration as set 
out to offset  -  I  am sure, there is a piece of paper, which is  going around this side of the 
House.  So, I will slow down, but I will take one minute to wrap-up, if I may – any increase 
in the cost of living every year.  What is being engaged upon is, a balancing exercise will be 
carried out.  We cannot look at a utopic world.  On one side, we have what everybody wants 
the best in terms of wages for employees.  Of course, we are a caring Government and this is 
what we want, but in so doing we have to look at the reality of what we are doing.  We have 
to look at the context in which it is being done.  We have to look at what SMEs are saying 
because this is the reality not only in Mauritius, but if you go to Ireland, you go to the States, 
everywhere  you  go  to,  the  first  reaction  that  you  get  with  increase  in  minimum  wages, 
increase  in  wages  is,  how  will  SMEs  survive?    How  will  businesses  survive?    And  I  had 
heard  the  appeal  of  hon.  Bholah  earlier  on  when  he  talked  about  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises and this is actually true.  So, in looking at all this and in coming up with this Bill 
as it is styled, the hon. Minister has taken the impact upon economy, upon employment or 
unemployment as will be affected, has taken the impact upon inflation and also upon poverty 
level. So, intrinsically it is a balanced exercise of all these elements before we can come up 

 

133 

with the Bill and that is why Mr Eyraud, in his Report, said:   “There is no simple system.  
There is no one perfect system”.  And when will this House understand that this Government 
is coming with change for the people, but in so doing it has to balance, it has to take into 
account  all  these  factors  and  it  has  to  ensure  at  the  same  time  a  minimum  comfort  and 
eradication of poverty for those at the lower rung but, at the same time, ensure the survival of 
those who will be paying those at the lower rung because if we anéanti all those, if we kill all 
these enterprises that are budding and that we want for this economic development, then, at 
the end of the day, one can hear already what the other side of the House will be saying on 
political  platforms,  that,  “this  Government  has  killed  all  development.”  So,  we  have  to 
balance. We are not saying: “No, we cannot do it”, as has been cited by hon. Rutnah earlier 
on. What we are saying is, we are doing a balancing exercise.  We are being realistic, but we 
are not shying away from our responsibility and this very important. We have said something 
and however it is, we are going to put it into reality. This is the Government, with our Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister who always says: “we have been given a mandate, like it or not, we will 
do it to the best of our ability”. 

I  have  a  lot  more  to  say,  but  I  thank  you,  Madam  Speaker,  because  time  is  up,  I 

understand. 

(7.38 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):    Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, this is a very popular Bill. It is a Bill going in the right 
direction and we have 25 orators. Everybody wants to speak about the Bill because it is really 
a landmark in the history of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, this is a long-awaited Bill. I am not going to be long because I have 
been told to speak only for 8 or 10 minutes. So, I will be very short, but I want to raise a few 
points which I didn’t hear the other orators raising. 

This long-awaited Bill, Madam Speaker, is definitely a positive move to fight against 
human injustice. It is also a positive move towards social justice. Now, the whole idea here, 
Madam Speaker, is to reduce the level of Gini coefficient, that is, the gap between the high-
end workers earning high-end salaries and the low paid workers. And this is not an easy thing 
because reducing the Gini coefficient is not without any loss of job, loss in employment. If 
we are introducing a Minimum Wage Policy, definitely we will have to have some economic 
disturbance and this is proved by past experiences in other countries. So, we need to measure 

 

134 

the opportunity costs of introducing a Minimum Wage Policy. There needs to be a trade-off 
between the level of decrease in the Gini coefficient and the decrease in employment, if any. 
Hopefully, there won’t be any loss in employment. 

Madam  Speaker,  Minimum  Wage  Policies  have  always  been  followed  by  some  job 
losses everywhere around the world. Now, quite recently, in 2010, President Obama had to 
suspend a law in the American Samoa because it was predicted that two-third of the labour 
force from the private sector would be losing their jobs. Two-third of them! And he had to 
suspend the law and give it some time before they brought it back after a couple of years’ 
time.  

In the past also we have seen, in 1973, because of the oil price shock, many countries 
suspended  the  Minimum  Wage  Policy  because  there  were  definitely  major  economic 
disturbances.  Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  delicate  matter.  And  I  need  to 
congratulate the hon. Minister. It is a very bold decision because this can make or break. It is 
something  very  delicate  and  if  it  is  not  taken  seriously,  it  can  create  havoc.  So,  the  hon. 
Minister  has  taken  this  decision  to  bring  the  Bill  and  I  was  talking  to  him  earlier,  he  is 
targeting to bring a minimum wage within a year of this Bill. A positive move! 

The minimum wage, Madam Speaker, we have seen in other countries, the economics 
of it has created three things: job losses, inflation and a middle income trap.  Past experiences 
appear to show that a Minimum Wage Policy may provoke temporary job losses. They are 
not permanent job losses because people who are highly paid, they consume more and in turn 
production increases and in turn there are new jobs created. With a little bit of training and re-
training, that is what you need to prepare before the minimum wage comes in force, we need 
to train and re-train; those people who will fall in the trap of job losses they can get out of it 
quite quickly and easily. 

The minimum wage everywhere has caused inflationary effect. It is very simple. Firms 
have got three choices when they are faced with increase in salaries. They can either spare 
themselves of their profits, that is, they make less profit or they cut down cost, they reduce 
employment  or  they  can  raise  prices  of  the  product.  Now,  we  know  that  there  is  no 
entrepreneur who would like to decrease their profit.  Just on the contrary, they would like to 
increase their profit and they would do two things: either they would decrease the jobs, cut 
down  cost  or  they  would  raise  prices.  And  we  know  there  will  be  social  pressure, 

 

135 

Government pressure, they would very unlikely reduce job, but they would raise prices. Now, 
this will have a spiral effect and this would create inflation. 

Madam  Speaker,  therefore,  it  is  inevitable  that  there  would  be  price  rises  and  that 
would  create  inflationary  effect  in  the  economy.  Therefore,  it  is  very  important  that  the 
Minimum  Wage  Policy  must  be  properly  planned,  properly  implemented  and  properly 
controlled to reduce the negative effects it brings. 

Madam Speaker, there is also a key role which the Bank of Mauritius will have to play 
when we come to this inflationary effect.  They will have to fine-tune it with the Monetary 
Policy with the help of Government so that it has less effect on the economy.  

Now, taking all this into account, Madam Speaker, this is why we understand that all 
previous Governments have been very reluctant to bring a minimum wage policy. I heard the 
Member, on the other side, saying that the Labour Government has always been on the side 
of workers, but this is a very, very bold decision which no Government would venture to do, 
to bring in, unless it is sure what it is doing. 

Therefore, again, I would congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Government 

and the Minister of Labour to come up with this Bill which I am all for it. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, in order to make a success of this venture, all precautions 
must  be  taken  so  that  we  don’t  need  to  backpedal  just  like  President  Obama  did  in  the 
American Samoa. 

I think the minimum wage must be a tolerable one so that it does not discourage the 
entrepreneurs to do business, to keep jobs and to create jobs, but, at the same time, it must 
also not leave the workers unhappy. 

As such, Madam Speaker, I will, once again, humbly request the Ministry of Labour 
to  carefully  and  seriously  prepare  for  this  new  event  so  that  it  can  reduce  the  level  of 
temporary job losses, if any, by organising re-skilling, multi-skilling programmes to enable 
the workers to transition to other jobs. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

  

 

 
(7.46 p.m.) 

136 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, there 
is no doubt that, with the adoption of this Bill by the House today, this will constitute une 
avancée in the fight, struggle of the trade unionists in this country and also une avancée for 
the working class of this country. 

I  see  this  Bill  in  the  context  of  the  fight  against  poverty.  I  see  this  Bill,  Madam 
Speaker, as one of the battery of measures to reduce poverty in this country. I have a few 
reservations about the Bill. I will come to these reservations in a few minutes, but,  by way of 
introduction, I must say, Madam Speaker, that -  my friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, a few 
minutes ago, talked about this World Bank Report and the situation in the country from 2007 
to 2012 with regard to the state of poverty in our country - this Bill is an answer,  perhaps a 
modest contribution to be able to redress the situation in our country. 

I will not come to talk about poverty here and try to involve the House in a debate 
about  what  is  poverty,  absolute  poverty,  relative  poverty,  moderate  poverty  and  so  on, 
Madam  Speaker,  but,  in  a  nutshell,  what  this  report  told  us  was  that  there  has  been  in 
Mauritius une mauvaise redistribution de la prospérité et des fruits de la croissance. This is 
how the report elaborates on the erosion of the middle-class in this country, of the young face 
of poverty, how 30% of the poorest households in this country are headed by women and so 
on and so forth. 

Therefore, there is no doubt that the setting-up of a minimum wage in any country is a 
redistributive tool. I am using the word of Mr Eyraud, I think. He said it at one time in his 
report. I am sure all of us who have read this report will remember this expression when he 
said the setting-up of a minimum wage system in a country is, in fact, a redistributive tool. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is why when this Bill was first made public in the 
country some two weeks ago, just one week before the celebration of the Labour Day or 10 
days,  my  party,  the  Mouvement  Patriotique,  we  were  the  first  political  party,  as  far  as  I 
remember, to comment on the proposals in this Bill. We supported the various trade unions at 
that time who had expressed their dissatisfaction, their reservations on the initial proposals 
made by the Government in the Bill. We expressed our disapproval also with regard to the 
clauses  which  had  been  criticised  by  the  unions  and  time  passed  by,  the  outcry  became 
consistent and more intense. 

137 

 
Fortunately,  I  must  say  that  the  Minister  showed  a  lot  of  openness.  He  started  to 
consult the unions. I know he met them, different confederations, discussions took place and 
the  hon.  Minister  rightly  agreed  to  the  proposals  for  amendments  to  make  the  Bill  more 
acceptable to one and all. The amendments which have been circulated last week and which 
will be moved by the hon. Minister at Committee Stage go in the right direction. They have 
taken care of most of the grievances  expressed  by the unions, but there still remain a few 
issues on which some of the confederations still do not agree with the proposals in the Bill. 
We would have wished that there is a consensus on this Bill, Madam Speaker, that all the 
confederations approve, support the Bill so that this Council can start to sit en toute sérénité. 
The work starts and we move on with the possibility of setting up a minimum wage in this 
country. 

At the start, Madam Speaker, when we have listened to all that has been said in this 
House  since  last  Tuesday,  when  we  look  at  the  amendments  brought  by  the  hon.  Minister 
which will be proposed  during Committee Stage,  I  wonder whether the title of this Bill is 
correct:  The  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill.  This  is  an  argument,  a  proposal,  a 
suggestion  that  has  been  made  by  one  of  the  confederations.  Shouldn’t  this  Bill  had  been 
named  -  I  think  the  proper  title  should  have  been  -  ‘The  National  Minimum  Wage 
Consultative Council Bill’. This Council will not reflect or will not deliberate on the wage 
policy  of  this  country.  This  Council  will  not  be  another  wage  setting  mechanism  in  our 
country. It will deliberate, it will reflect, it will propose a minimum wage, not the wage.  

This is why I think this Bill should have been entitled the National Minimum Wage 
Consultative Council Bill. Because, I repeat, it will reflect, deliberate, discuss and propose 
what should be the national minimum wage in this country, the more so, as the Minister now 
has removed from the Bill the question concerning the tripartite negotiations and the salary 
compensation.  This  salary  compensation  relates  to  the  wages  of  all  the  workers  in  this 
country. At that time perhaps when this was in the Bill, possibly, the Bill could have had the 
title  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill.  Now  that  the  question  of  the  salary 
compensation,  the  tripartite  negotiations  have  been  eliminated  from  this  Bill,  this  Bill  has 
nothing to do with wage setting mechanism and wage proposals. What this Bill will do, it will 
propose a national minimum wage to the poorest workers of this country. 

That is why, Madam Speaker, without any doubt, if things work as they have to work 
- and I will elaborate on what I am saying - there is no doubt, as I said, that this Bill will 
constitute a progress for the working class and the trade unions of this country. This Bill, if it 

 

138 

comes with the proper minimum wage, will reduce the working poor, will reduce the gender 
pay  gap,  will  reduce  overall  inequality  and  will  certainly  limit  the  increase  of  l’inégalité 
sociale in our country. The poorest workers are the targets of this Bill. The poorest segment 
of our population is the target of this minimum wage legislation, Madam Speaker. 

I  come  back  to  this  question  of  the  tripartite  negotiations  which  has  been  removed 
from  this  Bill.  The  hon.  Minister  has  taken  the  right  decision.  Contrary  to  what  hon. 
Rughoobur was saying earlier on when he took the floor, to my mind, Madam Speaker, by 
removing the issue of the payment of additional remuneration which takes place every year 
from the purview of this Bill, again the hon. Minister has gone in the right direction. This is 
indeed a commendable  decision because, time and again, in this House, when the issue of 
tripartite  negotiations  cropped  up,  especially  under  the  mandate  of  the  last  Labour 
Government, many of us systematically and consistently opposed the idea of doing away with 
this practice which had for decades now become part and parcel of a wage setting framework 
in our country. This tripartite negotiation has got the virtue of providing the so much needed 
social stability in our country.  

As we all know, although at the end of the day the unions are not always satisfied 
with the percentage increase in the wages proposed after the tripartite exercise, we know for 
the years that had passed that this exercise has helped enormously in the social stability in our 
country.  That  is  why,  Madam  Speaker,  in  December  last  year  when  the  Additional 
Remuneration Bill was being debated in this very House, I reiterated that the tripartite has 
been enshrined in our economic system and has become a centrepiece of our economic life 
and  the  present  Government  -  I  said  that  in  December  when  we  were  discussing  the 
Additional  Remuneration  Bill  -  should  not  repeat  the  dreadful  experience  of  the  previous 
regime which had at one time set up the National Wage Council thus giving the death blow to 
tripartite  negotiations.  I  even  remember  in  December  last  having  warned  Government  that 
Government should be very  careful about trying to prop up a new institution which might 
sign the death warrant of the spirit of tripartite negotiations. And, I am very happy that the 
hon. Minister came back on his decision. 

Madam Speaker, as the previous orator before me has said, in fact there is no ideal 
minimum wage system and, to quote from Mr Eyraud, I think hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus just 
said it – 

“The best system is the one elaborated through social dialogue leading to consensus.” 

 

139 

This is the key issue, Madam Speaker, how much dialogue has been achieved, on what basis 
has the body, the institution, the council, been set up and has there been sufficient consensus 
through the social dialogue. 

Madam Speaker, this is why to me the independence of this Council is at the heart of 
the  issue  that  we  are  debating  today.  I  must  say  it  is  very  unfortunate  that,  to  me,  not 
sufficient  independence  and  autonomy  has  been  given  to  this  National  Minimum  Wage 
Consultative Council and I will elaborate in a few minutes, Madam Speaker, why do I say 
that. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I must say I listened very attentively to hon. Uteem and he said the 
right  things.  I  will  not  repeat  what  he  has  said.  There  are  a  few  issues  which  have  to  be 
highlighted  when  we  are  talking  about  such  a  Bill.  Firstly,  what  mechanism  should  be 
adopted  for  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  wage?  The  first  key  question:  should it  be  a 
tripartite  body?  Should  it  be  a  multi-sectoral  body  set  up  by  Government  or  should  the 
national  minimum  wage  be  proposed  by  Government  itself?  There  are  different  formulae. 
Government alone, Government upon consultation of social partners, Government following 
the  recommendation  of  a  specialised  body,  Government  after  consultation  of  a  specialised 
body or the specialised body on its own or by way of collective bargaining between the social 
partners.  

There is an incredible variety of ways in terms of procedures for fixing the national 
minimum  wage.  In  some  countries,  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  statutory  minimum  wage 
systems and in others, as I just said, the trade unions are stronger in terms of maturity and 
experience,  have  a  lot  in  terms  of  track  record.  They  are  the  result  of  a  well-established 
collective bargaining process. In others, as I said, it is a public authority which has been set 
up to propose the minimum wage. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, with regard to the question of procedure there are more 
or  less  two  systems;  one  is  the  determination  by  Government  following  a  period  of 
negotiation  with  the  Tripartite  Committee  and  the  second  one  is  that  of  a  Tripartite 
Committee itself fixing the minimum wage rates and the Government afterwards confirming 
the decision. But, be that as it may, Madam Speaker, even when we read the report of Mr 
Eyraud, the report that we are all quoting or another report which my friend, hon. Shakeel 
Mohamed, alluded to: Fundamentals of Minimum Wage. If my memory serves me right, in 

 

140 

fact, in the report of Mr Eyraud that is before us, to me, Mr Eyraud seems to be suggesting 
different things during different times, at different pages in his report. Madam Speaker, in the 
other report which I have just mentioned, Mr Eyraud said that - 

“It  is  clear  that  the  most  popular  system  is  minimum  wage  determination  by 
Government followed by tripartite or bipartite system”.  

This is why I think at the beginning the unions in the country were claiming that it 
was not for Government to have taken the responsibility of setting the minimum wage as they 
were claiming right when the Bill was first made public because this proposal is in line with 
what  takes  place  in  many  other  countries.  But  whatever  be  it,  Madam  Speaker,  I  think 
whether  it  is  Government  alone  itself  or  whether  after  consultation  with  the  tripartite 
organisation/bodies or whether it is the formula that we are suggesting in this Bill, what is 
more important to me is the independence, the autonomy of this body, of this institution.  

Unfortunately, when we look at our Bill, when we look at the three sections, in fact, in 
a nutshell, what are the proposals in this Bill, that in terms of composition 29 members and 
the majority are appointed by the hon. Minister. The Minister has the right at the end of the 
day  to  reject  the  report  although  he  has  to  come  to  the  National  Assembly  and  give  the 
reasons for that. After all this work would have been done, he has the final say. In another 
section, he can give directives to this Council which must comply with whatever directives he 
gives. So, these are the three main sections which, according to me, go at the root of what is 
important in such a Bill, in such an issue, Madam Speaker, the autonomy, the independence 
of this Council.  

So, I would have thought, Madam Speaker, that we have to review one or two clauses. 
The hon. Minister would be well advised to have a fresh look at one or two clauses of this 
Bill, especially the one which is still hurting the union, that it is the Minister who will appoint 
the representatives of the trade union of the Confederations, Madam Speaker. I think this is 
an insult to the Trade Union Confederations and I have talked to the hon. Minister, pleading 
to him, imploring him to have a fresh look at this question of the appointment of the trade 
unionist. The seven trade unionists will be appointed by the hon. Minister in consultation as it 
is spelt out in the Bill but, according to me, the unions are right to claim that it should have 
been left to the trade unions to designate their own representatives in this Council.  

So, when we look at this Bill from this perspective, I will not say the mainmise, but 
there is, Madam Speaker, a suspicion that the hon. Minister might have a hidden agenda in 

 

141 

terms of the composition of the Council, in terms of the appointment of the seven members 
representing the union. This is why, I think, the refusal by the hon. Minister to take on board 
this reasonable and justified proposal of the union give credence to the criticism made by the 
trade unions and the Opposition that the hon. Minister might have a hidden agenda and wants 
to control the Council. I think the hon. Minister should reconsider amending this particular 
clause at Committee Stage. 

Madam Speaker, regarding this Clause 17 of the Bill where it is stipulated that – 

“The Minister may give such written directions of a general character to the Council, 
(...), and the Council shall comply to, with his directions”.  

I have this to say to the hon.  Minister and to the Government - this Clause is a very 
classical and a very common provision in our laws. This prerogative, true I agree, I concede, 
is  a  prerogative  offered  to  any  Minister  when  Government  set  up  a  statutory  body  or  a 
parastatal organisation. We have seen it in many Bills or in many Acts that we have in our 
statute book. In the present case, Madam Speaker, the situation is different. Today, we are not 
setting up a classical parastatal organisation or a classical statutory body. We are setting up a 
body and institution which is tripartite in its nature and whose jurisdiction and purview is so 
wide that its independence and autonomy cannot be curtailed or limited by the prerogative of 
a Minister. 

I am not talking about the present Minister who is introducing the Bill. I am talking of 
any  Minister  in  the  future  who  might  step  in  the  shoes  of  the  incumbent  today,  Madam 
Speaker. I say that because I can give an example to this House, of a body set up by law, of 
course,  by  the  MSM/MMM  Government  in  2004  wherein  in  view  of  the  function  of  that 
body, the then Government decided not to come up, not to impose, if I may say, any such 
provision in our law. Madam Speaker, I am talking of the Utility Regulatory Authority. In 
this Bill, powers of the Minister, because a regulatory authority is not a classical parastatal 
body. Utility Regulatory Authority is an authority, is a regulator. So, in this Act, Section 29, 
provides – 

“Powers of Minister 

The Minister may issue general policy recommendations to the authority, on matters 
concerning utility services, to the extent that such recommendation is not inconsistent 
with the act and the relevant utility legislation”. 

142 

 
So, this is why I think in our Bill, Madam Speaker, when you look at Section 17, the 
Powers of the Minister, I would have thought that we could have amended Section 17 (1), so 
that the Clause should read – 

“The Minister may give such written directions of a general character to the Council, 
not inconsistent with this Act, as may be necessary in the public interest”. 

We should do away with –  

“(...) and the Council shall comply with those directions”. 

Because  as  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  this  body  has  a  different  function  and  it  is 
completely different to what obtains in other legislation, in other laws where Government has 
set up a classical statutory body. The composition of the Council also is, in fact, flooded with 
members appointed by the Minister. I will not go into the details we know, Madam Speaker, 
it is in the Bill and we all know the social partners will disagree finally, as they always do, on 
the  one  side  the  unions  and  on  the  other  side  the  employers.  They  will  disagree  on  the 
proportion or on the percentage of the median wage, and so on and so forth, there is no doubt 
about that. 

So, the other members should be independent members.  When they are appointed by 
the Minister, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, will they be able to play their role of arbiter, of 
referees between the two blocks, on the one side the union, on the other side the employers or 
their representatives?  So, this is why, unfortunately, in the legislation, Madam Speaker, this 
question of the independence, the autonomy of the Council laisse à désirer.  I think the hon. 
Minister should review it, especially in terms of the appointment of the trade unionists and 
also  with  regard  to  the  prerogative  that  he  has  to  give  directives  to  the  Council  and  the 
Council is bound to comply with his directives. 

I say it again; I am not targeting the present Minister.  The Minister is not eternal; one 
day, another Minister will come.  So, as a matter of principle, we should emulate what has 
been proposed in the Utility Regulatory Authority, because the nature of the function of the 
Utility Regulatory Authority, the function of this Council today is different, I say it again, 
from a classical statutory or parastatal body, where in those cases, I agree, the Minister has 
the right to give directions and the Board should comply with these directives. In this case, it 
is completely different. 

Madam Speaker, I will come to my last point. When we have discussed about who 
fixes  the  minimum  wage,  whether  it  is  a  council,  a  tripartite  body  or  the  Minister  or 

 

143 

Government  or  by  collective  bargaining,  whatever  case,  whatever  scenario  it  is,  the  other 
question is about fixing the minimum wage.  Hon. Uteem also elaborated on this, and I will 
not repeat what he has said. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, historically, it is difficult to know how the minimum wage 
was initially set. Most probably, it was often the outcome of negotiation between unions and 
employers’ organisations and the government. The cost of living is usually the first method 
and  is  the  most  logical  and  clear-cut  method.  The  wage  statistics  can  also  be  taken  into 
consideration. Professor Eyraud suggested, I think, three possibilities, not only the one which 
is in the Bill today.  But I agree with hon. Uteem when he said we should not have fettered, 
nous n’aurions pas dû attacher, lier les mains du Council. When the Bill makes mention in 
section 5 of - 

“(…)  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  national  wage  calculated  on  an  hourly  rate 
equivalent to the proportion of the domestic median wage of the preceding year for 
the lowest paid workers;” 

this is fettering the Council. 

I think we should have left it open to the Council, especially as the Bill has elaborated 
what are the criteria, and this clause has even been amended to enlarge, to add more criteria.  
So, I think we should have left it upon the Council itself to decide about the quantum of the 
minimum wage, Madam Speaker, especially when we have a look at clause 6 (2) of the Bill, 
mention is made that - 

“The Council shall, before making a recommendation, on the national minimum wage 
to the Minister - 

(b) 

have regard to the need to improve the living conditions of the lowest 
paid workers and promote decent work and living conditions;” 

So,  the  Bill  itself  insists,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Council,  before  making  the 
recommendation  to  the  Minister,  must  have  regard  to  the  need  to  improve  the  living 
conditions  of  the  lowest  paid  workers  and  promote  decent  work  and  living  conditions. 
Therefore, by restricting the Council, by delimiting le champ d’action of the Council, Madam 
Speaker,  I think the  Bill has fettered the hands  of the Council by restricting the Council’s 
recommendation to this issue of an equivalent to the proportion of the domestic living wage. 

 

144 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Bill, according to me, should not have specified this 
particular formula and imposed this formula upon the Council for the determination of the 
national minimum wage. 

Madam Speaker, this is a sensitive issue. There is no doubt about that, and this is why 
I think, in the law, one year has been given to the Council. I think hon. Fowdar mentioned 
that the Minister told him it will take one year after the setting up of the Council.  Of course, 
it will take one year, because it is in the law. The law says that, within 12 months of the date 
of  its  constitution,  the  Council  will  recommend  a  national  minimum  wage  that  may  be 
introduced for the lowest paid workers in relation to the median wage. So, 12 months after 
the constitution, the Council will have to work and come up with a proposal. 

Madam Speaker, this is a sensitive and complex issue. In the British case, when the 
Low Pay Commission was set up, it took two years for it to adjust the minimum wage.  This 
Low  Pay  Commission,  which  I  think  is  composed  of  nine  members,  did  a  lot  of  studies, 
enquiries, with the help of Technical Committees, which also supported them, and it took two 
years for it, at that time, to come up with a proposal for minimum wage. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that in view precisely of the complexity, 
of the sensitive nature, of the enormous task on which this Council is called upon to embark, 
I think we should have had a consensus.  The hon. Minister should have gone all the way to 
listen  to  the  trade  unionists  -  not  half  or  three-quarter  -  and  should  have  listened 
sympathetically to this proposal of the unions, because it is when the Council is set up in a 
consensus, with social dialogue, and supported by the trade unions in the country, that finally 
we  will  most  probably  come  with  a  rate,  with  a  quantum  that  will  be  agreeable  to  all  the 
social partners. 

But there is another point which has not been looked into by the Bill, Madam Speaker, 
namely the adjustment process. When we finish determining the quantum of the minimum 
wage, with time, the question of the adjustment procedure will have to be answered, that is, in 
one year, in two years. I see that in our law, in the Bill, it is provided that in another period of 
five  years,  the  Council  will  re-adjust,  will  come  with  new  proposals.  But  I  think,  most 
probably  because  of  the  imperatives  of  life,  anything  can  happen  within  the  five  years.    I 
think  we  should  have  provided  the  possibility  of  adjustment  by  the  Council  in  certain 
unexpected circumstances in our legislation.  This should have been taken care of.  In France, 
for example, Madam Speaker, adjustment is triggered by a 2% rise in inflation.  In the UK 

 

145 

also, there are periodic adjustments to the minimum wage.  But in the Bill which is before 
this  House,  I  see  that  no  such  mention  has  been  made  with  regard  to  the  adjustment 
procedure. 

Madam Speaker, I will sit down, but in the hope that the hon. Minister will listen to the 
trade unions with regard especially to the appointment of the trade union representatives, and 
I appeal to him again to see to it that at Committee Stage, besides the amendments that have 
been circulated, a new amendment is brought so that, as I said, the possibility of a consensus 
is reached and the Council sets up to work and comes within an year with this proposal of a 
national minimum wage. 

Madam Speaker, I will sit down, but in the hope that the hon. Minister will listen to the 
trade unions with regard especially to the appointment of the trade union representatives, and 
I appeal to him again to see to it that at Committee Stage, besides the amendments that have 
been circulated, a new amendment is brought so that, as I said, the possibility of a consensus 
is reached and the Council sets up to work and comes within a year with this proposal of a 
national minimum wage. 

I have done and I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Thursday 26 May 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

  Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 8.27 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 26 May 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

 

146 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

MBC – RESTRUCTURATION 

(No.  B/455)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to where matters stand as to the re-
organisation  thereof  with  a  view  to  making  it  more  efficient,  service  oriented  and  less 
dependent on Government funding as announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019. 

Reply: In my reply to Parliamentary Question B/139 on 12 April 2016, I informed the 
House  that  the  Reports  of  the  Public  Sector  Efficiency  Bureau  highlighted  various 
shortcomings  at  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  (MBC).    I  pointed  out  that  I  had 
already  given  instructions  to  re-structure  the  whole  organisation.    I  also  indicated  that 
consideration  will  be  given  to  conduct  a  forensic  analysis  of  the  staff  requirement  of  the 
Corporation. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Officer-in-Charge  of  the  MBC  that  the  Corporation  is  in  the 
process  of  finalising  a  Medium  Term  Strategic  Plan  with  a  view  to  re-organising  the  core 
services  of  the  MBC,  including  the  production  department,  the  marketing  department,  the 
engineering  and  technology  services  and  the  human  resource,  finance  and  operational 
services and making the Corporation financially sustainable and autonomous. 

The Medium Term Strategic Plan will take on board the recommendations made by 

the Public Sector Efficiency Bureau in its Reports on the re-engineering of the Corporation. 

In parallel, my Office has also solicited the assistance of the Ministry of Civil Service 
and Administrative Reforms for the elaboration of a Human Resource Management Manual 
adapted to the Corporation and the conduct of a Human Resource Audit at the MBC. 

SALE BY LEVY – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY – RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/456)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Commission of Inquiry on Process/Practices for 

 

147 

the granting of loans secured on immovable property  and sale by levy,  he will state if the 
main recommendations thereof have been implemented and, if not, why not. 

Reply: As the House is aware, the Report of Commission of Inquiry was submitted to 
the then Government in August 2014 and nothing was done until the new Government took 
office. 

A  Special  Committee  was  then  set  up  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, and comprising relevant institutions, to examine the Report of the Commission 
and seek views from parties concerned. 

Subsequently,  it  was  decided  to  invite  the  views  of  the  public  generally.    In  that 
context, the Report was made public on 08 May 2016 and a copy tabled in the House at the 
sitting of 17 May 2016. 

The  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  invited  comments,  views 

and suggestions from the public on the Report by Friday 27 May 2016. 

As  I  indicated  earlier  in  my  reply  to  Parliamentary  Question  B/449,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  is  working,  at  the  same  time,  on  the  project  for  the  setting  up  of  the  Asset 
Management  Company  to  deal  with  the issues  relating  to  non-performing  loans  as  well  as 
those on sale by Levy. 

In the light of the recommendations received, in relation to the sale by levy and the 
setting  up  of  the  Asset  Management  Company,  actions  will  be  taken  to  implement  the 
recommendations that will be approved. Appropriate draft legislation will then be prepared. 

FOREIGNERS – IMPRISONMENT 

(No.  B/457)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the foreigners, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Acting Commissioner of Prisons, information as to the number thereof, by age group and by 
sex  respectively,  who  are  presently  serving  terms  of  imprisonment,  indicating  the  number 
thereof  who  are  presently  serving  the  term  of  imprisonment  in  their  country  of  origin, 
indicating the policy in relation thereto. 

Reply: I am informed by the Acting Commissioner of Prisons that, as at to date, there 
are 128 foreign detainees in custody.  Out of this number, 67 detainees, i.e., 37 men and 30 

 

148 

women,  have  been  convicted  and  are  presently  serving  their  terms  of  imprisonment  in 
Mauritius. 

I  am  tabling  the  detailed  information,  i.e.,  age  group  and  sex  of  these  67  foreign 

detainees. 

I  am  also  informed  that,  since  December  2002,  53  foreign  detainees  have  been 
transferred to their respective countries, in accordance with the following provisions under 
the Transfer of Prisoners Act: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

among 54 countries (including Mauritius) which are party to the ‘Strasbourg 
Convention  on  Transfer  of  Sentenced  Persons’  by  virtue  of  the  Transfer  of 
Prisoners (Convention) Regulations 2005;  

among  27  Commonwealth  countries  by  virtue  of  the  Transfer  of  Prisoners 
(Commonwealth Countries) Regulations 2002; or 

by way of bilateral agreement between Mauritius and a particular country (not 
covered under the above two Regulations) and subsequent Regulations made 
pursuant to section 3 of the Act.  

However, there is no record as to whether they are still serving terms of imprisonment 

in their respective home countries. 

I wish to inform the House that Government has recently agreed to the adoption of a 
new policy in respect of requests from foreign nationals, who are undergoing sentence in our 
prisons,  for  their  transfer  to  their  native  country.    The  policy  requires  that  the  request  for 
transfer will be considered only if the foreign detainees have completed two-thirds of their 
sentence in Mauritius.  Regulations are being made under the Transfer of Prisoners Act to 
that effect. 

This would help to ensure that a detainee serves a reasonable period of his sentence 

and this would act as a deterrent against any offence, including drug trafficking. 

PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT 

(No.  B/458)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the public sector debt, he will state the – 

(a) 

amount thereof over the past three financial years and the forecast thereof for 
the year ending 30 June 2016 – 

149 

in absolute terms, and 
as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product and 

(i) 
(ii) 
reasons for a deterioration thereof since January 2015 to date. 

 

(b) 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question,  I am tabling a statement  giving the 

information requested. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, the main reasons for the deterioration in public 

sector debt since January 2015 may be attributed to following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

First, issuance of Government securities for the purpose of mopping up excess 
liquidity of an additional amount of Rs5 billion; 
Second, revaluation of the foreign debt stock due to strengthening of the US 
Dollar,  Euro,  Japanese  Yen  and  Chinese  Yuan.    During  the  period  I  just 
mentioned, these currencies appreciated vis-à-vis the local currency by 11.5%, 
4.1%,  18.6%  and  7%  respectively.  This  accounted  for  an  increase  in  public 
sector debt by about Rs3 billion; 
Third, borrowing requirements of public enterprises; 
Fourth, higher borrowing requirements of Government  during the period; 
Fifth,  lower  nominal  GDP  growth  mainly  as  a  result  of  one  of  the  lowest 
levels  of  GDP  deflator  of  1.3%  and  lower  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  3.1% 
during 2015. 

MARIJUANA – DEPENALISATION 

(No.  B/459)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to marijuana, he will state if consideration will be given for the setting up 
of  a  national  scientific  and  medical  committee  for  the  carrying  out  of  an  independent 
investigation in Mauritius under the aegis of the Mauritius Research Council in the light of 
the publication of national and scientific reports worldwide, which have concluded that the 
consumption  thereof  has  no  more  negative  effects  than  alcoholic  drinks  and  other  legal 
intoxicants consumed with moderation, leading to the current wave of legalisation thereof. 

Reply: I have already stated on various occasions that the question of legalisation of 

marijuana in all its forms will not arise as long as I am the Prime Minister of this country. 

 

 

150 

MARIJUANA – DEPENALISATION - ECONOMIC EFFECTS 

(No.  B/460)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to marijuana, he will state if consideration will be given for the carrying 
out of an independent study in Mauritius, as has been done by reputed financial institutions 
overseas,  including  the  CIBC  Bank,  of  the  possible  beneficial  economic  effects  of  the 
legalization thereof, strictly controlled and monitored by Government, as was the case until 
1928. 

(Vide PQ No. B/459) 

PRISONS DEPARTMENT – VACANCIES 

(No.  B/461)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Mauritius Prison’s Service, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

if promotions currently expected by the officers thereof have been finalised, 
including  those  for  the  posts  of  Principal  Prisons  Officer  (Industries)  and 
Principal Prisons Officer (Works) awaiting appointment since 2008 and, if not, 
why not, and 
when the exercise regarding a total of about 13 posts waiting to be filled will 
be completed and officially confirmed. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Acting  Commissioner  of  Prisons  that  the  following 

vacancies in different posts have occurred at the Prisons Department – 

(i) 

(ii) 

2 vacancies in the grade of Superintendent of Prisons/Senior Superintendent of 
Prisons  which  have  been  reported  to  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service 
Commission (DFSC) on 18 February 2016; 

2  vacancies  for  the  post  of  Prisons  Medical  Health  Officer/Senior  Prisons 
Medical  Health  Officer  which  have  been  reported  to  the  DFSC  on  16 
November 2015; 

 
(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

151 

6  vacancies  in  the  grade  of  Principal  Prisons  Officer  (Industries)  and  5 
vacancies in the grade of Principal Prisons Officer (Works) have been reported 
to  the  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commission  on  23  July  2015  and 
recommendations have been made for the posts to be filled by promotion; 

9 vacancies for the posts of Hospital Officer (Male) have been advertised to 
the public by the DFSC on 5 November 2015; 

1  vacancy  for  the  post  of  Hospital  Officer  (Female)  was  advertised  to  the 
public on 07 January 2016; 

7 vacancies for the posts of Senior Officer Cadet (Male) and  1 vacancy for the 
post  of  Senior  Officer  Cadet  (Female)  were  advertised  to  the  public  on  16 
December 2015; and 

(vii) 

19  vacancies  for  the  posts  of  Female  Prisons  Officer/Senior  Female  Prisons 
Officer have been advertised to the public on 27 August 2015. 

I am also informed by the Acting Commissioner of Prisons that two vacancies exist in 
the grade of Senior Hospital Officer (Female).  However, these vacancies cannot be filled for 
the time being as the most senior Hospital Officer (Female) is under interdiction. In order to 
ensure  the  smooth  running  of  the  service,  two  seniormost  Hospital  Officers  have  been 
assigned the duties of Senior Hospital Officer since 06 June 2014. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Acting  Commissioner  of  Prisons  that  the  post  of 
Assistant Superintendent of Prisons (Works), Assistant Superintendent of Prisons (Industries) 
and  Principal  Prisons  Officers  (Shoemaking)  cannot  be  filled  for  the  time  being  in  the 
absence of qualified candidates. 

In regard to the six vacancies which have occurred in the grade of Principal Prisons 
Officer,  action  is  being  taken  by  the  Prisons  Department  to  report  these  vacancies  to  the 
DFSC. 

I wish to point out to the hon. Member that the filling of vacancies for the Prisons 

Department is the prerogative of the DFSC. 

MELROSE HIGH SECURITY PRISON - SEARCHES 

(No. B/462) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Melrose High Security Prison, he will, for the benefit of the House, 

 

152 

obtain from the Acting Commissioner of Prisons, information as to the number of searches 
effected thereat by officers of the Security Service thereof since the coming into operation 
thereof to date, giving a list of the illegal goods seized, indicating the – 

(a) 
(b) 

amount of dangerous drugs seized, and 
number of arrests effected following the searches, if any. 

Reply: I am informed by the Acting Commissioner of Prisons that since the coming 
into operation of the Eastern High Security Prison at Melrose in March 2014, 93 searches 
have been carried out by the officers of the Prison Security Squad.  During the course of 45 
such searches, prohibited items have been secured as follows – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

69 mobile phones; 

36 mobile phones battery; 

25 battery charger; 

21 ear piece; 

39 SIM cards; 

5 syringes; 

26 improvised weapons, and 

3 smart watches. 

Moreover, in six instances dry leaves suspected to be cannabis, and in five instances, 
drug  powder  have  been  secured.    On  one  occasion,  a  small  gandia  plant  has  also  been 
secured. 

As regards part (b) of the question, enquiries are being conducted in respect of three 

detainees who were found in possession of dangerous drugs. 

TERRITORIAL WATERS – PIRACY - FUNDS 

 (No. B/463) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the trial of the pirates in Mauritius, he will state the total amount of 
money donated to Mauritius by the European Union and by other international institutions, if 
any, giving details as to how same has been spent as at to date. 

153 

 
Reply:  In  July  2011,  Mauritius  signed  a  Transfer  Agreement  with  the  European 
Union defining the conditions for the transfer, into Mauritius, of pirates suspected of having 
committed acts of piracy within the area of operation of the EU-led Naval Force on the High 
Seas, off the territorial waters of Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros Islands, the Seychelles and 
Reunion Island, and those detained by the EU-led Naval Force.  The agreement defines the 
modalities for investigation in such cases, prosecution, trial and detention of the pirates in 
Mauritius, the transfer of property seized and the treatment of such persons. 

In  the  wake  of  this  agreement,  funds  to  the  tune  of  three  million  Euros,  i.e.  about 
Rs120  m.  were  provided  by  the  EU  under  the  10th  European  Development  Fund  to  assist 
Mauritius  to  cover  further  needs  and  to  compensate  the  additional  costs  incurred  by 
Government to respond to piracy.  The funds were disbursed in November 2012 as general 
budget support.  Part thereof were utilised for the construction of a new prison facility for 
pirates in Beau Bassin at a cost of Rs44 m.  The project was completed in September 2014 
and became operational in October 2014. 

A  short-term  assistance  package  was  also  worked  out  jointly  by  the  EU  and  the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Mauritius in the implementation of the 
Transfer  Agreement.    Under  this  package,  funds  to  the  tune  of  1,080,000  Euros  were 
provided  for  the  implementation  of  short-term  measures.    This  programme  had  four  main 
components – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Support to Police; 

Support  to  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  and  the  Office  of  the  Director  of 
Public Prosecutions; 

(iii) 

Support to Courts, and 

(iv) 

Support to the Prisons. 

The  programme  was  implemented  during  the  period  2011  to  2013  and  included 
technical assistance for the legislative review that was required for the implementation of the 
Transfer Agreement, setting up of a temporary unit at the Beau Bassin Prison pending the 
completion of the new prison for pirates, provision of interpreters, provision of security and 
other equipment for the Police, the Prisons and the Intermediate Court, refurbishment of the 
Police  Armoury  and  training  programmes  for  Police  investigators,  prosecutors,  Prison 
Officers and members of the Judiciary. 

154 

 
Additionally,  funds  amounting  to  US  $  1.6  million  i.e.  around  Rs48  m.,  were  also 
made available in 2013 by the UK Government, through the United Nations Office on Drugs 
and  Crime,  and  were  utilised  to  finance  partly  the  construction  of  a  new  District  Court  in 
Moka.  The project comprised the setting up of a Piracy Court in the premises of the District 
Court.  The total cost of the project was Rs76 m., and the balance was met out of local funds.  
The project was completed in January 2015. 

RENEWABLE ENERGY - PROSUMERS 

(No.  B/483)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Stand-by  Generation  Capacity  Charge  for  grid  connected  solar  photovoltaic  and  wind 
farm systems, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, 
information as to the reasons why the tariffs set out therefor in Schedule 1 to the General 
Notice No. 3011 of 2014 are no longer applicable. 

Reply: I thank the hon. Member for asking this question which, I hope, will spur a 

debate on that very particular issue relating to Renewable Energy. 

In its 2013 Report, the National Energy Commission had strongly urged the country 
to  embark  on  an  acceleration  of  its  Renewable  Energy  programme.  Thus  there  was  a 
commitment to achieve a target of 35% by the year 2025. When we took over in December 
2014,  the  Prime  Minister’s  directives  to  me  were  that  we  should  boost  up  our  renewable 
energy program. This is what I have done.  

The issue raised by the hon. Member relates to “Prosumers”. These are persons who 
invest in solar PV power generation (or wind turbines) for their own consumption. However, 
since the sun and the  wind are intermittent, they  must  cater for the time when there is no 
sunlight or no wind. For those times, they must stock the electricity they produce in batteries 
to use, for instance, during the night or when there is no wind. Although the price of batteries 
is  falling  on  the  world  market,  they  are  still  expensive  and  can  bill  up  to  40%  of  the 
equipment cost. Most prosumers, therefore, intrinsically require the national grid as support 
to mitigate the variability of their electricity generation systems.  

Within this category, we need to differentiate between small scale and medium scale 
distributed generation. SSDGs relate to households while MSDGs relate to larger enterprises 
such as Super U, Bagatelle, etc. 

The General Notice referred to by the hon. Member was dated 12 November 2014, 
and  applied  to  “all  undertakers  operating  solar  photovoltaic  and/or  wind  farm  systems  for 

 

155 

their  own  consumption  and  using  the  CEB  grid  as  backup  supply”,  that  is,  all  prosumers. 
These prosumers henceforth would have to pay a “Standby Generation Capacity Charge” as 
from 01 December 2014. For Solar PV, the charge was Rs139 per Kilowatt installed capacity 
per month.  For wind, the charge was Rs122. This meant that an average household operating 
an  average  solar  system  would  pay  some  Rs350  per  month  in  addition  to  his  normal 
electricity bill. This is on the assumption that his equipment is 2.5 MW. For a commercial 
mall with 1 MW capacity, the charge would be to the tune of Rs139,000 per month.  

And, this, irrespective of the actual electricity supplied to that prosumer. Even small 
household which had invested in batteries and which required CEB only in times of dire need 
(e.g. during week-long cyclonic weather) were subject to that same charge. 

This  charge  applied  in  an  indiscriminate  manner  and  at  the  same  rate  to  small 
households,  SME’s  and  medium  enterprises  as  well  as  large  commercial  malls.  And,  this, 
irrespective of the actual amount of electricity consumed.  

This was most unfair. But it was also a strong disincentive to the implementation of 
small  and  medium  scale  renewable  energy  projects.  More  than  a  charge,  it  was  a  penalty 
which  discouraged  small  households  from  investing  in  renewable  energy  while  benefiting 
large prosumers. 

In  my  intervention  on  the  MARENA  Bill  in  September  2015,  I  explained  why  I 
directed the CEB to repeal the General Notice No. 3011 of 2014 on the Standby Generation 
Capacity Charge.  This was done in May 2015. 

 

FLACQ -  SUPER U - SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM 

(No.  B/484)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities  whether, in regard to 
the Super U of Flacq, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to the date on which it submitted its request to the Central Electricity 
Board for the operation of a solar photovoltaic system for its own consumption and using the 
Central Electricity Board grid as backup supply, indicating - 

(a) the date of approval thereof, and  
(b) if it is the first to benefit from the non-applicability of the tariffs set out therefor in 

Schedule 1 to the General Notice No. 3011 of 2014.  

Reply: I am informed by the CEB that Super U submitted an application on 22 July 
2014  for  the  installation  of  1.146  MW  Solar  PV  for  generation  of  electricity  for  its  own 

 

156 

consumption and to be supplied to the grid. The conditional Undertaker’s Permit was given 
on 25 August 2015.   

 

Super U is classified under the category of MSDG prosumers. It will be producing 
only some 30% of its requirements and therefore needs CEB to provide it with the balance of 
electricity  required  and  as  a  backup.    It  made  its  application  to  the  CEB  under  the  net 
metering scheme for Medium Scale Distributed Generation (MSDG).  

Under the MSDG scheme, the CEB applies an ad hoc new tariff determined on a 
case  to  case  basis  for  a  capacity  greater  than  50  kilowatts  integrating  the  cost  of  grid 
integration and supply of electricity to the prosumer when there is no sunshine or wind to 
generate electricity and if it has no battery storage.  

CEB, on its side absorbs 50% of the cost of integration.  

For Super U, the cost is 70 cents per unit in addition to the Rs5.83 for each unit 
consumed.  It  is  the  first  to  have  completed  its  solar  PV  installations,  but  there  are  several 
other  applications  which  have  been  processed  and  approved  by  the  CEB  under  the  same 
scheme. It is not correct to state that Super U has benefited from the repeal of General Notice 
3011 of 2014. 

In fact, Government is facing strong representations from the large business sector 

for the removal of all stand-by charges. 

SORÈZE - FATAL ROAD ACCIDENT - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/485)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the fatal 
road  accident  which  occurred  at  Sorèze  in  which  a  National  Transport  Corporation  was 
involved bus whereby several passengers lost their lives, he will state the - 

(a) outcome of the inquiry carried out thereinto; 
(b) claims received by the National Transport Corporation from the passengers and 

staff thereof, and  

(c) amount of compensation paid out as at to date by the insurance companies of the 

National Transport Corporation.  

157 

 
Reply: Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that a Judicial Enquiry was 
carried out by the Acting Magistrate of the Intermediate Court at the request of the Director 
of Public Prosecution 

The evidence on record reveals that the brake system of the bus failed because there 
was a leakage of compressed air from the flexible feed tubing actuating the door, which got 
ruptured during the journey.   

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that 30 claims from the passengers 
and two claims from the staff of NTC have been received at the level of the State Insurance 
Company of Mauritius Limited (SICOM). 

As regards part (c) of the question, I am informed that an amount of Rs5.5 m. and 
Rs2.8  m.  to  14  passengers  and  one  employee  of  the  National  Transport  Corporation, 
respectively. 

 

HERITAGE CITY COMPANY LTD - STREE CONTRACTING - SERVICES 
(No.  B/486)  Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  and  Port 
Louis Central) asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to Stree Consulting, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from  Heritage  City  Company  Ltd.,  information  as  to  if  the  services  that  it  will  provide 
include  architectural,  civil  engineering,  mechanical  and  electrical  engineering,  quantity 
surveying  and  project  management  services  and,  if  not,  indicate  who  shall  be  responsible 
therefor. 

Reply:  I  refer  the  h on.  Member  to  m y  response  to  the  PNQ  of  19 April 2016 
and also to PQ B/234  of same date where  I informed  the House  that pursuant to Section  3 
of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  the  professional  services  of  Stree  Contracting  were 
enlisted  for  the  detailed  Master  Plan  and  Engineering  Design  of  the  project;  the 
schematic  design  of  Government  offices, 
ICT 
infrastructure, renewable  energy  component of the 6 government  buildings. 

infrastructure  design, 

including 

I  further informed the  House  that  Heritage  City Co.  Ltd  had retained Luxconsult 

(Mtius) Ltd for consultancy  services in line with the advice of the  Solicitor  General. 

I am informed by Heritage City Co. Ltd that the tender which was launched by  the  
State  Land   Development   Co.  Ltd   and   awarded   to  Luxconsult (Mtius)  Ltd  was 
with  respect  to  infrastructure  works,  both  onsite  and · offsite.  As  part  of  the  tender  

 

158 

submission,   Luxconsult   (Mtius)  Ltd  has  provided   the   following   personnel   with  
the  requisite  qualification  and experience - 

 

SN  Designation 

1 

Project Manager I Team Leader 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Urban Planner 

Architect 

Landscape Architect 

Design Engineer (Roads) 

Design Engineer (Services) 

Structural Engineer (Bridge) 

Traffic (Transportation) Engineer 

9  Mechanical and Electrical Engineer 
10  Geo-technical Engineer 

11  Quantity Surveyor 

12 

Sworn Land Surveyor 

13  Surveying Technician 

14  Certified Valuer 

15  Marketing Expert 

16  Legal Adviser 

17  Financial Expert 

18 

IT Expert 

 

Numbers 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

With  respect  to  construction  works,  Stree  Contracting  has  been  entrusted so 
far  with  the  preparation  of the  detailed  Master  Plan  and  Engineering Design for the 
whole project and the schematic design of the Government buildings. 

I  am  informed  that  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd  is  in  the  process  of  launching 
open tenders  for consultancy  services  in relation  to the  construction  of the buildings 

 

159 

which would  include amongst  others architectural,  civil engineering, mechanical  and 
electrical engineering, quantity surveying and project management  services. 

 

CIVIL SERVICE - MANAGEMENT SUPPORT OFFICERS - 

RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/487) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in 
regard  to  the  last  recruitment  exercise  for  officers  in  the  grade  of  Management  Support 
Officers in the civil service, he will state - 

(a) if the letters of appointment have been issued and, if so, indicate the -  

(i) number thereof, and  
(ii) total number of posts that will be filled ; 

(b) the number of applications received from Higher School Certificate, diploma and 
degree  holders  respectively,  indicating  the  number  thereof  which  were  selected 
per category, and  

(c) a breakdown of the selected applicants, district-wise. 
Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that letters 
of appointment have been issued by my Ministry to the 350 selected candidates on 28 April 
2016 for the filling of 350 posts. 

As regards parts (b) and (c) of the question,  I am informed that this information is 

held by the Public Service Commission and is therefore not available.  

 

AFRICAN UNION COMMISSION – CHAIRPERSON - ELECTION 

(No.  B/489)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  forthcoming  election  of  the  Chairperson  of  the  African  Union 
Commission,  he  will  state  if  Government  has  decided  to  give  its  support  to  any  candidate 
therefor and, if so, indicate the name thereof. 

Reply: Elections for the post of Chairperson of  the African Union Commission are 
scheduled to take place during the 27th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union, which 
will be held in July 2016 in Kigali, Rwanda.   

 
The AU has received three  candidatures for the  post of Chairperson of the African 

160 

Union as follows - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

Ms Wandira Specioza Kazibwe  (Former Vice President, Uganda); 
Mr Agapito Mba Mokuy  (Minister of Foreign Affairs, Equatorial Guinea), and 
Ms  Pelonomi  Venson-Moitoi  –  (Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  International 
Cooperation, Botswana)  

It  is  not  the  policy  of  Government  to  publicly  declare  which  candidature  it  is  going  to 
support, the more so when all candidatures received are good and emanate from friendly countries 
with which we entertain excellent diplomatic relations. 

 

ZONES D’EDUCATION PRIORITAIRE HOT MEAL PROJECT - 

IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/490)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the    Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to the Zones d’Education Prioritaire Hot Meal Project, 
she will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating the time frame 
set therefor. 

Reply: I wish at the very outset to inform to the House that currently all pupils of ZEP 
Schools are being provided with a meal consisting of bread, butter, cheese, cake and other 
supplements such as biscuits and fresh fruits as per the advice of the Ministry of Health and 
Quality of Life and this pending the provision of hot meals in such schools. 

In  my  reply  to  PQ  B/639,  I  informed  the  House  that,  taking  into  consideration  the 
security and health of pupils, the Ministry of Education and Human Resources had decided to 
invest the schools with proper infrastructure and facilities so that provision of hot meal can be 
implemented in salubrious conditions and that all necessary sanitary and hygienic precautions 
are taken at every step in the production, storage, handling and distribution of hot meal to our 
children. 

The Ministry has, accordingly, embarked on a pilot project involving 4 ZEP schools. 
The project involves the construction of a kitchen, a storage area and an eating area on the 
school  premises  of  Bois  des  Amourettes  Government  School,  Cascavelle  Government 
School, Pointe aux Piments Government School and Aimé Césaire Government School.   

161 

 
The implementation of the infrastructural works has already started.  The construction 
works at Bois des Amourettes Government School which were expected to be completed by 
December 2015 have been delayed and are now scheduled to be finalised by end June 2016.   
Handing over of site following award of contract in respect of works at Pointe aux 

Piments Government School is expected around first week of June 2016.   

As  regards  the  3rd  pilot  school,  that  is,  Aimé  Césaire  Government  School,  tenders 

have been launched a new following an initial unsuccessful bidding exercise. 

As regards Cascavelle Government School, the construction works have not yet been 
completed because according to information received from Ministry of Public Infrastructure 
and Land Transport, the contractor has vacated the site.  

Once the schools are ready with the infrastructure and facilities, arrangements will be 

made for the provision of hot meal. 

Based on the feedback  received  from the pilot project, same could be rolled out in 
other  ZEP  schools  where  appropriate  facilities  will  be  set  up.  Other  options  would  be 
envisaged for the provision of hot meals in schools constrained by lack of space.  

I wish to reiterate that the hot meal project in ZEP schools will be resumed once all 
the conditions for the provision of such meals under acceptable sanitary and hygienic norms 
and standards are complied with.  

 

UNIVERSITY OF MAURITIUS - CRASH COURSES 

(No.  B/491)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  grant  by  Government  of  about  Rs80,000  per 
student per year to cover the cost of tailor made crash courses offered at the University of 
Mauritius in fields with high job prospects, as announced in the Budget Speech 2015-2016, 
she will state the amount of money disbursed in relation thereto as at to date - 

(a) indicating the number of students who have benefitted therefrom, and  
(b) giving details of the crash courses offered. 
Reply:  Following  the  2015-2016  Budget  Speech,  Government  put  up  a  Graduate 
Training Scheme (GTES), with the main objective of enhancing the employment prospects of 
the unemployed graduates, by providing them with skills according to the requirements of the 
evolving job markets. 

162 

 
In  this  context,  a  Joint Working  Group,  co-chaired  by  my  Ministry  and  Business 
Mauritius  has  been  set  up  to  oversee  the  project,  with  the  Human  Resource  Development 
Council (HRDC) as the implementing arm. 

In respect of the Scheme, employers provide inputs for the mounting of appropriate 
courses based on their particular skills needs. Upon successful completion of the courses, the 
trainees are employed by the partner industries. 

As at 19 May 2016, a total amount of MUR 5,023,660 has been disbursed for seven 
(7) projects, out of which six (6) are being dispensed in-house by the partner industries and 
one  (1)  by  the  University  of  Technology,  Mauritius.  A  ‘Post  Graduate  Diploma  in  Digital 
Technologies’  will  be  offered  by  the  University  of  Mauritius  as  from  June  of  this  year  in 
collaboration with relevant industry partners. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  76  graduates  have 

benefited from the programme. 

In respect of part (b), I am tabling the relevant information. 

 

HEALTH INSTITUTIONS - MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE 

(No. B/492) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to medical negligence, he 
will state if consideration will be given for the setting up of a full-fledged tribunal to hear 
complaints of alleged cases thereof against public and private health institutions and, if so, 
when and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

LA GAULETTE - REMI OLLIER ROAD - REPAIRS 

(No. B/493) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Remi Ollier 
Road,  in  the  village  of  La  Gaulette,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Road Development Authority, information as to if there is any project for repair works to be 
carried  out  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  when  same  will  be  executed  and  the  estimated  cost 
thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Road Development Authority that the Remy Ollier Road 
in the Village of La Gaulette is not a classified road and does not, therefore, fall under its 
responsibility. 

 

163 

However,  I  am  informed  by  the  District  Council  of  Black  River  that  presently,  they 

have no road work project at Remy Ollier Road due to unavailability of funds. 

I am further informed by the National Development Unit that they are contemplating 
the upgrading/resurfacing of the Remy Ollier Road in La Gaulette in Financial Year 2016-
2017 subject to availability of funds in the next budget. 

 

HERITAGE CITY PROJECT – POWER SUPPLY 

(No. B/494) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Heritage City Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to if it is in presence of a correspondence from the promoter thereof in 
relation  to  the  future  power  requirements  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  load  and  the 
investment that the Board will have to make for the supply thereof. 

 
Reply:  I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that it has received a letter dated 
18  April  2016  from  Heritage  City  Company  Ltd,  advising  it  that  a  total  electricity 
consumption of 80 MW would be required. 

The  Central  Electricity  Board  is  still  examining  the  matter  in  the  context  of  its 
capacity and demand planning. It has requested the Heritage City Company Ltd to provide 
further clarifications. It is therefore not in a position to provide an estimation of investment at 
this stage.  

LALLMATIE – MARKET - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/496)  Mr  R.  Dayal  (First  Member  for  Flacq  &  Bon  Accueil)  asked  the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the construction of 
the market of Lallmatie, he will state if – 

(a) 

a prior planning exercise had been carried out in relation to the site inasmuch as 
vehicular access thereto is difficult, and  

(b)  provision has been made for proper ventilation  and lighting thereat and, if not, 

why not. 

Reply: I am informed by the National Development Unit that on 24 November 2011, it 
awarded a contract for an amount of Rs26,747,856.02 to EDCC Co Ltd for the construction 
of a market fair at Lallmatie. The project was completed on 21 March 2013 and handed over 
to the District Council of Flacq. 

 

164 

For  the  implementation  of  the  project,  the  Technical  Section  of  my  Ministry  was 
involved in the architectural and structural design whereas the supervision was done by the 
NDU. 

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and 
Lands that according to records available at their end, in the year 2002, a portion of land was 
identified for the construction of a market at Gandhi Road, Lallmatie and another portion was 
identified for the construction of a gymnasium at Kalimaye Road in the same region. 

The  plot  at  Gandhi  Road  was  found,  planning-wise,  acceptable  for  the  market  fair 
subject to the implementation of an appropriate traffic management scheme on market fair 
days. 

Thereafter, following an inter-ministerial joint site visit held on 07 February 2003, it 
was decided that the 2 sites identified be interchanged. A plot of land of an extent of 3A50p 
for  the  market  fair  was  subsequently  acquired  at  Kalimaye  Road  on  24  June  2005  by  the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands at the request of the then Ministry of Local Government and 
Rodrigues. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  that  the  access  to  the 
market from Brisée Verdière-St. Julien Road (B23) is through a one-way access of 3.65 m. 
wide and the exit from the market to the B23 Road is through another one way road of 4 m. 
wide. 

A new access road of 6 m. wide over a length of 300 m. has been constructed at the rear 
of  the  market  fair  which  connects  Seenundun  Lane  and  links  Brisée  Verdière-St.  Julien 
Constance Road (B23). 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the District Council of Flacq that 
no complaint has been received in respect of poor ventilation. However, I am informed that 
the District Council has recently received representations from sellers in the Haberdashery 
section to the effect that lighting is insufficient. Remedial actions have already been taken. 
Additional  flood  lights  have  been  provided.  Moreover,  the  Council  is  looking  at  the 
possibility of re-engineering the lighting network in the Haberdashery section. 

Any improvement work at the Lallmatie market will have to be undertaken by the Flacq 

District Council and my Ministry will provide the necessary technical assistance required.  

 
 
 

 
LUZERNER KANTONSSPITAL/MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF 

165 

LIFE - MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 

(No. B/497) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Memorandum of 
Understanding  signed  between  the  Luzerner  Kantonsspital  of  Luzern,  Switzerland,  and  his 
Ministry, he will state the – 

criteria used for the choice of the said hospital;  

(a) 
(b)  names  of  the  officials  from  the  said  hospital  who  were  involved  in  the 

(c) 

negotiations in relation thereto, and 
scope  of  involvement  in  the  decisional  process  as  far  as  strategy,  choice  of 
treatment  and  specific  equipment  for  the  management  of  cancer  patients  are 
concerned. 

(Withdrawn) 

CANCER - RISK FACTORS - PREVENTION 

(No.  B/498)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  risk 
factors of cancer, he will state the strategies developed by his Ministry to create awareness 
thereof and incidentally the prevention thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

CANCER - MORTALITY RATE 

(No.  B/499)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to cancer, he 
will state the latest statistics regarding the – 
(a) incidence thereof, and  
(b) mortality rate by the said disease in Mauritius. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

CEB - VERGER COCO, BAIN DES DAMES - WORKS 

(No. B/500) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West)  
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
works being carried out by the Central Electricity Board at Verger Coco, Bain des Dames, in 
Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board, information as to – 

(a) the purpose thereof, and  

 
(b)  if  prior  consultations  were  held  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  region  thereof  in 

166 

relation thereto. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/468) 

 

SECONDARY COLLEGES - MAURITIAN CREOLE LANGUAGE - 

INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/501) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  introduction  of  the  Mauritian  Creole  Language  in  the 
secondary colleges, she will state – 

 (a) if prior consultations were held with the teaching staff members of the secondary 

colleges, and  

(b) the minimum qualifications requirement for a teacher of the secondary colleges to 

teach the Mauritian Creole Language. 

Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  Kreol  Morisien  (KM)  has  been  introduced  as  an 
optional subject in primary schools, at par with the Asian Languages and Arabic, since 2012.  
It is currently being taught up to Standard V.  In line with the Nine-Year Continuous Basic 
Education and as stipulated in the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) for Grades 1 to 9 
document which was released last year, KM will be rolled out on an optional basis in Grades 
7, 8 and 9 as from January 2018. 

My  Ministry  is  currently  working  on  the  elaboration  of  the  National  Curriculum 
Framework (NCF) for Grades 7 to 9.  In this connection, a Consultative Committee, headed by 
the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry,  has  been  set  up,  comprising,  inter  alia, 
representatives of the MIE, MGI, MES, MITD and other stakeholders in order to provide the 
broad orientation for the development of the NCF. 

Consultations  have  been  initiated  on  the  teaching  of  KM  in  secondary  schools.  The 
MIE  will  pursue  action  on  the  elaboration  of  the  NCF  for  Grades  7-9  and  the  teaching 
syllabuses for KM. A team will also be working on the grammar and orthography for KM.  

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  Question,  my  Ministry  has  decided  to  invite  for 
expressions of interest from language teachers of secondary schools already having a P.G.C.E 
or a B. Ed. These teachers will be trained by the MIE in the teaching of KM at Grades 7 to 9.  
In the medium to long term, MIE will enlist trainees on a full time PGCE in KM.  

The qualifications for teaching KM in secondary schools will thus be a degree in a 

Language discipline.  

 

167 

 

SUSPECTS - CUSTODY 

(No. B/502) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Attorney-General whether, in regard to the suspects, he will state if Government proposes to 
introduce  legislation  to  provide  a  statutory  basis  of  the  amount  of  credit  to  be  given  to 
suspects  for  the  time  spent  in  custody  pending  trial  or  appeal  in  order  to  harmonize  the 
sentencing  principles,  having  regard  to  the  pronouncement  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  its 
judgment in the case of Kamshov v/s The State of Mauritius and the Commissioner of Police 
(2016 SC521).  

Reply:  I  understand  that  the  hon.  First  Member  for  Savanne  and  Black 
River is referring to the Supreme Court decision in the case of Kamasho v State 
of Mauritius 2016  SCJ  21  delivered  on 21 January  2016 by  the  Full Bench  of 
the Supreme Court comprising the Chief Justice,  the Senior Puisne Judge, Judge 
Chui  Yew Cheong, Judge  Caunhye  and Judge Chan Kan  Cheong. 

For  the  record,  I  have  to  state  that  the  Office  of  the  Master  and 
Registrar  also  sent  me  a  copy  of  the  said  judgment  on  21  January 2016 
requesting me to take such action as I may deem necessary. 

Following  that judgment,  the Law Reform  Commission  also sent  me  a 
comprehensive  correspondence  dated  05  February  2016  in  regard  to  the 
legal  issues  raised  in  the judgment  and  also  proposed legislation.  It further 
highlighted  that  the  decision  in  J.N.  Kamasho  v  State  o f  Mauritius 
reiterated, in accordance with the decisions of the Judicial  Committee  of  the 
Privy  Council  in  Callachand  v  The State (2008] UKPC 49 and Dookhee  v 
The  State  (2012) UKPC  21,  that the time  spent on remand  prior to sentence 
by  a  person  to  whom  bail  has  been  refused,  should  be  taken  into  account 
when assessing the length of sentence that is to be served. 

I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  my  officers  have  briefed  me  about 
the  judgment  and  I  have  already  instructed  them  to  proceed  with  the 
drafting  of 
therein.  The 
implication  of  the  draft  legislation  is  being  carefully  studied  before  I 
proceed  to  seek  the  agreement  of  my  colleagues  in  Cabinet  to introduce the 
legislation in the National Assembly. 

to  deal  with 

legislation 

the 

issues  raised 

 

 

168 

BEAUX SONGES - BUS STOP 

(No. B/503) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  village  of 
Beaux Songes, he will state if his Ministry or the Transport Management Road Safety Unit is 
in presence of representations from the inhabitants thereof for the installation of a bus stop at 
the  end  of  the  road  thereof  with  a  view  to  alleviating  the  inconveniences  presently  being 
faced by the bus users thereat, especially, the children and the elderly. 

Reply: I am informed that verbal representations have been received in 2014 at the 

level of my Ministry regarding the installation of bus stops in the village of Beaux Songes. 

 Subsequently,  a  joint  site  visit  was  carried  out  in  August  2015  by  Officers  of  the 
Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit,  the  Citizens  Advice  Bureau  and  the  National 
Transport Authority with a view to assessing the need for the provision of one pair of bus 
stops particularly at the end of the village. 

It  was  observed  that  the  distance  between  the  bus  stops  in  any  direction  is  800m 
which  is  considered  excessive.    It  was  also  found  that  an  on-street  bus  stop  would  not  be 
adequate at the proposed location due to road safety problem that might result from the road 
bend found in the vicinity of the site. 

In the circumstances, it was proposed to provide a bus stop within a bus layby and 

land would have to be acquired for the purpose. 

The land to be acquired has already been surveyed and the land acquisition procedure 

is under process. 

With the siting of the new bus stops, the maximum walking distance for someone to 
reach a bus stop would be 400 metres which is the normal yardstick for siting of bus stops 
islandwide. 

Once  the  bus  layby  is  constructed,  the  nearby  existing  pedestrian  crossing  will  be 
relocated to form an integral part of the road safety improvement resulting from the proposal 
lay-by and thus help the elderly and children that will use the new bus stop. 

Besides  the  above  measures,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  whole  segment 
between Solferino and Cascavelle is being scrutinized as regards road safety. New measures 
have been implemented from Solferino to Bassin. Part of the middle lane has been hatched. 
Curbs  have  been  placed  to  make  a  physical  barrier  between  the  lanes  in  order  to  prevent 

 

169 

hazardous overtaking, thus rendering this segment safe. It is now envisaged to replicate these 
measures from Bassin to Pierrefonds and Beaux Songes to Cascavelle to improve safety. 

SHELTERS - CHILDREN - ACCESS TO EDUCATION 

(No. B/504) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in 
regard to children who are living within the confined premises of shelters, she will state the 
measures taken for them to have full access to education. 

Reply:  At  the  very  outset,  I  need  to  point  out  that  the  right  to  education  is  an 
unalienable right of a child as outlined in Articles 28 and 29 of the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child, to which Mauritius is a party. As such it is our duty to provide access to, and the 
means to access education to all children of the Republic of Mauritius, whatever their place 
of abode or their condition. 

In  regard  to  children  who  are  living  within  the  confined  premises  of  shelters,  I  am 
informed  that  the  following  arrangements  are  in  place  for  them  to  have  full  access  to 
education, be it pre-primary, primary, secondary, tertiary or vocational and technical - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

 Managers  of  Shelters/Residential  Care  Institutions  where  the  children  are 
placed have an obligation to arrange for their schooling following submission 
of all documents by my Ministry; 
 In case a child is undeclared by the parents, officers of my Ministry facilitate 
the  process  and  ensure  that  the  child  is  admitted  to  a  school  pending  the 
finalisation of procedures to declare the child. 
Children  with  learning  disabilities  or  with  physical/mental  impairment  are 
admitted to specialised schools; 
Children who have never been admitted to school prior to their placement in 
shelters,  and  slow  learners  who  cannot  be  admitted  to  the  mainstream 
education system, are made to follow remedial classes, within the compound 
of  the  shelters,  by  teachers  specially  assigned  for  that  purpose  from  the 
Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research;  
Children  who  cannot  continue  with  the    academic  curriculum  are  made  to 
follow vocational/technical classes at the Mauritius  Institute of Training and 
Development (MITD), and 

 
(f) 

170 

In  cases  where  children  have  not  succeeded  at  the  Certificate  of  Primary 
Education (CPE) examinations, arrangements are made to have them admitted 
in Prevocational schools. 

In so far as enforcement of the obligation to attend school is concerned, it remains the 
responsibility  of  the  Manager  responsible  for  the  Residential  institution  where  the  child  is 
admitted. Nevertheless, officers of my Ministry do conduct regular site visit to ensure that the 
children admitted in shelters and other  residential care institution are not deprived of their 
right to education. 

There are also some Non-Governmental institutions which provide schooling facilities 
to  their  children,  being  given  that  the  latter  suffer  from  heavy  physical  impairment  and 
mental retardation. 

I am satisfied that children on the mainstream, technical and vocational curriculum are 
having  their  educational  needs  fulfilled.  However,  I  am  deeply  concerned  with  the  fate  of 
children  with  special  needs.  These  include  children  with  mental  deficiencies  and  physical 
impairment. 

I  have  to  pay  homage  to  NGOs  like  CEDEM,  APEIM,  Autisme  Maurice  and 
Association  pour  les  Handicapés  de  Malherbes,  pour  ne  citer  qu’eux,  who  are  doing  a 
wonderful job. 

Children with mental impairment, who are in places of safety, are not, according to 
me, getting access to the best attention to which they have the right to aspire. In that respect, 
my Ministry is presently making the need assessment in contemplation of the creation of a 
specialised institution wherein children with mental impairment, who are victim of neglect 
and/or abuse, will be adequately cared for and supported. 

RESIDENCE BASSIN - FOOTBALL GROUND 

(No.  A/14)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  football  ground  at 
Residence Bassin in Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain information as to if - 

(a) it has been vested in the Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes, and  

(b) there is any project for the provision of lighting thereat and, if not, why not. 

 

171 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Municipal 
Council of Quatre Bornes that the football ground at Residence Bassin in Constituency No. 
14 is not its property but that of the Sugar Industry Labour Welfare Fund. 

As far as part (b) of the question is concerned, I am informed that there is no project 
for  provision  of  lighting  facilities  in  the  football  ground.  However,  only  trimming  and 
mowing works at the football ground are carried out by the Council. 

 

